{"id": "25613", "revid": "135518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25613", "title": "Racism", "text": "Race or ethnic-based discrimination\nRacism is the belief that groups of humans possess different behavioral traits corresponding to inherited attributes and can be divided based on the superiority of one race or ethnicity over another. It may also mean prejudice, discrimination, or antagonism directed against other people because they are of a different ethnic background. Modern variants of racism are often based in social perceptions of biological differences between peoples. These views can take the form of social actions, practices or beliefs, or political systems in which different races are ranked as inherently superior or inferior to each other, based on presumed shared inheritable traits, abilities, or qualities. There have been attempts to legitimize racist beliefs through scientific means, such as scientific racism, which have been overwhelmingly shown to be unfounded. In terms of political systems (e.g. apartheid) that support the expression of prejudice or aversion in discriminatory practices or laws, racist ideology may include associated social aspects such as nativism, xenophobia, otherness, segregation, hierarchical ranking, and supremacism.\nWhile the concepts of race and ethnicity are considered to be separate in contemporary social science, the two terms have a long history of equivalence in popular usage and older social science literature. \"Ethnicity\" is often used in a sense close to one traditionally attributed to \"race\", the division of human groups based on qualities assumed to be essential or innate to the group (e.g., shared ancestry or shared behavior). \"Racism\" and \"racial discrimination\" are often used to describe discrimination on an ethnic or cultural basis, independent of whether these differences are described as racial. According to the United Nations's Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, there is no distinction between the discrimination resulting from either basis of race or ethnicity, but that the terms do have different meanings that may not always coincide. It further concludes that superiority based on racial differentiation is scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust, and dangerous. The convention also declared that there is no justification for racial discrimination, anywhere, in theory or in practice.\nRacism is frequently described as a relatively modern concept, evolving during the European age of imperialism, transformed by capitalism, and the Atlantic slave trade, of which it was a major driving force. It was also a major force behind racial segregation in the United States in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and of apartheid in South Africa; 19th and 20th-century racism in Western culture is particularly well documented and constitutes a reference point in studies and discourses about racism. Racism has played a role in genocides such as the Holocaust, the Armenian genocide, the Rwandan genocide, and the Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia, as well as colonial projects including the European colonization of the Americas, Africa, Asia, and the population transfer in the Soviet Union including deportations of indigenous minorities. Indigenous peoples have been\u2014and are\u2014often subject to racist attitudes.\nEtymology, definition, and usage.\nIn the 19th century, many scientists subscribed to the belief that the human population can be divided into races. The term \"racism\" is a noun describing the state of being racist, i.e., subscribing to the belief that the human population can or should be classified into races with differential abilities and dispositions, which in turn may motivate a political ideology in which rights and privileges are differentially distributed based on racial categories. The term \"racist\" may be an adjective or a noun, the latter describing a person who holds those beliefs. The origin of the root word \"race\" is not clear. Linguists generally agree that it came to the English language from Middle French, but there is no such agreement on how it generally came into Latin-based languages. A recent proposal is that it derives from the Arabic \"ra's\", which means \"head, beginning, origin\" or the Hebrew \"rosh\", which has a similar meaning. Early race theorists generally held the view that some races were inferior to others and they consequently believed that the differential treatment of races was fully justified. These early theories guided pseudo-scientific research assumptions; the collective endeavors to adequately define and form hypotheses about racial differences are generally termed scientific racism, though this term is a misnomer, due to the lack of any actual science backing the claims.\nMost biologists, anthropologists, and sociologists reject a taxonomy of races in favor of more specific and/or empirically verifiable criteria, such as geography, ethnicity, or a history of endogamy. Human genome research indicates that race is not a meaningful genetic classification of humans.\nAn entry in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" (2008) defines racialism as \"[a]n earlier term than racism, but now largely superseded by it\", and cites the term \"racialism\" in a 1902 quote. The revised \"Oxford English Dictionary\" cites the shorter term \"racism\" in a quote from the year 1903. It was defined by the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" (2nd edition 1989) as \"[t]he theory that distinctive human characteristics and abilities are determined by race\"; the same dictionary termed \"racism\" a synonym of \"racialism\": \"belief in the superiority of a particular race\". By the end of World War II, \"racism\" had acquired the same supremacist connotations formerly associated with \"racialism\": \"racism\" by then implied racial discrimination, racial supremacism, and a harmful intent. The term \"race hatred\" had also been used by sociologist Frederick Hertz in the late 1920s.\nAs its history indicates, the popular use of the word \"racism\" is relatively recent. The word came into widespread usage in the Western world in the 1930s, when it was used to describe the social and political ideology of Nazism, which treated \"race\" as a naturally given political unit. It is commonly agreed that racism existed before the coinage of the word, but there is not a wide agreement on a single definition of what racism is and what it is not. Today, some scholars of racism prefer to use the concept in the plural \"racisms\", in order to emphasize its many different forms that do not easily fall under a single definition. They also argue that different forms of racism have characterized different historical periods and geographical areas. Garner (2009: p.\u00a011) summarizes different existing definitions of racism and identifies three common elements contained in those definitions of racism. First, a historical, hierarchical power relationship between groups; second, a set of ideas (an ideology) about racial differences; and, third, discriminatory actions (practices).\nLegal.\nThough many countries around the globe have passed laws related to race and discrimination, the first significant international human rights instrument developed by the United Nations (UN) was the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), which was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948. The UDHR recognizes that if people are to be treated with dignity, they require economic rights, social rights including education, and the rights to cultural and political participation and civil liberty. It further states that everyone is entitled to these rights \"without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status\".\nThe UN does not define \"racism\"; however, it does define \"racial discrimination\". According to the 1965 UN International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,\nThe term \"racial discrimination\" shall mean any distinction, exclusion, restriction, or preference based on race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin that has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life.\nIn their 1978 United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice (Article 1), the UN states, \"All human beings belong to a single species and are descended from a common stock. They are born equal in dignity and rights and all form an integral part of humanity.\"\nThe UN definition of racial discrimination does not make any distinction between discrimination based on ethnicity and race, in part because the distinction between the two has been a matter of debate among academics, including anthropologists. Similarly, in British law, the phrase \"racial group\" means \"any group of people who are defined by reference to their race, colour, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origin\".\nIn Norway, the word \"race\" has been removed from national laws concerning discrimination because the use of the phrase is considered problematic and unethical. The Norwegian Anti-Discrimination Act bans discrimination based on ethnicity, national origin, descent, and skin color.\nSocial and behavioral sciences.\nSociologists, in general, recognize \"race\" as a social construct. This means that, although the concepts of race and racism are based on observable biological characteristics, any conclusions drawn about race on the basis of those observations are heavily influenced by cultural ideologies. Racism, as an ideology, exists in a society at both the individual and institutional level.\nWhile much of the research and work on racism during the last half-century or so has concentrated on \"white racism\" in the Western world, historical accounts of race-based social practices can be found across the globe. Thus, racism can be broadly defined to encompass individual and group prejudices and acts of discrimination that result in material and cultural advantages conferred on a majority or a dominant social group. So-called \"white racism\" focuses on societies in which white populations are the majority or the dominant social group. In studies of these majority white societies, the aggregate of material and cultural advantages is usually termed \"white privilege\".\nRace and race relations are prominent areas of study in sociology and economics. Much of the sociological literature focuses on white racism. Some of the earliest sociological works on racism were written by sociologist W. E. B. Du Bois, the first African American to earn a doctoral degree from Harvard University. Du Bois wrote, \"[t]he problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line.\" Wellman (1993) defines racism as \"culturally sanctioned beliefs, which, regardless of intentions involved, defend the advantages whites have because of the subordinated position of racial minorities\". In both sociology and economics, the outcomes of racist actions are often measured by the inequality in income, wealth, net worth, and access to other cultural resources (such as education), between racial groups.\nIn sociology and social psychology, racial identity and the acquisition of that identity, is often used as a variable in racism studies. Racial ideologies and racial identity affect individuals' perception of race and discrimination. Cazenave and Maddern (1999) define racism as \"a highly organized system of 'race'-based group privilege that operates at every level of society and is held together by a sophisticated ideology of color/'race' supremacy. Racial centrality (the extent to which a culture recognizes individuals' racial identity) appears to affect the degree of discrimination African-American young adults perceive whereas racial ideology may buffer the detrimental emotional effects of that discrimination.\" Sellers and Shelton (2003) found that a relationship between racial discrimination and emotional distress was moderated by racial ideology and social beliefs.\nSome sociologists also argue that, particularly in the West, where racism is often negatively sanctioned in society, racism has changed from being a blatant to a more covert expression of racial prejudice. The \"newer\" (more hidden and less easily detectable) forms of racism\u2014which can be considered embedded in social processes and structures\u2014are more difficult to explore and challenge. It has been suggested that, while in many countries overt or explicit racism has become increasingly taboo, even among those who display egalitarian explicit attitudes, an implicit or aversive racism is still maintained subconsciously.\nThis process has been studied extensively in social psychology as implicit associations and implicit attitudes, a component of implicit cognition. Implicit attitudes are evaluations that occur without conscious awareness towards an attitude object or the self. These evaluations are generally either favorable or unfavorable. They come about from various influences in the individual experience. Implicit attitudes are not consciously identified (or they are inaccurately identified) traces of past experience that mediate favorable or unfavorable feelings, thoughts, or actions towards social objects. These feelings, thoughts, or actions have an influence on behavior of which the individual may not be aware.\nTherefore, subconscious racism can influence our visual processing and how our minds work when we are subliminally exposed to faces of different colors. In thinking about crime, for example, social psychologist Jennifer L. Eberhardt (2004) of Stanford University holds that, \"blackness is so associated with crime you're ready to pick out these crime objects.\" Such exposures influence our minds and they can cause subconscious racism in our behavior towards other people or even towards objects. Thus, racist thoughts and actions can arise from stereotypes and fears of which we are not aware. For example, scientists and activists have warned that the use of the stereotype \"Nigerian Prince\" for referring to advance-fee scammers is racist, i.e. \"reducing Nigeria to a nation of scammers and fraudulent princes, as some people still do online, is a stereotype that needs to be called out\".\nHumanities.\nLanguage, linguistics, and discourse are active areas of study in the humanities, along with literature and the arts. Discourse analysis seeks to reveal the meaning of race and the actions of racists through careful study of the ways in which these factors of human society are described and discussed in various written and oral works. For example, Van Dijk (1992) examines the different ways in which descriptions of racism and racist actions are depicted by the perpetrators of such actions as well as by their victims. He notes that when descriptions of actions have negative implications for the majority, and especially for white elites, they are often seen as controversial and such controversial interpretations are typically marked with quotation marks or they are greeted with expressions of distance or doubt. The previously cited book, \"The Souls of Black Folk\" by W.E.B. Du Bois, represents early African-American literature that describes the author's experiences with racism when he was traveling in the South as an African American.\nMuch American fictional literature has focused on issues of racism and the black \"racial experience\" in the US, including works written by whites, such as \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\", \"To Kill a Mockingbird\", and \"Imitation of Life\", or even the non-fiction work \"Black Like Me\". These books, and others like them, feed into what has been called the \"white savior narrative in film\", in which the heroes and heroines are white even though the story is about things that happen to black characters. Textual analysis of such writings can contrast sharply with black authors' descriptions of African Americans and their experiences in US society. African-American writers have sometimes been portrayed in African-American studies as retreating from racial issues when they write about \"whiteness\", while others identify this as an African-American literary tradition called \"the literature of white estrangement\", part of a multi-pronged effort to challenge and dismantle white supremacy in the US.\nPopular usage.\nAccording to dictionary definitions, racism is prejudice and discrimination based on race.\nRacism can also be said to describe a condition in society in which a dominant racial group benefits from the oppression of others, whether that group wants such benefits or not. Foucauldian scholar Ladelle McWhorter, in her 2009 book, \"Racism and Sexual Oppression in Anglo-America: A Genealogy\", posits modern racism similarly, focusing on the notion of a dominant group, usually whites, vying for racial purity and progress, rather than an overt or obvious ideology focused on the oppression of nonwhites.\nIn popular usage, as in some academic usage, little distinction is made between \"racism\" and \"ethnocentrism\". Often, the two are listed together as \"racial and ethnic\" in describing some action or outcome that is associated with prejudice within a majority or dominant group in society. Furthermore, the meaning of the term racism is often conflated with the terms prejudice, bigotry, and discrimination. Racism is a complex concept that can involve each of those; but it cannot be equated with, nor is it synonymous, with these other terms.\nSome academics use a new stipulative definition of racism, seeing racism not only in terms of individual prejudice, but also seeing it in terms of a power structure that protects the interests of the dominant culture and actively discriminates against ethnic minorities. From this newly defined perspective, racism means \"Prejudice plus power\".\nAspects.\nThe ideology underlying racism can manifest in many aspects of social life. Such aspects are described in this section, although the list is not exhaustive.\nAversive racism.\nAversive racism is a form of implicit racism, in which a person's unconscious negative evaluations of racial or ethnic minorities are realized by a persistent avoidance of interaction with other racial and ethnic groups. As opposed to traditional, overt racism, which is characterized by overt hatred for and explicit discrimination against racial/ethnic minorities, aversive racism is characterized by more complex, ambivalent expressions and attitudes. Aversive racism is similar in implications to the concept of symbolic or modern racism (described below), which is also a form of implicit, unconscious, or covert attitude which results in unconscious forms of discrimination.\nThe term was coined by Joel Kovel to describe the subtle racial behaviors of any ethnic or racial group who rationalize their aversion to a particular group by appeal to rules or stereotypes. People who behave in an aversively racial way may profess egalitarian beliefs, and will often deny their racially motivated behavior; nevertheless they change their behavior when dealing with a member of another race or ethnic group than the one they belong to. The motivation for the change is thought to be implicit or subconscious. Experiments have provided empirical support for the existence of aversive racism. Aversive racism has been shown to have potentially serious implications for decision making in employment, in legal decisions and in helping behavior.\nColor blindness.\nIn relation to racism, color blindness is the disregard of racial characteristics in social interaction, for example in the rejection of affirmative action, as a way to address the results of past patterns of discrimination. Critics of this attitude argue that by refusing to attend to racial disparities, racial color blindness in fact unconsciously perpetuates the patterns that produce racial inequality.\nEduardo Bonilla-Silva argues that color blind racism arises from an \"abstract liberalism, biologization of culture, naturalization of racial matters, and minimization of racism\". Color blind practices are \"subtle, institutional, and apparently nonracial\" because race is explicitly ignored in decision-making. If race is disregarded in predominantly white populations, for example, whiteness becomes the normative standard, whereas people of color are othered, and the racism these individuals experience may be minimized or erased. At an individual level, people with \"color blind prejudice\" reject racist ideology, but also reject systemic policies intended to fix institutional racism.\nCultural.\nCultural racism manifests as societal beliefs and customs that promote the assumption that the products of a given culture, including the language and traditions of that culture, are superior to those of other cultures. It shares a great deal with xenophobia, which is often characterized by fear of, or aggression toward, members of an outgroup by members of an ingroup.\nIn that sense it is also similar to communalism as used in South Asia.\nCultural racism exists when there is a widespread acceptance of stereotypes concerning diverse ethnic or population groups. Whereas racism can be characterised by the belief that one race is inherently superior to another, cultural racism can be characterised by the belief that one culture is inherently superior to another.\nEconomic.\nHistorical economic or social disparity is alleged to be a form of discrimination caused by past racism and historical reasons, affecting the present generation through deficits in the formal education and kinds of preparation in previous generations, and through primarily unconscious racist attitudes and actions on members of the general population. Some view that capitalism generally transformed racism depending on local circumstances, but racism is not necessary for capitalism. Economic discrimination may lead to choices that perpetuate racism. For example, color photographic film was tuned for white skin as are automatic soap dispensers and facial recognition systems.\nInstitutional.\nInstitutional racism (also known as structural racism, state racism or systemic racism) is racial discrimination by governments, corporations, religions, or educational institutions or other large organizations with the power to influence the lives of many individuals. Stokely Carmichael is credited for coining the phrase \"institutional racism\" in the late 1960s. He defined the term as \"the collective failure of an organization to provide an appropriate and professional service to people because of their colour, culture or ethnic origin\".\nMaulana Karenga argued that racism constituted the destruction of culture, language, religion, and human possibility and that the effects of racism were \"the morally monstrous destruction of human possibility involved redefining African humanity to the world, poisoning past, present and future relations with others who only know us through this stereotyping and thus damaging the truly human relations among peoples\".\nInstitutional racism refers to racism in terms of a power structure that protects the interests of the dominant culture and actively discriminates against ethnic minorities, not only in terms of individual prejudice or formal discrimination.\nOthering.\nOthering is the term used by some to describe a system of discrimination whereby the characteristics of a group are used to distinguish them as separate from the norm.\nOthering plays a fundamental role in the history and continuation of racism. To objectify a culture as something different, exotic or underdeveloped is to generalize that it is not like 'normal' society. Europe's colonial attitude towards the Orientals exemplifies this as it was thought that the East was the opposite of the West; feminine where the West was masculine, weak where the West was strong and traditional where the West was progressive. By making these generalizations and othering the East, Europe was simultaneously defining herself as the norm, further entrenching the gap.\nMuch of the process of othering relies on imagined difference, or the expectation of difference. Spatial difference can be enough to conclude that \"we\" are \"here\" and the \"others\" are over \"there\". Imagined differences serve to categorize people into groups and assign them characteristics that suit the imaginer's expectations.\nRacial discrimination.\nRacial discrimination refers to discrimination against someone on the basis of their race.\nRacial segregation.\nRacial segregation is the separation of humans into socially-constructed racial groups in daily life. It may apply to activities such as eating in a restaurant, drinking from a water fountain, using a bathroom, attending school, going to the movies, or in the rental or purchase of a home. Segregation is generally outlawed, but may exist through social norms, even when there is no strong individual preference for it, as suggested by Thomas Schelling's models of segregation and subsequent work.\nSupremacism.\nCenturies of European colonialism in the Americas, Africa and Asia were often justified by white supremacist attitudes. During the early 20th century, the phrase \"The White Man's Burden\" was widely used to justify an imperialist policy as a noble enterprise. A justification for the policy of conquest and subjugation of Native Americans emanated from the stereotyped perceptions of the indigenous people as \"merciless Indian savages\", as they are described in the United States Declaration of Independence. Sam Wolfson of \"The Guardian\" writes that \"the declaration's passage has often been cited as an encapsulation of the dehumanizing attitude toward indigenous Americans that the US was founded on.\" In an 1890 article about colonial expansion onto Native American land, author L. Frank Baum wrote: \"The Whites, by law of conquest, by justice of civilization, are masters of the American continent, and the best safety of the frontier settlements will be secured by the total annihilation of the few remaining Indians.\" In his \"Notes on the State of Virginia\", published in 1785, Thomas Jefferson wrote: \"blacks, whether originally a distinct race, or made distinct by time or circumstances, are inferior to the whites in the endowments of both body and mind.\" Attitudes of black supremacy, Arab supremacy, and East Asian supremacy also exist.\nSymbolic/modern.\nSome scholars argue that in the US, earlier violent and aggressive forms of racism have evolved into a more subtle form of prejudice in the late 20th century. This new form of racism is sometimes referred to as \"modern racism\" and it is characterized by outwardly acting unprejudiced while inwardly maintaining prejudiced attitudes, displaying subtle prejudiced behaviors such as actions informed by attributing qualities to others based on racial stereotypes, and evaluating the same behavior differently based on the race of the person being evaluated. This view is based on studies of prejudice and discriminatory behavior, where some people will act ambivalently towards black people, with positive reactions in certain, more public contexts, but more negative views and expressions in more private contexts. This ambivalence may also be visible for example in hiring decisions where job candidates that are otherwise positively evaluated may be unconsciously disfavored by employers in the final decision because of their race. Some scholars consider modern racism to be characterized by an explicit rejection of stereotypes, combined with resistance to changing structures of discrimination for reasons that are ostensibly non-racial, an ideology that considers opportunity at a purely individual basis denying the relevance of race in determining individual opportunities and the exhibition of indirect forms of micro-aggression toward and/or avoidance of people of other races.\nSubconscious biases.\nRecent research has shown that individuals who consciously claim to reject racism may still exhibit race-based subconscious biases in their decision-making processes. While such \"subconscious racial biases\" do not fully fit the definition of racism, their impact can be similar, though typically less pronounced, not being explicit, conscious or deliberate.\nInternational law and racial discrimination.\nIn 1919, a proposal to include a racial equality provision in the Covenant of the League of Nations was supported by a majority, but not adopted in the Paris Peace Conference in 1919. In 1943, Japan and its allies declared work for the abolition of racial discrimination to be their aim at the Greater East Asia Conference. Article 1 of the 1945 UN Charter includes \"promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race\" as UN purpose.\nIn 1950, UNESCO suggested in \"The Race Question\"\u2014a statement signed by 21 scholars such as Ashley Montagu, Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss, Gunnar Myrdal, Julian Huxley, etc.\u2014to \"drop the term \"race\" altogether and instead speak of ethnic groups\". The statement condemned scientific racism theories that had played a role in the Holocaust. It aimed both at debunking scientific racist theories, by popularizing modern knowledge concerning \"the race question\", and morally condemned racism as contrary to the philosophy of the Enlightenment and its assumption of equal rights for all. Along with Myrdal's \"\" (1944), \"The Race Question\" influenced the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court desegregation decision in \"Brown v. Board of Education\". Also, in 1950, the European Convention on Human Rights was adopted, which was widely used on racial discrimination issues.\nThe United Nations use the definition of racial discrimination laid out in the \"International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination\", adopted in 1966:\n...\u00a0any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, color, descent, or national or ethnic origin that has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life. (Part 1 of Article 1 of the U.N. International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination)\nIn 2001, the European Union explicitly banned racism, along with many other forms of social discrimination, in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, the legal effect of which, if any, would necessarily be limited to Institutions of the European Union: \"Article 21 of the charter prohibits discrimination on any ground such as race, color, ethnic or social origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national minority, property, disability, age or sexual orientation and also discrimination on the grounds of nationality.\"\nIdeology.\nRacism existed during the 19th century as scientific racism, which attempted to provide a racial classification of humanity. In 1775 Johann Blumenbach divided the world's population into five groups according to skin color (Caucasians, Mongols, etc.), positing the view that the non-Caucasians had arisen through a process of degeneration. Another early view in scientific racism was the polygenist view, which held that the different races had been separately created. Polygenist Christoph Meiners (1747 \u2013 May 1810) for example, split mankind into two divisions which he labeled the \"beautiful White race\" and the \"ugly Black race\". In Meiners' book, \"The Outline of History of Mankind\", he claimed that a main characteristic of race is either beauty or ugliness. He viewed only the white race as beautiful. He considered ugly races to be inferior, immoral and animal-like.\nAnders Retzius (1796\u20131860) demonstrated that neither Europeans nor others are one \"pure race\", but of mixed origins. While discredited, derivations of Blumenbach's taxonomy are still widely used for the classification of the population in the United States. Hans Peder Steensby, while strongly emphasizing that all humans today are of mixed origins, in 1907 claimed that the origins of human differences must be traced extraordinarily far back in time, and conjectured that the \"purest race\" today would be the Australian Aboriginals.\nScientific racism fell strongly out of favor in the early 20th century, but the origins of fundamental human and societal differences are still researched within academia, in fields such as human genetics including paleogenetics, social anthropology, comparative politics, history of religions, history of ideas, prehistory, history, ethics, and psychiatry. There is widespread rejection of any methodology based on anything similar to Blumenbach's races. It is more unclear to which extent and when ethnic and national stereotypes are accepted.\nAlthough after World War II and the Holocaust, racist ideologies were discredited on ethical, political and scientific grounds, racism and racial discrimination have remained widespread around the world.\nDu Bois observed that it is not so much \"race\" that we think about, but culture: \"...\u00a0a common history, common laws and religion, similar habits of thought and a conscious striving together for certain ideals of life\". Late 19th century nationalists were the first to embrace contemporary discourses on \"race\", ethnicity, and \"survival of the fittest\" to shape new nationalist doctrines. Ultimately, race came to represent not only the most important traits of the human body, but was also regarded as decisively shaping the character and personality of the nation. According to this view, culture is the physical manifestation created by ethnic groupings, as such fully determined by racial characteristics. Culture and race became considered intertwined and dependent upon each other, sometimes even to the extent of including nationality or language to the set of definition. Pureness of race tended to be related to rather superficial characteristics that were easily addressed and advertised, such as blondness. Racial qualities tended to be related to nationality and language rather than the actual geographic distribution of racial characteristics. In the case of Nordicism, the denomination \"Germanic\" was equivalent to superiority of race.\nBolstered by some nationalist and ethnocentric values and achievements of choice, this concept of racial superiority evolved to distinguish from other cultures that were considered inferior or impure. This emphasis on culture corresponds to the modern mainstream definition of racism: \"[r]acism does not originate from the existence of 'races'. It \"creates\" them through a process of social division into categories: anybody can be racialised, independently of their somatic, cultural, religious differences.\"\nThis definition explicitly ignores the biological concept of race, which is still subject to scientific debate. In the words of David C. Rowe, \"[a] racial concept, although sometimes in the guise of another name, will remain in use in biology and in other fields because scientists, as well as lay persons, are fascinated by human diversity, some of which is captured by race.\"\nRacial prejudice became subject to international legislation. For instance, the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 20 November 1963, addresses racial prejudice explicitly next to discrimination for reasons of race, colour or ethnic origin (Article I).\nEthnicity and ethnic conflicts.\nDebates over the origins of racism often suffer from a lack of clarity over the term. Many use the term \"racism\" to refer to more general phenomena, such as xenophobia and ethnocentrism, although scholars attempt to clearly distinguish those phenomena from racism as an ideology or from scientific racism, which has little to do with ordinary xenophobia. Others conflate recent forms of racism with earlier forms of ethnic and national conflict. In most cases, ethno-national conflict seems to owe itself to conflict over land and strategic resources. In some cases, ethnicity and nationalism were harnessed in order to rally combatants in wars between great religious empires (for example, the Muslim Turks and the Catholic Austro-Hungarians).\nNotions of race and racism have often played central roles in ethnic conflicts. Throughout history, when an adversary is identified as \"other\" based on notions of race or ethnicity (in particular when \"other\" is interpreted to mean \"inferior\"), the means employed by the self-presumed \"superior\" party to appropriate territory, human chattel, or material wealth often have been more ruthless, more brutal, and less constrained by moral or ethical considerations. According to historian Daniel Richter, Pontiac's Rebellion saw the emergence on both sides of the conflict of \"the novel idea that all Native people were 'Indians,' that all Euro-Americans were 'Whites,' and that all on one side must unite to destroy the other\". Basil Davidson states in his documentary, \"Africa: Different but Equal\", that racism, in fact, only just recently surfaced as late as the 19th century, due to the need for a justification for slavery in the Americas.\nHistorically, racism was a major driving force behind the Transatlantic slave trade. It was also a major force behind racial segregation, especially in the United States in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and South Africa under apartheid; 19th and 20th century racism in the Western world is particularly well documented and constitutes a reference point in studies and discourses about racism. Racism has played a role in genocides such as the Armenian genocide, and the Holocaust, and colonial projects like the European colonization of the Americas, Africa, and Asia. Indigenous peoples have been\u2014and are\u2014often subject to racist attitudes. Practices and ideologies of racism are condemned by the United Nations in the Declaration of Human Rights.\nEthnic and racial nationalism.\nAfter the Napoleonic Wars, Europe was confronted with the new \"nationalities question\", leading to reconfigurations of the European map, on which the frontiers between the states had been delineated during the 1648 Peace of Westphalia. Nationalism had made its first appearance with the invention of the \"lev\u00e9e en masse\" by the French Revolutionaries, thus inventing mass conscription in order to be able to defend the newly founded Republic against the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\" order represented by the European monarchies. This led to the French Revolutionary Wars (1792\u20131802) and then to the conquests of Napoleon, and to the subsequent European-wide debates on the concepts and realities of nations, and in particular of nation-states. The Westphalia Treaty had divided Europe into various empires and kingdoms (such as the Ottoman Empire, the Holy Roman Empire, the Swedish Empire, the Kingdom of France, etc.), and for centuries wars were waged between princes (\"Kabinettskriege\" in German).\nModern nation-states appeared in the wake of the French Revolution, with the formation of patriotic sentiments for the first time in Spain during the Peninsula War (1808\u20131813, known in Spain as the Independence War). Despite the restoration of the previous order with the 1815 Congress of Vienna, the \"nationalities question\" became the main problem of Europe during the Industrial Era, leading in particular to the 1848 Revolutions, the Italian unification completed during the 1871 Franco-Prussian War, which itself culminated in the proclamation of the German Empire in the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles, thus achieving the German unification.\nMeanwhile, the Ottoman Empire, the \"sick man of Europe\", was confronted with endless nationalist movements, which, along with the dissolving of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire, would lead to the creation, after World War I, of the various nation-states of the Balkans, with \"national minorities\" in their borders.\nEthnic nationalism, which advocated the belief in a hereditary membership of the nation, made its appearance in the historical context surrounding the creation of the modern nation-states.\nOne of its main influences was the Romantic nationalist movement at the turn of the 19th century, represented by figures such as Johann Herder (1744\u20131803), Johan Fichte (1762\u20131814) in the \"Addresses to the German Nation\" (1808), Friedrich Hegel (1770\u20131831), or also, in France, Jules Michelet (1798\u20131874). It was opposed to liberal nationalism, represented by authors such as Ernest Renan (1823\u20131892), who conceived of the nation as a community, which, instead of being based on the \"Volk\" ethnic group and on a specific, common language, was founded on the subjective will to live together (\"the nation is a daily plebiscite\", 1882) or also John Stuart Mill (1806\u20131873).\nEthnic nationalism blended with scientific racist discourses, as well as with \"continental imperialist\" (Hannah Arendt, 1951) discourses, for example in the pan-Germanism discourses, which postulated the racial superiority of the German \"Volk\" (people/folk). The Pan-German League (\"Alldeutscher Verband\"), created in 1891, promoted German imperialism and \"racial hygiene\", and was opposed to intermarriage with Jews. Another popular current, the \"V\u00f6lkisch movement\", was also an important proponent of the German ethnic nationalist discourse, and it combined Pan-Germanism with modern racial antisemitism. Members of the V\u00f6lkisch movement, in particular the Thule Society, would participate in the founding of the German Workers' Party (DAP) in Munich in 1918, the predecessor of the Nazi Party. Pan-Germanism played a decisive role in the interwar period of the 1920s\u20131930s.\nThese currents began to associate the idea of the nation with the biological concept of a \"master race\" (often the \"Aryan race\" or the \"Nordic race\") issued from the scientific racist discourse. They conflated nationalities with ethnic groups, called \"races\", in a radical distinction from previous racial discourses that posited the existence of a \"race struggle\" inside the nation and the state itself. Furthermore, they believed that political boundaries should mirror these alleged racial and ethnic groups, thus justifying ethnic cleansing, in order to achieve \"racial purity\" and also to achieve ethnic homogeneity in the nation-state.\nSuch racist discourses, combined with nationalism, were not, however, limited to pan-Germanism. In France, the transition from Republican liberal nationalism, to ethnic nationalism, which made nationalism a characteristic of far-right movements in France, took place during the Dreyfus Affair at the end of the 19th century. During several years, a nationwide crisis affected French society, concerning the alleged treason of Alfred Dreyfus, a French Jewish military officer. The country polarized itself into two opposite camps, one represented by \u00c9mile Zola, who wrote \"J'Accuse\u2026!\" in defense of Alfred Dreyfus, and the other represented by the nationalist poet, Maurice Barr\u00e8s (1862\u20131923), one of the founders of the ethnic nationalist discourse in France. At the same time, Charles Maurras (1868\u20131952), founder of the monarchist \"Action fran\u00e7aise\" movement, theorized the \"anti-France\", composed of the \"four confederate states of Protestants, Jews, Freemasons and foreigners\" (his actual word for the latter being the pejorative \"m\u00e9t\u00e8ques\"). Indeed, to him the first three were all \"internal foreigners\", who threatened the ethnic unity of the French people.\nHistory.\nEthnocentrism and proto-racism.\nAristotle.\nBernard Lewis has cited the Greek philosopher Aristotle who, in his discussion of slavery, stated that while Greeks are free by nature, \"barbarians\" (non-Greeks) are slaves by nature, in that it is in their nature to be more willing to submit to a despotic government. Though Aristotle does not specify any particular races, he argues that people from nations outside Greece are more prone to the burden of slavery than those from Greece. While Aristotle makes remarks about the most natural slaves being those with strong bodies and slave souls (unfit for rule, unintelligent) which would seem to imply a physical basis for discrimination, he also explicitly states that the right kind of souls and bodies do not always go together, implying that the greatest determinate for inferiority and natural slaves versus natural masters is the soul, not the body. The modern version of racism based on the idea of hereditary inferiority had not yet been developed, and Aristotle never explicitly stated whether he believed the supposed natural inferiority of Barbarians was caused by environment and climate (like many of his contemporaries) or by birth.\nHistorian Dante A. Puzzo, in his discussion of Aristotle, racism, and the ancient world writes that:\nRacism rests on two basic assumptions: that a correlation exists between physical characteristics and moral qualities; that mankind is divisible into superior and inferior stocks. Racism, thus defined, is a modern conception, for prior to the XVIth century there was virtually nothing in the life and thought of the West that can be described as racist. To prevent misunderstanding a clear distinction must be made between racism and ethnocentrism\u00a0... The Ancient Hebrews, in referring to all who were not Hebrews as Gentiles, were indulging in ethnocentrism, not in racism. ... So it was with the Hellenes who denominated all non-Hellenes\u2014whether the wild Scythians or the Egyptians whom they acknowledged as their mentors in the arts of civilization\u2014Barbarians, the term denoting that which was strange or foreign.\nEarly antisemitism.\nSome scholars suggest that anti-Jewish policies under the Hellenistic empires and the Roman Empire constitute examples of ancient racism. Other scholars have criticized this view as based on an ahistorical conception of race, and argued that such policies were aimed at repressing a religious group resistant to imperialism and conformity rather than a racialized entity.\nMedieval Arab writers.\nBernard Lewis has also cited historians and geographers of the Middle East and North Africa region, including Al-Muqaddasi, Al-Jahiz, Al-Masudi, Abu Rayhan Biruni, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, and Ibn Qutaybah. Though the Qur'an expresses no racial prejudice, Lewis argues that ethnocentric prejudice later developed among Arabs, for a variety of reasons: their extensive conquests and slave trade; the influence of Aristotelian ideas regarding slavery, which some Muslim philosophers directed towards Zanj (Bantu) and Turkic peoples; and the influence of Judeo-Christian ideas regarding divisions among humankind. By the eighth century, anti-black prejudice among Arabs resulted in discrimination. A number of medieval Arabic authors argued against this prejudice, urging respect for all black people and especially Ethiopians. By the 14th century, a significant number of slaves came from sub-Saharan Africa; Lewis argues that this led to the likes of Egyptian historian Al-Abshibi (1388\u20131446) writing that \"[i]t is said that when the [black] slave is sated, he fornicates, when he is hungry, he steals.\" According to Lewis, the 14th-century Tunisian scholar Ibn Khaldun also wrote:\n...beyond [known peoples of black West Africa] to the south there is no civilization in the proper sense. There are only humans who are closer to dumb animals than to rational beings. They live in thickets and caves, and eat herbs and unprepared grain. They frequently eat each other. They cannot be considered human beings. Therefore, the Negro nations are, as a rule, submissive to slavery, because (Negroes) have little that is (essentially) human and possess attributes that are quite similar to those of dumb animals, as we have stated.\nAccording to Wesleyan University professor Abdelmajid Hannoum, French Orientalists projected racist and colonialist views of the 19th century into their translations of medieval Arabic writings, including those of Ibn Khaldun. This resulted in the translated texts racializing Arabs and Berber people, when no such distinction was made in the originals. James E. Lindsay argues that the concept of an Arab identity itself did not exist until modern times, though others like Robert Hoyland have argued that a common sense of Arab identity already existed by the 9th century.\n\"Limpieza de sangre\".\nWith the Umayyad Caliphate's conquest of Hispania, Muslim Arabs and Berbers overthrew the previous Visigothic rulers and created Al-Andalus, which contributed to the Golden age of Jewish culture, and lasted for six centuries. It was followed by the centuries-long \"Reconquista\", during which Christian Iberian kingdoms contested Al-Andalus and progressively conquered the divided Muslim kingdoms, culminating in the fall of the Nasrid kingdom of Granada in 1492 and the rise of Ferdinand V and Isabella I as Catholic monarchs of Spain. The legacy Catholic Spaniards then formulated the \"limpieza de sangre\" (\"cleanliness of blood\") doctrine. It was during this time in history that the Western concept of aristocratic \"blue blood\" emerged in a racialized, religious and feudal context, so as to stem the upward social mobility of the converted New Christians. Robert Lacey explains:\nIt was the Spaniards who gave the world the notion that an aristocrat's blood is not red but blue. The Spanish nobility started taking shape around the ninth century in classic military fashion, occupying land as warriors on horseback. They were to continue the process for more than five hundred years, clawing back sections of the peninsula from its Moorish occupiers, and a nobleman demonstrated his pedigree by holding up his sword arm to display the filigree of blue-blooded veins beneath his pale skin\u2014proof that his birth had not been contaminated by the dark-skinned enemy. Sangre azul, blue blood, was thus a euphemism for being a white man\u2014Spain's own particular reminder that the refined footsteps of the aristocracy through history carry the rather less refined spoor of racism.\nFollowing the expulsion of the Arabic Moors and most of the Sephardic Jews from the Iberian peninsula, the remaining Jews and Muslims were forced to convert to Roman Catholicism, becoming \"New Christians\", who were sometimes discriminated against by the \"Old Christians\" in some cities (including Toledo), despite condemnations by the Church and the State, which both welcomed the new flock. The Inquisition was carried out by members of the Dominican Order in order to weed out the converts who still practiced Judaism and Islam in secret. The system and ideology of the \"limpieza de sangre\" ostracized false Christian converts from society in order to protect it against treason. The remnants of such legislation persevered into the 19th century in military contexts.\nIn Portugal, the legal distinction between New and Old Christian was only ended through a legal decree issued by the Marquis of Pombal in 1772, almost three centuries after the implementation of the racist discrimination. The \"limpieza de sangre\" legislation was common also during the colonization of the Americas, where it led to the racial and feudal separation of peoples and social strata in the colonies. It was however often ignored in practice, as the new colonies needed skilled people.\nAt the end of the Renaissance, the Valladolid debate (1550\u20131551), concerning the treatment of the natives of the \"New World\" pitted the Dominican friar and Bishop of Chiapas, Bartolom\u00e9 de Las Casas, to another Dominican and Humanist philosopher, Juan Gin\u00e9s de Sep\u00falveda. The latter argued that the Indians practiced human sacrifice of innocents, cannibalism, and other such \"crimes against nature\"; they were unacceptable and should be suppressed by any means possible including war, thus reducing them to slavery or serfdom was in accordance with Catholic theology and natural law. To the contrary, Bartolom\u00e9 de Las Casas argued that the Amerindians were free men in the natural order and deserved the same treatment as others, according to Catholic theology. It was one of the many controversies concerning racism, slavery, religion, and European morality that would arise in the following centuries and which resulted in the legislation protecting the natives. The marriage between Luisa de Abrego, a free black domestic servant from Seville and Miguel Rodr\u00edguez, a white segovian conquistador in 1565 in St. Augustine (Spanish Florida), is the first known and recorded Christian marriage anywhere in the continental United States.\nIn the Spanish colonies, Spaniards developed a complex caste system based on race, which was used for social control, and which also determined a person's importance in society. While many Latin American countries have long since rendered the system officially illegal through legislation, usually at the time of their independence, prejudice based on degrees of perceived racial distance from European ancestry combined with one's socioeconomic status remain, an echo of the colonial caste system.\nRacism as a modern phenomenon.\nRacism is frequently described as a \"modern\" phenomenon. In the view of the French philosopher and historian Michel Foucault, the first formulation of racism emerged in the Early Modern period as the \"discourse of race struggle\", and a historical and political discourse, which Foucault opposed to the philosophical and juridical discourse of sovereignty.\nThis European discourse, which first appeared in Great Britain, was then carried on in France by such people as Boulainvilliers (1658\u20131722), Nicolas Fr\u00e9ret (1688\u20131749), and then, during the 1789 French Revolution, Siey\u00e8s, and afterwards, Augustin Thierry and Cournot. Boulainvilliers, who created the matrix of such racist discourse in France, conceived of the \"race\" as being something closer to the sense of a \"nation\", that is, in his time, the \"race\" meant the \"people\".\nHe conceived of France as being divided between various nations\u2014the unified nation-state is an anachronism here\u2014which themselves formed different \"races\". Boulainvilliers opposed the absolute monarchy, which tried to bypass the aristocracy by establishing a direct relationship to the Third Estate. Thus, he developed the theory that the French aristocrats were the descendants of foreign invaders, whom he called the \"Franks\", while according to him, the Third Estate constituted the autochthonous, vanquished Gallo-Romans, who were dominated by the Frankish aristocracy as a consequence of the right of conquest. Early modern racism was opposed to nationalism and the nation-state: the Comte de Montlosier, in exile during the French Revolution, who borrowed Boulainvilliers' discourse on the \"Nordic race\" as being the French aristocracy that invaded the plebeian \"Gauls\", thus showed his contempt for the Third Estate, calling it \"this new people born of slaves\u00a0... mixture of all races and of all times\".\n19th century.\nWhile 19th-century racism became closely intertwined with nationalism, leading to the ethnic nationalist discourse that identified the \"race\" with the \"folk\", leading to such movements as pan-Germanism, pan-Turkism, pan-Arabism, and pan-Slavism, medieval racism precisely divided the nation into various non-biological \"races\", which were thought to be the consequence of historical conquests and social conflicts. Michel Foucault traced the genealogy of modern racism to this medieval \"historical and political discourse of race struggle\". According to him, it divided itself in the 19th century according to two rival lines: on one hand, it was incorporated by racists, biologists and eugenicists, who gave it the modern sense of \"race\", and they also transformed this popular discourse into a \"state racism\" (e.g., Nazism). On the other hand, Marxism also seized this discourse founded on the assumption of a political struggle that provided the real engine of history and continued to act underneath the apparent peace. Thus, Marxists transformed the essentialist notion of \"race\" into the historical notion of \"class struggle\", defined by socially structured positions: capitalist or proletarian. In \"The Will to Knowledge\" (1976), Foucault analyzed another opponent of the \"race struggle\" discourse: Sigmund Freud's psychoanalysis, which opposed the concept of \"blood heredity\", prevalent in the 19th century racist discourse.\nAuthors such as Hannah Arendt, in her 1951 book \"The Origins of Totalitarianism\", have said that the racist ideology (\"popular racism\") which developed at the end of the 19th century helped legitimize the imperialist conquests of foreign territories and the atrocities that sometimes accompanied them (such as the Herero and Nama genocide of 1904\u20131908 or the Armenian genocide of 1915\u20131917). Rudyard Kipling's poem, \"The White Man's Burden\" (1899), is one of the more famous illustrations of the belief in the inherent superiority of the European culture over the rest of the world, though it is also thought to be a satirical appraisal of such imperialism. Racist ideology thus helped legitimize the conquest and incorporation of foreign territories into an empire, which were regarded as a humanitarian obligation partially as a result of these racist beliefs.\nHowever, during the 19th century, Western European colonial powers were involved in the suppression of the Arab slave trade in Africa, as well as in the suppression of the slave trade in West Africa. Some Europeans during the time period objected to injustices that occurred in some colonies and lobbied on behalf of aboriginal peoples. Thus, when the Hottentot Venus was displayed in England in the beginning of the 19th century, the African Association publicly opposed itself to the exhibition. The same year that Kipling published his poem, Joseph Conrad published \"Heart of Darkness\" (1899), a clear criticism of the Congo Free State, which was owned by Leopold II of Belgium.\nExamples of racial theories used include the creation of the Hamitic theory during the European exploration of Africa. The term \"Hamite\" was applied to different populations within North Africa, mainly comprising Ethiopians, Eritreans, Somalis, Berbers, and the ancient Egyptians. Hamites were regarded as Caucasoid peoples who probably originated in either Arabia or Asia on the basis of their cultural, physical and linguistic similarities with the peoples of those areas. Europeans considered Hamites to be more civilized than Sub-Saharan Africans, and more akin to themselves and Semitic peoples. In the first two-thirds of the 20th century, the Hamitic race was, in fact, considered one of the branches of the Caucasian race, along with the Indo-Europeans, Semites, and the Mediterraneans.\nHowever, the Hamitic peoples themselves were often deemed to have failed as rulers, which was usually ascribed to interbreeding with Negroes. In the mid-20th century, the German scholar Carl Meinhof (1857\u20131944) claimed that the Bantu race was formed by a merger of Hamitic and Negro races. The Hottentots (Nama or Khoi) were formed by the merger of Hamitic and Bushmen (San) races\u2014both being termed nowadays as Khoisan peoples.\nIn the United States in the early 19th century, the American Colonization Society was established as the primary vehicle for proposals to return black Americans to greater freedom and equality in Africa. The colonization effort resulted from a mixture of motives with its founder Henry Clay stating that \"unconquerable prejudice resulting from their color, they never could amalgamate with the free whites of this country. It was desirable, therefore, as it respected them, and the residue of the population of the country, to drain them off\". Racism spread throughout the New World in the late 19th century and early 20th century. Whitecapping, which started in Indiana in the late 19th century, soon spread throughout all of North America, causing many African laborers to flee from the land they worked on. In the US, during the 1860s, racist posters were used during election campaigns. In one of these racist posters (see above), a black man is depicted lounging idly in the foreground as one white man ploughs his field and another chops wood. Accompanying labels are: \"In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread\", and \"The white man must work to keep his children and pay his taxes.\" The black man wonders, \"Whar is de use for me to work as long as dey make dese appropriations.\" Above in a cloud is an image of the \"Freedman's Bureau! Negro Estimate of Freedom!\" The bureau is pictured as a large domed building resembling the U.S. Capitol and is inscribed \"Freedom and No Work\". Its columns and walls are labeled, \"Candy\", \"Rum, Gin, Whiskey\", \"Sugar Plums\", \"Indolence\", \"White Women\", \"Apathy\", \"White Sugar\", \"Idleness\", and so on.\nOn 5 June 1873, Sir Francis Galton, distinguished English explorer and cousin of Charles Darwin, wrote in a letter to \"The Times\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My proposal is to make the encouragement of Chinese settlements of Africa a part of our national policy, in the belief that the Chinese immigrants would not only maintain their position, but that they would multiply and their descendants supplant the inferior Negro race\u00a0... I should expect that the African seaboard, now sparsely occupied by lazy, palavering savages, might in a few years be tenanted by industrious, order-loving Chinese, living either as a semidetached dependency of China, or else in perfect freedom under their own law.\n20th century.\nThe Nazi party, which seized power in the 1933 German elections and maintained a dictatorship over much of Europe until the End of World War II on the European continent, deemed the Germans to be part of an Aryan \"master race\" (\"Herrenvolk\"), who therefore had the right to expand their territory and enslave or kill members of other races deemed inferior.\nThe racial ideology conceived by the Nazis graded humans on a scale of pure Aryan to non-Aryan, with the latter viewed as subhuman. At the top of the scale of pure Aryans were Germans and other Germanic peoples including the Dutch, Scandinavians, and the English as well as other peoples such as some northern Italians and the French, who were said to have a suitable admixture of Germanic blood. Nazi policies labeled Romani people, people of color, and Slavs (mainly Poles, Serbs, Russians, Belarusians, Ukrainians and Czechs) as inferior non-Aryan subhumans. Jews were at the bottom of the hierarchy, considered inhuman and thus unworthy of life. In accordance with Nazi racial ideology, approximately six million Jews were killed in the Holocaust. 2.5\u00a0million ethnic Poles, 0.5\u00a0million ethnic Serbs and 0.2\u20130.5\u00a0million Romani were killed by the regime and its collaborators.\nThe Nazis considered most Slavs to be non-Aryan \"Untermenschen\". The Nazi Party's chief racial theorist, Alfred Rosenberg, adopted the term from Klansman Lothrop Stoddard's 1922 book \"The Revolt Against Civilization: The Menace of the Under-man\". In the secret plan (\"Master Plan East\") the Nazis resolved to expel, enslave, or exterminate most Slavic people to provide \"living space\" for Germans, but Nazi policy towards Slavs changed during World War II due to manpower shortages which necessitated limited Slavic participation in the Waffen-SS. Significant war crimes were committed against Slavs, particularly Poles, and Soviet POWs had a far higher mortality rate than their American and British counterparts due to deliberate neglect and mistreatment. Between June 1941 and January 1942, the Nazis killed an estimated 2.8 million Red Army POWs, whom they viewed as \"subhuman\".\nIn the years 1943\u20131945, around 120,000 Polish people, mostly women and children, became the victims of ethnicity-based massacres by the Ukrainian Insurgent Army, which was then operating in the territory of occupied Poland. In addition to Poles who represented the vast majority of the murdered people, the victims also included Jews, Armenians, Russians, and Ukrainians who were married to Poles or attempted to help them.\nDuring the intensification of ties with Nazi Germany in the 1930s, Ante Paveli\u0107 and the Usta\u0161e and their idea of the Croatian nation became increasingly race-oriented. The Usta\u0161e view of national and racial identity, as well as the theory of Serbs as an inferior race, was influenced by Croatian nationalists and intellectuals from the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century. Serbs were primary targets of racial laws and murders in the puppet Independent State of Croatia (NDH); Jews and Roma were also targeted. The Usta\u0161e introduced laws to strip Serbs of their citizenship, livelihoods, and possessions. During the genocide in the NDH, Serbs suffered among the highest casualty rates in Europe during the World War II, and the NDH was one of the most lethal regimes in the 20th century.\nGerman praise for America's institutional racism was continuous throughout the early 1930s, and Nazi lawyers were advocates of the use of American models. Race based U.S. citizenship laws and anti-miscegenation laws (no race mixing) directly inspired the Nazi's two principal Nuremberg racial laws\u2014the Citizenship Law and the Blood Law. Hitler's 1925 memoir \"Mein Kampf\" was full of admiration for America's treatment of \"coloreds\". Nazi expansion eastward was accompanied with invocation of America's colonial expansion westward, with the accompanying actions toward the Native Americans. In 1928, Hitler praised Americans for having \"gunned down the millions of Redskins to a few hundred thousand, and now keeps the modest remnant under observation in a cage.\" On Nazi Germany's expansion eastward, in 1941 Hitler stated, \"Our Mississippi [the line beyond which Thomas Jefferson wanted all Indians expelled] must be the Volga.\"\nWhite supremacy was dominant in the U.S. from its founding up to the civil rights movement. On the U.S. immigration laws prior to 1965, sociologist Stephen Klineberg cited the law as clearly declaring \"that Northern Europeans are a superior subspecies of the white race.\" While anti-Asian racism was embedded in U.S. politics and culture in the early 20th century, Indians were also racialized for their anticolonialism, with U.S. officials, casting them as a \"Hindu\" menace, pushing for Western imperial expansion abroad. The Naturalization Act of 1790 limited U.S. citizenship to whites only, and in the 1923 case, \"United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind\", the Supreme Court ruled that high caste Hindus were not \"white persons\" and were therefore racially ineligible for naturalized citizenship. It was after the Luce\u2013Celler Act of 1946 that a quota of 100 Indians per year could immigrate to the U.S. and become citizens. The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 dramatically opened entry to the U.S. to immigrants other than traditional Northern European and Germanic groups, and as a result would significantly alter the demographic mix in the U.S.\nSerious race riots in Durban between Indians and Zulus erupted in 1949. Ne Win's rise to power in Burma in 1962 and his relentless persecution of \"resident aliens\" led to an exodus of some 300,000 Burmese Indians. They migrated to escape racial discrimination and wholesale nationalisation of private enterprises a few years later, in 1964. The Zanzibar Revolution of 12 January 1964, put an end to the local Arab dynasty. Thousands of Arabs and Indians in Zanzibar were massacred in riots, and thousands more were detained or fled the island. In August 1972, Ugandan President Idi Amin started the expropriation of properties owned by Asians and Europeans. In the same year, Amin ethnically cleansed Uganda's Asians, giving them 90 days to leave the country. Shortly after World War II, the South African National Party took control of the government in South Africa. Between 1948 and 1994, the apartheid regime took place. This regime based its ideology on the racial separation of whites and non-whites, including the unequal rights of non-whites. Several protests and violence occurred during the struggle against apartheid, the most famous of these include the Sharpeville Massacre in 1960, the Soweto uprising in 1976, the Church Street bombing of 1983, and the Cape Town peace march of 1989.\nContemporary.\nDuring the Congo Civil War (1998\u20132003), Pygmy people were hunted down like game animals and eaten. Both sides in the war regarded them as \"subhuman\" and some say their flesh can confer magical powers. UN human rights activists reported in 2003 that rebels had carried out acts of cannibalism. Sinafasi Makelo, a representative of the Mbuti pygmies, has asked the UN Security Council to recognise cannibalism as both a crime against humanity and an act of genocide. A report released by the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination condemns Botswana's treatment of the 'Bushmen' as racist. In 2008, the tribunal of the 15-nation Southern African Development Community (SADC) accused Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe of having a racist attitude towards white people.\nThe mass demonstrations and riots against African students in Nanjing, China, lasted from December 1988 to January 1989. In November 2009, British newspaper \"The Guardian\" reported that Lou Jing, of mixed Chinese and African parentage, had emerged as the most famous talent show contestant in China and has become the subject of intense debate because of her skin color. Her attention in the media opened serious debates about racism in China and racial prejudice.\nSome 70,000 black African Mauritanians were expelled from Mauritania in the late 1980s. In the Sudan, black African captives in the civil war were often enslaved, and female prisoners were often sexually abused. The Darfur conflict has been described by some as a racial matter. In October 2006, Niger announced that it would deport the approximately 150,000 Arabs living in the Diffa region of eastern Niger to Chad. While the government collected Arabs in preparation for the deportation, two girls died, reportedly after fleeing Government forces, and three women suffered miscarriages.\nThe Jakarta riots of May 1998 targeted many Chinese Indonesians. The anti-Chinese legislation was in the Indonesian constitution until 1998. Resentment against Chinese workers has led to violent confrontations in Africa and Oceania. Anti-Chinese rioting, involving tens of thousands of people, broke out in Papua New Guinea in May 2009. Indo-Fijians suffered violent attacks after the Fiji coup in 2000. Non-indigenous citizens of Fiji are subject to discrimination. Racial divisions also exist in Guyana, Malaysia, Trinidad and Tobago, Madagascar, and South Africa. In Malaysia such racist state policies are codified on many levels, see Bumiputera.\nPeter Bouckaert, the Human Rights Watch's emergencies director, said in an interview that \"racist hatred\" is the chief motivation behind the violence against Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar.\nOne form of racism in the United States was enforced racial segregation, which existed until the 1960s, when it was outlawed in the Civil Rights Act of 1964. It has been argued that this separation of races continues to exist \"de facto\" today in different forms, such as lack of access to loans and resources or discrimination by police and other government officials.\nThe 2016 Pew Research poll found that Italians, in particular, hold strong anti-Romani views, with 82% of Italians expressing negative opinions about Romani. In Greece, there are 67%, in Hungary, 64%, in France, 61%, in Spain, 49%, in Poland, 47%, in the UK, 45%, in Sweden, 42%, in Germany, 40%, and in the Netherlands, 37%, that have an unfavourable view of Roma. A survey conducted by Harvard University found the Czech Republic, Lithuania, Belarus and Ukraine had the strongest racial bias against black people in Europe, while Serbia, Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina had the weakest racial bias, followed by Croatia and Ireland.\nA 2023 University of Cambridge survey which featured the largest sample of Black people in Britain found that 88% had reported racial discrimination at work, 79% believed the police unfairly targeted black people with stop and search powers and 80% definitely or somewhat agreed that the biggest barrier to academic attainment for young Black students was racial discrimination in education.\nScientific racism.\nThe modern biological definition of race developed in the 19th century with scientific racist theories. The term \"scientific racism\" refers to the use of science to justify and support racist beliefs, which goes back to the early 18th century, though it gained most of its influence in the mid-19th century, during the New Imperialism period. Also known as academic racism, such theories first needed to overcome the Church's resistance to positivist accounts of history and its support of monogenism, the concept that all human beings were originated from the same ancestors, in accordance with creationist accounts of history.\nThese racist theories put forth on scientific hypothesis were combined with unilineal theories of social progress, which postulated the superiority of the European civilization over the rest of the world. Furthermore, they frequently made use of the idea of \"survival of the fittest\", a term coined by Herbert Spencer in 1864, associated with ideas of competition, which were named social Darwinism in the 1940s. Charles Darwin himself opposed the idea of rigid racial differences in \"The Descent of Man\" (1871), in which he argued that humans were all of one species, sharing common descent. He recognised racial differences as varieties of humanity, and emphasised the close similarities between people of all races in mental faculties, tastes, dispositions and habits, while still contrasting the culture of the \"lowest savages\" with European civilization.\nAt the end of the 19th century, proponents of scientific racism intertwined themselves with eugenics discourses of \"degeneration of the race\" and \"blood heredity\". Henceforth, scientific racist discourses could be defined as the combination of polygenism, unilinealism, social Darwinism, and eugenism. They found their scientific legitimacy on physical anthropology, anthropometry, craniometry, phrenology, physiognomy, and others now discredited disciplines in order to formulate racist prejudices.\nBefore being disqualified in the 20th century by the American school of cultural anthropology (Franz Boas, etc.), the British school of social anthropology (Bronis\u0142aw Malinowski, Alfred Radcliffe-Brown, etc.), the French school of ethnology (Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss, etc.), as well as the discovery of the neo-Darwinian synthesis, such sciences, in particular anthropometry, were used to deduce behaviours and psychological characteristics from outward, physical appearances.\nThe neo-Darwinian synthesis, first developed in the 1930s, eventually led to a gene-centered view of evolution in the 1960s. According to the Human Genome Project, the most complete mapping of human DNA to date indicates that there is no clear genetic basis to racial groups. While some genes are more common in certain populations, there are no genes that exist in all members of one population and no members of any other.\nHeredity and eugenics.\nThe first theory of eugenics was developed in 1869 by Francis Galton (1822\u20131911), who used the then-popular concept of \"degeneration\". He applied statistics to study human differences and the alleged \"inheritance of intelligence\", foreshadowing future uses of \"intelligence testing\" by the anthropometry school. Such theories were vividly described by the writer \u00c9mile Zola (1840\u20131902), who started publishing in 1871, a twenty-novel cycle, \"Les Rougon-Macquart\", where he linked heredity to behavior. Thus, Zola described the high-born Rougons as those involved in politics (\"Son Excellence Eug\u00e8ne Rougon\") and medicine (\"Le Docteur Pascal\") and the low-born Macquarts as those fatally falling into alcoholism (\"L'Assommoir\"), prostitution (\"Nana\"), and homicide (\"La B\u00eate humaine\").\nDuring the rise of Nazism in Germany, some scientists in Western nations worked to debunk the regime's racial theories. A few argued against racist ideologies and discrimination, even if they believed in the alleged existence of biological races. However, in the fields of anthropology and biology, these were minority positions until the mid-20th century. According to the 1950 UNESCO statement, \"The Race Question\", an international project to debunk racist theories had been attempted in the mid-1930s. However, this project had been abandoned. Thus, in 1950, UNESCO declared that it had resumed:\n...up again, after a lapse of fifteen years, a project that the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation has wished to carry through but that it had to abandon in deference to the appeasement policy of the pre-war period. The race question had become one of the pivots of Nazi ideology and policy. Masaryk and Bene\u0161 took the initiative of calling for a conference to re-establish in the minds and consciences of men everywhere the truth about race\u00a0... Nazi propaganda was able to continue its baleful work unopposed by the authority of an international organisation.\nThe Third Reich's racial policies, its eugenics programs and the extermination of Jews in the Holocaust, as well as the Romani people in the Porrajmos (the Romani Holocaust) and others minorities led to a change in opinions about scientific research into race after the war. Changes within scientific disciplines, such as the rise of the Boasian school of anthropology in the United States contributed to this shift. These theories were strongly denounced in the 1950 UNESCO statement, signed by internationally renowned scholars, and titled \"The Race Question\".\nPolygenism and racial typologies.\nWorks such as Arthur de Gobineau's \"An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races\" (1853\u20131855) may be considered one of the first theorizations of this new racism, founded on an essentialist notion of race, which opposed the former racial discourse, of Boulainvilliers for example, which saw in races a fundamentally historical reality, which changed over time. Gobineau, thus, attempted to frame racism within the terms of biological differences among humans, giving it the legitimacy of biology.\nGobineau's theories would be expanded in France by Georges Vacher de Lapouge (1854\u20131936)'s typology of races, who published in 1899 \"The Aryan and his Social Role\", in which he claimed that the white \"Aryan race\" \"dolichocephalic\", was opposed to the \"brachycephalic\" race, of whom the \"Jew\" was the archetype. Vacher de Lapouge thus created a hierarchical classification of races, in which he identified the \"\"Homo europaeus\" (Teutonic, Protestant, etc.), the \"\"Homo alpinus\" (Auvergnat, Turkish, etc.), and finally the \"Homo mediterraneus\"\" (Neapolitan, Andalus, etc.) He assimilated races and social classes, considering that the French upper class was a representation of the \"Homo europaeus\", while the lower class represented the \"Homo alpinus\". Applying Galton's eugenics to his theory of races, Vacher de Lapouge's \"selectionism\" aimed first at achieving the annihilation of trade unionists, considered to be a \"degenerate\"; second, creating types of man each destined to one end, in order to prevent any contestation of labour conditions. His \"anthroposociology\" thus aimed at blocking social conflict by establishing a fixed, hierarchical social order.\nThe same year, William Z. Ripley used identical racial classification in \"The Races of Europe\" (1899), which would have a great influence in the United States. Other scientific authors include H.S. Chamberlain at the end of the 19th century (a British citizen who naturalized himself as German because of his admiration for the \"Aryan race\") and Madison Grant, a eugenicist and author of \"The Passing of the Great Race\" (1916). Madison Grant provided statistics for the Immigration Act of 1924, which severely restricted immigration of Jews, Slavs, and Southern Europeans, who were subsequently hindered in seeking to escape Nazi Germany.\nHuman zoos.\nHuman zoos (called \"People Shows\"), were an important means of bolstering \"popular racism\" by connecting it to scientific racism: they were both objects of public curiosity and of anthropology and anthropometry. Joice Heth, an African-American slave, was displayed by P.T. Barnum in 1836, a few years after the exhibition of Saartjie Baartman, the \"Hottentot Venus\", in England. Such exhibitions became common in the New Imperialism period, and remained so until World War II. Carl Hagenbeck, inventor of the modern zoos, exhibited animals beside humans who were considered \"savages\".\nCongolese pygmy Ota Benga was displayed in 1906 by eugenicist Madison Grant, head of the Bronx Zoo, as an attempt to illustrate the \"missing link\" between humans and orangutans: thus, racism was tied to Darwinism, creating a social Darwinist ideology that tried to ground itself in Darwin's scientific discoveries. The 1931 Paris Colonial Exhibition displayed Kanaks from New Caledonia. A \"Congolese village\" was on display as late as 1958 at the Brussels' World Fair.\nTheories about the origins of racism.\nEvolutionary psychologists John Tooby and Leda Cosmides were puzzled by the fact that in the US, race is one of the three characteristics most often used in brief descriptions of individuals (the others are age and sex). They reasoned that natural selection would not have favoured the evolution of an instinct for using race as a classification, because for most of human history, humans almost never encountered members of other races. Tooby and Cosmides hypothesized that modern people use race as a proxy (rough-and-ready indicator) for coalition membership, since a better-than-random guess about \"which side\" another person is on will be helpful if one does not actually know in advance.\nTheir colleague Robert Kurzban designed an experiment whose results appeared to support this hypothesis. Using the memory confusion protocol, they presented subjects with pictures of individuals and sentences, allegedly spoken by these individuals, which presented two sides of a debate. The errors that the subjects made in recalling who said what indicated that they sometimes mis-attributed a statement to a speaker of the same race as the \"correct\" speaker, although they also sometimes mis-attributed a statement to a speaker \"on the same side\" as the \"correct\" speaker. In a second run of the experiment, the team also distinguished the \"sides\" in the debate by clothing of similar colors; and in this case the effect of racial similarity in causing mistakes almost vanished, being replaced by the color of their clothing. In other words, the first group of subjects, with no clues from clothing, used race as a visual guide to guessing who was on which side of the debate; the second group of subjects used the clothing color as their main visual clue, and the effect of race became very small.\nSome research suggests that ethnocentric thinking may have actually contributed to the development of cooperation. Political scientists Ross Hammond and Robert Axelrod created a computer simulation wherein virtual individuals were randomly assigned one of a variety of skin colors, and then one of a variety of trading strategies: be color-blind, favor those of your own color, or favor those of other colors. They found that the ethnocentric individuals clustered together, then grew, until all the non-ethnocentric individuals were wiped out.\nIn \"The Selfish Gene\", evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins writes that \"Blood-feuds and inter-clan warfare are easily interpretable in terms of Hamilton's genetic theory.\" Dawkins writes that racial prejudice, while not evolutionarily adaptive, \"could be interpreted as an irrational generalization of a kin-selected tendency to identify with individuals physically resembling oneself, and to be nasty to individuals different in appearance.\" Simulation-based experiments in evolutionary game theory have attempted to provide an explanation for the selection of ethnocentric-strategy phenotypes.\nDespite support for evolutionary theories relating to an innate origin of racism, various studies have suggested racism is associated with lower intelligence and less diverse peer groups during childhood. A neuroimaging study on amygdala activity during racial matching activities found increased activity to be associated with adolescent age as well as less racially diverse peer groups, which the author conclude suggest a learned aspect of racism. A meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies found amygdala activity correlated to increased scores on implicit measures of racial bias. It was also argued amygdala activity in response to racial stimuli represents increased threat perception rather than the traditional theory of the amygdala activity represented ingroup-outgroup processing. Racism has also been associated with lower childhood IQ in an analysis of 15,000 people in the UK.\nPsychological causes.\nA 2017 study in the \"American Political Science Review\" found that prejudice towards marginalized groups, such as refugees, could be explained by a failure to take the perspective of the marginalized group. The study found that young Hungarian adults who played a perspective-taking game (a game intended to reduce prejudice towards marginalized groups by having players assume the role of a member of a marginalized group) showed reduced prejudice towards Romani people and refugees, as well as reduced their vote intentions for Hungary's overtly racist, far right party by 10%.\nState-sponsored racism.\nState racism\u2014the institutions and practices of a nation-state that are grounded in racist ideology\u2014has played a major role in all instances of settler colonialism, from the United States to Australia. It also played a prominent role in the Nazi German regime, in fascist regimes throughout Europe, and during the early years of Japan's Sh\u014dwa period. These governments advocated and implemented ideologies and policies that were racist, xenophobic, and, in the case of Nazism, genocidal.\nThe Nuremberg Race Laws of 1935 prohibited sexual relations between any Aryan and Jew, considering it \"Rassenschande\", \"racial pollution\". The Nuremberg Laws stripped all Jews, even quarter- and half-Jews (second and first degree \"Mischlings\"), of their German citizenship. This meant that they had no basic citizens' rights, e.g., the right to vote. In 1936, Jews were banned from all professional jobs, effectively preventing them from having any influence in education, politics, higher education, and industry. On 15 November 1938, Jewish children were banned from going to normal schools. By April 1939, nearly all Jewish companies had either collapsed under financial pressure and declining profits, or had been persuaded to sell out to the Nazi government. This further reduced their rights as human beings; they were in many ways officially separated from the German populace. Similar laws existed in Bulgaria (The Law for protection of the nation), Hungary, Romania, and Austria.\nLegislative state racism is known to have been enforced by the National Party of South Africa during its Apartheid regime between 1948 and 1994. Here, a series of Apartheid legislation was passed through the legal systems to make it legal for white South Africans to have rights which were superior to those of non-white South Africans. Non-white South Africans were not allowed involvement in any governing matters, including voting; access to quality healthcare; the provision of basic services, including clean water; electricity; as well as access to adequate schooling. Non-white South Africans were also prevented from accessing certain public areas, from using certain public transportation, and were required to live only in certain designated areas. Non-white South Africans were taxed differently than white South Africans and they were also required to carry on them at all times additional documentation, which later became known as \"dom passes\", to certify their non-white South African citizenship. All of these legislative racial laws were abolished through a series of equal human rights laws which were passed at the end of the Apartheid era in the early 1990s.\nAnti-racism.\nAnti-racism includes beliefs, actions, scholarship, movements, and policies which are adopted or developed in order to oppose racism. In general, it promotes an egalitarian society in which people are not discriminated against on the basis of race. Examples of anti-racist movements include the civil rights movement, the Anti-Apartheid Movement and Black Lives Matter. Socialist groups have also been closely aligned with a number of anti-racist organizations such as Anti-Nazi League and Unite Against Fascism. Nonviolent resistance is sometimes embraced as an element of anti-racist movements, although this was not always the case. Hate crime laws, affirmative action, and bans on racist speech are also examples of government policy which is intended to suppress racism.\nReverse racism.\nReverse racism is a concept often used to describe acts of discrimination or hostility against members of a dominant racial or ethnic group while favoring members of minority groups. This concept has been used especially in the United States in debates over color-conscious policies (such as affirmative action) intended to remedy racial inequalities. However, many experts and other commenters view reverse racism as a myth rather than a reality. From the substantive equality perspective, while members of ethnic minorities may be prejudiced against members of the dominant culture, they lack the political and economic power to actively oppress them, and they are therefore not practicing the \"Prejudice plus power\" definition of racism. Martha Minow refers to the differences between formal equality of opportunity and substantive equality as the Dilemma of difference. According to Richard Arneson affirmative action violates formal equality of opportunity.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25614", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25614", "title": "Race (human categorization)", "text": "Grouping by physical or social qualities\nRace is a categorization of humans based on shared physical or social qualities into groups generally viewed as distinct within a given society. The term came into common usage during the 16th century, when it was used to refer to groups of various kinds, including those characterized by close kinship relations. By the 17th century, the term began to refer to physical (phenotypical) traits, and then later to national affiliations. Modern science regards race as a social construct, an identity which is assigned based on rules made by society. While partly based on physical similarities within groups, race does not have an inherent physical or biological meaning. The concept of race is foundational to racism, the belief that humans can be divided based on the superiority of one race over another.\nSocial conceptions and groupings of races have varied over time, often involving folk taxonomies that define essential types of individuals based on perceived traits. Modern scientists consider such biological essentialism obsolete, and generally discourage racial explanations for collective differentiation in both physical and behavioral traits.\nEven though there is a broad scientific agreement that essentialist and typological conceptions of race are untenable, scientists around the world continue to conceptualize race in widely differing ways. While some researchers continue to use the concept of race to make distinctions among fuzzy sets of traits or observable differences in behavior, others in the scientific community suggest that the idea of race is inherently naive or simplistic. Still others argue that, among humans, race has no taxonomic significance because all living humans belong to the same subspecies, \"Homo sapiens sapiens\".\nSince the second half of the 20th century, race has been associated with discredited theories of scientific racism and has become increasingly seen as an essentially pseudoscientific system of classification. Although still used in general contexts, race has often been replaced by less ambiguous and/or loaded terms: \"populations\", \"people(s)\", \"ethnic groups\", or \"communities\", depending on context. Its use in genetics was formally renounced by the U.S. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in 2023.\nDefining race.\nModern scholarship views racial categories as socially constructed, that is, race is not intrinsic to human beings but rather an identity created, often by socially dominant groups, to establish meaning in a social context. Different cultures define different racial groups, often focused on the largest groups of social relevance, and these definitions can change over time.\nHistorical race concepts have included a wide variety of schemes to divide local or worldwide populations into races and sub-races. Across the world, different organizations and societies choose to disambiguate race to different extents:\nThe establishment of racial boundaries often involves the subjugation of groups defined as racially inferior, as in the one-drop rule used in the 19th-century United States to exclude those with any amount of African ancestry from the dominant racial grouping, defined as \"white\". Such racial identities reflect the cultural attitudes of imperial powers dominant during the age of European colonial expansion. This view rejects the notion that race is biologically defined.\nAccording to geneticist David Reich, \"while race may be a social construct, differences in genetic ancestry that happen to correlate to many of today's racial constructs are real\". In response to Reich, a group of 67 scientists from a broad range of disciplines wrote that his concept of race was \"flawed\" as \"the \"meaning and significance\" of the groups is produced through social interventions\".\nAlthough commonalities in physical traits such as facial features, skin color, and hair texture comprise part of the race concept, this linkage is a social distinction rather than an inherently biological one. Other dimensions of racial groupings include shared history, traditions, and language. For instance, African-American English is a dialect of English spoken by many African Americans, especially in areas of the United States where racial segregation formerly existed. Furthermore, many people often will self-identify as members of a race for political reasons.\nWhen people define and talk about a particular conception of race, they create a social reality through which social categorization is achieved. In this sense, races are said to be social constructs. These constructs develop within various legal, economic, and sociopolitical contexts, and may be the effect, rather than the cause, of While race is understood to be a social construct by many, most scholars agree that race has real material effects in the lives of people through institutionalized practices of preference and discrimination.\nSocioeconomic factors, in combination with early but enduring views of race, have led to considerable suffering within disadvantaged racial groups. Racial discrimination often coincides with racist mindsets, whereby the individuals and ideologies of one group come to perceive the members of an outgroup as both racially defined and morally inferior. As a result, racial groups possessing relatively little power often find themselves excluded or oppressed, while hegemonic individuals and institutions are charged with holding racist attitudes. Racism has led to many instances of tragedy, including slavery and genocide.\nIn some countries, law enforcement uses race to profile suspects. This use of racial categories is frequently criticized for perpetuating an outmoded understanding of human biological variation, and promoting stereotypes. Because in some societies racial groupings correspond closely with patterns of social stratification, for social scientists studying social inequality, race can be a significant variable. As sociological factors, racial categories may in part reflect subjective attributions, self-identities, and social institutions.\nScholars continue to debate the degrees to which racial categories are biologically warranted and socially constructed. For example, in 2008, John Hartigan Jr. argued for a view of race that focused primarily on culture, but which does not ignore the potential relevance of biology or genetics. Accordingly, the racial paradigms employed in different disciplines vary in their emphasis on biological reduction as contrasted with societal construction.\nIn the social sciences, theoretical frameworks such as racial formation theory and critical race theory investigate implications of race as social construction by exploring how the images, ideas and assumptions of race are expressed in everyday life. A large body of scholarship has traced the relationships between the historical and social production of race in legal and criminal language, and their effects on the policing and disproportionate incarceration of certain groups.\nHistorical origins of racial classification.\nGroups of humans have always identified themselves as distinct from neighboring groups, but such differences have not always been understood to be natural, immutable and global. These features are the distinguishing features of how the concept of race is used today. In this way the idea of race as we understand it today came about during the historical process of exploration and conquest which brought Europeans into contact with groups from different continents, and of the ideology of classification and typology found in the natural sciences. The term \"race\" was often used in a general biological taxonomic sense, starting from the 19th century, to denote genetically differentiated human populations defined by phenotype.\nThe modern concept of race emerged as a product of the colonial enterprises of European powers from the 16th to 18th centuries which identified race in terms of skin color and physical differences. Author Rebecca F. Kennedy argues that the Greeks and Romans would have found such concepts confusing in relation to their own systems of classification. According to Bancel et al., the epistemological moment where the modern concept of race was invented and rationalized lies somewhere between 1730 and 1790.\nColonialism.\nAccording to Smedley and Marks the European concept of \"race\", along with many of the ideas now associated with the term, arose at the time of the Scientific Revolution, which introduced and privileged the study of natural kinds, and the age of European imperialism and colonization which established political relations between Europeans and peoples with distinct cultural and political traditions. As Europeans encountered people from different parts of the world, they speculated about the physical, social, and cultural differences among various human groups. The rise of the Atlantic slave trade, which gradually displaced an earlier trade in slaves from throughout the world, created a further incentive to categorize human groups in order to justify the subordination of African slaves.\nDrawing on sources from classical antiquity and upon their own internal interactions\u00a0\u2013 for example, the hostility between the English and Irish powerfully influenced early European thinking about the differences between people\u00a0\u2013 Europeans began to sort themselves and others into groups based on physical appearance, and to attribute to individuals belonging to these groups behaviors and capacities which were claimed to be deeply ingrained. A set of folk beliefs took hold that linked inherited physical differences between groups to inherited intellectual, behavioral, and moral qualities. Similar ideas can be found in other cultures, for example in China, where a concept often translated as \"race\" was associated with supposed common descent from the Yellow Emperor, and used to stress the unity of ethnic groups in China. Brutal conflicts between ethnic groups have existed throughout history and across the world.\nEarly taxonomic models.\nThe first post-Graeco-Roman published classification of humans into distinct races seems to be Fran\u00e7ois Bernier's \"Nouvelle division de la terre par les diff\u00e9rents esp\u00e8ces ou races qui l'habitent\" (\"New division of Earth by the different species or races which inhabit it\"), published in 1684. In the 18th century the differences among human groups became a focus of scientific investigation. But the scientific classification of phenotypic variation was frequently coupled with racist ideas about innate predispositions of different groups, always attributing the most desirable features to the White, European race and arranging the other races along a continuum of progressively undesirable attributes. The 1735 classification of Carl Linnaeus, inventor of zoological taxonomy, divided the human species \"Homo sapiens\" into continental varieties of \"europaeus\", \"asiaticus\", \"americanus\", and \"afer\", each associated with a different humour: sanguine, melancholic, choleric, and phlegmatic, respectively. \"Homo sapiens europaeus\" was described as active, acute, and adventurous, whereas \"Homo sapiens afer\" was said to be crafty, lazy, and careless.\nThe 1775 treatise \"The Natural Varieties of Mankind\", by Johann Friedrich Blumenbach proposed five major divisions: the Caucasoid race, the Mongoloid race, the Ethiopian race (later termed \"Negroid\"), the American Indian race, and the Malayan race, but he did not propose any hierarchy among the races. Blumenbach also noted the graded transition in appearances from one group to adjacent groups and suggested that \"one variety of mankind does so sensibly pass into the other, that you cannot mark out the limits between them\".\nFrom the 17th through 19th centuries, the merging of folk beliefs about group differences with scientific explanations of those differences produced what Smedley has called an \"ideology of race\". According to this ideology, races are primordial, natural, enduring and distinct. It was further argued that some groups may be the result of mixture between formerly distinct populations, but that careful study could distinguish the ancestral races that had combined to produce admixed groups. Subsequent influential classifications by Georges Buffon, Petrus Camper and Christoph Meiners all classified \"Negros\" as inferior to Europeans. In the United States the racial theories of Thomas Jefferson were influential. He saw Africans as inferior to Whites especially in regards to their intellect, and imbued with unnatural sexual appetites, but described Native Americans as equals to whites.\nPolygenism vs monogenism.\nIn the last two decades of the 18th century, the theory of polygenism, the belief that different races had evolved separately in each continent and shared no common ancestor, was advocated in England by historian Edward Long and anatomist Charles White, in Germany by ethnographers Christoph Meiners and Georg Forster, and in France by Julien-Joseph Virey. In the US, Samuel George Morton, Josiah Nott and Louis Agassiz promoted this theory in the mid-19th century. Polygenism was popular and most widespread in the 19th century, culminating in the founding of the Anthropological Society of London (1863), which, during the period of the American Civil War, broke away from the Ethnological Society of London and its monogenic stance, their underlined difference lying, relevantly, in the so-called \"Negro question\": a substantial racist view by the former, and a more liberal view on race by the latter.\nModern scholarship.\nModels of human evolution.\nToday, all humans are classified as belonging to the species \"Homo sapiens\". However, this is not the first species of homininae: the first species of the genus \"Homo\", \"Homo habilis\", evolved in East Africa at least 2 million years ago, and members of this species populated different parts of Africa in a relatively short time. \"Homo erectus\" evolved more than 1.8 million years ago and, by 1.5 million years ago, had spread throughout Europe and Asia. Virtually all physical anthropologists agree that \"Archaic Homo sapiens\" (A group including the possible species \"H. heidelbergensis\", \"H. rhodesiensis\", and \"H. neanderthalensis\") evolved out of African \"H. erectus\" () or \"H. ergaster\". Anthropologists support the idea that anatomically modern humans (\"Homo sapiens\") evolved in North or East Africa from an archaic human species such as \"H. heidelbergensis\" and then migrated out of Africa, mixing with and replacing \"H. heidelbergensis\" and \"H. neanderthalensis\" populations throughout Europe and Asia, and \"H. rhodesiensis\" populations in Sub-Saharan Africa (a combination of the Out of Africa and Multiregional models).\nBiological classification.\nIn the early 20th century, many anthropologists taught that race was an entirely biological phenomenon and that this was core to a person's behavior and identity, a position commonly called racial essentialism. This, coupled with the belief that linguistic, cultural, and social groups fundamentally existed along racial lines, formed the basis of what is now called scientific racism. After the Nazi eugenics program, along with the rise of anti-colonial movements, racial essentialism lost widespread popularity. New studies of culture and the fledgling field of population genetics undermined the scientific standing of racial essentialism, leading race anthropologists to revise their conclusions about the sources of phenotypic variation. A significant number of modern anthropologists and biologists in the West came to view race as an invalid genetic or biological designation.\nThe first to challenge the concept of race on empirical grounds were the anthropologists Franz Boas, who provided evidence of phenotypic plasticity due to environmental factors, and Ashley Montagu, who relied on evidence from genetics. E. O. Wilson then challenged the concept from the perspective of general animal systematics and further rejected the claim that \"races\" were equivalent to \"subspecies\".\nHuman genetic variation is predominantly within races, continuous, and complex in structure, which is inconsistent with the concept of genetic human races. According to the biological anthropologist Jonathan Marks,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By the 1970s, it had become clear that (1) most human differences were cultural; (2) what was not cultural was principally polymorphic\u00a0\u2013 that is to say, found in diverse groups of people at different frequencies; (3) what was not cultural or polymorphic was principally clinal\u00a0\u2013 that is to say, gradually variable over geography; and (4) what was left\u00a0\u2013 the component of human diversity that was not cultural, polymorphic, or clinal\u00a0\u2013 was very small.\nA consensus consequently developed among anthropologists and geneticists that race as the previous generation had known it\u00a0\u2013 as largely discrete, geographically distinct, gene pools\u00a0\u2013 did not exist.\nSubspecies.\nThe term \"race\" in biology is used with caution because it can be ambiguous. Generally, when it is used it is effectively a synonym of \"subspecies\". (For animals, the only taxonomic unit below the species level is usually the subspecies; there are narrower infraspecific ranks in botany, and \"race\" does not correspond directly with any of them.) Traditionally, subspecies are seen as geographically isolated and genetically differentiated populations. Studies of human genetic variation show that human populations are not geographically isolated, and their genetic differences are far smaller than those among comparable subspecies.\nIn 1978, Sewall Wright suggested that human populations that have long inhabited separated parts of the world should generally be considered different subspecies by the criterion that most individuals of such populations can be allocated correctly by inspection. Wright argued: \"It does not require a trained anthropologist to classify an array of Englishmen, West Africans, and Chinese with 100% accuracy by features, skin color, and type of hair despite so much variability within each of these groups that every individual can easily be distinguished from every other.\" In practice, subspecies are commonly identified based on easily observable physical traits, but the variations in these traits among members of a species do not always hold evolutionary significance, resulting in a decreased acceptance of this classification method among evolutionary biologists. Likewise, this typological approach to race is generally regarded as discredited by biologists and anthropologists.\nAncestrally differentiated populations (clades).\nIn 2000, philosopher Robin Andreasen proposed that cladistics might be used to categorize human races biologically and that races can be both biologically real and socially constructed. Andreasen cited tree diagrams of relative genetic distances among populations published by Luigi Cavalli-Sforza as the basis for a phylogenetic tree of human races (p.\u00a0661). Biological anthropologist Jonathan Marks (2008) responded by arguing that Andreasen had misinterpreted the genetic literature: \"These trees are phenetic (based on similarity), rather than cladistic (based on monophyletic descent, that is from a series of unique ancestors).\" Evolutionary biologist Alan Templeton (2013) argued that multiple lines of evidence falsify the idea of a phylogenetic tree structure to human genetic diversity and confirm the presence of gene flow among populations. Marks, Templeton, and Cavalli-Sforza all conclude that genetics does not provide evidence of human races.\nPreviously, anthropologists Lieberman and Jackson (1995) had also critiqued the use of cladistics to support concepts of race. They argued that \"the molecular and biochemical proponents of this model explicitly use racial categories \"in their initial grouping of samples\"\". For example, the large and highly diverse macroethnic groups of East Indians, North Africans, and Europeans are presumptively grouped as Caucasians prior to the analysis of their DNA variation. They argued that this \"a priori\" grouping limits and skews interpretations, obscures other lineage relationships, deemphasizes the impact of more immediate clinal environmental factors on genomic diversity, and can cloud our understanding of the true patterns of affinity.\nIn 2015, Keith Hunley, Graciela Cabana, and Jeffrey Long analyzed the Human Genome Diversity Project sample of 1,037 individuals in 52 populations, finding that diversity among non-African populations is the result of a serial founder effect process, with non-African populations as a whole nested among African populations, that \"some African populations are equally related to other African populations and to non-African populations\", and that \"outside of Africa, regional groupings of populations are nested inside one another, and many of them are not monophyletic\". Earlier research had also suggested that there has always been considerable gene flow between human populations, meaning that human population groups are not monophyletic. Rachel Caspari has argued that since no groups currently regarded as races are monophyletic, by definition, none of these groups can be clades.\nClines.\nOne crucial innovation in reconceptualizing genotypic and phenotypic variation was the anthropologist C. Loring Brace's observation that such variations, insofar as they are affected by natural selection, slow migration, or genetic drift, are distributed along geographic gradations or clines. For example, with respect to skin color in Europe and Africa, Brace writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To this day, skin color grades by imperceptible means from Europe southward around the eastern end of the Mediterranean and up the Nile into Africa. From one end of this range to the other, there is no hint of a skin color boundary, and yet the spectrum runs from the lightest in the world at the northern edge to as dark as it is possible for humans to be at the equator.\nThis is partly due to isolation by distance, a point that called attention to a problem common to phenotype-based descriptions of races (e.g., those based on hair texture and skin color): they ignore a host of other similarities and differences (for example, blood type) that do not correlate highly with the markers for race. Thus, anthropologist Frank Livingstone concluded that, since clines cross racial boundaries, \"there are no races, only clines.\"\nIn a response to Livingstone, Theodore Dobzhansky argued that when talking about race, one must be attentive to how the term is being used: \"I agree with Dr. Livingstone that if races have to be 'discrete units', then there are no races, and if 'race' is used as an 'explanation' of the human variability, rather than vice versa, then the explanation is invalid.\" He further argued that one could use the term race if one distinguished between \"race differences\" and \"the race concept\". The former refers to any distinction in gene frequencies between populations; the latter is \"a matter of judgment\". He further observed that even when there is clinal variation: \"Race differences are objectively ascertainable biological phenomena\u00a0... but it does not follow that racially distinct populations must be given racial (or subspecific) labels.\" In short, Livingstone and Dobzhansky agree that there are genetic differences among human beings; they also agree that the use of the race concept to classify people, and how the race concept is used, is a matter of social convention. They differ on whether the race concept remains a meaningful and useful social convention.\nIn 1964, the biologists Paul Ehrlich and Holm pointed out cases where two or more clines are distributed discordantly\u00a0\u2013 for example, melanin is distributed in a decreasing pattern from the equator north and south; frequencies for the haplotype for beta-S hemoglobin, on the other hand, radiate out of specific geographical points in Africa. As the anthropologists Leonard Lieberman and Fatimah Linda Jackson observed, \"Discordant patterns of heterogeneity falsify any description of a population as if it were genotypically or even phenotypically homogeneous\".\nPatterns such as those seen in human physical and genetic variation as described above, have led to the consequence that the number and geographic location of any described races is highly dependent on the importance attributed to, and quantity of, the traits considered. A skin-lightening mutation, estimated to have occurred 20,000 to 50,000 years ago, partially accounts for the appearance of light skin in people who migrated out of Africa northward into what is now Europe. East Asians owe their relatively light skin to different mutations. On the other hand, the greater the number of traits (or alleles) considered, the more subdivisions of humanity are detected, since traits and gene frequencies do not always correspond to the same geographical location. Or as put it:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anthropologists long ago discovered that humans' physical traits vary gradually, with groups that are close geographic neighbors being more similar than groups that are geographically separated. This pattern of variation, known as clinal variation, is also observed for many alleles that vary from one human group to another. Another observation is that traits or alleles that vary from one group to another do not vary at the same rate. This pattern is referred to as nonconcordant variation. Because the variation of physical traits is clinal and nonconcordant, anthropologists of the late 19th and early 20th centuries discovered that the more traits and the more human groups they measured, the fewer discrete differences they observed among races and the more categories they had to create to classify human beings. The number of races observed expanded to the 1930s and 1950s, and eventually anthropologists concluded that there were no discrete races. Twentieth and 21st century biomedical researchers have discovered this same feature when evaluating human variation at the level of alleles and allele frequencies. Nature has not created four or five distinct, nonoverlapping genetic groups of people.\nGenetically differentiated populations.\nAnother way to look at differences between populations is to measure genetic differences rather than physical differences between groups. The mid-20th-century anthropologist William C. Boyd defined race as: \"A population which differs significantly from other populations in regard to the frequency of one or more of the genes it possesses. It is an arbitrary matter which, and how many, gene loci we choose to consider as a significant 'constellation'\". Leonard Lieberman and Rodney Kirk have pointed out that \"the paramount weakness of this statement is that if one gene can distinguish races then the number of races is as numerous as the number of human couples reproducing\". Moreover, the anthropologist Stephen Molnar has suggested that the discordance of clines inevitably results in a multiplication of races that renders the concept itself useless. The Human Genome Project states \"People who have lived in the same geographic region for many generations may have some alleles in common, but no allele will be found in all members of one population and in no members of any other.\" Massimo Pigliucci and Jonathan Kaplan argue that human races do exist, and that they correspond to the genetic classification of ecotypes, but that real human races do not correspond very much, if at all, to folk racial categories. In contrast, Walsh &amp; Yun reviewed the literature in 2011 and reported: \"Genetic studies using very few chromosomal loci find that genetic polymorphisms divide human populations into clusters with almost 100 percent accuracy and that they correspond to the traditional anthropological categories.\"\nSome biologists argue that racial categories correlate with biological traits (e.g. phenotype), and that certain genetic markers have varying frequencies among human populations, some of which correspond more or less to traditional racial groupings.\nDistribution of genetic variation.\nThe distribution of genetic variants within and among human populations are impossible to describe succinctly because of the difficulty of defining a population, the clinal nature of variation, and heterogeneity across the genome (Long and Kittles 2003). In general, however, an average of 85% of statistical genetic variation exists within local populations, \u22487% is between local populations within the same continent, and \u22488% of variation occurs between large groups living on different continents. The recent African origin theory for humans would predict that in Africa there exists a great deal more diversity than elsewhere and that diversity should decrease the further from Africa a population is sampled. Hence, the 85% average figure is misleading: Long and Kittles find that rather than 85% of human genetic diversity existing in all human populations, about 100% of human diversity exists in a single African population, whereas only about 60% of human genetic diversity exists in the least diverse population they analyzed (the Surui, a population derived from New Guinea). Statistical analysis that takes this difference into account confirms previous findings that \"Western-based racial classifications have no taxonomic significance\".\nCluster analysis.\nA 2002 study of random biallelic genetic loci found little to no evidence that humans were divided into distinct biological groups.\nIn his 2003 paper, \"\", A. W. F. Edwards argued that rather than using a locus-by-locus analysis of variation to derive taxonomy, it is possible to construct a human classification system based on characteristic genetic patterns, or \"clusters\" inferred from multilocus genetic data. Geographically based human studies since have shown that such genetic clusters can be derived from analyzing of a large number of loci which can assort individuals sampled into groups analogous to traditional continental racial groups. Joanna Mountain and Neil Risch cautioned that while genetic clusters may one day be shown to correspond to phenotypic variations between groups, such assumptions were premature as the relationship between genes and complex traits remains poorly understood. However, Risch denied such limitations render the analysis useless: \"Perhaps just using someone's actual birth year is not a very good way of measuring age. Does that mean we should throw it out?\u00a0... Any category you come up with is going to be imperfect, but that doesn't preclude you from using it or the fact that it has utility.\"\nEarly human genetic cluster analysis studies were conducted with samples taken from ancestral population groups living at extreme geographic distances from each other. It was thought that such large geographic distances would maximize the genetic variation between the groups sampled in the analysis, and thus maximize the probability of finding cluster patterns unique to each group. In light of the historically recent acceleration of human migration (and correspondingly, human gene flow) on a global scale, further studies were conducted to judge the degree to which genetic cluster analysis can pattern ancestrally identified groups as well as geographically separated groups. One such study looked at a large multiethnic population in the United States, and \"detected only modest genetic differentiation between different current geographic locales within each race/ethnicity group. Thus, ancient geographic ancestry, which is highly correlated with self-identified race/ethnicity\u00a0\u2013 as opposed to current residence\u00a0\u2013 is the major determinant of genetic structure in the U.S. population.\"\n have argued that even when individuals can be reliably assigned to specific population groups, it may still be possible for two randomly chosen individuals from different populations/clusters to be more similar to each other than to a randomly chosen member of their own cluster. They found that many thousands of genetic markers had to be used in order for the answer to the question \"How often is a pair of individuals from one population genetically more dissimilar than two individuals chosen from two different populations?\" to be \"never\". This assumed three population groups separated by large geographic ranges (European, African and East Asian). The entire world population is much more complex and studying an increasing number of groups would require an increasing number of markers for the same answer. The authors conclude that \"caution should be used when using geographic or genetic ancestry to make inferences about individual phenotypes\". Witherspoon, et al. concluded: \"The fact that, given enough genetic data, individuals can be correctly assigned to their populations of origin is compatible with the observation that most human genetic variation is found within populations, not between them. It is also compatible with our finding that, even when the most distinct populations are considered and hundreds of loci are used, individuals are frequently more similar to members of other populations than to members of their own population.\"\nAnthropologists such as C. Loring Brace, the philosophers Jonathan Kaplan and Rasmus Winther, and the geneticist Joseph Graves, have argued that the cluster structure of genetic data is dependent on the initial hypotheses of the researcher and the influence of these hypotheses on the choice of populations to sample. When one samples continental groups, the clusters become continental, but if one had chosen other sampling patterns, the clustering would be different. Weiss and Fullerton have noted that if one sampled only Icelanders, Mayans and Maoris, three distinct clusters would form and all other populations could be described as being clinally composed of admixtures of Maori, Icelandic and Mayan genetic materials. Kaplan and Winther therefore argue that, seen in this way, both Lewontin and Edwards are right in their arguments. They conclude that while racial groups are characterized by different allele frequencies, this does not mean that racial classification is a natural taxonomy of the human species, because multiple other genetic patterns can be found in human populations that crosscut racial distinctions. Moreover, the genomic data underdetermines whether one wishes to see subdivisions (i.e., splitters) or a continuum (i.e., lumpers). Under Kaplan and Winther's view, racial groupings are objective social constructions (see Mills 1998) that have conventional biological reality only insofar as the categories are chosen and constructed for pragmatic scientific reasons. In earlier work, Winther had identified \"diversity partitioning\" and \"clustering analysis\" as two separate methodologies, with distinct questions, assumptions, and protocols. Each is also associated with opposing ontological consequences vis-a-vis the metaphysics of race. Philosopher Lisa Gannett has argued that biogeographical ancestry, a concept devised by Mark Shriver and Tony Frudakis, is not an objective measure of the biological aspects of race as Shriver and Frudakis claim it is. She argues that it is actually just a \"local category shaped by the U.S. context of its production, especially the forensic aim of being able to predict the race or ethnicity of an unknown suspect based on DNA found at the crime scene\".\nClines and clusters in genetic variation.\nRecent studies of human genetic clustering have included a debate over how genetic variation is organized, with clusters and clines as the main possible orderings. argued for smooth, clinal genetic variation in ancestral populations even in regions previously considered racially homogeneous, with the apparent gaps turning out to be artifacts of sampling techniques. disputed this and offered an analysis of the Human Genetic Diversity Panel showing that there were small discontinuities in the smooth genetic variation for ancestral populations at the location of geographic barriers such as the Sahara, the Oceans, and the Himalayas. Nonetheless, stated that their findings \"should not be taken as evidence of our support of any particular concept of biological race\u00a0... Genetic differences among human populations derive mainly from gradations in allele frequencies rather than from distinctive 'diagnostic' genotypes.\" Using a sample of 40 populations distributed roughly evenly across the Earth's land surface, found that \"genetic diversity is distributed in a more clinal pattern when more geographically intermediate populations are sampled\".\nGuido Barbujani has written that human genetic variation is generally distributed continuously in gradients across much of Earth, and that there is no evidence that genetic boundaries between human populations exist as would be necessary for human races to exist.\nOver time, human genetic variation has formed a nested structure that is inconsistent with the concept of races that have evolved independently of one another.\nSocial constructions.\nAs anthropologists and other evolutionary scientists have shifted away from the language of race to the term \"population\" to talk about genetic differences, historians, cultural anthropologists and other social scientists re-conceptualized the term \"race\" as a cultural category or identity, i.e., a way among many possible ways in which a society chooses to divide its members into categories.\nMany social scientists have replaced the word race with the word \"ethnicity\" to refer to self-identifying groups based on beliefs concerning shared culture, ancestry and history. Alongside empirical and conceptual problems with \"race\", following the Second World War, evolutionary and social scientists were acutely aware of how beliefs about race had been used to justify discrimination, apartheid, slavery, and genocide. This questioning gained momentum in the 1960s during the civil rights movement in the United States and the emergence of numerous anti-colonial movements worldwide. They thus came to believe that race itself is a social construct, a concept that was believed to correspond to an objective reality but which was believed in because of its social functions.\nCraig Venter and Francis Collins of the National Institute of Health jointly made the announcement of the mapping of the human genome in 2000. Upon examining the data from the genome mapping, Venter realized that although the genetic variation within the human species is on the order of 1\u20133% (instead of the previously assumed 1%), the types of variations do not support the notion of genetically defined races. Venter said, \"Race is a social concept. It's not a scientific one. There are no bright lines (that would stand out), if we could compare all the sequenced genomes of everyone on the planet.\u00a0... When we try to apply science to try to sort out these social differences, it all falls apart.\"\nAnthropologist Stephan Palmi\u00e9 has argued that race \"is not a thing but a social relation\"; or, in the words of Katya Gibel Mevorach, \"a metonym\", \"a human invention whose criteria for differentiation are neither universal nor fixed but have always been used to manage difference\". As such, the use of the term \"race\" itself must be analyzed. Moreover, they argue that biology will not explain why or how people use the idea of race; only history and social relationships will.\nImani Perry has argued that race \"is produced by social arrangements and political decision making\", and that \"race is something that happens, rather than something that is. It is dynamic, but it holds no objective truth.\" Similarly, in \"\" (2005), Richard T. Ford argued that while \"there is no necessary correspondence between the ascribed identity of race and one's culture or personal sense of self\" and \"group difference is not intrinsic to members of social groups but rather contingent o[n] the social practices of group identification\", the social practices of identity politics may coerce individuals into the \"compulsory\" enactment of \"prewritten racial scripts\".\nBrazil.\nCompared to 19th-century United States, 20th-century Brazil was characterized by a perceived relative absence of sharply defined racial groups. According to anthropologist Marvin Harris, this pattern reflects a different history and different social relations.\nRace in Brazil was \"biologized\", but in a way that recognized the difference between ancestry (which determines genotype) and phenotypic differences. There, racial identity was not governed by rigid descent rule, such as the one-drop rule, as it was in the United States. A Brazilian child was never automatically identified with the racial type of one or both parents, nor were there only a very limited number of categories to choose from, to the extent that full siblings can pertain to different racial groups.\nOver a dozen racial categories would be recognized in conformity with all the possible combinations of hair color, hair texture, eye color, and skin color. These types grade into each other like the colors of the spectrum, and not one category stands significantly isolated from the rest. That is, race referred preferentially to appearance, not heredity, and appearance is a poor indication of ancestry, because only a few genes are responsible for someone's skin color and traits: a person who is considered white may have more African ancestry than a person who is considered black, and the reverse can be also true about European ancestry. The complexity of racial classifications in Brazil reflects the extent of genetic mixing in Brazilian society, a society that remains highly, but not strictly, stratified along color lines. These socioeconomic factors are also significant to the limits of racial lines, because a minority of \"pardos\", or brown people, are likely to start declaring themselves white or black if socially upward, and being seen as relatively \"whiter\" as their perceived social status increases (much as in other regions of Latin America).\nFluidity of racial categories aside, the \"biologification\" of race in Brazil referred above would match contemporary concepts of race in the United States quite closely, though, if Brazilians are supposed to choose their race as one among, Asian and Indigenous apart, three IBGE's census categories. While assimilated Amerindians and people with very high quantities of Amerindian ancestry are usually grouped as \"caboclos\", a subgroup of \"pardos\" which roughly translates as both mestizo and hillbilly, for those of lower quantity of Amerindian descent a higher European genetic contribution is expected to be grouped as a \"pardo\". In several genetic tests, people with less than 60\u201365% of European descent and 5\u201310% of Amerindian descent usually cluster with Afro-Brazilians (as reported by the individuals), or 6.9% of the population, and those with about 45% or more of Subsaharan contribution most times do so (in average, Afro-Brazilian DNA was reported to be about 50% Subsaharan African, 37% European and 13% Amerindian).\nIf a more consistent report with the genetic groups in the gradation of genetic mixing is to be considered (e.g. that would not cluster people with a balanced degree of African and non-African ancestry in the black group instead of the multiracial one, unlike elsewhere in Latin America where people of high quantity of African descent tend to classify themselves as mixed), more people would report themselves as white and \"pardo\" in Brazil (47.7% and 42.4% of the population as of 2010, respectively), because by research its population is believed to have between 65 and 80% of autosomal European ancestry, in average (also &gt;35% of European mt-DNA and &gt;95% of European Y-DNA).\nFrom the last decades of the Empire until the 1950s, the proportion of the white population increased significantly while Brazil welcomed 5.5 million immigrants between 1821 and 1932, not much behind its neighbor Argentina with 6.4 million, and it received more European immigrants in its colonial history than the United States. Between 1500 and 1760, 700.000 Europeans settled in Brazil, while 530.000 Europeans settled in the United States for the same given time. Thus, the historical construction of race in Brazilian society dealt primarily with gradations between persons of majority European ancestry and little minority groups with otherwise lower quantity therefrom in recent times.\nEuropean Union.\nAccording to the Council of the European Union:\nThe European Union uses the terms racial origin and ethnic origin synonymously in its documents and according to it \"the use of the term 'racial origin' in this directive does not imply an acceptance of such [racial] theories\". Haney L\u00f3pez warns that using \"race\" as a category within the law tends to legitimize its existence in the popular imagination. In the diverse geographic context of Europe, ethnicity and ethnic origin are arguably more resonant and are less encumbered by the ideological baggage associated with \"race\". In European context, historical resonance of \"race\" underscores its problematic nature. In some states, it is strongly associated with laws promulgated by the Nazi and Fascist governments in Europe during the 1930s and 1940s. Indeed, in 1996, the European Parliament adopted a resolution stating that \"the term should therefore be avoided in all official texts\".\nThe concept of racial origin relies on the notion that human beings can be separated into biologically distinct \"races\", an idea generally rejected by the scientific community. Since all human beings belong to the same species, the ECRI (European Commission against Racism and Intolerance) rejects theories based on the existence of different \"races\". However, in its Recommendation ECRI uses this term in order to ensure that those persons who are generally and erroneously perceived as belonging to \"another race\" are not excluded from the protection provided for by the legislation. The law claims to reject the existence of \"race\", yet penalize situations where someone is treated less favourably on this ground.\nUnited States.\nThe immigrants to the United States came from every region of Europe, Africa, and Asia. They mixed among themselves and with the indigenous inhabitants of the continent. In the United States most people who self-identify as African American have some European ancestors, while many people who identify as European American have some African or Amerindian ancestors.\nSince the early history of the United States, Amerindians, African Americans, and European Americans have been classified as belonging to different races. Efforts to track mixing between groups led to a proliferation of categories, such as mulatto and octoroon. The criteria for membership in these races diverged in the late 19th century. During the Reconstruction era, increasing numbers of Americans began to consider anyone with \"one drop\" of known \"Black blood\" to be Black, regardless of appearance. By the early 20th century, this notion was made statutory in many states. Amerindians continue to be defined by a certain percentage of \"Indian blood\" (called \"blood quantum\"). To be White one had to have perceived \"pure\" White ancestry. The one-drop rule or hypodescent rule refers to the convention of defining a person as racially black if he or she has any known African ancestry. This rule meant that those that were mixed race but with some discernible African ancestry were defined as black. The one-drop rule is specific to not only those with African ancestry but to the United States, making it a particularly African-American experience.\nThe decennial censuses conducted since 1790 in the United States created an incentive to establish racial categories and fit people into these categories.\nThe term \"Hispanic\" as an ethnonym emerged in the 20th century with the rise of migration of laborers from the Spanish-speaking countries of Latin America to the United States. Today, the word \"Latino\" is often used as a synonym for \"Hispanic\". The definitions of both terms are non-race specific, and include people who consider themselves to be of distinct races (Black, White, Amerindian, Asian, and mixed groups). However, there is a common misconception in the US that Hispanic/Latino is a race or sometimes even that national origins such as Mexican, Cuban, Colombian, Salvadoran, etc. are races. In contrast to \"Latino\" or \"Hispanic\", \"Anglo\" refers to non-Hispanic White Americans or non-Hispanic European Americans, most of whom speak the English language but are not necessarily of English descent.\nViews across disciplines over time.\nAnthropology.\nThe concept of race classification in physical anthropology lost credibility around the 1960s and is now considered untenable. A 2019 statement by the American Association of Physical Anthropologists declares:Race does not provide an accurate representation of human biological variation. It was never accurate in the past, and it remains inaccurate when referencing contemporary human populations. Humans are not divided biologically into distinct continental types or racial genetic clusters. Instead, the Western concept of race must be understood as a classification system that emerged from, and in support of, European colonialism, oppression, and discrimination.Wagner et al. (2017) surveyed 3,286 American anthropologists' views on race and genetics, including both cultural and biological anthropologists. They found a consensus among them that biological races do not exist in humans, but that race does exist insofar as the social experiences of members of different races can have significant effects on health.\nWang, \u0160trkalj et al. (2003) examined the use of race as a biological concept in research papers published in China's only biological anthropology journal, \"Acta Anthropologica Sinica\". The study showed that the race concept was widely used among Chinese anthropologists. In a 2007 review paper, \u0160trkalj suggested that the stark contrast of the racial approach between the United States and China was due to the fact that race is a factor for social cohesion among the ethnically diverse people of China, whereas \"race\" is a very sensitive issue in America and the racial approach is considered to undermine social cohesion\u00a0\u2013 with the result that in the socio-political context of US academics scientists are encouraged not to use racial categories, whereas in China they are encouraged to use them.\nLieberman et al. in a 2004 study researched the acceptance of race as a concept among anthropologists in the United States, Canada, the Spanish speaking areas, Europe, Russia and China. Rejection of race ranged from high to low, with the highest rejection rate in the United States and Canada, a moderate rejection rate in Europe, and the lowest rejection rate in Russia and China. Methods used in the studies reported included questionnaires and content analysis.\nKaszycka et al. (2009) in 2002\u20132003 surveyed European anthropologists' opinions toward the biological race concept. Three factors\u00a0\u2013 country of academic education, discipline, and age\u00a0\u2013 were found to be significant in differentiating the replies. Those educated in Western Europe, physical anthropologists, and middle-aged persons rejected race more frequently than those educated in Eastern Europe, people in other branches of science, and those from both younger and older generations. \"The survey shows that the views on race are sociopolitically (ideologically) influenced and highly dependent on education.\"\nUnited States.\nSince the second half of the 20th century, physical anthropology in the United States has moved away from a typological understanding of human biological diversity towards a genomic and population-based perspective. Anthropologists have tended to understand race as a social classification of humans based on phenotype and ancestry as well as cultural factors, as the concept is understood in the social sciences. Since 1932, an increasing number of college textbooks introducing physical anthropology have rejected race as a valid concept: from 1932 to 1976, only seven out of thirty-two rejected race; from 1975 to 1984, thirteen out of thirty-three rejected race; from 1985 to 1993, thirteen out of nineteen rejected race. According to one academic journal entry, where 78 percent of the articles in the 1931 \"Journal of Physical Anthropology\" employed these or nearly synonymous terms reflecting a bio-race paradigm, only 36 percent did so in 1965, and just 28 percent did in 1996.\nA 1998 \"Statement on 'Race'\" composed by a select committee of anthropologists and issued by the executive board of the American Anthropological Association, which they argue \"represents generally the contemporary thinking and scholarly positions of a majority of anthropologists\", declares:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the United States both scholars and the general public have been conditioned to viewing human races as natural and separate divisions within the human species based on visible physical differences. With the vast expansion of scientific knowledge in this century, however, it has become clear that human populations are not unambiguous, clearly demarcated, biologically distinct groups. Evidence from the analysis of genetics (e.g., DNA) indicates that most physical variation, about 94%, lies within so-called racial groups. Conventional geographic \"racial\" groupings differ from one another only in about 6% of their genes. This means that there is greater variation within \"racial\" groups than between them. In neighboring populations there is much overlapping of genes and their phenotypic (physical) expressions. Throughout history whenever different groups have come into contact, they have interbred. The continued sharing of genetic materials has maintained all of humankind as a single species.\u00a0...\nWith the vast expansion of scientific knowledge in this century,\u00a0... it has become clear that human populations are not unambiguous, clearly demarcated, biologically distinct groups.\u00a0... Given what we know about the capacity of normal humans to achieve and function within any culture, we conclude that present-day inequalities between so-called \"racial\" groups are not consequences of their biological inheritance but products of historical and contemporary social, economic, educational, and political circumstances.\nAn earlier survey, conducted in 1985 , asked 1,200 American scientists how many \"disagree\" with the following proposition: \"There are biological races in the species \"Homo sapiens\".\" Among anthropologists, the responses were:\nLieberman's study also showed that more women reject the concept of race than men.\nThe same survey, conducted again in 1999, showed that the number of anthropologists disagreeing with the idea of biological race had risen substantially. The results were as follows:\nA line of research conducted by Cartmill (1998), however, seemed to limit the scope of Lieberman's finding that there was \"a significant degree of change in the status of the race concept\". Goran \u0160trkalj has argued that this may be because Lieberman and collaborators had looked at all the members of the American Anthropological Association irrespective of their field of research interest, while Cartmill had looked specifically at biological anthropologists interested in human variation.\nIn 2007, Ann Morning interviewed over 40 American biologists and anthropologists and found significant disagreements over the nature of race, with no one viewpoint holding a majority among either group. Morning also argues that a third position, \"antiessentialism\", which holds that race is not a useful concept for biologists, should be introduced into this debate in addition to \"constructionism\" and \"essentialism\".\nAccording to the 2000 University of Wyoming edition of a popular physical anthropology textbook, forensic anthropologists are overwhelmingly in support of the idea of the basic biological reality of human races. Forensic physical anthropologist and professor George W. Gill has said that the idea that race is only skin deep \"is simply not true, as any experienced forensic anthropologist will affirm\" and \"Many morphological features tend to follow geographic boundaries coinciding often with climatic zones. This is not surprising since the selective forces of climate are probably the primary forces of nature that have shaped human races with regard not only to skin color and hair form but also the underlying bony structures of the nose, cheekbones, etc. (For example, more prominent noses humidify air better.)\" While he can see good arguments for both sides, the complete denial of the opposing evidence \"seems to stem largely from socio-political motivation and not science at all\". He also states that many biological anthropologists see races as real yet \"not one introductory textbook of physical anthropology even presents that perspective as a possibility. In a case as flagrant as this, we are not dealing with science but rather with blatant, politically motivated censorship\".\nIn partial response to Gill's statement, Professor of Biological Anthropology C. Loring Brace argues that the reason laymen and biological anthropologists can determine the geographic ancestry of an individual can be explained by the fact that biological characteristics are clinally distributed across the planet, and that does not translate into the concept of race. He states: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Well, you may ask, why can't we call those regional patterns \"races\"? In fact, we can and do, but it does not make them coherent biological entities. \"Races\" defined in such a way are products of our perceptions.\u00a0... We realize that in the extremes of our transit\u00a0\u2013 Moscow to Nairobi, perhaps\u00a0\u2013 there is a major but gradual change in skin color from what we euphemistically call white to black, and that this is related to the latitudinal difference in the intensity of the ultraviolet component of sunlight. What we do not see, however, is the myriad other traits that are distributed in a fashion quite unrelated to the intensity of ultraviolet radiation. Where skin color is concerned, all the northern populations of the Old World are lighter than the long-term inhabitants near the equator. Although Europeans and Chinese are obviously different, in skin color they are closer to each other than either is to equatorial Africans. But if we test the distribution of the widely known ABO blood-group system, then Europeans and Africans are closer to each other than either is to Chinese.The concept of \"race\" is still sometimes used within forensic anthropology (when analyzing skeletal remains), biomedical research, and race-based medicine. Brace has criticized forensic anthropologists for this, arguing that they in fact should be talking about regional ancestry. He argues that while forensic anthropologists can determine that a skeletal remain comes from a person with ancestors in a specific region of Africa, categorizing that skeletal as being \"black\" is a socially constructed category that is only meaningful in the particular social context of the United States, and which is not itself scientifically valid.\nBiology, anatomy, and medicine.\nIn the same 1985 survey , 16% of the surveyed biologists and 36% of the surveyed developmental psychologists disagreed with the proposition: \"There are biological races in the species \"Homo sapiens\".\"\nThe authors of the study also examined 77 college textbooks in biology and 69 in physical anthropology published between 1932 and 1989. Physical anthropology texts argued that biological races exist until the 1970s, when they began to argue that races do not exist. In contrast, biology textbooks did not undergo such a reversal but many instead dropped their discussion of race altogether. The authors attributed this to biologists trying to avoid discussing the political implications of racial classifications, and to the ongoing discussions in biology about the validity of the idea of \"subspecies\". The authors concluded, \"The concept of race, masking the overwhelming genetic similarity of all peoples and the mosaic patterns of variation that do not correspond to racial divisions, is not only socially dysfunctional but is biologically indefensible as well (pp. 5 18\u20135 19).\"\nA 1994 examination of 32 English sport/exercise science textbooks found that 7 (21.9%) claimed that there are biophysical differences due to race that might explain differences in sports performance, 24 (75%) did not mention nor refute the concept, and 1 (3.1%) expressed caution with the idea.\nIn February 2001, the editors of \"Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine\" asked \"authors to not use race and ethnicity when there is no biological, scientific, or sociological reason for doing so\". The editors also stated that \"analysis by race and ethnicity has become an analytical knee-jerk reflex\". \"Nature Genetics\" now ask authors to \"explain why they make use of particular ethnic groups or populations, and how classification was achieved\".\nMorning (2008) looked at high school biology textbooks during the 1952\u20132002 period and initially found a similar pattern with only 35% directly discussing race in the 1983\u201392 period from initially 92% doing so. However, this has increased somewhat after this to 43%. More indirect and brief discussions of race in the context of medical disorders have increased from none to 93% of textbooks. In general, the material on race has moved from surface traits to genetics and evolutionary history. The study argues that the textbooks' fundamental message about the existence of races has changed little.\nSurveying views on race in the scientific community in 2008, Morning concluded that biologists had failed to come to a clear consensus, and they often split along cultural and demographic lines. She notes: \"At best, one can conclude that biologists and anthropologists now appear equally divided in their beliefs about the nature of race.\"\nGissis (2008) examined several important American and British journals in genetics, epidemiology and medicine for their content during the 1946\u20132003 period. He wrote that \"Based upon my findings I argue that the category of race only \"seemingly\" disappeared from scientific discourse after World War II and has had a \"fluctuating yet continuous use\" during the time span from 1946 to 2003, and has even \"become more pronounced from the early 1970s on\"\".\n33 health services researchers from differing geographic regions were interviewed in a 2008 study. The researchers recognized the problems with racial and ethnic variables but the majority still believed these variables were necessary and useful.\nA 2010 examination of 18 widely used English anatomy textbooks found that they all represented human biological variation in superficial and outdated ways, many of them making use of the race concept in ways that were current in 1950s anthropology. The authors recommended that anatomical education should describe human anatomical variation in more detail and rely on newer research that demonstrates the inadequacies of simple racial typologies.\nA 2021 study that examined over 11,000 papers from 1949 to 2018 in the \"American Journal of Human Genetics\", found that \"race\" was used in only 5% of papers published in the last decade, down from 22% in the first. Together with an increase in use of the terms \"ethnicity\", \"ancestry\", and location-based terms, it suggests that human geneticists have mostly abandoned the term \"race\".\nThe National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM), supported by the US the National Institutes of Health, formally declared that \"researchers should not use race as a proxy for describing human genetic variation\". The report of its Committee on the Use of Race, Ethnicity, and Ancestry as Population Descriptors in Genomics Research titled \"Using Population Descriptors in Genetics and Genomics Research\" was released on 14 March 2023. The report stated: \"In humans, race is a socially constructed designation, a misleading and harmful surrogate for population genetic differences, and has a long history of being incorrectly identified as the major genetic reason for phenotypic differences between groups.\" The committee co-chair Charmaine D. Royal and Robert O. Keohane of Duke University agreed in the meeting: \"Classifying people by race is a practice entangled with and rooted in racism.\"\nSociology.\nLester Frank Ward (1841\u20131913), considered to be one of the founders of American sociology, rejected notions that there were fundamental differences that distinguished one race from another, although he acknowledged that social conditions differed dramatically by race. At the turn of the 20th century, sociologists viewed the concept of race in ways that were shaped by the scientific racism of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Many sociologists focused on African Americans, called Negroes at that time, and claimed that they were inferior to whites. White sociologist Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1860\u20131935), for example, used biological arguments to claim the inferiority of African Americans. American sociologist Charles H. Cooley (1864\u20131929) theorized that differences among races were \"natural\", and that biological differences result in differences in intellectual abilities. Edward Alsworth Ross (1866\u20131951), also an important figure in the founding of American sociology, and a eugenicist, believed that whites were the superior race, and that there were essential differences in \"temperament\" among races. In 1910, the \"Journal\" published an article by Ulysses G. Weatherly (1865\u20131940) that called for white supremacy and segregation of the races to protect racial purity.\nW. E. B. Du Bois (1868\u20131963), one of the first African-American sociologists, was the first sociologist to use sociological concepts and empirical research methods to analyze race as a social construct instead of a biological reality. Beginning in 1899 with his book \"The Philadelphia Negro\", Du Bois studied and wrote about race and racism throughout his career. In his work, he contended that social class, colonialism, and capitalism shaped ideas about race and racial categories. Social scientists largely abandoned scientific racism and biological reasons for racial categorization schemes by the 1930s. Other early sociologists, especially those associated with the Chicago School, joined Du Bois in theorizing race as a socially constructed fact. By 1978, William Julius Wilson argued that race and racial classification systems were declining in significance, and that instead, social class more accurately described what sociologists had earlier understood as race. By 1986, sociologists Michael Omi and Howard Winant successfully introduced the concept of racial formation to describe the process by which racial categories are created. Omi and Winant assert that \"there is no biological basis for distinguishing among human groups along the lines of race\".\nEduardo Bonilla-Silva, Sociology professor at Duke University, remarks: \"I contend that racism is, more than anything else, a matter of group power; it is about a dominant racial group (whites) striving to maintain its systemic advantages and minorities fighting to subvert the racial status quo.\" The types of practices that take place under this new color-blind racism is subtle, institutionalized, and supposedly not racial. Color-blind racism thrives on the idea that race is no longer an issue in the United States. There are contradictions between the alleged color-blindness of most whites and the persistence of a color-coded system of inequality.\nToday, sociologists generally understand race and racial categories as socially constructed, and reject racial categorization schemes that depend on biological differences.\nPolitical and practical uses.\nBiomedicine.\nIn the United States, federal government policy promotes the use of racially categorized data to identify and address health disparities between racial or ethnic groups. In clinical settings, race has sometimes been considered in the diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. Doctors have noted that some medical conditions are more prevalent in certain racial or ethnic groups than in others, without being sure of the cause of those differences. Recent interest in race-based medicine, or race-targeted pharmacogenomics, has been fueled by the proliferation of human genetic data which followed the decoding of the human genome in the first decade of the twenty-first century. There is an active debate among biomedical researchers about the meaning and importance of race in their research. Proponents of the use of racial categories in biomedicine argue that continued use of racial categorizations in biomedical research and clinical practice makes possible the application of new genetic findings, and provides a clue to diagnosis. Biomedical researchers' positions on race fall into two main camps: those who consider the concept of race to have no biological basis and those who consider it to have the potential to be biologically meaningful. Members of the latter camp often base their arguments around the potential to create genome-based personalized medicine.\nOther researchers point out that finding a difference in disease prevalence between two socially defined groups does not necessarily imply genetic causation of the difference. They suggest that medical practices should maintain their focus on the individual rather than an individual's membership to any group. They argue that overemphasizing genetic contributions to health disparities carries various risks such as reinforcing stereotypes, promoting racism or ignoring the contribution of non-genetic factors to health disparities. International epidemiological data show that living conditions rather than race make the biggest difference in health outcomes even for diseases that have \"race-specific\" treatments. Some studies have found that patients are reluctant to accept racial categorization in medical practice.\nLaw enforcement.\nIn an attempt to provide general descriptions that may facilitate the job of law enforcement officers seeking to apprehend suspects, the United States FBI employs the term \"race\" to summarize the general appearance (skin color, hair texture, eye shape, and other such easily noticed characteristics) of individuals whom they are attempting to apprehend. From the perspective of law enforcement officers, it is generally more important to arrive at a description that will readily suggest the general appearance of an individual than to make a scientifically valid categorization by DNA or other such means. Thus, in addition to assigning a wanted individual to a racial category, such a description will include: height, weight, eye color, scars and other distinguishing characteristics.\nCriminal justice agencies in England and Wales use at least two separate racial/ethnic classification systems when reporting crime, as of 2010. One is the system used in the 2001 Census when individuals identify themselves as belonging to a particular ethnic group: W1 (White-British), W2 (White-Irish), W9 (Any other white background); M1 (White and black Caribbean), M2 (White and black African), M3 (White and Asian), M9 (Any other mixed background); A1 (Asian-Indian), A2 (Asian-Pakistani), A3 (Asian-Bangladeshi), A9 (Any other Asian background); B1 (Black Caribbean), B2 (Black African), B3 (Any other black background); O1 (Chinese), O9 (Any other). The other is categories used by the police when they visually identify someone as belonging to an ethnic group, e.g. at the time of a stop and search or an arrest: White \u2013 North European (IC1), White \u2013 South European (IC2), Black (IC3), Asian (IC4), Chinese, Japanese, or South East Asian (IC5), Middle Eastern (IC6), and Unknown (IC0). \"IC\" stands for \"Identification Code;\" these items are also referred to as Phoenix classifications. Officers are instructed to \"record the response that has been given\" even if the person gives an answer which may be incorrect; their own perception of the person's ethnic background is recorded separately. Comparability of the information being recorded by officers was brought into question by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) in September 2007, as part of its Equality Data Review; one problem cited was the number of reports that contained an ethnicity of \"Not Stated\".\nIn many countries, such as France, the state is legally banned from maintaining data based on race.\nIn the United States, the practice of racial profiling has been ruled to be both unconstitutional and a violation of civil rights. There is active debate regarding the cause of a marked correlation between the recorded crimes, punishments meted out, and the country's populations. Many consider \"de facto\" racial profiling an example of institutional racism in law enforcement.\nMass incarceration in the United States disproportionately impacts African American and Latino communities. Michelle Alexander, author of \"The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness\" (2010), argues that mass incarceration is best understood as not only a system of overcrowded prisons. Mass incarceration is also, \"the larger web of laws, rules, policies, and customs that control those labeled criminals both in and out of prison\". She defines it further as \"a system that locks people not only behind actual bars in actual prisons, but also behind virtual bars and virtual walls\", illustrating the second-class citizenship that is imposed on a disproportionate number of people of color, specifically African-Americans. She compares mass incarceration to Jim Crow laws, stating that both work as racial caste systems.\nMany research findings appear to agree that the impact of victim race in the interpersonal violence (IPV) arrest decision might include a racial bias in favor of white victims. A 2011 study in a national sample of IPV arrests found that female arrest was more likely if the male victim was white and the female offender was black, while male arrest was more likely if the female victim was white. For both female and male arrest in IPV cases, situations involving married couples were more likely to lead to arrest compared to dating or divorced couples. More research is needed to understand agency and community factors that influence police behavior and how discrepancies in IPV interventions/ tools of justice can be addressed.\nRecent work using DNA cluster analysis to determine race background has been used by some criminal investigators to narrow their search for the identity of both suspects and victims. Proponents of DNA profiling in criminal investigations cite cases where leads based on DNA analysis proved useful, but the practice remains controversial among medical ethicists, defense lawyers and some in law enforcement.\nThe Constitution of Australia contains a line about 'people of any race for whom it is deemed necessary to make special laws', despite there being no agreed definition of race described in the document.\nForensic anthropology.\nSimilarly, forensic anthropologists draw on highly heritable morphological features of human remains (e.g. cranial measurements) to aid in the identification of the body, including in terms of race. In a 1992 article, anthropologist Norman Sauer noted that anthropologists had generally abandoned the concept of race as a valid representation of human biological diversity, except for forensic anthropologists. He asked, \"If races don't exist, why are forensic anthropologists so good at identifying them?\" He concluded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he successful assignment of race to a skeletal specimen is not a vindication of the race concept, but rather a prediction that an individual, while alive was assigned to a particular socially constructed \"racial\" category. A specimen may display features that point to African ancestry. In this country that person is likely to have been labeled Black regardless of whether or not such a race actually exists in nature.\nIdentification of the ancestry of an individual is dependent upon knowledge of the frequency and distribution of phenotypic traits in a population. This does not necessitate the use of a racial classification scheme based on unrelated traits, although the race concept is widely used in medical and legal contexts in the United States. Some studies have reported that races can be identified with a high degree of accuracy using certain methods, such as that developed by Giles and Elliot. However, this method sometimes fails to be replicated in other times and places; for instance, when the method was re-tested to identify Native Americans, the average rate of accuracy dropped from 85% to 33%. Prior information about the individual (e.g. Census data) is also important in allowing the accurate identification of the individual's \"race\".\nIn a different approach, anthropologist C. Loring Brace said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The simple answer is that, as members of the society that poses the question, they are inculcated into the social conventions that determine the expected answer. They should also be aware of the biological inaccuracies contained in that \"politically correct\" answer. Skeletal analysis provides no direct assessment of skin color, but it does allow an accurate estimate of original geographical origins. African, eastern Asian, and European ancestry can be specified with a high degree of accuracy. Africa of course entails \"black\", but \"black\" does not entail African.\nIn association with a NOVA program in 2000 about race, he wrote an essay opposing use of the term.\nA 2002 study found that about 13% of human craniometric variation existed between regions, while 6% existed between local populations within regions and 81% within local populations. In contrast, the opposite pattern of genetic variation was observed for skin color (which is often used to define race), with 88% of variation between regions. The study concluded: \"The apportionment of genetic diversity in skin color is atypical, and cannot be used for purposes of classification.\"\nSimilarly, a 2009 study found that craniometrics could be used accurately to determine what part of the world someone was from based on their cranium; however, this study also found that there were no abrupt boundaries that separated craniometric variation into distinct racial groups. Another 2009 study showed that American blacks and whites had different skeletal morphologies, and that significant patterning in variation in these traits exists within continents. This suggests that classifying humans into races based on skeletal characteristics would necessitate many different \"races\" being defined.\nIn 2010, philosopher Neven Sesardi\u0107 argued that when several traits are analyzed at the same time, forensic anthropologists can classify a person's race with an accuracy of close to 100% based on only skeletal remains. Sesardi\u0107's claim has been disputed by philosopher Massimo Pigliucci, who accused Sesardi\u0107 of \"cherry pick[ing] the scientific evidence and reach[ing] conclusions that are contradicted by it\". Specifically, Pigliucci argued that Sesardi\u0107 misrepresented a paper by Ousley et al. (2009), and neglected to mention that they identified differentiation not just between individuals from different races, but also between individuals from different tribes, local environments, and time periods.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPopular press.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25615", "revid": "62058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25615", "title": "Racist", "text": ""}
{"id": "25616", "revid": "26021349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25616", "title": "Rpm", "text": ""}
{"id": "25618", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25618", "title": "R", "text": "Eighteenth letter of the Latin alphabet\nR, or r, is the eighteenth letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is \"ar\" (pronounced ), plural \"ars\".\nThe letter \u27e8r\u27e9 is the eighth most common letter in English and the fourth-most common consonant, after \u27e8t\u27e9, \u27e8n\u27e9, and \u27e8s\u27e9.\nName.\nThe name of the letter in Latin was (), following the pattern of other letters representing continuants, such as \u27e8F\u27e9, \u27e8L\u27e9, \u27e8M\u27e9, \u27e8N\u27e9, and \u27e8S\u27e9. This name is preserved in French and many other languages. In Middle English, the name of the letter changed from to , following a pattern exhibited in many other words such as \"farm\" (compare French ) and \"star\" (compare German ).\nIn Hiberno-English, the letter is called or , somewhat similar to \"oar\", \"ore\", \"orr\".\nThe letter \u27e8R\u27e9 is sometimes referred to as the 'canine letter', often rendered in English as the dog's letter. This Latin term referred to the Latin \u27e8R\u27e9 that was trilled to sound like a growling dog, a spoken style referred to as 'dog voice' (e.g. in Spanish 'dog').\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nThe letter \u27e8R\u27e9 is believed to derive ultimately from an image of a head, used in Semitic alphabets for the sound because the word for 'head' was \"r\u00ea\u0161\" or similar in most Semitic languages. The word became the name of the letter, as an example of acrophony.\nIt developed into Greek \u27e8\u03a1\u27e9 () and Latin \u27e8R\u27e9. The descending diagonal stroke develops as a graphic variant in some Western Greek alphabets (writing \"rho\" as \u27e8\u27e9), but it was not adopted in most Old Italic alphabets; most Old Italic alphabets show variants of their \"rho\" between a \u27e8P\u27e9 and a \u27e8D\u27e9 shape, but without the Western Greek descending stroke.\nIndeed, the oldest known forms of the Latin alphabet itself of the 7th to 6th centuries BC, in the Duenos and the Forum inscription, still write \u27e8r\u27e9 using the \u27e8P\u27e9 shape of the letter.\nThe Lapis Satricanus inscription shows the form of the Latin alphabet around 500 BC. Here, the rounded, closing \u27e8\u03a0\u27e9 shape of the \u27e8p\u27e9 and the \u27e8\u03a1\u27e9 shape of the \u27e8r\u27e9 have become difficult to distinguish.\nThe descending stroke of the Latin letter \u27e8R\u27e9 has fully developed by the 3rd century BC, as seen in the Tomb of the Scipios sarcophagus inscriptions of that era. From c.\u200950 AD, the letter \u27e8P\u27e9 would be written with its loop fully closed, assuming the shape formerly taken by \u27e8R\u27e9.\nCursive.\nThe minuscule form \u27e8r\u27e9 developed through several variations on the capital form.\nAlong with Latin minuscule writing in general, it developed ultimately from Roman cursive via the uncial script of Late Antiquity into the Carolingian minuscule of the 9th century.\nIn handwriting, it was common not to close the bottom of the loop but continue into the leg, saving an extra pen stroke. The loop-leg stroke shortened into the simple arc used in the Carolingian minuscule and until today.\nA calligraphic minuscule \u27e8r\u27e9, known as \"r rotunda\" \u27e8\ua75b\u27e9, was used in the sequence \u27e8or\u27e9, bending the shape of the \u27e8r\u27e9 to accommodate the bulge of the \u27e8o\u27e9 as in \u27e8o\ua75b\u27e9, as opposed to \u27e8or\u27e9. Later, the same variant was also used where \u27e8r\u27e9 followed other lower case letters with a rounded loop towards the right, such as with \u27e8b\u27e9, \u27e8h\u27e9, \u27e8p\u27e9, as well as to write the geminate \u27e8rr\u27e9 as \u27e8\ua75b\ua75b\u27e9. Use of \"r rotunda\" was mostly tied to blackletter typefaces, and the glyph fell out of use along with blackletter fonts in English language contexts mostly by the 18th century.\nInsular script used a minuscule which retained two downward strokes, but which did not close the loop, known as the \"Insular r\" \u27e8\ua783\u27e9; this variant survives in the Gaelic type popular in Ireland until the mid-20th century, but has become largely limited to a decorative function.\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\n\u27e8R\u27e9 represents a rhotic consonant in English, such as the alveolar approximant (most varieties), alveolar trill (some British varieties), or the retroflex approximant (some varieties in the United States, South West England and Dublin).\nIn non-rhotic accents, it is not pronounced in certain positions, but can affect the pronunciation of the vowel that precedes it.\nR is the ninth most frequently used letter in the English language.\nOther languages.\n\u27e8R\u27e9 represents a rhotic consonant in many languages, as shown in the table below.\nOther languages may use the letter \u27e8r\u27e9 in their alphabets (or Latin transliteration schemes) to represent rhotic consonants different from the alveolar trill. In Haitian Creole, it represents a sound so weak that it is often written interchangeably with \u27e8w\u27e9, e.g. 'Kweyol' for 'Kreyol'.\nThe doubled \u27e8rr\u27e9 represents a trilled in Albanian, Aragonese, Asturian, Basque, Catalan and Spanish.\nBrazilian Portuguese has a great number of allophones of , such as , , , , , and . The latter three ones can be used only in certain contexts ( and as \u27e8rr\u27e9; in the syllable coda, as an allophone of according to the European Portuguese norm and according to the Brazilian Portuguese norm). Usually at least two of them are present in a single dialect, such as Rio de Janeiro's , , and, for a few speakers, .\nOther systems.\nThe International Phonetic Alphabet uses several variations of the letter to represent the different rhotic consonants; \u27e8\u27e9 represents the alveolar trill.\nOther representations.\nComputing.\nThere are many precomposed character forms of the letter with various diacritics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25622", "revid": "11760157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25622", "title": "Richard Bachman", "text": "Pen name used by horror fiction author Stephen King\nRichard Bachman is a pen name (as well as a fictional character) of American horror fiction author Stephen King, adopted in 1977 for the novel \"Rage\". King hid the link between himself and Bachman, until allowing for his identification in 1985. He collected the first four Bachman novels into \"The Bachman Books\". \"Rage\" became controversial for being about a school shooting and was allowed to go out of print after the 1997 Heath High School shooting. In total, seven novels have been published under the Bachman name.\nKing portrays a character named Richard Bachman in the third season of the FX television series \"Sons of Anarchy\" (2010).\nOrigin.\nAt the beginning of King's career, the general view among publishers was that an author was limited to one book per year, since publishing more would be unacceptable to the public. King therefore wanted to write under another name in order to increase his publication without saturating the market for the King \"brand\". He convinced his publisher, Signet Books, to print these novels under a pseudonym.\nIn his introduction to \"The Bachman Books,\" King states that adopting the pen name Bachman was also an attempt to make sense of his career and try to answer the question of whether his success was due to talent or luck. He says he deliberately released the Bachman novels with as little marketing presence as possible and did his best to \"load the dice against\" Bachman. King concludes that he has yet to find an answer to the \"talent versus luck\" question, as he felt he was outed as Bachman too early to know. The Bachman book \"Thinner\" (1984) sold 28,000 copies during its initial run\u2014and then ten times as many when it was revealed that Bachman was, in fact, King.\nThe pseudonym that King originally selected, Gus Pillsbury, is King's maternal grandfather's name, but at the last moment, because the pseudonym was outed, King changed it to Richard Bachman. Richard is a tribute to crime author Donald E. Westlake's long-running pseudonym Richard Stark. (The surname Stark \"was\" later used in King's novel \"The Dark Half,\" in which an author's malevolent pseudonym, \"George Stark\", comes to life.) Bachman was inspired by Bachman\u2013Turner Overdrive, a rock and roll band which King was listening to at the time his publisher asked him to choose a pseudonym on the spot.\nBiography.\nKing provided biographical details for Bachman, initially in the \"about the author\" blurbs in the early novels. Known \"facts\" about Bachman were that he was born in New York and served a four-year stint in the Coast Guard, which he then followed with ten years in the Merchant Marine. Bachman finally settled down in rural central New Hampshire, where he ran a medium-sized dairy farm, writing at night. His fifth novel was dedicated to his wife, Claudia Inez Bachman, who also received credit for the faked author photo on the book jacket. Other \"facts\" about the author were revealed in publicity dispatches from Bachman's publishers: The Bachmans had one child, a boy, who died in an unfortunate, Stephen King-esque accident at the age of six, when he fell into a well and drowned. In 1982, a brain tumour was discovered near the base of Bachman's brain; tricky surgery removed it. After Bachman's true identity was revealed, later publicity dispatches (and \"about the author\" blurbs) revealed that Bachman died suddenly in late 1985 of \"cancer of the pseudonym, a rare form of schizonomia\".\nIdentification.\nKing dedicated Bachman's early books\u2014\"Rage\" (1977), \"The Long Walk\" (1979), \"Roadwork\" (1981), and \"The Running Man\" (1982)\u2014to people close to him. The link between King and his shadow writer was exposed in early 1985 after Steve Brown, a bookstore clerk in Washington, D.C., noted similarities between the writing styles of King and Bachman. Brown located publisher's records at the Library of Congress which included a document naming King as the author of one of Bachman's novels. Brown wrote to King's publishers with a copy of the documents he had uncovered, and asked them what to do. Two weeks later, King telephoned Brown personally and suggested he write an article about how he discovered the truth, allowing himself to be interviewed. At the time of the announcement in 1985, King was working on \"Misery\", which he had planned to release as a Bachman book, but changed his mind after the outing. The next Bachman book was not until 1996, with \"The Regulators\". And the last Bachman book is the 2007 \"Blaze\". These latter books were said to have been \"found\" or \"discovered\".\nPost-outing.\nIn 1987, the Bachman novel \"The Running Man\" inspired the Paul Michael Glaser film of the same name. King insisted that his name not be on the credits, and the screen credit for the film went to Richard Bachman.\nKing used the \"relationship\" between himself and Bachman as a concept in his 1989 book \"The Dark Half.\" In the novel, a writer's darker pseudonym takes on a life of its own. King dedicated \"The Dark Half\" to \"the late Richard Bachman.\" Originally there were plans to make the book a collaboration between the two, although this was later scrapped.\nIn 1996, Bachman's \"The Regulators\" came out, with the publishers claiming the book's manuscript was found among Bachman's leftover papers by his widow. It was released as a companion novel to King's \"Desperation\"; the two novels took place in different universes but featured many of the same characters. The two book covers were designed to be placed together to form a single picture. In the foreword by King included with \"Desperation\" he said that there may be another Bachman novel left to be \"found\".\nThe next Bachman book to be \"discovered\" was \"Blaze\". \"Blaze\" was, in fact, an unpublished novel by King, written before \"Carrie\" or the creation of Richard Bachman. For its publication, King rewrote, edited, and updated the entire text. It was published in 2007 under the Bachman pseudonym, with a foreword by King under his own name.\nKing has taken full ownership of the Bachman name on numerous occasions, as with the republication of the first four Bachman titles \"The Bachman Books: Four Early Novels by Stephen King\" in 1985. The introduction, titled \"Why I Was Bachman\", details the whole Bachman/King story. (In 1996, the collection was reissued with a new King essay, \"The Importance of Being Bachman\".)\nBachman was also referred to in King's \"The Dark Tower\" series of books. In the fifth book, ', the sinister children's book \"Charlie the Choo Choo\" is revealed to be written by \"Claudia y Inez Bachman\". The spelling discrepancy of the added 'y' was later explained as a deus ex machina on the part of \"The White\" (a force of good throughout King's \"Tower\" series) to bring the total number of letters in her name to nineteen, a number prominent in King's series. In the next novel of the series, ', King briefly discusses his Richard Bachman pseudonym.\nAfter the 1997 Heath High School shooting, King announced that he would allow \"Rage\" to go out of print, fearing that it might inspire similar tragedies. \"Rage\" for a time continued to be available in the United Kingdom in \"The Bachman Books\" collection, although the collection now no longer contains \"Rage\". In a footnote to the preface of \"Blaze\", dated 30 January 2007, King wrote of \"Rage\": \"Now out of print, and a good thing.\" King's other Bachman novels are available in the US in separate volumes.\nIn 2010, King appeared as Bachman in the third season of the FX television series \"Sons of Anarchy\" in a cameo role, the character performing contract work quietly disposing of deceased bodies.\nIn issue 29 of the comic adaptation of \"The Stand\", Richard \"Rich\" Bachman appears as one of the top lieutenants of Randall Flagg, replacing the character of Whitney Horgan from the original novel. He is drawn to resemble King.\nIn the 2013 \"Grimm\" episode \"Nameless\", Bachman being a pseudonym of King was a plot point. King's novel, \"Rage\", had its title page used as a prop for the killer to write a note to the police.\nThe 2025 film adaptation of \"The Running Man\" openly credits King with having written the original book (as opposed to the 1987 film adaptation).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25624", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25624", "title": "Roberto Baggio", "text": "Italian former footballer (born 1967)\nRoberto Baggio (; born 18 February 1967) is an Italian former professional footballer who mainly played as a second striker, or as an attacking midfielder, although he was capable of playing in several offensive positions. He is the former president of the technical sector of the Italian Football Federation. A technically gifted creative playmaker and set piece specialist, renowned for his curling free-kicks, dribbling skills, and goalscoring, Baggio is widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time.\nIn 1999, Baggio came fourth in the FIFA Player of the Century internet poll, and was chosen on the FIFA World Cup Dream Team in 2002. In 1993, he was named FIFA World Player of the Year and won the Ballon d'Or. In 2004, he was named by Pel\u00e9 in the FIFA 100, a list of the world's greatest living players.\nBaggio played for Italy in 56 matches and is the joint fourth-highest goalscorer for his national team. He starred in the Italian team that finished third in the 1990 FIFA World Cup. At the 1994 World Cup, he led Italy to the final, received the World Cup Silver Ball and was named in the World Cup All-Star Team. Although he was the star performer for Italy at the tournament, he missed the decisive penalty in the shootout of the final against Brazil. Baggio is the only Italian to score in three World Cups, and with nine goals holds the record for most goals scored in World Cup tournaments for Italy, along with Paolo Rossi and Christian Vieri.\nIn 2002, Baggio became the first Italian player in over 50 years to score more than 300 career goals; he is the fifth-highest scoring Italian in all competitions with 318 goals. In 2004, during the final season of his career, Baggio became the first player in over 30 years to score 200 goals in Serie A, and is the seventh-highest goalscorer of all time in Serie A, with 205 goals. In 1990, he moved from Fiorentina to Juventus for a world record transfer fee. Baggio won two Serie A titles, a Coppa Italia, and a UEFA Cup, playing for seven different Italian clubs during his career (Vicenza, Fiorentina, Juventus, AC Milan, Bologna, Inter Milan, and Brescia).\nBaggio is known as (\"The Divine Ponytail\"), for the hairstyle he wore for most of his career, for his talent, and for his Buddhist beliefs. In 2002, Baggio was nominated Goodwill Ambassador of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. In 2003, he was the inaugural winner of the Golden Foot award. In recognition of his human rights activism, he received the Man of Peace award from the Nobel Peace Prize Laureates in 2010. In 2011, he was the first footballer to be inducted into the Italian Football Hall of Fame.\nEarly life.\nRoberto Baggio was born in Caldogno, Veneto, the son of Matilde and Florindo Baggio, the sixth of eight siblings. His younger brother, Eddy Baggio, was also a footballer.\nClub career.\n1976\u20131985: Early career and Vicenza.\nBaggio began his youth career after being noticed by his hometown youth team, Caldogno, at age nine. By the time he turned 11, he had scored 45 goals and provided 20 assists in 26 matches, also scoring six goals in one match. His talent was recognised by scout Antonio Mora, and he was acquired by the Vicenza youth team at age 13 for \u00a3300 (500,000 Lit). After scoring 110 goals in 120 matches, Baggio began his professional career with the Vicenza senior side in 1983, at age 15.\nAt the age of 16, Baggio made his Serie C1 debut with Vicenza on 5 June 1983, a 1\u20130 home loss against Piacenza, in the final league match of the season, coming on as a second-half substitute. He scored his first goal in Serie C1 during the following season, on 3 June 1984, from a penalty in a 3\u20130 win against Brescia, the club with which he retired in 2004. Baggio scored the first professional goal of his career in the Coppa Italia Serie C in a 4\u20131 away win over Legnano on 30 November 1983. He also made his Coppa Italia debut with the club on 31 August 1983, against Palermo, and he scored his first Coppa Italia goal in a 4\u20132 away loss to Empoli, on 26 August 1984. During the 1984\u201385 Serie C1 season under manager Bruno Giorgi, he scored 12 goals in 29 appearances, helping the club to gain promotion to Serie B. Baggio began to draw the attention of larger Italian clubs, in particular Serie A side Fiorentina, and his playing style was compared to that of his idol Zico. Baggio was also awarded the Guerin d'Oro in 1985 as the Best Player in Serie C1.\nDuring the end of his final season at Vicenza, Baggio shattered both the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and the meniscus of his right knee while playing against Rimini on 5 May 1985, while attempting a slide tackle. The injury occurred two days before his official transfer deal to Fiorentina had been finalised, and it seriously threatened his career, at age 18. Although several team doctors feared he would not play again, Fiorentina retained their faith in him, agreeing to commit to the transfer as well as fund the required surgery, one of many reasons for Baggio's attachment to the club.\n1985\u20131990: Fiorentina.\nFiorentina purchased Baggio in 1985 for \u00a31.5\u00a0million. During his time at the club, despite initial injuries, he became extremely popular, and is regarded as one of the club's best ever players. In his first season with the club, Baggio did not appear in Serie A as he was sidelined by injury; Fiorentina finished in fifth place in the league and reached the semi-finals of the Coppa Italia, with Baggio making his club debut in the latter competition. He finally made his Serie A debut the following season on 21 September 1986, in a 2\u20130 home win against Sampdoria, and he also made his European debut that season on 17 September 1986, in an UEFA Cup match against Boavista. Baggio suffered another knee injury on 28 September, and he was operated again, requiring 220 stitches to have it rebuilt, losing 12\u00a0kg as a result and missing most of the season. Baggio returned, and scored his first league goal from a free-kick on 10 May 1987 in a 1\u20131 draw against Diego Maradona's Napoli, the eventual Serie A champions; Baggio's equaliser saved Fiorentina from relegation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The angels sing in his legs.\"\n\u2014Former Fiorentina manager Aldo Agroppi on Baggio.\nBaggio led Fiorentina to a Coppa Italia quarter-final during the 1988\u201389 season under manager Sven-G\u00f6ran Eriksson, scoring nine goals, as Fiorentina were eliminated by eventual champions Sampdoria. This season would be Baggio's breakthrough, as he scored 15 goals in Serie A, finishing third in the \"capocannoniere\" (top goalscorer) title. He also helped Fiorentina finish in seventh place in Serie A and win an UEFA Cup spot, assisting the only goal by Roberto Pruzzo in the tiebreak qualifier against Roma. He formed a notable attacking partnership with Stefano Borgonovo, and the pair scored 29 of Fiorentina's 44 Serie A goals, earning the nickname \"B2\". Baggio's performances elevated him to hero status among the fans, and he drew praise from several pundits. His characteristics led former Fiorentina playmaker Miguel Montuori to say Baggio was \"more productive than Maradona; he is without doubt the best number 10 in the league\", also stating that Baggio had \"ice in his veins\" due to his composure in front of goal.\nAlthough Fiorentina were struggling against relegation during the 1989\u201390 season, Baggio led the club to the 1990 UEFA Cup final, only to be defeated by his future club, Juventus. Baggio scored 1 goal in 12 appearances in the competition, in a round of 16 1\u20130 home win against Dynamo Kyiv, from a penalty, on 22 November 1989; this was his first goal in European competitions. He also scored the decisive penalty in the first round shootout against Atl\u00e9tico Madrid. With 17 goals, Baggio was the second-highest goalscorer in the 1989\u201390 Serie A season after Marco van Basten, and was awarded the Bravo Award as the best under-23 player in European competitions. He also placed eighth in the 1990 Ballon d'Or. With Fiorentina, Baggio scored 55 goals in 136 appearances, 39 of which were in Serie A, from 94 appearances.\n1990\u20131995: Juventus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"One game stands out in particular, one against Ancona [actually Udinese] which we won 5\u20131 [actually 5\u20130]. Baggio scored four goals in the first 20 minutes and killed the game off. I don't think I've seen a better performance from any player in any game I've ever played in. For half an hour, he was on fire. As footballers go, he's a genius.\"\n\u2014Former Juventus teammate David Platt on Baggio, 1995.\nIn 1990, Baggio was sold to one of Fiorentina's rivals, Juventus, for \u00a38\u00a0million, the world record transfer for a footballer at the time. He inherited the number 10 shirt, formerly worn by Michel Platini. Following the transfer, there were riots on the streets of Florence, where 50 people were injured. Baggio replied to his fans, saying: \"I was compelled to accept the transfer.\"\nWhen Juventus played Fiorentina on 7 April 1991, Baggio refused to take a penalty, stating Fiorentina goalkeeper Gianmatteo Mareggini knew him too well. However, Luigi De Agostini, Baggio's replacement, missed the penalty and Juventus eventually lost the match. When Baggio was substituted, he picked up a Fiorentina scarf thrown onto the field, a gesture which, although appreciated by his former club's fans, caused outrage among the Juventus supporters, who were initially reluctant to accept Baggio. He claimed to be \"always purple\" in his heart, with purple being the colour of Fiorentina.\nIn this first season at Juventus, Baggio scored 14 goals and provided 12 assists in Serie A, often playing behind the forwards under Luigi Maifredi, although Juventus finished in seventh place in Serie A, outside the European qualification spots. However, Juventus did reach the semi-finals of the European Cup Winners' Cup that year, a tournament in which Baggio was top scorer with nine goals, bringing his seasonal total to 27 goals. Juventus would ultimately be eliminated by Johan Cruyff's Barcelona \"Dream Team\". Juventus were also eliminated in the quarter-finals of the Coppa Italia to eventual winners Roma, with Baggio scoring three goals. Juventus also lost the Supercoppa Italiana against Napoli at the beginning of the season; Baggio scored Juventus's only goal from a free-kick. Baggio made his 100th Serie A appearance in a 0\u20130 draw against Lazio on 21 October 1990.\nIn his second season, under new manager Giovanni Trapattoni, Baggio finished runner-up to Marco van Basten for the Serie A top scorer title, scoring 18 goals and providing 8 assists, as Juventus finished runners-up to Fabio Capello's AC Milan in Serie A, and to Parma in the Coppa Italia final, in which Baggio scored in his club's 1\u20130 victory in the first leg from a penalty. It was during his second season with the club that Baggio came to be accepted by the Juventus fans, as he was seen as a leader around whom the club's play revolved. However, Trapattoni often deployed Baggio in a more advanced role, which led to minor disagreements between the player, his coach and Juventus management.\nBaggio was appointed team captain for the 1992\u201393 season. He had a dominant season, winning the only European club trophy of his career after helping Juventus to the UEFA Cup final, in which he scored twice and assisted another goal over both legs, defeating Borussia Dortmund 6\u20131 on aggregate. \"En route\" to the final, Baggio scored two goals in the 2\u20131 home victory against Paris Saint-Germain, in the first leg of the semi-final, and he went on to score the only goal in the return leg. Juventus also reached the semi-finals of the Coppa Italia, losing on away goals to local rivals and winners Torino. Juventus finished fourth in Serie A that season, although they managed a 3\u20131 away win against the Serie A champions Milan, with Baggio scoring a memorable individual goal while also setting-up Andreas M\u00f6ller's first goal of the match. One of the highlights of the season involved Baggio scoring four goals in open play against Udinese in a 5\u20130 Juventus home win. Baggio was once again runner-up for the Serie A \"capocannoniere\" title with 21 goals and 6 assists. He scored a personal best of 30 goals in all club competitions that season, in addition to five goals with the Italy national team. During the 1993 calendar year, Baggio managed a personal record 39 goals across all competitions, scoring 23 goals in Serie A, 3 in the Coppa Italia, 8 goals in European competitions and 5 goals for Italy, helping his national side qualify for the World Cup. Baggio's performances throughout the year earned him both the European Footballer of the Year, with 142 points from a possible 150, and the FIFA World Player of the Year awards. He was also awarded the Onze d'Or, and the World Soccer Player of the Year Award.\nIn the 1993\u201394 season, Baggio often played as a second striker alongside Gianluca Vialli or Fabrizio Ravanelli, and occasionally the young Alessandro Del Piero; Juventus once again finished runners up to Milan in Serie A, and Baggio finished third in the \"capocannoniere\" title with 17 goals and 8 assists, while the club suffered a quarter-final elimination in the UEFA Cup against Cagliari. On 31 October 1993, Baggio scored a hat-trick in a 4\u20130 win over Genoa, which included his 100th Serie A goal; he also set up a goal for M\u00f6ller during the match. Baggio made his 200th Serie A appearance on 5 December 1993 in a 1\u20130 win over Napoli. After sustaining an injury earlier that season, Baggio was operated on his meniscus in March 1994. Baggio placed second in the 1994 Ballon d'Or, third in the 1994 FIFA World Player of the Year, and was awarded the 1994 Onze de Bronze.\nIn the 1994\u201395 season, Trapattoni's replacement, Marcello Lippi, wanted to create a more cohesive team, less dependent on Baggio, who was deployed as an outside forward in a 4\u20133\u20133 formation. Baggio was injured for most of the season, being ruled out for over three months after sustaining a knee injury against Padova on 27 November 1994. After scoring from a free-kick, he was substituted by Alessandro Del Piero, who temporarily took his place in the team. Baggio returned to the starting line-up in the first leg of the Coppa Italia semi-final against Lazio in Rome on 8 March 1995, setting up Fabrizio Ravanelli's winner. On his first Serie A match back from injury, on 12 March 1995, Baggio scored Juventus' second goal in a 2\u20130 win over Foggia, and set up Ravanelli's goal. Due to his injury, Baggio only managed 17 Serie A appearances, but still contributed to his first \"scudetto\" with Juventus by contributing eight goals and eight assists. He provided assists for three of the goals in the title-deciding match against Parma, which Juventus won 4\u20130 in Turin on 21 May 1995. He helped Juventus win the Coppa Italia that year, notching two goals and two assists, scoring the winning goal in the second leg of the semi-final. He helped lead Juventus to another UEFA Cup final by scoring four goals, including two goals and an assist over both legs of the semi-finals against Borussia Dortmund. Despite Baggio's strong performance, Juventus were defeated in the UEFA Cup final by Parma.\nBaggio scored 115 goals in 200 appearances during his five seasons at Juventus; 78 were scored in Serie A in 141 appearances. In 1995, Baggio was nominated for the Ballon d'Or and placed fifth in the 1995 FIFA World Player of the Year Award. He was also awarded the 1995 Onze d'Argent Award, behind George Weah. Baggio is currently Juventus' ninth-highest goalscorer in all competitions, and is the joint tenth-highest goalscorer for Juventus in Serie A, alongside Pietro Anastasi. He is the sixth-highest Juventus goalscorer in the Coppa Italia with 14 goals, and is also the joint fourth all-time Juventus goalscorer in European competitions, as well as the joint fifth all-time Juventus goalscorer in international competitions, with 22 goals, alongside Anastasi once again. In 2010, he was named one of the club's 50 greatest legends.\n1995\u20131997: AC Milan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Baggio on the bench? It's something that I will never understand in my lifetime.\"\n\u2014Zinedine Zidane on Baggio starting on the bench.\nIn 1995, Marcello Lippi, Roberto Bettega and Umberto Agnelli announced that Baggio no longer featured in their plans at Juventus and decided to focus on the emerging star Alessandro Del Piero, who would inherit Baggio's number 10 shirt. Baggio faced difficulties with Agnelli, Luciano Moggi, and Juventus management during his final season, as they stated they would only renew his contract if he reduced his salary by 50%. After strong pressure from AC Milan chairman Silvio Berlusconi and manager Fabio Capello, Baggio was sold to the Milanese club for \u00a36.8\u00a0million, amidst several protests from Juventus fans. At the time, Baggio had been linked with Inter Milan, Real Madrid, and English Premier League clubs Manchester United and Blackburn Rovers.\nAlthough Baggio initially struggled with injuries at the beginning of his first season with Milan, he came back into the starting line-up and was appointed the main penalty taker. He helped Milan win the Serie A title, notably scoring a goal against his former team Fiorentina from a penalty in the title-deciding match. Baggio finished the season with 10 goals in all competitions, in 34 appearances; seven of his goals were scored in Serie A, in 28 appearances, and he also provided 12 assists in Serie A, making him the top assist provider of the season. He became one of only six players to win the \"scudetto\" in consecutive years with different teams, and was voted the club's best player of the season by the fans, despite playing a more creative role. Towards the end of the season, Baggio had disagreements with Capello due to limited playing time, as Capello believed he was no longer fit enough to play for 90 minutes; although Baggio frequently started matches, he was often substituted during the second half; during the course of the season, he only played nine matches in their entirety, being substituted on 17 occasions, and coming off the bench twice.\nDuring the opening of the 1996\u201397 Serie A under new Milan manager \u00d3scar Tab\u00e1rez, Baggio was initially left out of the first team, with the former commenting \"[t]here is no place for poets in modern football.\" Baggio was later able to convince the Uruguayan manager of his abilities and earn himself a spot in the starting line-up; he became the focal point of the team's offensive play, and was initially started in his preferred role behind George Weah, and on occasion as a left-winger or as a central-midfielder playmaker. After a series of disappointing results, Baggio was relegated to the bench, and Milan's former coach Arrigo Sacchi, also the former Italy manager with whom Baggio had argued following the 1994 World Cup, was called in as a replacement. Although their relationship initially improved, Sacchi gave Baggio limited playing time, and he soon fell out of form, along with the rest of the squad, which caused their relationship to deteriorate again. Milan failed to retain their league title, finishing the season in a disappointing 11th place, and they were knocked out once again in the quarter-finals of the Coppa Italia. Baggio made his UEFA Champions League debut in the 1996\u201397 season, scoring his first goal in the competition, although Milan were eliminated in the group stage. Milan also lost the 1996 Supercoppa Italiana to Fiorentina, as Baggio was left on the bench. During his time at Milan, Baggio scored 19 goals in 67 appearances in all competitions; 12 of his goals were scored in Serie A, in 51 appearances, 3 were scored in the Coppa Italia in 6 appearances, and 4 were scored in European competitions, in 10 appearances.\n1997\u20131998: Bologna.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I said, 'No, you have to play striker.' Baggio went to another club. That year Baggio scored 25 [actually 22] goals \u2013 for Bologna! I lost 25 goals! Big mistake.\"\n\u2014Carlo Ancelotti talking to Simon Kuper of the \"Financial Times\" in 2014, reminiscing his greatest regret in football, choosing a system over a generational talent.\nIn 1997, Capello returned to Milan, subsequently stating Baggio was not a part of his plans with the club. Baggio chose to move to Parma, but the manager at the time, Carlo Ancelotti, impeded the transfer, as he also did not feel Baggio would fit into his tactical plans. Ancelotti would later state he regretted this decision, stating that in his na\u00efvet\u00e9, he believed that the 4\u20134\u20132 formation was the ideal formation for success, and he felt that at the time, creative players such as Gianfranco Zola and Baggio were not compatible with this system.\nBaggio subsequently transferred to Bologna, aiming to save the squad from relegation, and earn a place at the 1998 FIFA World Cup. Baggio refound his form with the club and had a dominant season, scoring a personal best of 22 goals in Serie A, as well as providing 9 assists, leading Bologna to an eighth-place finish, allowing them to qualify for the UEFA Intertoto Cup. Baggio was the highest scoring Italian in Serie A that season, and the third-highest goalscorer in Serie A. His performances earned him a place in Italy's 1998 World Cup squad. Baggio also led Bologna to the round of 16 in the Coppa Italia, where he scored one goal in three appearances. Although he rose to hero status amongst the fans, he had difficulties with his manager Renzo Ulivieri, in particular when he was left out of the starting 11 against Juventus. Ulivieri later denied ever having any difficulties with Baggio. At the beginning of the season, Baggio cut off his iconic ponytail, signifying his rebirth. Baggio was named as Bologna's captain for part of the season, before handing the armband to Giancarlo Marocchi. Baggio made his 300th Serie A appearance while at Bologna, in a 0\u20130 draw against Empoli on 11 January 1998. Baggio received nominations for both the Ballon d'Or and the FIFA World Player of the Year due to his performances for Bologna and Italy that season. He was also nominated for the 1998 Serie A Italian Footballer of the Year and Serie A Footballer of the Year awards, losing out to Alessandro Del Piero and Ronaldo, respectively.\n1998\u20132000: Inter Milan.\nAfter the 1998 World Cup, Baggio signed with his favourite childhood club Inter Milan in order to compete in the UEFA Champions League. He made his club debut on 12 August 1998, in the first leg of the second round of the qualifying stages of the latter competition, scoring a goal and providing three assists in a 4\u20130 win over Skonto FC in Pisa. After injuries, disappointing results, and several managerial changes throughout the season, including Luigi Simoni, Mircea Lucescu, and Roy Hodgson, Baggio struggled to gain playing time, and was used out of position as a winger, often as a substitute. Baggio scored five league goals and provided 10 assists in 23 appearances during the 1998\u201399 season, as Inter finished in eighth place, missing out on a European spot. He helped Inter to a Coppa Italia semi-final, losing out to eventual winners Parma. Baggio scored a goal against his former club Bologna in a European play-off match, but Inter lost both matches, failing to qualify for the UEFA Cup. Baggio also scored four goals in the Champions League, helping lead Inter through the qualifying rounds to the quarter-finals, where they were eliminated by eventual winners Manchester United, also scoring a memorable brace against defending champions Real Madrid in the group stage.\nIn the 1999\u20132000 season, Marcello Lippi, Baggio's former manager at Juventus, was appointed as Inter's new coach. Lippi did not favour Baggio and left him out of the squad for most of the season, stating Baggio was out of shape. In his autobiography, Baggio stated Lippi had dumped him after Baggio refused to point out which of Inter's players had expressed negative opinions about the coach, also highlighting an incident during a training session where he called out Christian Vieri and Christian Panucci for applauding Baggio for a notable assist.\nBaggio was used scarcely and often as a substitute, scoring 4 goals in 18 appearances during the regular Serie A season. He made five appearances in the Coppa Italia, with his only goal coming against local rivals AC Milan in the second leg of the quarter-finals, as he helped Inter reach the final, only to be defeated by Lazio. Despite his limited playing time, Baggio still managed several important goals to help Inter to a fourth-place finish, alongside Parma, such as his match winning goal against Hellas Verona, which he scored after coming off the bench, after being excluded from the team since 18 December 1999. Baggio had also previously helped to set up Inter's equaliser during the match. This was the first time Baggio had scored for Inter since his goal on 27 May of the previous season, and in the post-match the interview, he denied accusations made by Lippi in regard to his personal form.\nBaggio's last important contribution to Inter was scoring two memorable goals against Parma in the play-off match for the last remaining Champions League place, which Inter won 3\u20131; Lippi had been forced to field Baggio due to several injuries. Baggio was given a perfect 10 rating from the Italian sports newspaper \"La Gazzetta dello Sport\", which described his performance as \"absolutely perfect all game\". This match is considered an example of professionalism shown by Baggio, as Inter president Massimo Moratti had stated Lippi would only stay on if the team qualified for the Champions League.\n2000\u20132004: Brescia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Roberto Baggio was the best Italian \"fantasista\"; he was better than Meazza and Boniperti, and he was amongst the greatest of all time, right behind Maradona, Pel\u00e9, and maybe Cruyff. Without the injury problems and the difficulties with his knees, he would have been the very best player in history.\"\n\u2014Carlo Mazzone, Baggio's coach at Brescia.\nAfter two years with Inter, Baggio decided not to renew his expiring contract due to his conflicts with Marcello Lippi, making him a free agent at age 33. He was linked with several Serie A clubs, such as Napoli and Reggina, and also various Premier League and La Liga clubs, including Barcelona. Baggio ultimately transferred to Serie A newcomers Brescia under head coach Carlo Mazzone, aiming to save them from relegation; he remained in Italy in order to have a greater opportunity of being called up for the 2002 World Cup. He was made captain and was given the number 10 shirt, playing as an attacking midfielder.\nDespite injury problems during the first half of the season, Baggio re-found his form and managed ten goals and ten assists in the 2000\u201301 season. Brescia finished in a joint seventh place, their best Serie A finish since the league's re-establishment in 1946, and qualified for the UEFA Intertoto Cup, also reaching the quarter-finals of the Coppa Italia, losing to eventual winners Fiorentina. Baggio helped Brescia to the final of the 2001 UEFA Intertoto Cup, where they were defeated by Paris Saint-Germain on away goals. Baggio scored one goal in the tournament, in the final from a penalty. His performances earned him a nomination for the 2001 Ballon d'Or, and he finished 25th overall in the rankings. Baggio was one of the best offensive playmakers in the league, winning the Guerin d'oro Award in 2001, awarded by the Italian sports magazine \"Guerin Sportivo\", to the player with the highest average rating throughout the season with at least 19 appearances.\nAt the start of 2001\u201302 season, Baggio scored eight goals in the first nine matches, leading him to the top of the Serie A goalscoring table. In his eighth league appearance of the season, against Piacenza, Baggio scored a goal but later suffered an injury. A week later, against Venezia, he scored from a penalty, but he endured a more serious injury following a hard challenge which caused him to tear the ACL of his left knee, keeping him out of action for four months. He suffered a second serious injury that season, tearing the meniscus in his left knee, after returning to the team, and coming off the bench, in the Coppa Italia semi-final against Parma on 31 January 2002. He was operated on 4 February 2002 and he returned for three matches before the end of the season, making a recovery in 76 days. On 21 April 2002, in the first game after his comeback, Baggio came on as a substitute to score two goals against Fiorentina, helping Brescia win the match. He scored again against Bologna, saving Brescia from relegation on the final matchday, and bringing his seasonal tally to 11 goals in 12 Serie A matches. Despite Baggio's performances and public demand, Italy national team head coach Giovanni Trapattoni did not deem him fully fit, prompting the coach to leave Baggio out of the final squad for the 2002 World Cup. Trapattoni also expressed concern about bringing Baggio to the World Cup due to the presence of Francesco Totti and Alessandro Del Piero in his role, believing that this could create a rivalry between the players. After missing out on the tournament, Baggio reversed his initial decision to retire after the World Cup, expressing his intention to surpass the 200 Serie A goal mark.\nBaggio maintained a high level of performance under new coach Gianni De Biasi. Baggio managed 12 goals and 9 assists during the 2002\u201303 season, helping Brescia to an eighth-place finish and another UEFA Intertoto Cup spot. He scored his 300th career goal from a penalty on 15 December 2002, in Brescia's 3\u20131 home victory over Perugia, also setting-up one of Igli Tare's goals.\nIn the 2003\u201304 season, the final season of his career, Baggio recorded 12 goals and 11 assists. He scored his 200th goal in Serie A in a 2\u20132 draw against Parma on 14 March 2004, saving Brescia from relegation, as they finished the season in 11th place. Baggio was the first player in almost 30 years to surpass the 200-goal milestone, and is currently only one of seven players to have accomplished the feat. Baggio scored his final and 205th Serie A career goal on the second last matchday, in a 2\u20131 home win over Coppa Italia winners Lazio on 9 May 2004; he also set up Brescia's first goal in that match. Baggio played his last career match on 16 May 2004 on the final matchday of the season at the San Siro against Milan, which ended in a 4\u20132 loss to the Serie A champions; during the game, he set-up Matuzal\u00e9m's second goal. In the 88th minute, De Biasi substituted Baggio, prompting the 80,000 present at the San Siro to give him a standing ovation; Milan's captain, defender Paolo Maldini, who was Baggio's former teammate both with the Italy national team and Milan, also embraced him before he left the pitch.\nWith Brescia, Baggio scored 46 goals in 101 appearances in all competitions, scoring 45 goals in 95 Serie A appearances, and one goal in two European matches. Baggio also made four Coppa Italia appearances with Brescia. Baggio retired as Brescia's all-time leading goalscorer in Serie A. He ended his career with 205 goals in Serie A, making him the seventh-highest scorer of all time, behind Silvio Piola, Francesco Totti (who overtook him in 2011), Gunnar Nordahl, Giuseppe Meazza, Jos\u00e9 Altafini, and Antonio Di Natale (who overtook him in 2015). Baggio's number 10 shirt was retired by Brescia in his honour, and he is considered the club's greatest ever player. Before Baggio had joined Brescia, they had never been able to avoid relegation after being newly promoted to Serie A, in over 40 years. During the four years under Baggio, Brescia recorded their best ever Serie A run and were never relegated.\nInternational career.\nYouth career and senior debut.\nBaggio totalled 27 goals in 56 caps for his national team at senior level, making him Italy's fourth-highest all-time goalscorer, tied with Del Piero, who managed the tally in 91 appearances. At youth level, he was capped for the Italy U16 on four occasions in 1984, scoring three goals. Under Cesare Maldini, he was called up for one Italy under-21 match against Switzerland on 16 October 1987, although he was an unused substitute, and strangely failed to make an appearance for the \"azzurrini\".\nHis first senior International call-up was given to him by manager Azeglio Vicini, and he made his first appearance for Italy on 16 November 1988 at age 21 in a 1\u20130 friendly victory over the Netherlands, assisting Gianluca Vialli's match-winning goal. He scored his first goal for Italy on 22 April 1989, from a free-kick in a 1\u20131 draw against Uruguay in an international friendly in Verona. Later that year, in his following international appearance in Italy's friendly against Bulgaria, held in Cesena on 20 September, he scored his first brace for Italy in a 4\u20130 victory, also later assisting Andrea Carnevale's goal with a cross from a free kick, and contributing to Nikolay Iliev's own goal by setting-up Vialli, whose shot was subsequently deflected by the Bulgarian defender.\n1990 FIFA World Cup.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Baggio. Oh yes, oh yes\u2026oh yes! What a goal by Baggio! That's the goal they've all been waiting for!\"\n\u2014ITV Commentator Alan Parry's reaction to Baggio's goal in Italy's group stage match against Czechoslovakia, during the 1990 World Cup.\nBaggio was called up for his first World Cup tournament in 1990, on home soil. Baggio appeared in five matches, starting in four of them, as Italy manager Azeglio Vicini preferred the more experienced Gianluca Vialli to start against Argentina. Baggio was still able to display his ability throughout the tournament, and Vicini's decision not to use him more frequently was later criticised, as Baggio's creative combinations with Salvatore Schillaci were praised. Baggio scored twice during the tournament, including the \"goal of the tournament\" in a 2\u20130 win in his first competitive international fixture, in Italy's final group match against Czechoslovakia. The goal, which drew him comparisons with Giuseppe Meazza, involved an exchange with Giuseppe Giannini on the left wing, followed by a dribbling run from midfield, in which Baggio beat several players, wrong-footing the last defender with a feint, before putting the ball past the goalkeeper. This goal was later recognised as the seventh-best goal in World Cup history in a FIFA poll.\nIn the round of 16 match against Uruguay, which Italy won 2\u20130, Baggio started the play which led to Italy's first goal, scored by Schillaci. Baggio also scored a goal from a direct free-kick, but it was disallowed as the referee had awarded an indirect free-kick. Baggio also had a goal incorrectly ruled offside in the quarter-final against the Republic of Ireland, which Italy won 1\u20130; Baggio was once again involved in the build-up which led to Schillaci's match winning goal. Italy were eliminated on penalties against defending champions Argentina in the semi-finals after a 1\u20131 draw, although Baggio was able to score his penalty in the shootout. Baggio had come off the bench in the second half for Giannini, and came close to winning the match with a free-kick, but it was saved by Sergio Goycochea.\nIn the bronze medal match against England, Baggio returned to the starting line-up, playing behind Schillaci. He scored Italy's first goal of the match after stealing the ball from Peter Shilton. David Platt momentarily equalised, but with five minutes left on the clock, Baggio set up Schillaci, who was fouled inside the area by Paul Parker. Although Baggio was the regularly designated penalty taker for his national team, he stepped aside to allow Schillaci to score and capture the Golden Shoe, a gesture which was praised by the Italian media. Baggio assisted a goal by Nicola Berti in the dying minutes of the match, but it was incorrectly ruled offside. Italy won the match 2\u20131, capturing the third place medal.\nFollowing the World Cup, Baggio was not called up often by Vicini for the Euro 1992 Qualification matches, only making three appearances and scoring two goals as Italy failed to qualify for the tournament, finishing second in their qualifying group behind the Soviet Union.\n1994 FIFA World Cup.\nUnder Italy's new manager, Arrigo Sacchi, Baggio was his team's top scorer during their qualifying campaign for the 1994 World Cup, scoring five goals of the team's 14 goals in the eight games in also providing seven assists. He helped Italy top their group and qualify for the 1994 World Cup, notably contributing to Dino Baggio's winner in the decisive final group match against Portugal, which secured Italy's place in the final competition. One of his best performances during the qualifying campaign occurred on 14 October 1992 against Switzerland; Italy were trailing 2\u20130 at home and Baggio led his team to a 2\u20132 draw comeback, scoring a goal. Under Sacchi, Baggio made his first and only starting appearance as Italy's captain in the 1994 World Cup qualifying match in Glasgow against Scotland on 18 November 1992. However, he was substituted off in the final minutes of the 0\u20130 draw after injuring his rib.\nDespite a series of injuries prior to the tournament, Baggio was expected to be one of the stars of the 1994 World Cup, entering the competition as the reigning Ballon d'Or winner and FIFA World Player of the Year, and at the peak of his career; after a lacklustre start, he led his team to the final with three match winning performances in the knockout rounds, wearing the number 10 shirt, and scoring five goals in the process. In a disappointing first match against Republic of Ireland at Giants Stadium, New Jersey, Italy were defeated 1\u20130. In the second match against Norway, he appeared more inspired; however, Italy goalkeeper Gianluca Pagliuca was sent off for handling the ball outside the area. Luca Marchegiani was brought in to replace him, and Arrigo Sacchi decided to sacrifice Baggio in what produced an outcry amidst the fans. Baggio later stated that Sacchi was \"crazy\". Italy won the match 1\u20130. Italy continued to disappoint, as their final group match ended in a 1\u20131 draw against Mexico, and he again failed to influence the result. The Italians finished third in their group, drawing much criticism from the press, and only advancing from the first round as the fourth-best third-placed team; Juventus president Gianni Agnelli famously called Baggio \"un coniglio bagnato\" (\"a wet rabbit\"), referring to his despondent demeanour, hoping the jab would spur him on to score.\nAfter under-performing during the group stage, Baggio refound his form in the knockout stages, where he scored five memorable goals. He scored two in the round of 16, helping a ten-man Italy defeat Nigeria 2\u20131 at Foxboro Stadium in Boston, after trailing for most of the match. He scored his first goal of the match with two minutes left on the clock, after receiving ball at the edge of the area from Roberto Mussi. He then went on to score the winning goal from a penalty in extra time after setting up Antonio Benarrivo with a lobbed pass, who was then fouled in the penalty area.\nBaggio scored another match-winning goal in the quarter-finals to defeat Spain 2\u20131 with three minutes remaining. After receiving the ball from Giuseppe Signori, he dribbled past the Spanish goalkeeper Andoni Zubizarreta, scoring off-balance from a tight angle. He was also involved in the build-up which led to Italy's first goal by his unrelated namesake Dino Baggio. Baggio gave a man of the match performance in the semi-finals; he scored two more goals to beat Bulgaria 2\u20131 at Giants Stadium, leading Italy to the World Cup final for the first time in 12 years. He scored his first goal after beating two players and curling the ball from outside the area into the bottom-right corner. His second was scored with a half volley from a tight angle, assisted by Demetrio Albertini with a lobbed ball.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I knew what I had to do and my concentration was perfect. But I was so tired that I tried to hit the ball too hard.\"\n\u2014Baggio on his physical and mental state before taking the penalty in the final.\nBaggio was not fully fit for the final against Brazil at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California, after pulling his hamstring during the semi-final and playing with the aid of a painkiller injection. Despite being far less dominant than in previous matches, he still tested Brazilian goalkeeper Cl\u00e1udio Taffarel and was able to set up a few chances for his teammates. The match ended 0\u20130 after extra time; he took Italy's last penalty in the resulting shootout, but he put the decisive spot-kick over the crossbar, which meant the Brazilians won the title, resulting in one of the most upsetting moments in World Cup history, and a miss with which his career would frequently become associated.\nImmediately after the match, Baggio stated that he was \"very disappointed,\" also noting that \"a shock of pain\" went through his leg as he kicked. Reportedly, Baggio stood near the goal alone for 8 minutes with his head down after missing the penalty, which has given him the moniker \"The Man who Died Standing\" Baggio has since described the infamous miss as the worst moment of his career, stating that it affected him for years, and that he still \"dreams\" about it to this day. In his autobiography, when recounting the miss, he later reflected: \"Penalties are only missed by those who have the courage to take them.\" Before him, two other Italians, Franco Baresi and Daniele Massaro, had already missed penalties. Having led Italy to the final with his memorable performances, Baggio received the Silver Ball as the second-best player of the tournament, behind Rom\u00e1rio, and also finished tied for second in goals scored throughout the tournament, although he missed out on the Bronze Boot, which went to Kennet Andersson and Rom\u00e1rio. He was also named in the World Cup All-Star Team. Baggio finished runner-up for the Ballon d'Or, with 136 points from a possible 245, and third place for the FIFA World Player of the Year in 1994.\nDespite Baggio's association with missing the decisive penalty in the 1994 World Cup final shoot-out, former \"Telelatino\" broadcaster Alf De Blasis stated in 2010 that he believed that Baggio's performance throughout the entire tournament cemented his legacy as a footballer. Reflecting on Baggio's performance at the 1994 World Cup in 2001, Stefano Bozzi of BBC Sport stated: \"At the USA 94 World Cup, [Baggio] single-handedly hauled Italy to the final.\" In 2006, the BBC described him as \"Italy's best player throughout the [1994] tournament.\" In 2017, Emmet Gates instead described Baggio's run-up to the 1994 World Cup final with Italy as \"the greatest show of individual excellence since another equally majestic number ten [Maradona] dominated the 1986 tournament.\" When summarising Baggio's 1994 World Cup in 2018, Ed Dove of \"ESPN FC\" stated that \"'[t]he Divine Ponytail' had arguably been the outstanding player of the tournament, bailing Italy out on numerous occasions, but his inspirational touch deserted him when it mattered most.\" His colleague Nick Miller instead stated that \"Roberto Baggio was the best player at the 1994 World Cup, dragging Italy to the final virtually on his own.\"\nPost-World Cup.\nAfter the 1994 World Cup, Italy head coach Arrigo Sacchi and Baggio infamously fell out. Their relationship deteriorated in September 1994 following a 1\u20131 draw against Slovenia in a Euro 1996 qualifying match, where Baggio was benched. After a 2\u20131 defeat to Croatia in a Euro 1996 qualifying match in November, their relationship hit the breaking point, and Baggio, supported by his teammates, asked for the manager's dismissal. Due to his disagreements with Sacchi, Baggio was called up to the national team less frequently, only making one more substitute appearance in a 1\u20130 home win against Slovenia in a Euro 1996 qualifier in September 1995. He eventually lost his spot in the squad, missing out on Italy's Euro 1996 squad, despite winning the \"scudetto\" that year with Milan. Sacchi justified his decision by stating Baggio was not fully fit, and that Enrico Chiesa helped the team more when possession was lost. Italy were eliminated in the group stage of the competition. Baggio was also excluded from Cesare Maldini's Italian Olympic squad in 1996.\n1998 FIFA World Cup.\nAfter a lengthy absence from the national team, Baggio was called up by Cesare Maldini for a World Cup qualifying match against Poland on 30 April 1997, in Naples; Baggio came off the bench and scored a goal in a 3\u20130 win. He was subsequently selected as one of Italy's 22 players for the 1998 World Cup following his performances with Bologna.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I had the image of my miss from four years ago stuck in my mind. I was stepping up to the penalty spot and I thought to myself: 'Just hit it hard, hit it hard...'\n\u2014Baggio on his penalty against Chile in the 1998 World Cup.\nIn Italy's opening match of the 1998 World Cup in France, against Chile, Baggio started alongside Christian Vieri, playing all 90 minutes, as Alessandro Del Piero was still recovering from an injury. Vieri opened the scoring from a Baggio assist, but Chile managed to equalise and take the lead through Marcelo Salas. Baggio created several chances, but Italy were unable to equalise. Towards the end of the match, Baggio played a low cross into the box which unintentionally touched Chilean defender Ronald Fuentes's hand at the edge of the penalty area, resulting in a fortunate penalty for Italy. Despite missing the decisive penalty in the 1994 World Cup final shootout, Baggio stepped up to take the penalty, and he scored Italy's equalising goal, becoming the first Italian player to score in three World Cups. This was the first penalty he had taken for Italy since the 1994 World Cup final miss; Baggio described the goal as \"liberating\".\nIn Italy's 3\u20130 second group match win over Cameroon, Baggio assisted Luigi Di Biagio's opening goal with a cross following a corner; however, he was replaced by Del Piero during the second half after sustaining a minor injury. Baggio scored his second goal of the tournament in Italy's final group match against Austria, which ended in a 2\u20131 win to Italy. Baggio came on during the second half, replacing Del Piero, after the crowd had begun to chant his name. He scored the winning goal of the match, after combining with Francesco Moriero and Filippo Inzaghi, as Italy topped their group. With this goal, he tied Paolo Rossi's record for most goals by an Italian player in the World Cup finals, with nine; this was also his 27th and final goal for Italy. He was left on the bench for the round of 16 win over Norway as Italy advanced to the quarter-finals.\nIn the quarter-final match against eventual champions France, Baggio came on as a substitute for Del Piero in the second half, and managed to create some scoring opportunities. The score remained 0\u20130, and the match went to extra time, although Baggio came the closest to scoring the golden goal, with a volley from a lobbed pass by Albertini, but his shot was put just wide of Fabien Barthez's far post. The match eventually went to a penalty shootout. Although Baggio converted his penalty Italy's first, the shootout was won by the host nation and Italy was eliminated from a World Cup on penalties for the third consecutive time. Italy's coach was criticised for starting the recovering Del Piero ahead of Baggio, and for not allowing the two players to play alongside each other. Despite rumours that the substitutions had created a rivalry between the players, Baggio and Del Piero remain friends. In 2008, Baggio stated that he has great respect for Del Piero, and that there had never been disagreements between them. In turn, Del Piero expressed his admiration for Baggio in 2011.\nLater career.\nBaggio was initially a regular squad member under Dino Zoff, appearing as a substitute in two UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying matches, and in a 2\u20130 win against Wales in 1998, setting up a goal for Vieri; and in a 1\u20131 draw against Belarus in 1999. Baggio made a starting appearance in a 0\u20130 friendly draw against Norway in 1999, creating several chances, helping to set-up a goal which was ruled offside, and hitting the post from a free-kick. However, he was later dropped from the squad after Inter's poor 1998\u201399 season, and he was not called up for UEFA Euro 2000 due to his limited playing time during the 1999\u20132000 season, and accusations made against his fitness. Zoff centred his squad around younger offensive players, such as Francesco Totti, Alessandro Del Piero, Stefano Fiore, Marco Delvecchio, Filippo Inzaghi and Vincenzo Montella. Baggio was voted Italy's \"Player of the Century\" in 2000.\nBaggio was controversially excluded from Italy's 2002 World Cup squad by coach Giovanni Trapattoni, who believed him to not have fully recovered from the serious injury he had sustained during the season. Although he was initially keen to include Baggio in the final 23-man list, he ultimately excluded him from the squad; Baggio had made a direct appeal to him prior to the tournament by writing him a letter. Fans and pundits criticised the omission, as Italy were eliminated by co-hosts South Korea in the round of 16.\nMany fans hoped to see him play for Italy at Euro 2004, or with the 2004 Olympic squad that eventually managed a bronze medal, but this was not to be the case. However, he was given an international send-off by Trapattoni at age 37 in a friendly match against Spain on 28 April 2004, in which he wore the number 10 shirt for the final time, as well as the captain's armband for part of the match. Although Baggio entertained the crowd with his creativity and skill, he was unable to score, despite winning a free-kick from which Vieri's equalising goal arose. The match finished 1\u20131 and Baggio was given a standing ovation after being substituted off for Fabrizio Miccoli. This was Baggio's 56th and final match for Italy, and it was the first time an Italian footballer's career had been celebrated this way since Silvio Piola retired.\nBaggio is the only Italian player ever to score in three World Cups with nine career World Cup goals, putting him equal with Christian Vieri and Paolo Rossi as Italy's top World Cup goalscorers. Despite his performances for Italy in the 1990, 1994, and 1998 World Cups, he never played for Italy in the UEFA European Championships, and is currently the Italian player with the most caps without playing in a European Championship.\nPlayer profile.\nStyle of play.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"He's without doubt the most skilful number ten in the modern game, the archetypal playmaker, if you like, who can create chances and score goals.\"\n\u2014Brian Laudrup on Baggio, 1995.\nDescribed as a \"fantasista\", \"trequartista\", \"mezzapunta\", or \"rifinitore\" throughout his career in the Italian media, due to his role on the pitch and creative playing style, Baggio was a world class playmaker with an eye for goal, who was renowned for his vision, creativity, ability to read the game, crossing accuracy, and passing ability, which made him an excellent assist provider; however, he usually played as a second striker throughout his career, as he was known for scoring goals as well as creating them. This led Michel Platini to describe him as a \"9 and a half\", namely a player whose role lay half-way between that of a forward and a midfielder, as he was not a true number 9 (the shirt number usually associated with a striker), due to his creative ability, but he scored more than a number 10 (the shirt number commonly associated with an advanced playmaker), a description which often saw him identified with the role of an inside forward. He also stated that Baggio's playing style coincided with the re-emergence of the attacking midfielder in Italy during the early 2000s; indeed, he served as an inspiration to many future players.\nBaggio was a tactically versatile player, with a good understanding of the game, and was comfortable attacking on either flank or through the centre of the pitch; this allowed him to operate anywhere along the front-line. His preferred position was in a free playmaking role behind the forwards, as a creative attacking midfielder, although he was rarely deployed in this position throughout his career due to the prevalence of the 4\u20134\u20132 formation, in which he usually functioned either as a main striker, or more frequently in a supporting role as a deep-lying forward. It was only in later years that he was able to play in this free role more frequently. He was also occasionally deployed out of position as a left winger in an attacking trident, as a wide midfielder, or even in central midfield as a \"mezzala\" or deep-lying playmaker on rarer instances. During the lead-up to the 1994 World Cup, he was also initially employed by Italy's manager Arrigo Sacchi as a centre-forward, in a role known in Italian football jargon as \"centravanti di manovra\" (which literally translates to \"manoeuvring centre-forward\"), which was a precursor to the modern false-nine role; in this position, Baggio was expected to link-up with other players and create chances for them, in addition to creating space with his movement by dropping deep into midfield, and allowing the team's wingers to cut inside and make attacking runs into the centre.\nA prolific goalscorer, Baggio was an accurate finisher from both inside and outside the area, and was known for his accurate bending shots and composure in front of goal, rather than his power. Due to his excellent technique, he was a precise volleyer, and he had a penchant for scoring from chip shots. Moreover, he was also a set piece specialist, who was highly regarded for his ball delivery from dead-ball situations, as well as his precision from direct free-kicks and his ability to curl the ball, which earned him a reputation as one of the best free kick takers of his generation. His free-kick technique influenced several other players who came to be renowned for their prowess from dead-ball situations, such as Alessandro Del Piero and Andrea Pirlo. During his time with Juventus, his free kick technique was described as a cross between that of Maradona's, Zico's, and Platini's, as at the time, his ball-striking technique was thought to resemble Platini's, although, like Zico and Maradona, he preferred to take free kicks from close range, usually from a distance of around 20 to 16 metres from the goal, or even just outside the area, and to have the ball touched by a teammate first before striking it. Despite his decisive miss in the 1994 World Cup final shootout, Baggio was also a penalty kick specialist.\nAlthough naturally right-footed, Baggio was comfortable using either foot, and often began dribbling with his left foot. Not particularly imposing physically, or in the air, due to his diminutive stature and slender physique, he was known however for his pace and acceleration over short distances, which, along with his movement, positioning, anticipation, technical ability, quick feet, low centre of gravity, and resulting agility, allowed him to lose his markers when making offensive runs into the area, both on and off the ball. Regarded as one of the greatest dribblers ever, and as one of the most technically accomplished players of all time, Baggio possessed an excellent first touch, and was renowned for his skilful dribbling, ball control and balance, as well as his spatial awareness, speed of thought and execution, reactions, close control at speed, and ability to beat opponents with flair, tricks, body feints, or sudden changes of pace or direction, both in one-on-one situations, or during individual dribbling runs. Zico once described Baggio as \"technically flawless,\" while Gianluigi Buffon, in his 2008 autobiography \"Numero 1\", described Baggio as the \"most technical player\" with whom he had ever shared a pitch, adding that his touch and ball control were \"unique\". In 2004, Sacchi stated: \"Baggio is creativity, flair, unpredictability, intuition, harmony.\" In 2016, Rob Smyth of \"The Guardian\" praised Baggio for his \"instinctive intelligence\", when commenting on his playing style, also describing him as a \"conductor\" on the pitch \"who knew when and how to change the tempo of an attack\".\nReception.\nConsidered by pundits to be a highly promising prospect in his youth, Baggio later established himself as one of the best players of his generation, and as one of Italy's greatest players ever; Baggio is regarded by many in the sport, including his former Milan manager Fabio Capello, as the best Italian footballer of all time, and by many in the sport, as one of the greatest players in the history of the game. Italian journalist Gianni Brera, who had observed both Giuseppe Meazza and Gianni Rivera, stated that Baggio was the best Italian player he had ever seen. During his time at Juventus, the club's former chairman, Gianni Agnelli, referred to Baggio as an \"artist\", comparing his elegance to the painter \"Raffaello\", while he described the emerging talent Alessandro Del Piero as \"Pinturicchio\". In a 2011 interview with \"La Gazzetta dello Sport\", Del Piero stated that Baggio, along with Zinedine Zidane, was the best player with whom he had ever played, a view shared by Baggio's fellow former Juventus teammate Angelo Peruzzi and his former Brescia teammate Pep Guardiola in 2010, as well as his former Inter teammate Javier Zanetti in 2020, while Matthew Le Tissier named Baggio as his best ever opponent in 2012. In 2017, Baggio's former teammate Ravanelli instead labelled Baggio as the greatest player of all time. In 1993, Giampiero Boniperti stated that he believed that Baggio was \"already one of the greatest number tens ever.\" In 2018, Cathal Kelly of \"The Globe and Mail\" described Baggio playing in the 1994 World Cup as \"the best player in the world\" at the time, while \"The Guardian\" described him as \"[t]he definitive player of the decade\", also adding that \"the 1990s belonged to Il Divin Codino\", and labelled him as \"probably the finest player in the world between 1992 and 1995.\" In 2015, Les Carpenter of \"The Guardian\" described Baggio as \"perhaps the greatest player of his time,\" while his colleague Emmet Gates dubbed him \"the best player of his generation.\" In 2010, Marco Gori of \"TuttoMercatoWeb\" labelled Baggio as \"one of the best footballers in history.\" Throughout his career, pundit Gianni Brera compared his playing style to that of Italian former footballer Giuseppe Meazza, while manager Trapattoni instead compared Baggio's technical characteristics to other former number 10s such as Zico, Platini, and Juan Alberto Schiaffino.\nIn 2017, Baggio received praise from numerous sporting figures and pundits ahead of his 50th birthday, with Stefano Edel of \"La Gazzetta di Mantova\" describing Baggio as \"the Italian Maradona\", and echoing Sacchi's words prior to the 1994 World Cup, when he compared Baggio's importance to Italy with that of Maradona to Argentina. Zico described him as \"one of the best players in the history of Italian football\", while Tommaso Pellizzari of \"Il Corriere della Sera\" called him \"the greatest pure talent of Italian football.\" James McHie of \"Calciomercato.com\" instead named him as Italy's greatest player, calling him \"the greatest player [...] to pull on the Azzurri shirt\", a view shared by Stefano Discreti of \"Mediaset\", who called Baggio \"the best Italian footballer of all time\" in 2019. Also in 2017, Giuseppe Bergomi described Baggio as \"extraordinary\" and as a \"pure talent\", who was \"devastating when he played because he was capable of deciding games on his own.\" In 2004, Gianni Rivera described him as \"one of the greatest Italian footballers ever.\" In 2019, Marco Gentile of \"Il Giornale\" described Baggio as \"one of the best Italian [...] players in the history of football\", and also as \"one of the best players in the history of world football.\" In 2020, Luca Stamerra of \"Eurosport\" described him as one of the \"best number 10s in the history of this sport.\" In 2019, his former Italy manager Dino Zoff listed Baggio as one of the best players he ever coached, while his former Fiorentina manager Sven-G\u00f6ran Eriksson named him as the most talented player he had ever coached alongside Wayne Rooney in 2021, commenting: \"He had everything: incredible technique, vision, pace.\" In 2019, author Paolo Cond\u00f2 ranked Baggio among the greatest players of all time, a view shared by Emmanuel Amunike in 2020 as well as Roberto Mancini and John Keilman of the \"Chicago Tribune\", who both described Baggio as one of the \"all-time greats\" in 2018 and 2019, respectively. Former RAI commentator Bruno Pizzul, who served as a pundit for the Italy national team's World Cup matches between 1986 and 2002, named Baggio as his favourite player, and as one of the best footballers he ever saw, among both Italian and non-Italian players. In 2020, Matteo Marani of \"La Stampa\" dubbed Baggio as \"one of the purest expressions of talent that world football has produced\".\nKnown for his dislike of the defensive, physical and tactical nature of Italian football in the 1990s, Baggio drew criticism from certain pundits and some of his managers for his limited defensive work-rate when possession was lost, as well as the fact that the athletic part of his game was not his main focus during training sessions in his youth, while in his later career, his physical ailments often forced him to train independently with a personal fitness coach and physiotherapist, rather than with his team; as such, Baggio's Milan manager Capello believed that he was not capable of playing for 90 minutes, due to the precarious physical condition of his knees. Luigi Simoni, one of his Inter managers, lauded Baggio for his work-rate in training, stating in 2009 that he would do up to six or seven hours of gym work a day under his tenure, a view which was also shared by Baggio's former Bologna teammate Daniele Carnasciali in 2013. Carlo Mazzone and Gianni De Biasi, his managers at Brescia, as well as his former teammates Luca Toni and Emanuele Filippini, also praised Baggio for his discipline, professionalism, and dedication in training during his time with the club, with De Biasi calling him \"an example.\" Known to be an introvert in the media, due to his quiet private life and reluctance to give interviews, some in the sport,\u00a0including Gianni Rivera, argued that Baggio lacked leadership qualities on the pitch. His personality is thought to have limited him from being more successful, in particular with larger clubs, with some pundits instead arguing that he excelled more with smaller teams; others instead believed that he had a difficult character due to his disagreements with several of his managers throughout his career, although he was generally regarded as a \"correct\" and co-operative player by officials, and as a classy and well-behaved footballer in the media. Mazzone also said of him: \"Baggio was one of the greatest Italian football players of all time. But I can tell you this, he was an even greater man. He was quiet, polite, respectful, humble. He never let his great talent weigh on anyone else. He was a friend who helped me win games on a Sunday.\" In 1995, Fabio Capello described Baggio as a player who was \"decisive.\" His former teammate Andrea Pirlo instead commented that \"[Baggio] was a silent leader, and above all, he was a leader on the pitch. When he played for the team, he made you win the games\", also later describing him as a player who \"carried his teammates.\"\nDespite his talent, success, popularity with the fans, and reputation as one of the greatest players of all time, critical reception of Baggio was occasionally divided throughout his career; this was in part due to his recurring injury struggles, as well as the fact that tactically certain managers struggled to find a suitable playing position for him. His role as a playmaker between the midfield and forward lines, as well as his skilful and creative playing style, were often regarded as being obsolete in modern football, in which managers often favoured the use of the 4\u20134\u20132 formation and a more athletic approach to the game; moreover, while Baggio was not an outright forward, he was also thought to lack the stamina to play in midfield, which made him less suited to this particular system, and occasionally led him to be excluded by his managers, although he was ultimately able to adapt to playing as a forward effectively. Baggio's unique playing position, style, and approach to the game, combined with his talent, limited work-rate, and injury struggles, led him to have both many admirers and several detractors. Maradona once described Baggio as \"a genius\" but also as \"a great player who was never able to fulfil his entire potential\", something with which Michel Platini concurred, while Pel\u00e9 instead called him a \"legend.\" A 1994 article on Baggio by \"The Independent\" stated: \"Among professionals, [Baggio] is regarded as the best\", quoting Ryan Giggs, who said: \"You look to Roberto Baggio, and you realise what a good player looks like.\" However, the newspaper also went on to say that \"Baggio's is a brittle influence. There are no half measures in his play. He is either brilliant, or he disappears, looking confused and unhappy. Since Juventus's whole pattern of play depends on him, his disappearances can be tricky. The press has interpreted his inconsistency as a lack of commitment.\"\nIn 2015, \"The Daily Telegraph\" accused him of going \"missing in big games.\" In 2020, Daniel Story of \"Planet Football\" stated he believed that Baggio was one of the most underrated players of the past 30 years. In 2016, Luke Chandley of \"The Huffington Post\" described Baggio as \"Italian football's great oxymoron\", noting: \"For all the skill he possessed going forward, he was the opposite of the reputation given to Italian football spanning across his whole career. Italian football was defensive know-how and structured play.\" His former manager Arrigo Sacchi believed that Baggio was often misused by his coaches, and that he would have been an even greater player had he been born abroad, a view which was also held by journalist Mattia Losi, who felt that Baggio would have been more appreciated had he been born in Brazil or Argentina, rather than in a country with a football legacy like Italy's, which often failed to recognise young local talent, and Emmet Gates, who said in 2013 that \"Baggio unfortunately was born in the wrong country, or rather, he was born in Italy at the wrong time.\" Regarding this contrast and Baggio's overall career, Tim Collings of \"The Guardian\" described him as \"Italy's greatest player of fantasia\" in 2004 but also wrote: Baggio's record, as a player for club and country, fails to match his reputation. He is less known for his acts of great success than for his injuries, his misfortunes and his courage; he is an artist in sport whose work is appreciated but no longer used in modern currency. Baggio's career is filled by cameos of sublime skill, particular games when his imagination and ability enabled his team to transcend all normal expectations. Yet the lasting memory will be of his missed penalty in the shootout at the end of the 1994 World Cup final in Pasadena.\nIn 2017, Antonio Martelli of \"La Presse\" described Baggio as \"one of the greatest Italian players of all time maybe the best of the last thirty years\", and as \"an \"authentic champion who could have been even greater without a series of extremely severe knee injuries that undermined his career since its dawning\", a view shared by Raffaele Di Fusco, who said \"who knows what he could have become without all of those injuries\", and also Renzo Ulivieri, who stated that \"if he had had fewer injuries, he would have won more.\" In 2018, Greg Murray of \"Football Italia\" described Baggio as \"one of the greatest football players of all time\" but also lamented that \"we never saw him at full fitness and are fortunate we got to enjoy him at all.\" He summarised Baggio's career with the following: \"It is perhaps one of football's great injustices that Il Divin Codino is best known globally for his penalty miss in the Final of the 1994 World Cup against Brazil. For fans of Serie A, Baggio is recognised as the best of his generation, despite a career that was blighted by injury and clashes with his Coaches.\" He also added: Retiring in 2004, it has been suggested that Baggio was a victim of the era in which he lived. As player with transcendent creativity, but physically fragile, he struggled to fit into his Coaches\u2019 plans during a time when tactics and hard work were everything. Had he been born in the current era, where players are far more protected, he would perhaps have achieved even more. It's heart-breaking to think what we missed out on, but we\u2019re also grateful to have experienced the Divine Ponytail at all.\nBaggio's career was affected by many serious injuries, which led to a gradual loss of pace and mobility as his career progressed, as well as increasing weight-gain in the final years of his career, which eventually forced him to undergo a training regime in order to build muscle mass in his legs and prolong his career during his time at Brescia; his continual physical struggles ultimately led him to retire in 2004, which he later described as a \"liberation.\" Since suffering his first series of career-threatening injuries with Vicenza and Fiorentina in 1985 and 1986, respectively, he was prone to persistent knee problems in particular, which often limited his playing time; injuries led certain pundits, such as Benedetto Ferrara of \"La Repubblica\" in 2010, to label Baggio as a \"superfine talent\" but who was also \"inconsistent.\" In 1995, Maurizio Crosetti, Ferrara's colleague, had previously described Baggio as \"fragile.\" Regarding the injuries that threatened his career as a youngster, and which haggled him until he retired, Baggio wrote in his 2001 autobiography that \"all of my professional career, I played it with a leg and a half. Thousands of hours of work to keep alive a leg which, if it were up to her, would diminish each day. I played it without being fully all right, ever, because if I were to play matches only when I felt one-hundred percent I would play three matches a year.\" Despite the numerous physical impairments he faced throughout his career, Baggio also stood out for his longevity, and was able to maintain a consistently high level of performance even in the final years of his career with Brescia into his late 30s. In 2004, Sacchi praised Baggio for his strength of character, which he believed even surpassed his talent, as it allowed him to overcome his injuries and physical struggles, and ultimately \"win [his] personal battles against bad luck.\" In 2017, Capello noted that Baggio had the extraordinary willpower to carry on playing despite his physical struggles. Baggio attributes his inner strength to Buddhism.\nLegacy.\nWidely considered to be one of the greatest footballers of all time, Baggio came fourth in the 1999 FIFA Player of the Century internet poll, and was ranked 16th in \"World Soccers list of the 100 greatest footballers of the 20th century, the highest ranked Italian player; in IFFHS's election for the best player of the 20th century in the same year, he was elected the ninth-best Italian player and the 53rd-best European player of the Century. He was voted Italy's player of the century in 2000. In 2002, Baggio was elected to the FIFA World Cup Dream Team, and in 2003, he was the inaugural winner of the Golden Foot award, awarded for ability and personality. In 2004, he was named by Pel\u00e9 in the FIFA 100 list of the world's greatest living players, and was voted 24th in the online UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll, celebrating the best European footballers of the past 50 years. In 2010, Baggio was named one of the 50 greatest Juventus legends. In 2011, he was the first footballer to be inducted into the Italian Football Hall of Fame. In a 2014 FIFA poll, Baggio was voted the ninth-greatest number 10 of all time, and later that year he was ranked 24th in \"The Guardians list of the 100 greatest World Cup players of all time, ahead of the 2014 World Cup in Brazil.\nIn 2015, journalists of \"La Gazzetta dello Sport\" elected the greatest Italian player of all time, with Baggio finishing in second place behind only Gianni Rivera; in a fan poll that was subsequently organised by the newspaper, Baggio was instead voted as the greatest Italian footballer of all time, while Majid Mohamed of \"UEFA\" ranked him as the twentieth-best player ever not to have won the UEFA Champions League. That same year, \"The Daily Telegraph\" also included Baggio at number 12 in their list of \"The top 20 overrated football players of all time.\" \"FourFourTwo\" placed Baggio at number 52 in their 2017 list of the \"100 Greatest Footballers Ever\" and also named him in 2019 as the sixth best player never to win the UEFA Champions League. In July 2019, the same magazine ranked Baggio at number ten in their list of the \"101 greatest football players of the last 25 years\" since their first edition in the summer of 1994, while in September 2023, he was ranked 27th in their list of the \"100 best football players of all time.\" In December 2023, Tom Hancock, of the same magazine, placed Baggio at number three, behind only Zidane and Ronaldo, in his list of the greatest footballers of the 1990s. In 2020, Jack Gallagher of 90min.com placed Baggio at number nine in his list of \"The 50 Greatest Footballers of All Time\", while Sky Sports ranked him as the fifth-best player ever never to have won the Champions League or European Cup.\nRecords and selected statistics.\nBaggio played in 16 World Cup matches for Italy; the Republic of Ireland is the only nation against which he played more than once. He is the joint-highest Italian goalscorer of all time in the World Cup, with nine goals, alongside Paolo Rossi and Christian Vieri. Baggio is the only Italian to have scored in three World Cups (two goals in 1990, five in 1994 and two in 1998). Three of his World Cup goals were scored in the group stage and six were scored during knockout matches. Baggio is the joint fourth-highest scorer for Italy with 27 goals in 56 appearances, with a 0.48 goal per match average. With Baggio, Italy was always eliminated from the World Cup in penalty shootouts: in 1990, in the semi-finals against Argentina; in 1994, in the final against Brazil; and in 1998, in the quarter-finals against France.\nDespite his decisive penalty miss in the 1994 World Cup final shoot-out, Baggio is statistically one of the greatest penalty kick specialists in Italian football history, as he scored 85% of his career penalties with only 19 misses, scoring 108 out of 127 penalties in official matches, the most in Italian football history. Baggio scored 10 with Vicenza, 25 with Fiorentina, 38 with Juventus, 5 with Milan, 11 with Bologna, 1 with Inter Milan, 11 with Brescia and 7 with Italy (from 7 attempts, the most goals scored from the spot by a member of the national team). 68 of his penalties were scored in Serie A, from 83 attempts, with an 82% conversion rate, one of the best records in Serie A history. In Serie A, Baggio scored 17 penalties for Fiorentina (from 19 attempts), 25 for Juventus (from 28 attempts), 3 for Milan (from 5 attempts), 11 for Bologna (from 11 attempts), 1 for Inter Milan (from 2 attempts), and 11 for Brescia (from 18 attempts). Baggio has scored penalties for six different Serie A clubs. Four of his fifteen misses in Serie A were then scored on rebounds. Behind Totti, Baggio has scored the most penalties in Serie A history. Of his other penalties, 8 were scored in Serie C (from 8 attempts), 8 in European competitions (from 9 attempts), and 17 in the Coppa Italia (from 20 attempts). In shoot-outs, Baggio converted three of four career penalties: one in the UEFA Cup with Fiorentina, and the other two with Italy at the World Cup; in World Cup shootouts, Baggio scored twice (1990 and 1998), with his only miss in 1994.\nAlthough he never won the Serie A top goalscorer title, Baggio is currently the seventh all-time highest scorer in Serie A, with 205 goals in 452 appearances. Of these goals, 96 were decisive (either equalisers or match winners). Alongside Totti, Baggio has also scored the fourth-highest number of free-kicks in Serie A with 21 goals; ahead of him are only Alessando Del Piero, Andrea Pirlo, and Sini\u0161a Mihajlovi\u0107. Of his open play goals in Serie A, 84 were with his right foot, 26 with his left, and 6 were headers. He also assisted 123 goals in Serie A, making him the second\u2013highest assist provider of all time in Serie A, behind only Totti. He is the fourth-highest scoring Italian in all competitions, behind Del Piero, Giueseppe Meazza and Silvio Piola, with 318 professional career goals in 699 appearances. Alongside Totti and Alberto Gilardino, he has scored against the most different clubs (38) in Serie A. With eight hat-tricks in Serie A, he has also scored the joint-tenth most hat-tricks in the history of the Italian league, alongside Amedeo Amadei, Giampiero Boniperti, Hern\u00e1n Crespo, and Marco van Basten. Throughout his career, including friendlies, Baggio scored 425 goals.\nAfter retirement.\nIn August 2010, Baggio was appointed president of the technical sector of the Italian Football Federation, replacing his former Italy national team manager Azeglio Vicini. On 23 January 2013, Baggio stepped down from the position, stating the federation had ignored his ideas about improving the system and focusing on youth talent, which prompted him to resign.\nBaggio obtained his Italy Category 2 Coaching License (UEFA A License) in mid-2011, which made him eligible to coach Lega Pro teams, or work as vice-coach in Serie A and Serie B. On 5 July 2012, Baggio obtained his Category 1 UEFA Pro Coaching Licence at Coverciano, which officially allows him to coach a professional Serie A club.\nOutside of professional football.\nPersonal life.\nAfter his career threatening injury in 1985, Baggio, formerly a Roman Catholic, converted to Buddhism, practicing Nichiren Buddhism, and is a member of the Soka Gakkai International Buddhist organisation. The captain's armband that he wore throughout his career bore the colours of this religious school (blue, yellow, and red) and the Japanese motto \"We win. We must win\" in ideograms of the language. Despite his conversion, he married his long-time girlfriend Andreina Fabbi in 1989 in a traditional Roman Catholic ceremony. They have a daughter, Valentina (1990), and two sons, Mattia (1994) and Leonardo (2005).\nBetween 1991 and 2012, Baggio was the owner of a sporting goods store in Thiene, Vicenza, called \"Baggio Sport\", which he was eventually forced to close due to losses from the Great Recession.\nIn 2001, Baggio wrote an autobiography entitled \"\" (literally \"A Door in the Sky\", also known as \"A Goal in the Sky\"), including details about his career, childhood, religion, personal life and rifts with managers. It won the award for best football book at the 2002 Serie A Awards.\nBaggio has close ties with Argentina; he speaks Spanish and owns a ranch property in Rivera, where he enjoys hunting wild game. In March 2008, he gave a lengthy interview with \"La Gazzetta Dello Sport\", in which he revealed that he came to support Argentine club Boca Juniors due to their passionate fanbase.\nIn June 2024, Baggio sustained minor injuries during a robbery at his villa near Vicenza.\nPhilanthropy.\nOn 16 October 2002, Baggio was named a Goodwill Ambassador of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Through the organisation, Baggio helped to fund hospitals, raise money for the victims of the Haiti earthquake, contribute to tackling bird flu, and was involved in the Burmese pro-democracy movement, which supported the opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi and her release from prison. Baggio was awarded the 2010 Man of Peace title in Hiroshima, presented by the World Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates in recognition of his charitable work and contribution to social justice and peace.\nOn 8 October 2008, Baggio appeared in a charity match between Milan and Fiorentina, which had been organised in honour of his former Fiorentina teammate Stefano Borgonovo to raise money for his foundation, his treatment and for ALS research. In 2014, Baggio was one of the many celebrities to take part in the \"ALS Ice Bucket Challenge\" to raise awareness about the disease and funds for ALS research.\nOn 1 September 2014, Baggio took part in the \"Match for Peace\", which was played at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome, with the proceeds being donated to charity. Baggio set up Juan Iturbe's goal and scored from a Diego Maradona assist. On 25 October 2014, Baggio participated in the opening of the SGI Ikeda Cultural Center in Corsico, on the outskirts of Milan. It is the largest Buddhist center in Europe.\nMedia and popular culture.\nIn 1994, Italian satirist Corrado Guzzanti parodied Baggio's advertisement for Italian Petrol Company IP prior to the 1994 World Cup. Italian poet Giovanni Raboni composed the sonnet \"Lode a Baggio\" in a tribute to him. He has been referenced in several songs, such as \"Baggio, Baggio\" by Lucio Dalla, \"Marmellata n. 25\" by Cesare Cremonini and \"Baggio\" by Miles Kane.\nBaggio has featured in two Italian commercials which reference his infamous penalty miss in the 1994 World Cup final. The first was made for Wind in 2000, and shows Baggio scoring the final penalty to win the tournament. The second, made for Johnnie Walker in 2001, showed how he managed to conquer his grief from the miss by believing in himself and scoring the equalising penalty against Chile in the 1998 World Cup. He has featured in several Diadora commercials, as he endorsed their products. In July 2017, Diadora teamed up with Baggio once again to launch the new Signature Match Winner RB Capsule Collection.\nBaggio is popular in Japan, and has held close ties with the country since his conversion to Buddhism. He has endorsed several Japanese football video games, such as Human Entertainment's \"\", and Sega's \"Virtua Pro Football\" and \"Let's Make a Soccer Team!\". An animated version of himself appeared in the Japanese football cartoon \"Captain Tsubasa\", best known in Italy as \"Che Campioni: Holly &amp; Benji\".\nIn the Channel 4 sitcom \"Father Ted\", Baggio (and Alessandro Costacurta) is mentioned during the 1995 episode \"Grant Unto Him Eternal Rest\" by Father Dougal McGuire (portrayed by Ardal O'Hanlon), who, when prompted to say the last rites in Latin, ends up saying the footballers' names. (This stems from Graham Linehan and O'Hanlon being fans of \"Football Italia\"). In the music video for the 2010 World Cup song \"Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)\" by Shakira, footage of Baggio's goal against Spain and his penalty miss from the 1994 World Cup are shown.\nThroughout his career, Baggio has been nicknamed the \"Divin' Codino\" (\"Divine Ponytail\" in Italian, a reference to the iconic hairstyle he wore for a large part of his career as well as his playing ability and Buddhist beliefs) and Robi, or Roby, by his fans. An alter-ego of his is referenced in the Italian children's comics of \"Mickey Mouse\" and \"Duck Tales\" (Topolino) in the volume \"Topolino e il Giallo alla World Cup\" in which he is known as Roberto Paggio. In 2011, Italian sports newspaper \"La Gazzetta dello Sport\" issued a collection of DVDs entitled \"Io Che Sar\u00f2 Roberto Baggio\" recounting his career. Baggio's impact on football has been celebrated with the release of an online game called \"Baggio's Magical Kicks\", in which players try to replicate his accuracy on free-kicks and penalties. In 2015, the arcade game company Konami announced Baggio would feature in their football video game \"Pro Evolution Soccer 2016\" as one of the new myClub Legends. On 3 August 2018, EA Sports announced on their official Twitter account that Baggio would feature in EA Sports' football video game \"FIFA 19\" as one of the new Ultimate Team Icons.\nIn 2019, Netflix announced the development of a documentary on Roberto Baggio in partnership with Mediaset. In March 2021, Netflix released the trailer of a docudrama film on Baggio's career, entitled \"\", which was released on 26 May 2021; Andrea Arcangeli portrayed Baggio.\nCareer statistics.\nClub.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Scores and results list Italy's goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Baggio goal.\"\nHonours.\nJuventus\nAC Milan\nItaly\nIndividual\nOrders\n* 5th Class / Knight: \"Cavaliere Ordine al Merito della Repubblica Italiana\": 1991\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25625", "revid": "4484456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25625", "title": "Richard Matheson", "text": "American author and screenwriter (1926\u20132013)\nRichard Burton Matheson (February 20, 1926\u00a0\u2013 June 23, 2013) was an American author and screenwriter, primarily in the fantasy, horror, and science fiction genres.\nHe is best known as the author of \"I Am Legend\", a 1954 science fiction horror novel that has been adapted for the screen three times. Matheson himself was co-writer of the first film version, \"The Last Man on Earth\", starring Vincent Price, which was released in 1964. The other two adaptations were \"The Omega Man\", starring Charlton Heston, and \"I Am Legend\", with Will Smith. Matheson also wrote 16 television episodes of \"The Twilight Zone\", including \"Nightmare at 20,000 Feet\", \"Little Girl Lost\" and \"Steel\", as well as several adaptations of Edgar Allan Poe stories for Roger Corman and American International Pictures \u2013 \"House of Usher\", \"The Pit and the Pendulum\", \"Tales of Terror\" and \"The Raven\". He adapted his 1971 short story \"Duel\" as a screenplay, directed by Steven Spielberg as the television film of the same name that year.\nIn addition to \"I Am Legend\" and \"Duel\", nine more of his novels and short stories have been adapted as motion pictures: \"The Shrinking Man\" (filmed as \"The Incredible Shrinking Man\"), \"Hell House\" (filmed as \"The Legend of Hell House\"), \"What Dreams May Come\", \"Bid Time Return\" (filmed as \"Somewhere in Time\"), \"A Stir of Echoes\", \"Steel\" (filmed as \"Real Steel\"), and \"Button, Button\" (filmed as \"The Box\"). The movie \"Cold Sweat\" was based on his novel \"Ride the Nightmare\", and \"Les seins de glace\" (\"Icy Breasts\") was based on his novel \"Someone Is Bleeding\". Both \"Steel\" and \"Button\" had previously been episodes of \"The Twilight Zone\".\nEarly life.\nMatheson was born in Allendale, New Jersey, to Norwegian immigrants Bertolf and Fanny Matheson. They divorced when he was eight, and he was raised in Brooklyn, New York by his mother. His early writing influences were the film \"Dracula\" (1931), novels by Kenneth Roberts, and a poem which he read in the \"Brooklyn Eagle\", where he published his first short story at age eight. He entered Brooklyn Technical High School in 1939, graduated in 1943, and served with the Army in Europe during World War II; this formed the basis for his 1960 novel \"The Beardless Warriors\". Following his discharge, he received his undergraduate degree (via the G.I. Bill) from the Missouri School of Journalism at the University of Missouri in 1949 before moving to California.\nCareer.\n1950s and 1960s.\nHis first-written novel, \"Hunger and Thirst\", was ignored by publishers for several decades before eventually being published in 2010, but his short story \"Born of Man and Woman\" was published in \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\"'s summer 1950 issue, the new quarterly's third issue, and attracted attention. It is the tale of a monstrous child chained by its parents in the cellar, written in the form of the creature's diary and using non-idiomatic English. Later that year, Matheson placed stories in the first and third issues of \"Galaxy Science Fiction\", a new monthly. His first anthology of work was published in 1954. Between 1950 and 1971, he produced dozens of stories, frequently blending elements of the science fiction, horror, and fantasy genres.\nHe was a member of the \"Southern California Sorcerers\" group in the 1950s and 1960s, an informal collective of West Coast-based writers which included Charles Beaumont, Ray Bradbury, George Clayton Johnson, William F. Nolan, Jerry Sohl, and others; collectively, these writers shared an affinity for an allegorically numinous storytelling approach that bridged the heretofore persistent lacuna between the relatively cloistered, professionally interlocked world of print science fiction (and such critical derivations as contemporaneous amateur press association-oriented science fiction fandom) with the \"mainstream\" New York City-based publishing industry (in particular, Bradbury was championed by the likes of Christopher Isherwood and Truman Capote) and the broader milieux of film and television (culminating in their recognition as a kind of informal brain trust retained by creator/showrunner Rod Serling on \"The Twilight Zone\").\nMatheson's first novel to be published, \"Someone Is Bleeding\", appeared from Lion Books in 1953. In the 1950s, he published a handful of Western stories (later collected in \"By the Gun\"), and in the 1990s, he published Western novels such as \"Journal of the Gun Years\", \"The Gunfight\", \"The Memoirs of Wild Bill Hickok\", and \"Shadow on the Sun\".\nHis other early novels include \"The Shrinking Man\" (1956, filmed in 1957 as \"The Incredible Shrinking Man\", again from Matheson's own screenplay) and a science fiction vampire novel, \"I Am Legend\" (1954, filmed as \"The Last Man on Earth\" in 1964, \"The Omega Man\" in 1971, and \"I Am Legend\" in 2007). In 1960, Matheson published \"The Beardless Warriors\", a non-fantastic, autobiographical novel about teenage American soldiers in World War II. It was filmed in 1967 as \"The Young Warriors\", though most of Matheson's plot was jettisoned. \nMatheson wrote teleplays for several television programs, including the Westerns \"Cheyenne\", \"Have Gun \u2013 Will Travel\", and \"Lawman\". He also wrote the \" episode \" (1966). However, he is most closely associated with the American TV series \"The Twilight Zone\", for which he wrote more than a dozen episodes, including \"Steel\" (1963), \"Nightmare at 20,000 Feet\" (1963), \"Little Girl Lost\" (1962), and \"Death Ship\" (1963). For all of his \"Twilight Zone\" scripts, Matheson wrote the introductory and closing statements spoken by creator Rod Serling. He adapted five works of Edgar Allan Poe for Roger Corman's Poe series, including \"House of Usher\" (1960), \"The Pit and the Pendulum (1961)\", and \"The Raven\" (1963). He was one of the key screenwriters in Corman's career.\nFor Hammer Film Productions, he wrote the screenplay for \"Fanatic\" (1965; US title: \"Die! Die! My Darling!\"), starring Tallulah Bankhead and Stefanie Powers and based on the novel \"Nightmare\" by Anne Blaisdell; he also adapted for Hammer Dennis Wheatley's \"The Devil Rides Out\" (1968).\n1970s and 1980s.\nIn 1971, Matheson's short story \"Duel\" was adapted into the TV movie of the same name. In 1973, Matheson earned an Edgar Award from the Mystery Writers of America for his teleplay for \"The Night Stalker\" (1972), one of two TV movies written by Matheson for producer Dan Curtis, the other being \"The Night Strangler\" (1973), which preceded the TV series \"\". Matheson worked extensively with Curtis; the 1977 television anthology film \"Dead of Night\" features three stories written for the screen by Matheson: \"Second Chance\" (based on the story by Jack Finney); \"No Such Thing as a Vampire\" (based on Matheson's story of the same name); and \"Bobby\", an original script written for this anthology by Matheson.\nThree of his short stories were filmed together as \"Trilogy of Terror\" (1975), including \"Prey\" (initially published in the April 1969 issue of \"Playboy\" magazine), a tale of a Zuni warrior fetish doll. The doll later reappeared in the final segment of the belated sequel to the first movie, \"Trilogy of Terror II\" (1996), and \"Bobby\" from \"Dead of Night\" was refilmed with different actors for the second segment of the film.\nOther Matheson novels adapted into films in the 1970s include \"Bid Time Return\" (1975, released as \"Somewhere in Time\" in 1980), and \"Hell House\" (1971, released as \"The Legend of Hell House\" in 1973), both adapted and scripted by Matheson himself.\nIn the 1980s, Matheson published the novel \"Earthbound\", wrote several screenplays for the TV series \"Amazing Stories\", and continued to publish short fiction.\n1990s.\nMatheson published four Western novels in this decade, as well as the suspense novel \"Seven Steps to Midnight\" (1993) and the darkly comic locked-room mystery novel \"Now You See It\u00a0...\" (1995), dedicated to Robert Bloch.\nHe also wrote the screenplays for several movies, including the comedy \"Loose Cannons\" (1990) and the television biopic ' (1990), as well as a segment of ' (1994) and segments of \"Trilogy of Terror II\". Matheson continued to write short stories, and two more of his novels were adapted by others for the big screen: \"What Dreams May Come\" (1998) and \"A Stir of Echoes\" (1999, as \"Stir of Echoes\"). In 1999, Matheson published a non-fiction work, \"The Path\", inspired by his interest in psychic phenomena.\n21st century.\nMany previously unpublished novels by Matheson appeared late in his career, as did various collections of his work and previously unpublished screenplays. He also wrote new works, such as the suspense novel \"Hunted Past Reason\" (2002) and the children's illustrated fantasy \"Abu and the 7 Marvels\" (2002).\nStyle.\nSeveral of Matheson's stories, including \"Third from the Sun\" (1950), \"Deadline\" (1959), and \"Button, Button\" (1970), are simple sketches with twist endings; others, like \"Trespass\" (1953), \"Being\" (1954), and \"Mute\" (1962), explore their characters' dilemmas over 20 or 30 pages. Some tales, such as \"The Doll that Does Everything\" (1954) and \"The Funeral\" (1955), incorporate satirical humor at the expense of genre clich\u00e9s, and are written in bombastic prose that differed from Matheson's usual pared-down style. Others, like \"The Test\" (1954) and \"Steel\" (1956), portray the moral and physical struggles of ordinary people, rather than those of scientists and superheroes, in situations which are at once futuristic and quotidian. Still others, such as \"Mad House\" (1953), \"The Curious Child\" (1954) and \"Duel\" (1971), are tales of paranoia, in which the commonplace environment of the present day becomes inexplicably alien or threatening.\nSources of inspiration.\nMatheson cited specific inspirations for many of his works. \"Duel\" was derived from an incident in which he and friend Jerry Sohl were dangerously tailgated by a large truck on the same day as the assassination of John F. Kennedy. \nAccording to film critic Roger Ebert, Matheson's scientific approach to the supernatural in \"I Am Legend\" and other novels from the 1950s and early 1960s \"anticipated pseudorealistic fantasy novels like \"Rosemary's Baby\" and \"The Exorcist\".\"\nPersonal life and death.\nIn 1952, Matheson married Ruth Ann Woodson, whom he met in California. They had four children: Bettina Mayberry, Richard Christian, Christopher Matheson and Ali Marie Matheson. Richard, Chris, and Ali became writers of fiction and screenplays.\nMatheson died on June 23, 2013, at his home in Calabasas, California, at the age of 87.&lt;ref name=\"washingtonpost/richard-matheson-87\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nAwards.\nMatheson received the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement in 1984 and the Bram Stoker Award for Lifetime Achievement from the Horror Writers Association in 1991. In 1993, he won the World Horror Convention Grand Master Award. The Science Fiction Hall of Fame inducted him in 2010.\nAt the annual World Fantasy Conventions, he won two judged, annual literary awards for particular works: World Fantasy Awards for \"Bid Time Return\" as the best novel of 1975 and \"Richard Matheson: Collected Stories\" as the best collection of 1989.\nIn 1989, he won the Bram Stoker Award for best Fiction Collection for \"Richard Matheson: Collected Stories\" &amp; was nominated in 2002 for the Bram Stoker Award for Work for Young Readers for \"Abu and the 7 Marvels\".\nIn 1991 he won the Spur Award for Best Western Novel for \"Journal of the Gun Years\".\nIn 2008, he won the Geffen Award for Science Fiction &amp; the T\u00e4htivaeltaja Award for \"I Am Legend\".\nMatheson died just days before he was due to receive the Visionary Award at the 39th Saturn Awards ceremony. As a tribute, the ceremony was dedicated to him and the award was presented posthumously. Academy president Robert Holguin said, \"Richard's accomplishments will live on forever in the imaginations of everyone who read or saw his inspired and inimitable work.\"\nInfluence.\nOther writers.\nStephen King has listed Matheson as a creative influence, and his novels \"Cell\" (2006) and \"Elevation\" (2018) are dedicated to Matheson, along with filmmaker George A. Romero. Romero frequently acknowledged Matheson as an inspiration and listed the shambling vampire creatures that appear in \"The Last Man on Earth\", the first film version of \"I Am Legend\", as the inspiration for the zombie \"ghouls\" he envisioned in \"Night of the Living Dead\".\nAnne Rice stated that Matheson's short story \"Dress of White Silk\" was an early influence on her interest in vampires and fantasy fiction.\nDirectors.\nAfter his death, several figures offered tributes to his life and work. Director Steven Spielberg said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Richard Matheson's ironic and iconic imagination created seminal science-fiction stories and gave me my first break when he wrote the short story and screenplay for \"Duel\". His \"Twilight Zone\"s were among my favorites, and he recently worked with us on \"Real Steel\". For me, he is in the same category as Bradbury and Asimov.\nAnother frequent collaborator, Roger Corman, said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Richard Matheson was a close friend and the best screenwriter I ever worked with. I always shot his first draft. I will miss him.\nOn Twitter, director Edgar Wright wrote, \"If it's true that the great Richard Matheson has passed away, 140 characters can't begin to cover what he has given the sci fi &amp; horror genre.\" Director Richard Kelly added, \"I loved Richard Matheson's writing and it was a huge honor getting to adapt his story 'Button, Button' into a film. RIP.\"\nWorks.\nNovels.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nShort stories.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nShort story collections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilms.\n\"For television films, see Television section below.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTelevision.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25627", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25627", "title": "History of Reunion", "text": ""}
{"id": "25628", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25628", "title": "Geography of R\u00e9union", "text": " \nR\u00e9union is an island in Southern Africa, in the Indian Ocean, east of Madagascar. It is an overseas region of France. The total area of the island is 2,512\u00a0km2, of which 10\u00a0km2 is water. The island has a coastline of 207\u00a0km. The maritime claims of R\u00e9union include an exclusive economic zone of 200 nautical miles, and a territorial sea of . Reunion is geologically situated in the Somali Plate.\nClimate.\nThe climate in R\u00e9union is tropical, but temperature moderates with elevation. The weather is cool and dry from May to November, and hot and rainy from November to April. The terrain is mostly rugged and mountainous, with fertile lowlands along the coast. The lowest point is the Indian Ocean and the highest is Piton des Neiges at 3,069 m.\nNatural resources.\nR\u00e9union's natural resources are fish, arable land and hydropower. In 1993, 60\u00a0km2 of the land was irrigated. The use of the land in 1993 is described in the table below:\nNatural hazards.\nLocal natural hazards include: periodic, devastating cyclones (December to April), and Piton de la Fournaise (2,631 m) on the southeastern coast, which is an active volcano.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25629", "revid": "28991092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25629", "title": "Demographics of R\u00e9union", "text": " \nThis article concerns the demography of R\u00e9union. People of R\u00e9union are \"R\u00e9unionese\". The official language is French, and R\u00e9unionese Creole is widely spoken. The population of R\u00e9union is as of .\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of , estimates put the population of R\u00e9union at , with a growth rate of 1.63%. The birth rate was estimated at 21.84 births per 1,000 population, and the death rate at 5.55 deaths per 1,000 population in the same year. The net migration rate was zero in 2000. The following table describes age structure and sex ratios in R\u00e9union.\nStructure of the population.\nStructure of the population (01.01.2010) (Provisional estimates): \nPopulation by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.I.2015): \nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020):\nVital statistics.\nLife expectancy.\nAt birth, life expectancy is 76.5 years for male children, and 82.9 for female (figures for 2011).\nEthnic groups.\nEthnic groups present include people of European, African, Malagasy, Indians and Chinese origin as well as many of mixed race. Local names for these are used: Yabs, Cafres, Malbars and Zarabes (both ethnic groups of Indian origin) and Chinois.\nThe proportion of people of each ethnicity is not known exactly, since the 1958 constitution bans questions about ethnicity in compulsory censuses in France. Long-established and ongoing intermarriage also blurs the issue. People of primarily African descent make up 35% of the population, those of primarily European and Indian descent number about one-quarter each, and people of Chinese, Malay, Vietnamese descent, along with those identifying as M\u00e9tis, form roughly 15%.\nPeople of Tamil origin make up the majority of the Indo-R\u00e9unionnais people about 12%-13% of the island's population; Gujarati, Bihari and other origins form the remainder of the population. The island's community of Muslims from modern region of Pakistan and North India and elsewhere is also commonly referred to as Zarabes.\nCreoles (a name given to those born on the island, of various ethnic origins), make up the majority of the population. Groups that are not creole include people from Metropolitan France (known as Zoreilles) and those from Mayotte and the Comoros.\nGenetics.\nIn 2005, a genetic study on the racially mixed people of R\u00e9union found the following.\nFor maternal (mitochondrial) DNA, the haplogroups are Indian (44%), East Asian (27%), European/Middle Eastern (19%) or African (10%). The Indian lineages are M2, M6 and U2i, the East Asian ones are E1, D5a, M7c, and F (E1 and M7c also found only in South East Asia and in Madagascar), the European/Middle Eastern ones are U2e, T1, J, H, and I, and the African ones are L1b1, L2a1, L3b, and L3e1.\nFor paternal (Y-chromosome) DNA, the haplogroups are European/Middle Eastern (85%) or East Asian (15%). The European lineages are R1b and I, the Middle Eastern one E1b1b1c (formerly E3b3) (also found in Northeast Africa), and the East Asian ones are R1a (found in many parts of the world including Europe and Central and Southern Asia but the particular sequence has been found in Asia) and O3.\nLanguages.\nFrench is the only official language of Reunion. Although not official, R\u00e9union Creole is also commonly spoken by the majority of the population. One can hear it in any administration or office, but education is only in French.\nTamil is taught as optional language in some schools. Due to the diverse population, other languages such as Mandarin, Hakka and Cantonese are also spoken by members of the Chinese community, but fewer people speak these languages as younger generations start to converse in French. The number of speakers of Indian languages (mostly Urdu and Gujarati) is also dropping sharply. Arabic is taught in mosques and spoken by a small community of Arabs.\nReligion.\nThe predominant religion is the Catholic branch of Christianity, with Hinduism, Islam and Buddhism also represented, among others."}
{"id": "25630", "revid": "40824097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25630", "title": "Politics of R\u00e9union", "text": " \nR\u00e9union is an overseas d\u00e9partement of France.\nThe island's conventional name is the \"Department of R\u00e9union\", or \"R\u00e9union\". The French flag is used on the island. The island's capital is Saint-Denis, and the island is divided into 4 arrondissements, 24 communes and 25 cantons.\nR\u00e9union is governed by French law under Article 73 of the Constitution of France, under which the laws and regulations are applicable as of right, as in metropolitan France. Suffrage is granted universally to all those over the age of 18.\nExecutive branch.\nThe chief of state is the French President Emmanuel Macron, who is represented by Prefect Jacques Billant. The President of the Regional Council is Huguette Bello. The president of the Departmental Council is Cyrille Melchior.\nElections held in R\u00e9union include the French presidential vote. A prefect is appointed by the president on the advice of the French Ministry of the Interior. The presidents of the General and Regional Councils are elected by members of those councils.\nLegislative branch.\nThe regional council has 45 seats, and exercises the powers of a French region and certain specific powers of an overseas region.\nThe departmental council has 50 seats, and exercises departmental powers.\nDeputies.\nR\u00e9union elects seven deputies to the National Assembly for five-year terms.\nSenators.\nR\u00e9union elects four senators to the Senate for six-year terms.\nEuropean Parliament.\nR\u00e9union participates in French elections to the European Parliament. It was formerly a part of the Indian Ocean section of the Overseas constituency, before France reverted to a single constituency in 2019.\nJudicial branch.\nThe Judicial branch of the overseas d\u00e9partement is run by the Cour d'Appel (Court of Appeals).\nInternational organization participation.\nReunion is a member in the Indian Ocean Commission (InOC) since 1986, and of the World Federation of Trade Unions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25631", "revid": "41225088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25631", "title": "Economy of R\u00e9union", "text": "The economy of R\u00e9union has traditionally been based on agriculture. Sugarcane has been the primary crop for more than a century, and in some years it accounts for 85% of exports. The government has been pushing the development of a tourist industry to relieve high unemployment, which amounts to more than 40% of the labour force.\nThe gap in R\u00e9union between the well-off and the poor is large and accounts for persistent social tensions. The outbreak of severe rioting in February 1991 illustrated the seriousness of socio-economic tensions.\nIn 2007 the GDP per capita of R\u00e9union at nominal exchange rates, not at PPP, was \u20ac17,146 (US$23,501). However, while this is exceptionally high compared with its neighbours in Madagascar and the African continent, it is only 57% of the 30,140 euros per capita GDP of metropolitan France in 2007. Reunion Island\u00a0is one of the French departments with the highest poverty rate with 42% of the population living below the poverty line.\u00a0 The total GDP of the island was US$18.8\u00a0billion in 2007.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "25633", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25633", "title": "Transport in R\u00e9union", "text": " \nR\u00e9union possesses a network of highways, which cover a total distance of 2,784\u00a0km. Of that length, 2,187\u00a0km of the road system is paved. There are no roads going into the cirque of Mafate; thus transportation there has to take place by foot or helicopter.\nMotorways.\nA system of highways that run between the main cities has been developed.\nSea.\nThere are two major ports in R\u00e9union: Le Port and Pointe des Galets. There are six marinas. R\u00e9union possesses a merchant marine of one ship with a weight exceeding 1,000\u00a0gt, which is a chemical tanker.\nAirports.\nThere are two airports on the island, of which both have paved runways. The main airport is the international Roland Garros Airport located close to Saint-Denis and the second one is the A\u00e9roport de Pierrefond, located near Saint-Pierre in the south of the island.\nRailways.\nThere are no railways in R\u00e9union, with the exception of a short tourist line, which was originally part of a larger rail network. A 42\u00a0km light rail project was cancelled in 2010, after a regional government change in 2010, mostly because the project was considered too expensive (\u20ac1.6\u00a0billion). The region's new president chose to fund a new coastal road instead. In 2019 a new light rail system was proposed to link Le Barachois with the airport.\nCable car.\nDue to huge traffic congestion, channelled by the rough topography on the main coastal road, public authorities invested in a cable car transportation system, linking two districts of Saint-Denis : Le Chaudron to Bois de N\u00e8fles, with three intermediate stops. Built by POMA, a leading French company in cable car systems, it opened in March 2022. With 46 cabins, it is designed to transport up to 1200 persons per hour. This cable car is the first in the whole Indian Ocean.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25636", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25636", "title": "History of Romania", "text": "Romania has been inhabited by humans since the paleolithic. During antiquity, the main population that lived in the area corresponding to modern-day Romania were the Dacians. Dacian civilisation prospered from the second century BC to the second century AD, resulting in the establishment of a Dacian kingdom as a regional power. Following several wars with the Roman Empire, Dacia was conquered in 106 AD, and the kingdom's core was turned into a Roman province. The province was abandoned by 276 AD following several invasions from various barbarian peoples. Many Romanian historians believe that the origin of the Romanians can be traced back to the Dacians and Romans intermixing, which in turn formed the basis of the Romanian ethnicity.\nDuring the early Middle Ages, numerous migratory peoples moved across and settled the territory of Romania. A prominent Turkic population also settled Romanian territory, particularly the Cumans. Early Romanian culture was heavily influenced by these peoples, Vlachs \u2013 Romance-language speakers in the Balkans \u2013 were first clearly attested in the 10th century, inhabiting areas on both sides of the Danube. By the 13th century, numerous small Vlach political entities abounded in areas such as Muntenia, Oltenia and Transylvania. These political entities gradually unified, and by the mid-14th century, the two major historical Romanian principalities had emerged, Wallachia and Moldavia.\nThe principalities partook in many conflicts against their often stronger neighbours, such as the Ottoman Empire. Eventually, they became vassal states to the Ottomans, however they always managed to preserve their autonomy as well as slowly progress a Romanian national identity. In 1600, Michael the Brave managed to unite all the Romanian-inhabited states, including Transylvania for the first time, however the union was short-lived and folded under pressure from the Habsburgs, Hungarians and Poles. Nevertheless, the Romanian identity continued to cultivate, culminating in movements such as the Transylvanian School and blossoming in the 19th century through the 1848 revolutions in both Wallachia and Moldavia. The modern Romanian state was established in 1859 through a personal union of the Danubian Principalities. The new state, which fought for and gained its independence in 1877, consolidated itself as a kingdom in 1881. \nDuring World War I, after declaring its neutrality in 1914, Romania fought together with the Allied Powers from 1916. In the aftermath of the war, Bukovina, Bessarabia and Transylvania, as well as parts of the Banat, Cri\u0219ana, and Maramure\u0219 united with Romania, resulting in the establishment of Greater Romania. In the summer of 1940, as a consequence of the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact and Second Vienna Award, Romania was compelled to cede Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina to the Soviet Union and Northern Transylvania to Hungary. In November\u00a01940, Romania signed the Tripartite Pact and, consequently, in June\u00a01941 entered World War II on the Axis side, fighting against the Soviet Union until August\u00a01944, when it joined the Allies and recovered Northern Transylvania. Following the war and occupation by the Red Army, Romania became a socialist republic and a member of the Warsaw Pact. After the 1989\u00a0Revolution, Romania began a transition towards democracy and a market economy.\nPrehistory.\nRemains of 34,950-year-old modern humans were discovered in present-day Romania when the \"Pe\u0219tera cu Oase\" (\"Cave with Bones\") was uncovered in 2002. The Romanian fossils are among the oldest remains of \"Homo sapiens\" in Europe.\nThe Neolithic-Age Cucuteni area in northeastern Romania was the western region of one of the earliest European civilizations, known as the Cucuteni\u2013Trypillia culture. The earliest-known salt works is at Poiana Slatinei near the village of Lunca; it was first used in the early Neolithic around 6050\u00a0BC by the Star\u010devo culture and later by the Cucuteni-Trypillia culture in the pre-Cucuteni period.\nDacia.\nThe Dacians, who are widely accepted to be the same people as the Getae, were a branch of Thracians who inhabited Dacia, which corresponds with modern Romania, Moldova, northern Bulgaria, south-western Ukraine, Hungary east of the Danube river and West Banat in Serbia.\nThe earliest written evidence of people living in the territory of present-day Romania comes from Herodotus in Book IV of his \"Histories\", written in c. 440\u00a0BC; He writes that the tribal union/confederation of the Getae were defeated by the Persian Emperor Darius the Great during his campaign against the Scythians. One of the most important artifacts from around this period was the Helmet of Co\u021bofene\u0219ti, which was stolen in 2025.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Dacians are the most law-abiding and the bravest of the Thracians. They believe they are immortal, forever living in the following sense: they think they do not die and that the one who dies joins Zalmoxis, a divine being.\u2014\u200a\nStrabo's account of the lands inhabited by the Getae: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Dacians spoke a dialect of the Thracian language but were influenced culturally by the neighboring Scythians in the east and by the Celtic invaders of Transylvania in the 4th century.\nDue to the fluctuating nature of the Dacian states, especially before the time of Burebista and before the 1st century AD, the Dacians would often be split into different kingdoms. Known rulers of the Dacians include Charnabon in the 5th century BC, Cothelas in the 4th century BC, Rex Histrianorum mentioned in 339 BC, Dual in the 3rd century BC, Moskon in the 3rd century BC, Dromichaetes in the 3rd century BC, Zalmodegicus around 200 BC, Rhemaxos also around 200 BC, Rubobostes before 168 BC, Zoltes after 168 BC, Oroles in the 2nd century BC, Dicomes in the 1st century BC, Rholes in the 1st century BC, Dapyx in the 1st century BC, Zyraxes in the 1st century BC, Burebista between 82 and 44 BC, Deceneus between 44 BC and around 27 BC, Thiamarkos between 1st century BC and 1st century AD, Cotiso between c. 40 BC and c.9 BC, Comosicus between 9 BC and 30 AD, Scorilo between c. 30 AD and 70 AD Coson in the 1st century AD, Duras between c. 69 AD to 87 AD, and Decebalus between 87 AD to 106 AD. Dacia became a province of the Roman Empire in 106 AD, conquered by Emperor Trajan. However the Free Dacians outside of the Roman Empire remain independent under Pieporus, king of Dacian Costoboci in the 2nd century AD, and possibly Tarbus in the 2nd century AD.\nThe Dacia of King Burebista (82\u201344 BC) stretched from the Black Sea to the source of the river Tisa and from the Balkan Mountains to Bohemia. During that period, the Geto-Dacians conquered a wider territory and Dacia extended from the Middle Danube to the Black Sea littoral (between Apollonia and Olbia) and from present-day Slovakia's mountains to the Balkan mountains. In 53 BC, Julius Caesar stated that the lands of the Dacians started on the eastern edge of the Hercynian Forest (Black Forest).\nGeto-Dacians inhabited both sides of the Tisa river prior to the rise of the Celtic Boii and again after the latter were defeated by the Dacians under the king Burebista. It seems likely that the Dacian state arose as a tribal confederacy, which was united only by charismatic leadership. Before 168 BC, under the rule of king Rubobostes in present-day Transylvania, the Dacians' power in the Carpathian basin increased after they defeated the Celts, who held power in the region since the Celtic invasion of Transylvania in the 4th century BC.\nA kingdom of Dacia also existed as early as the first half of the 2nd century BC under King Oroles. Conflicts with the Bastarnae and the Romans (112\u2013109 BC, 74 BC), against whom they had assisted the Scordisci and Dardani, greatly weakened the resources of the Dacians. The Roman historian Trogus Pompeius wrote about king Oroles punishing his soldiers into sleeping at their wives' feet and doing the household chores, because of their initial failure in defeating the invaders. Subsequently, the now \"highly motivated\" Dacian army defeated the Bastarnae.\nBurebista (Boerebista), a contemporary of Julius Caesar, ruled Geto-Dacian tribes between 82 BC and 44 BC. He reorganized the army and attempted to raise the moral standard and obedience of the people by persuading them to give up wine. During his reign, the limits of the Dacian Kingdom were extended to their maximum. The Bastarnae and Boii were conquered, and even the Greek towns of Olbia and Apollonia on the Black Sea (\"Pontus Euxinus\") recognized Burebista's authority. In 53 BC, Caesar stated that the Dacian territory was on the eastern border of the Hercynian Forest.\nBurebista suppressed the indigenous minting of coinages by four major tribal groups, adopting imported or copied Roman denarii as a monetary standard. During his reign, Burebista transferred the Geto-Dacian capital from Argedava to Sarmizegetusa Regia. For at least one and a half centuries, Sarmizegetusa served as the Dacians\u2019 capital and reached its zenith under King Decebalus. The Dacians appeared so formidable that Caesar contemplated launching an expedition against them, which was prevented by his death in 44 BC. That same year, Burebista was assassinated, and the kingdom was subsequently divided into four\u2014later five\u2014parts under separate rulers.\nThe Dacians are often mentioned during the reign of Augustus, who claimed they were compelled to recognize Roman supremacy. However, they were by no means subdued, and in later times, to maintain their independence, they seized every opportunity to cross the frozen Danube during the winter, ravaging Roman cities in the province of Moesia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although the Getae and Daci once attained to very great power, so that they actually could send forth an expedition of two hundred thousand men, they now find themselves reduced to as few as forty thousand, and they have come close to the point of yielding obedience to the Romans, though as yet they are not absolutely submissive, because of the hopes which they base on the Germans, who are enemies to the Romans.\u2014\u200a\nDuring the War of Actium, King Cotiso found himself courted by the two Roman antagonists, Octavian and Mark Antony. Cotiso was in a strong position to dictate the terms of any alliance. Octavian (later) Augustus worried about the frontier and possible alliance between Mark Antony and the Dacians, and he plotted an expedition against Dacia around 35 BC. Despite several small conflicts, no serious campaigns were mounted. King Cotiso chose to ally himself with Mark Antony. According to Alban Dewes Winspear and Lenore Kramp Geweke he \"proposed that the war should be fought in Macedonia rather than Epirus. Had his proposal been accepted, the subjection of Antonius might have been less easily accomplished.\"\nAccording to Appian, Mark Antony is responsible for the statement that Augustus sought to secure the goodwill of Cotiso by giving him his daughter, and he himself marrying a daughter of Cotiso. According to Suetonius, Cotiso refused the alliance and joined the party of Mark Antony. Suetonius (LXIII, \"Life of Augustus\") says Mark Antony wrote that Augustus betrothed his daughter Julia to marry Cotiso to create an alliance between the two men. This failed when Cotiso betrayed Augustus. According to Cassius Dio, the story about the proposed marriages is hardly credible and may have been invented by Mark Antony as propaganda to offset his own alliance with Cleopatra.\nAfter Augustus's victory in the civil wars, the Romans punished the Dacian ruler, who was apparently defeated in battle around 25 BC. In his account of his achievements as emperor, the \"Res Gestae\", Augustus claimed that the Dacians had been subdued. This was not entirely true, because Dacian troops frequently crossed the Danube to ravage parts of Pannonia and Moesia. He may have survived until the campaign of Marcus Vinicius in the Dacian area c.9 BC. Vinicius was the first Roman commander to cross the Danube and invade Dacia itself. Ioana A. Oltean argues that Cotiso probably died at some point during this campaign. According to Jordanes Cotiso was succeeded by Comosicus, about whom nothing is known beyond the name.\nKing Scorilo was Comosicus' successor and may have been the father of Decebalus. The Roman historian Jordanes lists a series of Dacian kings before Decebalus, placing a ruler called \"Coryllus\" between Comosicus and the independently attested Duras, who preceded Decebalus as king. Coryllus is supposed to have presided over a long peaceful 40-year rule, however, the name Coryllus is not mentioned by any other historian, and it has been argued that it \"is a misspelling of Scorilo, a relatively common Dacian name\". On this basis, Coryllus has been equated with the Scorilo named on an ancient Dacian pot bearing the words \u201cDecebalus per Scorilo\u201d. Though far from certain, this has also been translated as \"Decebalus son of Scorilo\". If so, this might mean that Decebalus was the son of Scorilo, with Duras possibly being either an older son or a brother of Scorilo. A Dacian king (\"dux Dacorum\") called Scorilo is also mentioned by Frontinus, who says he was in power during a period of turmoil in Rome. From this evidence and references to Dacian kings elsewhere, it is suggested that Scorilo probably ruled from the 30s or 40s AD through to 69\u201370.\nThe Dacians regularly raided into Roman territory in Moesia. The emperors Tiberius and Caligula solved this problem by paying protection money to the Dacians in the form of annual subsidies. This policy appears to have coincided with the reign of King Scorilo. Scorilo's brother was apparently held captive for a period in Rome, but was released in exchange for a promise that the Dacians would not intervene in Rome's volatile power-politics. During the reign of Emperor Nero, troops were withdrawn from the Dacian border. When Nero was overthrown in 69, the empire was plunged into turmoil in the Year of Four Emperors. The Dacians appear to have tried to take advantage of the situation to launch an invasion of Moesia in alliance with the Sarmatian Roxolani. The invasion was ill-timed. Licinius Mucianus, a supporter of Vespasian, was advancing with an army through Moesia towards Rome to overthrow Vitellius. The Dacians unexpectedly encountered his forces and suffered a major defeat. Scorilo appears to have died around this time.\nKing Duras ruled between the years AD 69 and 87, during the time that Domitian ruled the Roman Empire. He was one of a series of rulers following the Great King Burebista. Duras' immediate successor was Decebalus. Duras may be identical to the \"Diurpaneus\" (or \"Dorpaneus\") identified in Roman sources as the Dacian leader who, in the winter of 85, ravaged the southern banks of the Danube, which the Romans defended for many years. Many authors refer to him as \"Duras-Diurpaneus\". Other scholars argue that Duras and Diurpaneus are different individuals, or that Diurpaneus is identical to Decebalus.\nThe Roman governor of Moesia, Oppius Sabinus, raised an army and went to war with the Dacians following the Dacian (Getae) raids into Roman territory. Diurpaneus and his people defeated and decapitated Oppius Sabinus. When news of the defeat reached Rome, the citizens became fearful that the conquering enemy would invade and spread destruction further into the Empire. Because of this fear, Domitian was obliged to move with his entire army into Illyria and Moesia, the latter of which was now split into Upper and Lower regions. He ordered his commander Cornelius Fuscus to cross the Danube. The Dacians were pushed back across the Danube, but Fuscus suffered a crushing defeat when ambushed by \"Diurpaneus\". At this point, the probably elderly Duras seems to have peacefully ceded power to Decebalus.\nKing Decebalus ruled the Dacians between AD 87 and 106. The frontiers of Decebal's Dacia were marked by the Tisa River to the west, by the trans-Carpathians to the north and by the Dniester River to the east.\nFrom AD 85 to 89, the Dacians under Decebalus were engaged in two wars with the Romans. In AD 85, the Dacians had swarmed over the Danube and pillaged Moesia. In AD 87, the Roman troops sent by the Emperor Domitian against them under Cornelius Fuscus, were defeated and Cornelius Fuscus was killed by the Dacians by authority of their ruler, Diurpaneus. After this victory, Diurpaneus took the name of \"Decebalus\", but the Romans were victorious in the Battle of Tapae in AD 88 and a truce was drawn up . The next year, AD 88, new Roman troops under Tettius Julianus, gained a significant advantage, but were obligated to make a humiliating peace following the defeat of Domitian by the Marcomanni, leaving the Dacians effectively independent. Decebalus was given the status of \"king client to Rome\", receiving military instructors, craftsmen and money from Rome.\nTo increase the glory of his reign, restore the finances of Rome, and end a treaty perceived as humiliating, Trajan resolved on the conquest of Dacia, the capture of the famous Treasure of Decebalus, and control over the Dacian gold mines of Transylvania. The result of his first campaign (101\u2013102) was the siege of the Dacian capital Sarmizegethusa and the occupation of part of the country. Emperor Trajan recommenced hostilities against Dacia and, following an uncertain number of battles, and with Trajan's troops pressing towards the Dacian capital Sarmizegethusa, Decebalus once more sought terms.\nDecebalus rebuilt his power over the following years and attacked Roman garrisons again in AD 105. In response Trajan again marched into Dacia, attacking the Dacian capital in the siege of Sarmizegethusa, and razing it to the ground, the defeated Dacian king Decebalus committed suicide. In the following years, a new city was built on the ruins of the Dacian capital named Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa. With part of Dacia quelled as the Roman province Dacia Traiana. Trajan subsequently invaded the Parthian empire to the east. Rome's borders in the east were governed indirectly in this period, through a system of client states, which led to less direct campaigning than in the west.\nThe weapon most associated with the Dacian forces that fought against Trajan's army during his invasions of Dacia was the falx, a single-edged scythe-like weapon. The falx was able to inflict horrible wounds on opponents, easily disabling or killing the heavily armored Roman legionaries. Trajan erected the Column of Trajan in Rome to commemorate his victory.\nRoman Dacia (106\u2013275 AD).\nRoman Dacia, also known as Dacia Felix, was organized as an imperial province. It is estimated that the population of Roman Dacia ranging from 650,000 to 1,200,000. The area was the focus of a massive Roman colonization. New mines were opened and ore extraction intensified, while agriculture, stock breeding, and commerce flourished. Roman Dacia was of great importance to the military stationed throughout the Balkans and became an urban province, with about ten cities known and all of them originating from old military camps. Eight of these held the highest rank of \"colonia\". Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa was the financial, religious, and legislative center and where the imperial \"procurator\" (finance officer) had his seat, while Apulum was Roman Dacia's military center. The region was soon settled by the retired veterans who had served in the Dacian Wars, principally the Fifth (\"Macedonia\"), Ninth (\"Claudia\"), and Fourteenth (\"Gemina\") legions.\nWhile it is certain that colonists in large numbers were imported from all over the empire to settle in Roman Dacia, this appears to be true for the newly created Roman towns only. The lack of epigraphic evidence for native Dacian names in the towns suggests an urban\u2013rural split between Roman multi-ethnic urban centers and the native Dacian rural population. On at least two occasions the Dacians rebelled against Roman authority: first in 117 AD, which caused the return of Trajan from the east, and in 158 AD when they were put down by Marcus Statius Priscus.\nSome scholars have used the lack of \"civitates peregrinae\" in Roman Dacia, where indigenous peoples were organized into native townships, as evidence for the Roman depopulation of Dacia. Prior to its incorporation into the empire, Dacia was a kingdom ruled by one king, and did not possess a regional tribal structure that could easily be turned into the Roman \"civitas\" system as used successfully in other provinces of the empire.\nAs per usual Roman practice, Dacian males were recruited into auxiliary units and dispatched across the empire. The \"Vexillation Dacorum Parthica\" accompanied the emperor Septimius Severus during his Parthian expedition, while the \"cohort I Ulpia Dacorum\" was posted to Cappadocia. Others included the \"II Aurelia Dacorum\" in Pannonia Superior, the \"cohort I Aelia Dacorum\" in Roman Britain, and the \"II Augusta Dacorum milliaria\" in Moesia Inferior. There are a number of preserved relics originating from \"cohort I Aelia Dacorum\", with one inscription describing the \"sica\", a distinctive Dacian weapon. Numerous Roman military diplomas issued for Dacian soldiers discovered after 1990 indicate that veterans preferred to return to their place of origin; per usual Roman practice, these veterans were given Roman citizenship upon their discharge.\nIn an attempt to fill the cities, cultivate the fields, and mine the ore, a large-scale attempt at colonization took place with colonists coming in \"from all over the Roman world\". The colonists were a heterogeneous mix: of the some 3,000 names preserved in inscriptions found by the 1990s, 74% (c. 2,200) were Latin, 14% (c. 420) were Greek, 4% (c. 120) were Illyrian, 2.3% (c. 70) were Celtic, 2% (c. 60) were Thraco-Dacian, and another 2% (c. 60) were Semites from Syria. Regardless of their place of origin, the settlers and colonists were a physical manifestation of Roman civilization and imperial culture, bringing with them the most effective Romanizing mechanism: the use of Latin as the new \"lingua franca\".\nThe first settlement at Sarmizegetusa was made up of Roman citizens who had retired from their legions. Based upon the location of names scattered throughout the province, it has been argued that a large percentage of colonists originated from Noricum and western Pannonia. Specialist miners (the Pirusti tribesmen) were brought in from Dalmatia.\nAlthough the Romans conquered and destroyed the ancient Kingdom of Dacia, much of the land remained outside of Roman Imperial authority. The conquest changed the balance of power in the region and was the catalyst for a renewed alliance of Germanic and Celtic tribes and kingdoms against the Roman Empire. However, the material advantages of the Roman Imperial system was attractive to the surviving aristocracy. Afterwards, many of the Dacians became Romanized (see also Origin of Romanians). In AD 183, war broke out in Dacia: few details are available, but it appears two future contenders for the throne of emperor Commodus, Clodius Albinus and Pescennius Niger, both distinguished themselves in the campaign.\nAccording to Lactantius, the Roman emperor Decius (AD 249\u2013251) had to restore Roman Dacia from the Carpo-Dacians of Zosimus \"having undertaken an expedition against the Carpi, who had then possessed themselves of Dacia and Moesia\".\nEven so, the Germanic and Celtic kingdoms, particularly the Gothic tribes, slowly moved toward the Dacian borders, and within a generation were making assaults on the province. Ultimately, the Goths succeeded in dislodging the Romans and restoring the \"independence\" of Dacia following Emperor Aurelian's withdrawal, in 275. At the boundaries of Roman Dacia, Carpi (Free Dacians) were still strong enough to sustain five battles in eight years against the Romans from AD 301\u2013308. Roman Dacia was left in AD 275 by the Romans, to the Carpi again, and not to the Goths. There were still Dacians in AD 336, against whom Constantine the Great fought.\nThe province was abandoned by Roman troops, and, according to the \"Breviarium historiae Romanae\" by Eutropius, Roman citizens \"from the towns and lands of Dacia\" were resettled to the interior of Moesia. Under Diocletian, c. AD 296, in order to defend the Roman border, fortifications were erected by the Romans on both banks of the Danube.\nConstantinian reconquest of Dacia.\nIn 328 the emperor Constantine the Great inaugurated the Constantine's Bridge (Danube) at Sucidava, (today Corabia in Romania) in hopes of reconquering Dacia, a province that had been abandoned under Aurelian. In the late winter of 332, Constantine campaigned with the Sarmatians against the Goths. The weather and lack of food cost the Goths dearly: reportedly, nearly one hundred thousand died before they submitted. In celebration of this victory Constantine took the title \"Gothicus Maximus\" and claimed the subjugated territory as the new province of Gothia. In 334, after Sarmatian commoners had overthrown their leaders, Constantine led a campaign against the tribe. He won a victory in the war and extended his control over the region, as remains of camps and fortifications in the region indicate. Constantine resettled some Sarmatian exiles as farmers in Illyrian and Roman districts, and conscripted the rest into the army. The new frontier in Dacia was along the Brazda lui Novac line supported by Castra of Hinova, Rusidava and Castra of Pietroasele. The limes passed to the north of Castra of Tirighina-B\u0103rbo\u0219i and ended at Sasyk Lagoon near the Dniester River. Constantine took the title \"Dacicus maximus\" in 336. Some Roman territories north of the Danube resisted until Justinian.\nVictohali, Taifals, and Thervingians are tribes mentioned inhabiting Dacia in 350, after the Romans left. Archeological evidence suggests that Gepids were disputing Transylvania with Taifals and Tervingians. Taifals, once independent from Gothia, became federati of the Romans, from whom they obtained the right to settle Oltenia.\nIn 376 the region was conquered by Huns, who kept it until the death of Attila in 453. The Gepid tribe, ruled by Ardaric, used it as their base, until in 566 it was destroyed by Lombards. Lombards abandoned the country and the Avars (second half of the 6th century) dominated the region for 230 years, until their kingdom was destroyed by Charlemagne in 791. At the same time, Slavic people arrived.\nThe \"Hellenic chronicle\" could possibly qualify to the first testimony of Romanians in Pannonia and Eastern Europe during the time of Attila, implying that the formation of Proto-Romanian (or Common Romanian) from Vulgar Latin started in the 5th century. The words \"torna, torna fratre\" (return, return brother) recorded in connection with a Roman campaign across the Balkan Mountains by Theophylact Simocatta and Theophanes the Confessor evidence the development of a Romance language in the late 6th century. The words were shouted \"in native parlance\" by a local soldier in 587 or 588. The 11th-century Persian writer, Gardizi, wrote about a Christian people \"from the Roman Empire\" called \"N.n.d.r\", inhabiting the lands along the Danube. He describes them as \"more numerous than the Hungarians, but weaker\". Historian Adolf Armbruster identified this people as the Romanians. Hungarian historiography identifies this people as the Bulgarians.\nName.\nThe Dacians were known as \"Geta\" (plural \"Getae\") in Ancient Greek writings, and as \"Dacus\" (plural \"Daci\") or \"Getae\" in Roman documents, but also as \"Dagae\" and \"Gaete\" as depicted on the late Roman map \"Tabula Peutingeriana\". It was Herodotus who first used the ethnonym \"Getae\" in his \"Histories\". In Greek and Latin, in the writings of Julius Caesar, Strabo, and Pliny the Elder, the people became known as 'the Dacians'. Getae and Dacians were interchangeable terms, or used with some confusion by the Greeks. Latin poets often used the name \"Getae\". Modern historians prefer to use the name \"Geto-Dacians\". Strabo describes the Getae and Dacians as distinct but cognate tribes. This distinction refers to the regions they occupied. Strabo and Pliny the Elder also state that Getae and Dacians spoke the same language.\nBy contrast, the name of \"Dacians\", whatever the origin of the name, was used by the more western tribes who adjoined the Pannonians and therefore first became known to the Romans. According to Strabo's \"Geographica\", the original name of the Dacians was \"\"Daoi\". The name Daoi (one of the ancient Geto-Dacian tribes) was certainly adopted by foreign observers to designate all the inhabitants of the countries north of Danube that had not yet been conquered by Greece or Rome.\nThe ethnographic name \"Daci\" is found under various forms within ancient sources. Greeks used the forms \"Dakoi\"\" (Strabo, Dio Cassius, and Dioscorides) and \"Daoi\" (singular Daos). The form \"Daoi\" was frequently used according to Stephan of Byzantium. Latins used the forms \"Davus\", \"Dacus\", and a derived form \"Dacisci\" (Vopiscus and inscriptions).\nThere are similarities between the ethnonyms of the Dacians and those of Dahae (Greek \"D\u00e1oi\", \"D\u00e1ai\", \"Dai\", \"Dasai\"; Latin \"Dahae\", \"Daci\"), an Indo-European people located east of the Caspian Sea, until the 1st millennium BC. Scholars have suggested that there were links between the two peoples since ancient times. The historian David Gordon White has, moreover, stated that the \"Dacians ... appear to be related to the Dahae\".\nBy the end of the first century AD, all the inhabitants of the lands which now form Romania were known to the Romans as Daci, with the exception of some Celtic and Germanic tribes who infiltrated from the west, and Sarmatian and related people from the east.\nCarpi and Costoboci.\nThe Carpi were a sizeable group of tribes, who lived beyond the north-eastern boundary of Roman Dacia. The majority view among modern scholars is that the Carpi were a North Thracian tribe and a subgroup of the Dacians. However, some historians classify them as Slavs.\nAccording to Heather, the Carpi were Dacians from the eastern foothills of the Carpathian range \u2013 modern Moldavia and Wallachia \u2013 who had not been brought under direct Roman rule at the time of Trajan's conquest of Transylvania Dacia. After they generated a new degree of political unity among themselves in the course of the third century, these Dacian groups came to be known collectively as the Carpi.\nThe ancient sources about the Carpi, before 104 AD, located them on a territory situated between the western side of Eastern European Galicia and the mouth of the Danube. The name of the tribe is homonymous with the Carpathian mountains. Carpi and Carpathian are Dacian words derived from the root \"(s)ker\"- \"cut\" cf. Albanian \"karp\" \"stone\" and Sanskrit \"kar\"- \"cut\".A quote from the 6th-century Byzantine chronicler Zosimus referring to the Carpo-Dacians (Greek: \u039a\u03b1\u03c1\u03c0\u03bf\u03b4\u03ac\u03ba\u03b1\u03b9, Latin: \"Carpo-Dacae\"), who attacked the Romans in the late 4th century, is seen as evidence of their Dacian ethnicity. In fact, Carpi/Carpodaces is the term used for Dacians outside of Dacia proper. However, that the Carpi were Dacians is shown not so much by the form \u039a\u03b1\u03c1\u03c0\u03bf\u03b4\u03ac\u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 in Zosimus as by their characteristic place-names in \u2013\"dava\", given by Ptolemy in their country. The origin and ethnic affiliations of the Carpi have been debated over the years; in modern times they are closely associated with the Carpathian Mountains, and a good case has been made for attributing to the Carpi a distinct material culture, \"a developed form of the Geto-Dacian La Tene culture\", often known as the Poienesti culture, which is characteristic of this area.\nThe main view is that the \"Costoboci\" were ethnically Dacian. Others considered them a Slavic or Sarmatian tribe. There was also a Celtic influence, so that some consider them a mixed Celtic and Thracian group that appear, after Trajan's conquest, as a Dacian group within the Celtic superstratum. The Costoboci inhabited the southern slopes of the Carpathians. Ptolemy named the Coestoboci (Costoboci in Roman sources) twice, showing them divided by the Dniester and the Peucinian (Carpathian) Mountains. This suggests that they lived on both sides of the Carpathians, but it is also possible that two accounts about the same people were combined. There was also a group, the Transmontani, that some modern scholars identify as Dacian Transmontani Costoboci of the extreme north. The name Transmontani was from the Dacians' Latin, literally \"people over the mountains\". Mullenhoff identified these with the Transiugitani, another Dacian tribe north of the Carpathian mountains.\nBased on the account of Dio Cassius, Heather (2010) considers that Hasding Vandals, around 171 AD, attempted to take control of lands which previously belonged to the free Dacian group called the Costoboci. Hrushevskyi mentions that the earlier widespread view that these Carpathian tribes were Slavic has no basis. This would be contradicted by the Coestobocan names themselves that are known from the inscriptions, written by a Coestobocan and therefore presumably accurately. These names sound quite unlike anything Slavic. Scholars such as Tomaschek, Sch\u00fctte and Russu consider these Costobocian names to be Thraco-Dacian.\nCulture.\nBody-painting was customary among the Dacians. It is probable that the tattooing originally had a religious significance. They practiced symbolic-ritual tattooing or body painting for both men and women, with hereditary symbols transmitted up to the fourth generation.\nDacian religion was considered by the classic sources as a key source of authority, suggesting to some that Dacia was a predominantly theocratic state led by priest-kings. However, the layout of the Dacian capital Sarmizegethusa indicates the possibility of co-rulership, with a separate high king and high priest. Ancient sources recorded the names of several Dacian high priests (Deceneus, Comosicus and Vezina) and various orders of priests: \"god-worshipers\", \"smoke-walkers\" and \"founders\". Both Hellenistic and Oriental influences are discernible in the religious background, alongside chthonic and solar motifs.\nAccording to Herodotus' account of the story of Zalmoxis or Zamolxis, the Getae (speaking the same language as the Dacians and the Thracians, according to Strabo) believed in the immortality of the soul, and regarded death as merely a change of country. Their chief priest held a prominent position as the representative of the supreme deity, Zalmoxis, who is called also Gebeleizis by some among them. Strabo wrote about the high priest of King Burebista Deceneus: \"a man who not only had wandered through Egypt, but also had thoroughly learned certain prognostics through which he would pretend to tell the divine will; and within a short time he was set up as god (as I said when relating the story of Zamolxis)\".\nThe Goth Jordanes in his \"Getica\" (\"The origin and deeds of the Goths\"), also gives an account of Deceneus the highest priest, and considered Dacians a nation related to the Goths. Besides Zalmoxis, the Dacians believed in other deities, such as Gebeleizis, the god of storm and lightning, possibly related to the Thracian god Zibelthiurdos. Another important deity was Bendis, goddess of the moon and the hunt. By a decree of the oracle of Dodona, which required the Athenians to grant land for a shrine or temple, her cult was introduced into Attica by immigrant Thracian residents, and, though Thracian and Athenian processions remained separate, both cult and festival became so popular that in Plato's time (c. 429\u201313 BC) its festivities were naturalized as an official ceremony of the Athenian city-state, called the Bendideia.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nBetween 271 and 275, the Roman army and administration left Dacia, which was invaded later by the Goths. The Goths mixed with the local people until the 4th century, when the Huns, a nomadic people, arrived. The Gepids, the Avars, the Bulgars and their Slavic subjects ruled Transylvania until the 8th century. The territories of Wallachia and Moldavia were under the control of the First Bulgarian Empire from its establishment in 681 until around the time of the Hungarian conquest of Transylvania at the end of the 10th century.\nAfter the disintegration of Great Bulgaria following Khan Kubrat's death in 665, a large group of Bulgars followed Asparukh, the third son of the great Khan, who headed westwards. In the 670's they settled in the area known as the Ongal to the north of the Danube delta. From there, Asparukh's cavalry in alliance with local Slavs annually attacked the Byzantine territories in the south. In 680, the Byzantine Emperor Constantine IV led a large army to fight the Bulgars but was defeated in the battle of Ongal and the Byzantines were forced to acknowledge the formation of a new country, the First Bulgarian Empire. The northern border of the country followed the southern slopes of the Carpathian mountains from the Iron Gates and reached the Dneper river or possibly just the Dniester river to the east.\nThe Bulgarians' main rivals in the area were the Avars to the west and the Khazars to the east. The Khazars were a serious threat; they marched westwards after they crushed the resistance of Kubrat's eldest son Bayan and waged a war against Asparukh, who was killed, although not necessarily by a Khazar. To protect their northern borders, the Bulgarians built several enormous ditches that ran the whole length of the border from the Timok river to the Black Sea.\nIn 803, Krum of Bulgaria became Khan. The new, energetic ruler focused on the north-west where Bulgaria's old enemies the Avars experienced difficulties and setbacks against the Franks under Charlemagne. Between 804 and 806, the Bulgarian armies annihilated the Avars and destroyed their state. Krum took the eastern parts of the former Avar Khaganate and took over rule of the local Slavic tribes. Bulgaria's territory extended twice from the middle Danube to the north of present-day Budapest to the Dnester, though its possession of Transylvania is debatable. In 813 Khan Krum seized Odrin and plundered the whole of Eastern Thrace. He took 50,000 captives who were settled in \"Bulgaria across the Danube\".\nHigh Middle Ages.\nDuring the Middle Ages the Bulgarian Empire controlled vast areas to the north of the river Danube (with interruptions) from its establishment in 681 to its fragmentation in 1371\u20131422. These lands were called by contemporary Byzantine historians Bulgaria across the Danube, or Transdanubian Bulgaria. Original information for the centuries-old Bulgarian rule there is scarce as the archives of the Bulgarian rulers were destroyed and little is mentioned for this area in Byzantine or Hungarian manuscripts. During the First Bulgarian Empire, the Dridu culture developed in the beginning of the 8th\u00a0century and flourished until the 11th century. It represents an early medieval archaeological culture which emerged in the region of the Lower Danube. In Bulgaria it is usually referred to as Pliska-Preslav culture.\nThe Pechenegs, the Cumans and Uzes are also mentioned by historic chronicles on the territory of Romania until the founding of the Romanian principalities of Wallachia in the south by Basarab I around 1310 in the High Middle Ages, and Moldavia in the east, by Drago\u0219 around 1352.\nThe Pechenegs, a semi-nomadic Turkic people of the Central Asian steppes, occupied the steppes north of the Black Sea from the 8th to the 11th centuries, and by the 10th century they were in control of all of the territory between the Don and the lower Danube rivers. During the 11th and 12th centuries, the nomadic confederacy of the Cumans and Eastern Kipchaks dominated the territories between present-day Kazakhstan, southern Russia, Ukraine, southern Moldavia and western Wallachia.\nIt is debated whether elements of the mixed Daco\u2013Roman population survived in Transylvania through the Dark Ages to become the ancestors of modern Romanians or whether the first Vlachs and Romanians appeared in the area in the 13th century after a northward migration from the Balkan Peninsula. There is also debate over the ethnicity of Transylvania's population before the Hungarian conquest.\nSeveral Kings of Hungary invited settlers from Central and Western Europe, such as the Saxons, to occupy Transylvania. The Sz\u00e9kelys were brought to southeastern Transylvania as border guards. Romanians are mentioned by the Hungarian documents of a township called \"Olahteluk\" in 1283 in Bihar County. The \"land of Romanians\" (\"Terram Blacorum, Blacs are not equal to romanians.\") appeared in F\u0103g\u0103ra\u0219 and this area was mentioned under the name \"Olachi\" in 1285.\nKing Louis I of Hungary dispatched Andrew Lackfi, Count of the Sz\u00e9kelys to invade the lands of the Golden Horde in retaliation for the Tatars's earlier plundering raids against Transylvania. Lackfi and his army of mainly Sz\u00e9kely warriors inflicted a defeat on a large Tatar army on 2 February 1345. The campaign had finally expelled the Tatars and ended the devastations of the Mongols in Transylvania. The Golden Horde was pushed back behind the Dniester River, thereafter the Golden Horde's control of the lands between the Eastern Carpathians and the Black Sea weakened. Moldavia was founded in 1346.\nIndependent Wallachia had been near the border of the Ottoman Empire since the 14th century until it had gradually succumbed to the Ottomans' influence during the next centuries with brief periods of independence. Vlad III the Impaler was a Prince of Wallachia in 1448, 1456\u201362, and 1476. Vlad III is remembered for his raids against the Ottoman Empire and his initial success of keeping his small country free for a short time. In the Western world, Vlad is best known for being the inspiration for the main character in Bram Stoker's 1897 novel \"Dracula\". The Romanian historiography evaluates him as a ferocious but just ruler, and the defender of the Wallachian independence and of the European Christianity against Ottoman expansionism.\nStephen the Great () is thought to be the best voivode of Moldavia. Stephen ruled for 47 years, an unusually long period for that time. He was a successful military leader and statesman, losing only two out of fifty battles; he built a shrine to commemorate each victory, founding 48 churches and monasteries, many of which have a unique architectural style and are listed in UNESCO's list of World Heritage Sites. Stefan's most prestigious victory was over the Ottoman Empire in 1475 at the Battle of Vaslui, for which he raised the Vorone\u021b Monastery. For this victory, Pope Sixtus IV nominated him as \"verus christianae fidei athleta\" (a true Champion of the Christian Faith). After Stephen's death, Moldavia also came under the suzerainty of the Ottoman Empire during the 16th century.\nAlthough the core religious vocabulary of the Romanian language originated from Latin, many terms were adopted from the Slavic Orthodoxy, showing a significant influence dating from the Bulgarian Empire (681\u20131396).\nEarly modern period.\nOttoman Romania.\nAfter the Battle of Moh\u00e1cs in 1526, Transylvania belonged to the Eastern Hungarian Kingdom, from which the Principality of Transylvania emerged in 1570 by the Treaty of Speyer.\nBy 1541, the entire Balkan peninsula and the southern and central parts of Hungary became Ottoman provinces. Moldavia, Wallachia, and Transylvania came under Ottoman suzerainty but remained fully autonomous and until the 18th century, had some internal independence. However, regions of Banat, Dobrogea and Cri\u0219ana alongside cities of Giurgiu, Turnu and Braila were completely under Ottoman control. Unlike the autonomous Moldavia, Wallachia and Transylvania, many Muslims settled in those areas. During this period, the Romanian lands experienced a slow disappearance of the feudalism and the distinguishing of some rulers like Vasile Lupu and Dimitrie Cantemir in Moldavia, Matei Basarab and Constantin Br\u00e2ncoveanu in Wallachia. At that time, the Russian Empire appeared to become the political and military power the threatened the Romanian principalities.\nJohn II, the non-Habsburg King of Hungary, moved his royal court to Alba Iulia in Transylvania and after his abdication from the Hungarian throne, he became the first Prince of Transylvania. His 1568 Edict of Turda was the first decree of religious freedom in the modern European history. In the aftermath, Transylvania was ruled by mostly Calvinist Hungarian princes until the end of the 17th century, and Protestantism flourished in the region.\nMichael the Brave was the Prince of Wallachia from 1593 to 1601, of Transylvania from 1599 to 1600, and of Moldavia in 1600. For a short time during his reign, Transylvania was ruled together with Moldavia and Wallachia in a personal union. After his death the union dissolved and as vassal tributary states, Moldavia and Wallachia still had internal autonomy and some external independence, which was finally lost in the 18th century.\nThe Principality of Transylvania reached its golden age under the absolutist rule of G\u00e1bor Bethlen from 1613 to 1629. In 1690, the Habsburg monarchy gained possession of Transylvania through the Hungarian crown. After the failure R\u00e1k\u00f3czi's War of Independence in 1711 Habsburg control of Transylvania was consolidated, and Hungarian Transylvanian princes were replaced with Habsburg imperial governors. In 1699, Transylvania became a part of the Habsburg monarchy following the Austrian victory over the Turks. The Habsburgs rapidly expanded their empire; in 1718 Oltenia, a major part of Wallachia, was annexed to the Habsburg monarchy and was only returned in 1739. In 1775, the Habsburgs later occupied the north-western part of Moldavia, which was later called Bukovina and was incorporated to the Austrian Empire in 1804. The eastern half of the principality, which was called Bessarabia, was occupied in 1812 by Russia.\nDuring the Austro-Hungarian rule of Transylvania, Romanians formed the majority of the population.\nAfter their defeat to the Russians, the Ottoman Empire restored the Danube ports of Turnu, Giurgiu and Braila to Wallachia, and agreed to give up their commercial monopoly and recognize freedom of navigation on the Danube as specified in the Treaty of Adrianople, which was signed in 1829. The political autonomy of the Romanian principalities grew as their rulers were elected for life by a Community Assembly consisting of boyars, a method used to reduce political instability and Ottoman interventions. Following the war, Romanian lands came under Russian occupation under the governance of General Pavel Kiselyov until 1844. During his rule, the local boyars enacted the first Romanian constitution.\nRevolutions of 1848 and formation of modern Romania.\nIn 1848, there was a revolution in Moldavia, Wallachia and Transylvania perpetrated by Tudor Vladimirescu and his Pandurs in the Wallachian uprising of 1821. The goals of the revolutionaries were full independence for Moldavia and Wallachia, and national emancipation in Transylvania; these were not fulfilled but were the basis of the subsequent revolutions. The revolution in 1848 already carried the seeds of the national dream of a unified and united Romania, though the \"idea of unification\" had been known from earlier works of Naum Ramniceanu (1802) and Ion Budai-Deleanu (1804).\nUnited Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia.\nAfter the unsuccessful 1848 revolution, the Great Powers rejected the Romanians' desire to officially unite in a single state, forcing the Romanians to proceed alone in their struggle against the Turks.\nThe aftermath of the Russian Empire's defeat in the Crimean War brought the 1856 Treaty of Paris, which started a period of common tutelage for the Ottomans and a Congress of Great Powers\u2014the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, the Second French Empire, the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia, the Austrian Empire, Prussia, and, though never again fully, Russia. While the Moldavia-Wallachia unionist campaign, which had come to dominate political demands, was accepted with sympathy by the French, Russians, Prussians, and Sardinians, it was rejected by the Austrian Empire, and looked upon with suspicion by Great Britain and the Ottomans.\nNegotiations amounted to an agreement on a minimal formal union, to be known as the United Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia but with separate institutions and thrones and with each principality electing its own prince. However, the Moldavian and Wallachian elections for the ad-hoc divans in 1859 profited from an ambiguity in the text of the final agreement, which, while specifying two separate thrones, did not prevent the same person from occupying both thrones simultaneously and ultimately ushered in the ruling of Alexandru Ioan Cuza as \"Domnitor\" (Ruling Prince) over both Moldavia and Wallachia from 1859 onwards, uniting both principalities.\nAlexander Ioan Cuza carried out reforms including abolishing serfdom and started to unite the institutions one by one in spite of the convention from Paris. With help from unionists, he unified the government and parliament, effectively merging Wallachia and Moldavia into one country and in 1862 the country's name was changed to United Principalities of Romania.\nRomania was created as a personal union that did not include Transylvania, where the upper class and the aristocracy remained mainly Hungarian, although Romanian nationalism clashed with Hungarian nationalism at the end of the 19th century. Austria-Hungary, especially under the Dual Monarchy of 1867, kept the territory firmly in control even in parts of Transylvania where Romanians constituted a vast majority.\nIndependence and Kingdom of Romania.\nIn an 1866 \"coup d'\u00e9tat\", Cuza was exiled and replaced with Prince Karl of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen. He was appointed Domnitor, Ruling Prince of the United Principality of Romania, as Prince Carol of Romania. Romania declared its independence from the Ottoman Empire after the Russo-Turkish War (1877\u20131878), in which the Ottomans fought against the Russian empire.\nIn the 1878 Treaty of Berlin, Romania was officially recognized as an independent state by the Great Powers. In return, Romania ceded the district Bessarabia to Russia in exchange for access to the Black Sea ports and acquired Dobruja. In 1881, Romania's principality status was raised to that of a kingdom and on 26 March that year, Prince Carol became King Carol I of Romania.\nThe period between 1878 and 1914 was one of stability and progress for Romania. During the Second Balkan War, Romania joined Greece, Serbia and Montenegro against Bulgaria. In the Treaty of Bucharest of 1913, Romania gained Southern Dobruja and established the Durostor and Caliacra counties.\nThe governments of Britain and the United States repeatedly protested the brutal treatment of Romanian Jews, who were regarded as aliens who had no civil or political rights. Romania engaged in arbitrary expulsions of Jews as vagabonds and tolerated violent pogroms against Jews, many of whom fled to the United States.\nWorld War I.\nDue to Romania's unfavorable location between the Russian Empire and Kingdom of Bulgaria as well as King Carol I of Romania's German heritage, Romania had a secret treaty of alliance with Germany and Austria-Hungary since 1883. When the war began in 1914, King Carol I summoned an emergency midnight council where he revealed the secret treaty of alliance. While the king favored Germany, the nation's political elite favored the Entente. As such, the crown council took the decision to remain neutral. When the Austro-Hungarian Empire invoked a casus foederis on Romania and Italy linked to the secret treaty of alliance since 1883, both Italy and Romania refused to honor the treaty on the grounds that the attacks on Austria were not \"unprovoked\", as stipulated in the treaty of alliance.\nKing Carol I died on 10 October 1914, and his successor, King Ferdinand I of Romania was much more favorable towards the Entente. In August 1916, Romania received an ultimatum to decide whether to join the Entente. The Romanian government agreed to enter the war on the side of the Entente, although the situation on the battle fronts was not favorable. For Romania, the highest priority was taking Transylvania from Hungary, with around 2,800,000 Romanians out of around 5,000,000 people. The Allies wanted Romania to join their side in order to cut rail communications between Germany and Turkey, and to cut off Germany's oil supplies. Britain made loans, France sent a military training mission, and Russia promised modern munitions. The Allies promised at least 200,000 soldiers to defend Romania against Bulgaria to the south, and help it invade Austria-Hungary.\nOn 4 August 1916, Romania and the Entente signed the Political Treaty and Military Convention, which established the parameters of Romania's participation in the war. The Allies promised to Romania the Austro-Hungarian regions of Bukovina, Transylvania up to Tisza river and all of Banat. Joining the Entente had large popular support. The Romanian campaign plan (Hypothesis Z) consisted in attacking Austria-Hungary in Transylvania, while defending Southern Dobruja and Giurgiu from Bulgaria in the south.\nThe German high command was seriously worried about the prospect of Romania entering the war, Paul von Hindenburg writing:\nIt is certain that so relatively small a state as Rumania had never before been given a role so important, and, indeed, so decisive for the history of the world at so favorable a moment. Never before had two great Powers like Germany and Austria found themselves so much at the mercy of the military resources of a country which had scarcely one twentieth of the population of the two great states. Judging by the military situation, it was to be expected that Rumania had only to advance where she wished to decide the world war in favor of those Powers which had been hurling themselves at us in vain for years. Thus everything seemed to depend on whether Rumania was ready to make any sort of use of her momentary advantage.\nOn 27 August 1916, the Romanian Army launched an attack against Austria-Hungary, with limited Russian support. The Romanian offensive was initially successful and Romania managed to occupy 1/3rd of Transylvania, but when the German army arrived in Transylvania the Romanians began to be pushed back. Meanwhile on the southern front, a combined German-Bulgarian-Turkish offensive gradually occupied all of Dobruja and captured Giurgiu. The bulk of the Romanian army managed to escape encirclement from Giurgiu and retreated to Bucharest. As a result of the Battle of Bucharest, the Central Powers occupied the city on 6 December 1916.\nIn the summer of 1917, one of the largest concentrations of forces in World War I was present in Romania: 9 armies, 80 infantry divisions and 19 cavalry divisions, totaling 974 battalions, 550 squadrons and 923 artillery batteries. 800,000 combatants and 1,000,000 reservists were present.\nIn 1917, a new Central Powers offensive began, leading to the battles of M\u0103r\u0103\u0219ti, M\u0103r\u0103\u0219e\u0219ti, and Oituz, where the Romanian army managed to defeat the Central Powers offensives and take back some territory in a counter-offensive. Romania lost over 27,000 men while Germany and Austria-Hungary lost over 60,000. Notably, the Romanian heroine Ecaterina Teodoroiu and German General Karl von Wenninger were killed at the end of the Battle of M\u0103r\u0103\u0219e\u0219ti. However, shortly after the military victories, the October Revolution threw the Russian Empire out of the war leaving Romania alone on the Eastern Front, completely surrounded by the Central Powers. This forced Romania to drop out of the war, and it signed the Treaty of Bucharest with the Central Powers in May 1918.\nIn 1939, General August von Mackensen would describe the Central Powers offensive from 1917 as following:\nAfter fighting with the Rumanians in 1916, I thought the Rumanian army had disappeared, that it did not exist in 1917 when I had to make a new effort to conquer the rest of Rumania. But when the battles started in M\u0103r\u0103\u0219e\u0219ti, M\u0103r\u0103\u0219ti, Oituz, I was told that in front of me was the Rumanian army that I was convinced had disappeared. But the Rumanian army has risen from its ashes like the Phoenix bird. The attacks on the bayonet scared everyone, and they were running, the Germans, who didn't usually run, this time they were running.\nUnder the terms of the Treaty of Bucharest, Romania would lose all of Dobruja to Bulgaria and a joint central power occupation, all the Carpathian mountain passes to Austria-Hungary, and would lease all of its oil reserves to Germany for 99 years. However, the Central Powers recognized Romania's union with Bessarabia who had recently declared independence from the Russian Empire following the October Revolution and voted for union with Romania in April 1918. The parliament signed the treaty, however King Ferdinand refused to sign it, hoping for an Allied victory on the western front. In October 1918, Romania renounced the treaty and on 10 November 1918, one day before the German armistice, Romania reentered the war after the successful Allied advances on the Macedonian front and advanced in Transylvania. The next day, the Treaty of Bucharest was nullified by the terms of the Armistice of Compi\u00e8gne. Total Romanian deaths from 1914 to 1918, military and civilian, within contemporary borders, were estimated at 748,000.\nTransylvanian, Bukovinian and Bessarabian Romanians.\nIn Austria-Hungary, ethnic Romanians entered the war from the very beginning, with hundreds of thousands of Transylvanian and Bukovinian Romanians being mobilized throughout the war. Although most Transylvanian Romanians were loyal to the Austro-Hungarian Empire, over time, reactionary sentiments emerged, especially after Romania joined the war in 1916. Many of the previously loyal soldiers decided that it was much better to risk their lives through desertion, rather than shoot their ethnic conationals. According to studies made by the army of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the dedication of the Romanian military to the interest of Austria-Hungary was reduced, only ethnic Italians of the same empire can compete with them for the last place in a ranking according to devotion to the state per 100 soldiers, out of about 300,000 Austro-Hungarian deserters, 150,000 were ethnic Romanians.\nThe Austro-Hungarian Romanian prisoners of war in the Russian Empire would eventually form the Romanian Volunteer Corps in Russia who would eventually be repatriated to Romania in 1917 and take part in the battles of M\u0103r\u0103\u0219ti, M\u0103r\u0103\u0219e\u0219ti and Oituz and the Romanian Legion in Siberia who resisted the Bolsheviks in cooperation with the Czechoslovak Legion and the White movement during the Russian Civil War, these units were ultimately repatriated to Greater Romania in 1920. While the Austro-Hungarian Romanian prisoners of war in Italy would form the Romanian Volunteer Legion from Italy, which joined the fighting during the last battles on the Italian front and later, after the end of the war, participated in the Hungarian-Romanian War. Out of a total of 60,000 prisoners of war of Romanian origin, 37,000 Romanians requested to join the Romanian Legion in Italy. The ranks of the Austro-Hungarian soldiers enlisted in the Romanian Legion were equivalated to those corresponding of the Italian Royal Army. The sedentary part of the Romanian Legion, under the command of Colonel Camillo Ferraioli, was established at Albano Laziale, and the base camp in the Avezzano camp.\nIt is estimated that in the period 1914\u20131918 between 400,000 and 600,000 soldiers of Romanian origin fought on different fronts of Austria-Hungary, which represented a significant percentage of the Romanian ethnics who lived in those times in the Empire. In total, up to 150,000 Romanians were killed in action while fighting as part of the Austro-Hungarian Army.\nGreater Romania (1918\u20131940).\nBefore World War I, the union of Michael the Brave, who ruled over the three principalities with Romanian population for 5 years (Wallachia, Transylvania and Moldavia), was viewed in later periods as the precursor of a modern Romania, a thesis which was argued with noted intensity by Nicolae B\u0103lcescu. This theory became a point of reference for nationalists, as well as a catalyst for various Romanian forces to achieve a single Romanian state. World War I played a crucial part in the development of Romanian national consciousness.\nIn 1918, the union of Romania with Bukovina was ratified in 1919 in the Treaty of Saint Germain, and some of the Allies recognized the union with Bessarabia in 1920 through the never ratified Treaty of Paris. On 1 December, the Deputies of the Romanians from Transylvania voted to unite Transylvania, Banat, Cri\u0219ana and Maramure\u0219 with Romania by the \"Proclamation of Union\" of Alba Iulia. Romanians today celebrate this as the Great Union Day, that is a national holiday.\nThe Romanian expression \"Rom\u00e2nia Mare\" (Great or Greater Romania) refers to the Romanian state in the interwar period and to the territory Romania covered at the time. At that time, Romania achieved its greatest territorial extent, almost ), including all of the historic Romanian lands.\nMost of the claimed territories were granted to the Old Kingdom of Romania, which was ratified in 1920 by the Treaty of Trianon that defined the new border between Hungary and Romania. The union of Bucovina and Bessarabia with Romania was ratified in 1920 by the Treaty of Versailles. Romania also acquired Southern Dobruja territory called \"The Quadrilateral\" from Bulgaria as a result of its participation in the Second Balkan War in 1913.\nAs a result of the peace treaties, most regions with clear Romanian majorities were merged into a single state. It also led to the inclusion of sizable minorities. National minorities were recognized by the 1923 Constitution of Romania; they were represented in Parliament and several of them created political parties, although a unique standing of minorities with autonomy on a wide basis, provided for at the Great National Assembly of Alba Iulia on 1 December 1918, was not fulfilled. According to the 1930 Romanian Census, Romania had a population of 18,057,028. Romanians made up 71.9% of the population and 28.1% of the population were ethnic minorities. This occasionally led to violent conflict, as exemplified by the Hungarian\u2013Romanian War and the Tatarbunary Uprising. To contain Hungarian irredentism, Romania, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia established the Little Entente in 1921. That same year Romania and Poland concluded a defensive alliance against the emergent Soviet Union, and in 1934 the Balkan Entente was formed with Yugoslavia, Greece and Turkey, which were suspicious of Bulgaria.\nUntil 1938, Romania's governments maintained the form, if not always the substance, of a liberal constitutional monarchy. The National Liberal Party, dominant in the years immediately after World War I, became increasingly clientelist and nationalist, and in 1927 was supplanted in power by the National Peasants' Party. Between 1930 and 1940 there were over 25 separate governments; on several occasions in the last few years before World War II, the rivalry between the fascist Iron Guard and other political groupings approached the level of a civil war.\nUpon the death of King Ferdinand in 1927, his son, Prince Carol, was prevented from succeeding him because of previous marital scandals that had resulted in his renunciation of rights to the throne. After living three years in exile, with his brother Nicolae serving as regent and his young son Michael as king, Carol changed his mind and with the support of the ruling National Peasants' Party he returned and proclaimed himself king.\nIuliu Maniu, leader of the National Peasants' Party, engineered Carol's return on the basis of a promise that he would forsake his mistress Magda Lupescu, and Lupescu herself had agreed to the arrangement. However, it became clear upon Carol's first re-encounter with his former wife, Elena, that he had no interest in a reconciliation with her, and Carol soon arranged for Magda Lupescu's return to his side. Her unpopularity was to be a millstone around Carol's neck for the rest of his reign. Maniu and his National Peasant Party shared the same general political aims of the Iron Guard: both fought against the corruption and dictatorial policies of King Carol II and the National Liberal Party.\nThe worldwide Great Depression that started in 1929 and was also present in Romania destabilized the country. The early 1930s were marked by social unrest, high unemployment, and strikes. In several instances, the Romanian government violently repressed strikes and riots, notably the 1929 miners' strike in Valea Jiului and the strike in the Grivi\u021ba railroad workshops. In the mid-1930s, the Romanian economy recovered and the industry grew significantly, although about 80% of Romanians were still employed in agriculture. French economic and political influence was predominant in the early 1920s but then Germany became more dominant, especially in the 1930s.\nAs the 1930s progressed, Romania's already shaky democracy slowly deteriorated toward fascist dictatorship. The constitution of 1923 gave the king free rein to dissolve parliament and call elections at will; as a result, Romania was to experience over 25 governments in a single decade.\nIncreasingly, these governments were dominated by a number of antisemitic, ultra-nationalist, and mostly at least quasi-fascist parties. The National Liberal Party steadily became more nationalistic than liberal, but nonetheless lost its dominance over Romanian politics. It was eclipsed by parties like the (relatively moderate) National Peasants' Party and its more radical Romanian Front offshoot, the National-Christian Defense League (LANC) and the Iron Guard. In 1935, LANC merged with the National Agrarian Party to form the National Christian Party (NCP). The quasi-mystical fascist Iron Guard was an earlier LANC offshoot that, even more than these other parties, exploited nationalist feelings, fear of communism, and resentment of alleged foreign and Jewish domination of the economy.\nAlready, the Iron Guard had embraced the politics of assassinations, and various governments had reacted more or less in kind. On 10 December 1933, Liberal prime minister Ion Duca \"dissolved\" the Iron Guard, arresting thousands; consequently, 19 days later he was assassinated by Iron Guard legionnaires.\nIn December 1937, the king appointed LANC leader, the poet Octavian Goga as prime minister of Romania's first Fascist government. Around this time, Carol met with Adolf Hitler, who expressed his wish to see a Romanian government headed by the pro-Nazi Iron Guard. Instead, on 10 February 1938 King Carol II used the occasion of a public insult by Goga toward Lupescu as a reason to dismiss the government and institute a short-lived royal dictatorship, sanctioned seventeen days later by a new constitution under which the king named personally not only the prime minister but all the ministers. The new regime featured corporatist policies that often resembled those of Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany. In parallel with these internal developments, economic pressures and a weak Franco-British response to Hitler's aggressive foreign policy caused Romania to start drifting away from the Western Allies and closer to the Axis.\nIn April 1938, King Carol had Iron Guard leader Corneliu Zelea Codreanu (aka \"The Captain\") arrested and imprisoned. On the night of 29\u201330 November 1938, Codreanu and several other legionnaires were killed while purportedly attempting to escape from prison.\nThe royal dictatorship was brief. On 7 March 1939, a new government was formed with Armand C\u0103linescu as prime minister; on 21 September 1939, three weeks after the start of World War II, C\u0103linescu, in turn, was also assassinated by legionnaires avenging Codreanu's murder.\nOn 13 April 1939, France and the United Kingdom had pledged to guarantee the independence of the Kingdom of Romania. Negotiations with the Soviet Union concerning a similar guarantee collapsed when Romania refused to allow the Red Army to cross its frontiers. In August 1939, Germany and the Soviet Union signed the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, which stipulated, among other things, the Soviet \"interest\" in Bessarabia. After the 1940 territorial losses and growing increasingly unpopular, Carol was compelled to abdicate and name general Ion Antonescu as the new Prime-Minister with full powers in ruling the state by royal decree.\nWorld War II and aftermath (1940\u20131947).\nEight days later Nazi Germany invaded the Second Polish Republic. Expecting military aid from Britain and France, Poland chose not to activate the Polish-Romanian Alliance in order to be able to use the Romanian Bridgehead strategy. A neutral Romania would be used to resupply the Polish troops and could be used as an escape corridor in case of defeat. Following the fall of Poland, the Polish government, the treasury of the National Bank of Poland and about 120,000 Polish troops withdrew through Romania, the majority of those troops joined the newly formed Polish Armed Forces in the West in France and the United Kingdom during 1939 and 1940.\nRomania officially remained neutral and, under pressure from the Soviet Union and Germany, interned the fleeing Polish government after its members had crossed the Polish\u2013Romanian border on 17 September, forcing them to relegate their authority to what became the Polish government-in-exile. After the assassination of Prime Minister Armand C\u0103linescu on 21 September King Carol II tried to maintain neutrality for several months longer, but the surrender of the Third French Republic and the retreat of British forces from continental Europe rendered the assurances that both countries had made to Romania meaningless.\nIn 1940 Romania's territorial gains made following World War I were largely undone. In July, after a Soviet ultimatum, Romania agreed to give up Bessarabia and northern Bukovina (the Soviets also annexed the city of Hertsa, which was not stated in the ultimatum). Two-thirds of Bessarabia were combined with a small part of the Soviet Union to form the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic. The rest (northern Bukovina, the northern half of Hotin county and Budjak) was apportioned to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.\nShortly thereafter, on 30 August, under the Second Vienna Award, Germany and Italy mediated a compromise between Romania and the Kingdom of Hungary: Hungary received a region referred to as 'Northern Transylvania', while 'Southern Transylvania' remained part of Romania. Hungary had lost Transylvania after World War I in the Treaty of Trianon. On 7 September, under the Treaty of Craiova, Southern Dobruja (which Bulgaria had lost after the Romanian invasion during the Second Balkan War in 1913), was ceded to Bulgaria under pressure from Germany. Despite the relatively recent acquisition of these territories, they were inhabited by a majority of Romanian speaking people (except Southern Dobruja), so the Romanians had seen them as historically belonging to Romania, and the fact that so much land was lost without a fight shattered the underpinnings of King Carol's power.\nOn 4 July, Ion Gigurtu formed the first Romanian government to include an Iron Guardist minister, Horia Sima. Sima was a particularly virulent antisemite who had become the nominal leader of the movement after the death of Corneliu Codreanu. He was one of the few prominent far-right leaders to survive the bloody infighting and government suppression of the preceding years.\nIn the immediate wake of the loss of Northern Transylvania, on 4 September the Iron Guard (led by Horia Sima) and General (later Marshal) Ion Antonescu united to form the \"National Legionary State\", which forced the abdication of Carol II in favor of his 19-year-old son Michael. Carol and his mistress Magda Lupescu went into exile, and Romania, despite the unfavorable outcome of recent territorial disputes, leaned strongly toward the Axis. As part of the deal, the Iron Guard became the sole legal party in Romania. Antonescu became the Iron Guard's honorary leader, while Sima became deputy premier.\nIn power, the Iron Guard stiffened the already harsh antisemitic legislation, enacted legislation directed against minority businessmen and wreaked vengeance upon its enemies. On 8 October German troops began crossing into Romania. On 23 November Romania joined the Axis powers. On 27 November, 64 former dignitaries or officials were executed by the Iron Guard in Jilava prison while awaiting trial (see \"Jilava Massacre\"). Later that day, historian and former prime minister Nicolae Iorga and economist Virgil Madgearu, a former government minister, were assassinated.\nThe cohabitation between the Iron Guard and Antonescu was never an easy one. On 20 January 1941, the Iron Guard attempted a coup, combined with a pogrom against the Jews of Bucharest. Within four days, Antonescu had successfully suppressed the coup. The Iron Guard was forced out of the government. Sima and many other legionnaires took refuge in Germany; others were imprisoned. Antonescu abolished the National Legionary State, in its stead declaring Romania a \"National and Social State.\"\nOn 22 June 1941, German armies with Romanian support attacked the Soviet Union. German and Romanian units conquered Bessarabia, Odessa, and Sevastopol, then marched eastward across the Russian steppes toward Stalingrad. Romania welcomed the war because they were allies with Germany. Hitler rewarded Romania's loyalty by returning Bessarabia and northern Bukovina and by allowing Romania to administer Soviet lands immediately between the Dniester and the Bug, including Odessa and Nikolaev. Romanian jingoes in Odessa even distributed a geography showing that the Dacians had inhabited most of southern Russia. After recovering Bessarabia and Bukovina (Operation M\u00fcnchen), Romanian units fought side by side with the Germans onward to Odessa, Sevastopol, Stalingrad and the Caucasus. The total number of troops involved on the Eastern Front with the Romanian Third Army and the Romanian Fourth Army was second only to that of Nazi Germany itself. The Romanian Army had a total of 686,258 men under arms in the summer of 1941 and a total of 1,224,691 men in the summer of 1944. The number of Romanian troops sent to fight in the Soviet Union exceeded that of all of Germany's other allies combined. A \"Country Study\" by the U.S. Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress attributes this to a \"morbid competition with Hungary to curry Hitler's favor... [in hope of]... regaining northern Transylvania.\"\nBessarabia and the Northern Bukovina were now fully re-incorporated into the Romanian state after they had been occupied by the USSR a year earlier. As a substitute for Northern Transylvania, which had been given to Hungary following the Second Vienna Award, Hitler persuaded Antonescu in August 1941 to also take control of the Transnistria territory between the Dniester and the Southern Bug, which would also include Odessa after its eventual fall in October 1941. Although the Romanian administration set up a civil government, the Transnistria Governorate, the Romanian state had not yet formally incorporated Transnistria into its administrative framework by the time it was retaken by Soviet troops in early 1944.\nRomanian armies advanced far into the Soviet Union during 1941 and 1942 before being involved in the disaster at the Battle of Stalingrad in the winter of 1942\u201343. Petre Dumitrescu, one of Romania's most important generals, was commander of the Third Army at Stalingrad. In November 1942, the German Sixth Army was briefly put at Dumitrescu's disposal during a German attempt to relieve the Third Army following the devastating Soviet Operation Uranus. Prior to the Soviet counteroffensive at Stalingrad, the Antonescu government considered a war with Hungary over Transylvania an inevitability after the expected victory over the Soviet Union.\nKing Michael's Coup.\nOn 23 August 1944, with the Red Army penetrating German defenses during the Jassy\u2013Kishinev Offensive, King Michael I of Romania led a successful coup against the Axis with support from opposition politicians, most of the army and Communist-led civilians. Michael I, who was initially considered to be not much more than a figurehead, was able to successfully depose the Antonescu dictatorship. The King then offered a non-confrontational retreat to German ambassador Manfred von Killinger. But the Germans considered the coup \"reversible\" and attempted to turn the situation around by military force. The Romanian First, Second (forming), and what little was left of the Third and the Fourth Armies (one corps) were under orders from the King to defend Romania against any German attacks. King Michael offered to put the Romanian Army, which at that point had a strength of nearly 1,000,000 men, on the side of the Allies. Stalin immediately recognized the king and the restoration of the conservative Romanian monarchy.\nIn a radio broadcast to the Romanian nation and army on the night of 23 August King Michael issued a cease-fire, proclaimed Romania's loyalty to the Allies, announced the acceptance of an armistice (to be signed on September 12) offered by Great Britain, the United States, and the USSR, and declared war on Germany. The coup accelerated the Red Army's advance into Romania, but did not avert a rapid Soviet occupation and capture of about 130,000 Romanian soldiers, who were transported to the Soviet Union, where many perished in prison camps. The armistice was signed three weeks later on 12 September 1944, on terms virtually dictated by the Soviet Union. Under the terms of the armistice, Romania announced its unconditional surrender to the USSR and was placed under occupation of the Allied forces with the Soviet Union as their representative, in control of media, communication, post, and civil administration behind the front. Some attribute the postponement of a formal Allied recognition of the \"de facto\" change of orientation until 12 September (the date the armistice was signed in Moscow) to the complexities of the negotiations between the USSR and UK.\nDuring the Moscow Conference in October 1944 Winston Churchill, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, proposed an agreement to Soviet leader Joseph Stalin on how to split up Eastern Europe into spheres of influence after the war. The Soviet Union was offered a 90% share of influence in Romania.\nThe Armistice Agreement of 12 September stipulated in Article 18 that \"An Allied Control Commission will be established which will undertake until the conclusion of peace the regulation of and control over the execution of the present terms under the general direction and orders of the Allied (Soviet) High Command, acting on behalf of the Allied Powers\". The Annex to Article 18 made clear that \"The Romanian Government and their organs shall fulfil all instructions of the Allied Control Commission arising out of the Armistice Agreement.\" The Agreement also stipulated that the Allied Control Commission would have its seat in Bucharest. In line with Article 14 of the Armistice Agreement, two Romanian People's Tribunals were set up to try suspected war criminals.\nAs the country declared war on Germany on the night of 23 August 1944, border clashes between Hungarian and Romanian troops erupted almost immediately. On 24 August, German troops attempted to seize Bucharest and suppress Michael's coup, but were repelled by the city's defenses, which received some support from the United States Air Force. Other Wehrmacht units in the country suffered severe losses: remnants of the Sixth Army retreating west of the Prut River were cut off and destroyed by the Red Army, which was now advancing at an even greater speed, while Romanian units attacked German garrisons at the Ploie\u0219ti oilfields, forcing them to retreat to Hungary. The Romanian Army captured over 50,000 German prisoners around this time, who were later surrendered to the Soviets.\nIn early September, Soviet and Romanian forces entered Transylvania and captured the towns of Bra\u0219ov and Sibiu while advancing toward the Mure\u0219 River. Their main objective was Cluj (Cluj-Napoca), a city regarded as the historical capital of Transylvania. However, the Second Hungarian Army was present in the region, and together with the Eighth German Army engaged the Allied forces on 5 September in what was to become the Battle of Turda, which lasted until 8 October and resulted in heavy casualties for both sides. Also around this time, the Hungarian Army carried out its last independent offensive action of the war, penetrating Arad County in western Romania. Despite initial success, a number of ad hoc Romanian cadet battalions managed to stop the Hungarian advance at the Battle of P\u0103uli\u0219, and soon a combined Romanian-Soviet counterattack overwhelmed the Hungarians, who gave ground and evacuated Arad itself on 21 September.\nThe Romanian Army ended the war fighting against the Wehrmacht alongside the Red Army in Transylvania, Hungary, Yugoslavia, Austria and the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, from August 1944 until the end of the war in Europe. In May 1945, the First and Fourth armies took part in the Prague Offensive. The Romanian Army incurred heavy casualties fighting Nazi Germany. Of some 538,000 Romanian soldiers who fought against the Axis in 1944\u201345, some 167,000 were killed, wounded or went missing.\nUnder the 1947 Treaty of Paris, the Allies did not acknowledge Romania as a co-belligerent nation but instead applied the term \"ally of Hitlerite Germany\" to all recipients of the treaty's stipulations. Like Finland, Romania had to pay $300 million to the Soviet Union as war reparations. However, the treaty specifically acknowledged that Romania switched sides on 24 August 1944, and therefore \"acted in the interests of all the United Nations\". As a reward, Northern Transylvania was, once again, recognized as an integral part of Romania, but the border with the USSR and Bulgaria was fixed at its state in January 1941, restoring the pre-Barbarossa status quo (with one exception). Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Eastern territories became part of Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova.\nCommunist period (1947\u20131989).\nIn Romania proper, Soviet occupation following World War II facilitated the rise of the Communist Party as the main political force, leading ultimately to the forced abdication of the King and the establishment of a single-party people's republic in 1947.\nRomania was proclaimed a people's republic and remained under military and economic control of the Soviet Union until the late 1950s. During this period, Romania's resources were drained by the \"SovRom\" agreements; mixed Soviet-Romanian companies were established to mask the Soviet Union's looting of Romania.\nRomania's leader from 1948 to his death in 1965 was Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, the First Secretary of the Romanian Workers' Party. The Communist regime was formalized with the constitution of 13 April 1948. On 11 June 1948, all banks and large businesses were nationalized. This started the process of the Romanian Communist Party to collectivize the Romania's resources including agriculture.\nIn 1946 and 1947, several high-ranking members in the pro-Axis government were executed as war criminals, primarily for their involvement in the Holocaust and for attacking the Soviet Union. Antonescu himself was executed 1 June 1946. Once the Communist government became more entrenched, the number of arrests increased. All strata of society were involved, but particularly targeted were the prewar elites, such as intellectuals, and anybody who could potentially form the nucleus of anti-Communist resistance. According to figures, in the years between 1945 and 1964, 73,334 people were arrested. Between 60,000 and 80,000 political prisoners were detained.\nGheorghiu-Dej attained greater independence for Romania from the Soviet Union by persuading Soviet First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev to withdraw troops from Romania in April 1958. After the negotiated withdrawal of Soviet troops, Romania under the new leadership of Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu started to pursue independent policies, including the condemnation of the Soviet-led 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia\u2014Romania being the only Warsaw Pact country not to take part in the invasion\u2014the continuation of diplomatic relations with Israel after the Six-Day War of 1967 (again, the only Warsaw Pact country to do so), and the establishment of economic (1963) and diplomatic (1967) relations with West Germany. Romania's close ties with Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) allowed to play a key role in the Israel-Egypt and Israel-PLO peace processes by intermediating the visit of Egyptian president Sadat to Israel.\nBetween 1977 and 1981, Romania's foreign debt sharply increased from US$3 to US$10\u00a0billion and the influence of international financial organizations such as the IMF and the World Bank grew, in conflict with Ceau\u0219escu's autarchic policies. Ceau\u0219escu's independent foreign policy meant leaders of Western nations leaders were slow to criticize Romania's government which, by the late 1970s, had become arbitrary, capricious and harsh. The Romanian economy grew quickly through foreign credit but this was replaced with austerity and political repression, which became more draconian through the 1980s.\nCeau\u0219escu eventually initiated a project of full reimbursement of the foreign debt; to achieve this, he imposed austerity policies that impoverished Romanians and exhausted the nation's economy. The project was completed in 1989, shortly before his overthrow. He greatly extended the authority of the \"Securitate\" (secret police) and imposed a cult of personality, leading to a dramatic decrease in Ceau\u0219escu's popularity and culminating in his overthrow and execution in the bloody Romanian Revolution in December 1989.\n1989 Revolution.\nThe Romanian Revolution resulted in more than 1,100 deaths in Timi\u0219oara and Bucharest, and brought the fall of Ceau\u0219escu and the end of the Communist regime in Romania. After a week of unrest in Timi\u0219oara, a mass rally summoned in Bucharest in support of Ceau\u0219escu on 21 December 1989 turned hostile. The Ceau\u0219escu couple fled Bucharest by helicopter but ended up in the custody of the army.\nAfter being tried and convicted by a kangaroo court for genocide and other crimes, they were executed on 25 December 1989.\nIon Iliescu, a former Communist Party official marginalized by Ceau\u0219escu, attained national recognition as the leader of an impromptu governing coalition, the National Salvation Front (FSN) that proclaimed the establishment of democracy and civil liberties on 22 December 1989. The Communist Party was initially outlawed by Iliescu, but he soon revoked that decision; as a consequence, Communism is not outlawed in Romania today. However, Ceau\u0219escu's most controversial measures, such as bans on abortion and contraception, were among the first laws to be changed after the Revolution.\nTransition to free market (1990\u20132004).\nAfter the fall of Ceau\u0219escu, the National Salvation Front (FSN) led by Iliescu introduced partial multi-party democratic and free market measures. A university professor with family roots in the Communist Party, Petre Roman, was named prime minister of the new government, which mostly consisted of former communist officials. The government initiated modest free market reforms. Several major political parties of the pre-war era, the National Christian Democrat Peasant's Party (PN\u021a-CD), the National Liberal Party (PNL), and the Romanian Social Democratic Party (PSDR), were reconstituted.\nFrom April to June 1990, a series of anti-government protests known as the Golaniad took place in Bucharest's University Square, against the FSN consisting of several former Communists and Securitate officials. General elections were held on 20 May 1990, the first free ones since 1937. Benefitting from the FSN's tight media control, Iliescu won the presidency with 85% of the vote, whilst the FSN secured two-thirds of the seats in Parliament. Although most protesters left University Square after the elections, a minority deemed the results illegitimate and demanded the exclusion from political life of the former high-ranking Communist Party members. The peaceful demonstrations degenerated into violence; some of the protesters attacked the police headquarters, national television station, and the Foreign Ministry. After the police failed to bring the demonstrators to order, Iliescu called on the \"men of good will\" to defend the state institutions in Bucharest.\nVarious worker groups from Romania's industrial platforms responded, some of them engaged in altercations with the protesters. The coal miners of the Jiu Valley, thousands of whom arrived in Bucharest on 14 June, were the most visible and politically influential. According to the miners, most of the violence was perpetrated by government agents who were agitating the crowds. Some of the counter-protesters attacked the headquarters and private residences of opposition leaders. Later parliamentary inquiries showed members of the government intelligence services were involved in the instigation and manipulation of both the protesters and the miners, and in June 1994, a Bucharest court found two former Securitate officers guilty of ransacking and stealing $100,000 from the house of a leading opposition politician. Roman's government fell in late September 1991, when the miners returned to Bucharest to demand higher salaries. A technocrat, Theodor Stolojan, was appointed to head an interim government until new elections could be held.\n1991 constitution.\nIn the first referendum in post-Decembrist Romania, a new constitution was adopted in 1991, being revised in 2003. In 2018, 93.4% of the electorate voted in favor of amending the constitution definition of family in order to prohibit same-sex marriage, although the change was not implemented due to an only 21% voter turnout.\nAfter 1991.\nIn March 1992, the FSN split into two groups: the Democratic National Front (FDSN), led by Iliescu and the Democratic Party (PD), led by Roman. Iliescu won the presidential elections in September 1992 and his FDSN won the general elections held at the same time. With parliamentary support from the nationalist Romanian National Unity Party (PUNR), Greater Romania Party (PRM), and the ex-communist Socialist Workers' Party (PSM), a new government was formed in November 1992 under Prime Minister Nicolae V\u0103c\u0103roiu. The FDSN changed its name to Party of Social Democracy in Romania (PDSR) in July 1993.\nThe subsequent disintegration of the National Salvation Front (FSN) produced the Party of Social Democracy in Romania (PDSR) (later Social Democratic Party, PSD), the Democratic Party (PD), and the ApR (Alliance for Romania). The PDSR party governed Romania from 1990 until 1996 through several coalitions and governments with Iliescu as head of state.\nEmil Constantinescu of the Democratic Convention (CDR) won the second round of the 1996 presidential election and replaced Iliescu as head of state. The PDSR won the largest number of seats but failed to form a viable coalition. Constituent parties of the CDR joined the Democratic Party (PD) and the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR/RMDSZ) to form a centrist coalition government, holding 60% of the seats. This coalition implemented several critical reforms. The new coalition government, under prime minister Victor Ciorbea remained in office until March 1998, when Radu Vasile (PN\u021a-CD) took over as prime minister. The former governor of the National Bank, Mugur Is\u0103rescu, eventually replaced Radu Vasile as head of the government.\nThe 2000 election brought Iliescu's PDSR, known as Social Democratic Party (PSD) after the merger with the PSDR, back to power. Iliescu won a third term as the country's president. Adrian N\u0103stase became the prime minister of the newly formed government.\nIn 2004, Traian B\u0103sescu was elected president with an electoral coalition called Justice and Truth Alliance (DA). The government was formed by a larger coalition which also included the Conservative Party (PC) and the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR).\nNATO and the European Union membership (2004\u2013present).\nPost\u2013Cold War Romania developed closer ties with Western Europe, eventually joining NATO in 2004 and the EU in 2007.\nGeneral elections took place on in 2004, with the joint PNL-PD candidate Traian B\u0103sescu winning the second round with 51% of the vote.\nThen-PNL leader, C\u0103lin Popescu-T\u0103riceanu was assigned the task of building a coalition government without the PSD. In December 2004, the new coalition government (PD, PNL, PUR \u2014Romanian Humanist Party\u2014which eventually changed its name to Romanian Conservative Party/PC and UDMR/RMDSZ\u2014was sworn in under Prime Minister T\u0103riceanu.\nFollowing the free travel agreement and politic of the post\u2013Cold War period, as well as hardship of the life in the post 1990s economic depression, Romania has an increasingly large diaspora. The main emigration targets have been Italy, Germany, Spain, the United Kingdom, the United States and Hungary.\nIn 2009, President Traian B\u0103sescu was re-elected as the President.\nIn January 2012, Romania experienced national protests, which were the first significant popular uprising in the country since 1991. They were triggered by proposed health reforms, and were further motivated by wider disillusionment with austerity and the government.\nKlaus Iohannis was elected president in 2014, being re-elected in 2019, and serving until his resignation in 2025 in the aftermath of the annulment of the 2024 presidential election in which he did not stand.\nThe 2020 parliamentary election, which took place during the COVID-19 pandemic, resulted in PNL senator Florin C\u00ee\u021bu forming a center-right coalition consisting of two other parties. Following the 2021 political crisis, a grant coalition was agreed upon between the PNL and PSD in which they would rule Romania together for or the next seven years. Thus, it was agreed that the prime minister of Romania and several other important ministries would rotate every year and a half. Nicolae Ciuc\u0103 of PNL consequently succeeded C\u00ee\u021bu in November 2021, himself being succeeded by PSD leader Marcel Ciolacu in June 2023.\nIn the 2024 presidential election, Independent candidate C\u0103lin Georgescu achieved a surprise win in the first round. However, the Constitutional Court annulled the election results, citing alleged Russian meddling. The cancellation led to widespread protests, criticism by the United States, and Ilie Bolojan becoming acting president in February 2025 as Iohannis resigned to political pressure.\nOn 1 January 2025, Romania joined the Schengen Area.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nAncient.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25637", "revid": "1319391242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25637", "title": "Geography of Romania", "text": " \nWith an area of , Romania is the twelfth-largest country in Europe. It is a country located at the crossroads of Eastern and Southeast Europe. It is bordered on the Black Sea, the country is halfway between the equator and the North Pole and equidistant from the westernmost part of Europe\u2014the Atlantic Coast\u2014and the most easterly\u2014the Ural Mountains. Romania has of border. Moldova and Ukraine lie to the east, Bulgaria to the south, and Serbia and Hungary to the west by the Pannonian Plain. In the southeast, of sea coastline provide an important outlet to the Black Sea and the Atlantic Ocean.\nHistory.\nTraditionally Romania is divided into several historic regions that no longer perform any administrative function:\nDobruja is the easternmost region, extending from the northward course of the Danube to the shores of the Black Sea.\nMoldavia stretches from the Eastern Carpathians to the Prut River on the Moldovan and Ukrainian border.\nWallachia reaches south from the Transylvanian Alps to the Bulgarian border and is divided by the Olt River into Oltenia on the west and Muntenia on the east. The Danube forms a natural border between Muntenia and Dobruja.\nThe west-central region, known as Transylvania, is delimited by the arc of the Carpathians, which separates it from the Maramure\u0219 region in the northwest; by the Cri\u0219ana area, which borders Hungary in the west; and by the Banat region of the southwest, which adjoins both Hungary and Serbia. It is these areas west of the Carpathians that contain the highest concentrations of the nation's largest ethnic minorities\u2014Hungarians, Germans, and Serbs.\nRomania's exterior boundaries are a result of relatively recent events. At the outbreak of World War I, the country's territory included only the provinces of Walachia, Moldavia, and Dobruja. This area, known as the Regat or the Old Kingdom, came into being with the disintegration of the Ottoman Empire in the mid-nineteenth century. At the end of World War I, Romania acquired Transylvania and the Banat. Some of this territory was lost during World War II, but negotiations returned it to Romania. Although this acquisition united some 85 percent of the Romanian-speaking population of Eastern Europe into one nation, it left a considerable number of ethnic Hungarians under Romanian rule. Disputes between Hungary and Romania regarding this territory would surface regularly, as both considered the region part of their national heritage. Questions were also periodically raised as to the historical validity of the Soviet-Romanian border. Bukovina and Bessarabia, former Romanian provinces where significant percentages of the population are Romanian-speaking, were part of the Soviet Union from the end of World War II to its dissolution, and subsequently part of the (formerly Soviet) states of Ukraine and Moldova. Despite ongoing and potential disputes, however, since 1989 Romania has no territorial claims to make.\nRomania's current administrative divisions include 41 counties and one city, Bucharest, with special status; see Administrative divisions of Romania.\nTopography.\nRomania's natural landscape is almost evenly divided among mountains (23 percent), plains (39 percent), and hills (35 percent). These varied relief forms spread rather symmetrically from the Carpathian Mountains, which reach elevations of more than 2,500 meters, to the Danube Delta, which is just a few meters above sea level.\nThe arc of the Carpathians extends over 1,000 kilometers through the center of the country, covering an area of 71,000 square kilometers. These mountains are of low to medium altitude and are no wider than 100 kilometers. They are deeply fragmented by longitudinal and transverse valleys and crossed by several major rivers. These features and the fact that there are many summit passes\u2014some at altitudes up to 2,256 meters\u2014have made the Carpathians less of a barrier to movement than other European ranges. Another distinguishing feature is the many eroded platforms that provide tableland at relatively high altitudes. There are permanent settlements here at above 1,200 meters.\nRomania's Carpathians are differentiated into three ranges: the Eastern Carpathians, the Southern Carpathians or Transylvanian Alps, and the Western Romanian Carpathians. Each of these ranges has important distinguishing features. The Eastern Carpathians are composed of three parallel ridges that run from northwest to southeast. The westernmost ridge is an extinct volcanic range with many preserved cones and craters. The range has many large depressions, in the largest of which the city of Bra\u0219ov is situated. Important mining and industrial centers as well as agricultural areas are found within these depressions. The Eastern Carpathians are covered with forests\u2014some 32 percent of the country's woodlands are there. They also contain important ore deposits, including gold and silver, and their mineral water springs feed numerous health resorts.\nThe Southern Carpathians offer the highest peaks at Moldoveanu Peak (2,544 m) and Negoiu (2,535 m) and more than 150 glacial lakes. They have large grassland areas and some woodlands but few large depressions and subsoil resources. At higher elevations, the wind and rain have turned the rocks into spectacular figures such as the Sphinx and \"Babele\".\nThe region was crisscrossed by an ancient network of trans-Carpathian roads, and vestiges of the old Roman Way are still visible. Numerous passes and the valleys of the Olt, Jiu, and Danube rivers provide routes for roads and railways through the mountains.\nThe Western Romanian Carpathians are the lowest of the three ranges and are fragmented by many deep structural depressions. They have historically functioned as \"gates,\" which allow easy passage but can be readily defended. The most famous of these is the Iron Gate on the Danube. The Western Romanian Carpathians are the most densely settled, and it is in the northernmost area of this range, the Apuseni Mountains, that permanent settlements can be found at the highest altitudes.\nEnclosed within the great arc of the Carpathians lie the undulating plains and low hills of the Transylvanian Plateau\u2014the largest tableland in the country and the center of Romania. This important agricultural region also contains large deposits of methane gas and salt. To the south and east of the Carpathians, the Sub-Carpathians form a fringe of rolling terrain ranging from 396 to 1,006 meters in elevation. This terrain is matched in the west by the slightly lower Western Hills. The symmetry of Romania's relief continues with the Getic Tableland to the south of the Sub-Carpathians, the Moldavian Tableland in the east between the Sub-Carpathians and the Prut River, and the Dobrujan Tableland in the southeast between the Danube and the Black Sea. The Sub-Carpathians and the tableland areas provide good conditions for human settlement and are important areas for fruit growing, viticulture, and other agricultural activity. They also contain large deposits of brown coal and natural gas.\nBeyond the Carpathian foothills and tablelands, the plains spread south and west. In the southern parts of the country, the lower Danube Plain is divided by the Olt River; east of the river lies the Wallachian Plain (including the strategically important Foc\u0219ani Gate), and to the west is the Oltenian or Western Plain. The land here is rich with chernozemic soils and forms Romania's most important farming region. Irrigation is widely used, and marshlands in the Danube's floodplain have been diked and drained to provide additional tillable land.\nRomania's lowest land is found on the northern edge of the Dobruja region in the Danube Delta. The delta is a triangular swampy area of marshes, floating reed islands, and sandbanks, where the Danube ends its trek of almost 3,000 kilometers and divides into three frayed branches before emptying into the Black Sea. The Danube Delta provides a large part of the country's fish production, and its reeds are used to manufacture cellulose. The region also serves as a nature preserve for rare species of plant and animal life including migratory birds.\nHydrography.\nRivers.\nAfter entering the country in the southwest at Bazias, the Danube travels some 1,075 kilometers (almost 40% of its entire length) through or along Romanian territory, forming the southern frontier with Serbia and Bulgaria. Virtually all of the country's rivers are tributaries of the Danube, either directly or indirectly, and by the time the Danube's course ends in the Black Sea, they account for nearly 40 percent of the total discharge. The most important of these rivers are the Mure\u0219 River, the Olt River, the Prut, the Siret River, the Ialomi\u021ba River, the Some\u0219 River, and the Arge\u0219 River. The Olt River is the longest river that is fully within Romania's national borders.\nRomania's rivers primarily flow east, west, and south from the central crown of the Carpathians. They are fed by rainfall and melting snow, which causes considerable fluctuation in discharge and occasionally catastrophic flooding. In the east, river waters are collected by the Siret and the Prut. In the south, the rivers flow directly into the Danube, and in the west, waters are collected by the Tisza on Hungarian territory.\nThe Danube is by far Romania's most important river, not only for transportation, but also for the production of hydroelectric power. One of Europe's largest hydroelectric stations is located at the Iron Gates, where the Danube surges through the Carpathian gorges. The Danube is an important water route for domestic shipping, as well as international trade. It is navigable for river vessels along its entire Romanian course and for seagoing ships as far as the port of Br\u0103ila. A problem with the use of the Danube for inland transportation is its remoteness from most of the major industrial centers. Moreover, marshy banks and perennial flooding impede navigation in some areas.\nLakes.\nThere are over 3,500 lakes in Romania. Lake Razelm is the largest, with an area of .\nClimate.\nBecause of its position on the southeastern portion of the European continent, Romania has a climate that is generally continental. Climatic conditions are somewhat modified by the country's varied relief. The Carpathians serve as a barrier to Atlantic air masses, restricting their oceanic influences to the west and center of the country, where they make for milder winters and heavier rainfall. The mountains also block the continental influences of the vast plain to the north in Ukraine, which bring frosty winters and less rain to the south and southeast. In the extreme southeast, Mediterranean influences offer a milder, maritime climate. The average annual temperature is in the south and in the north. In Bucharest, the temperature ranges from in January to in July, with average temperatures of in January and in July. Rainfall, although adequate throughout the country, decreases from west to east and from mountains to plains. Some mountainous areas receive more than of precipitation each year. Annual precipitation averages about in central Transylvania, at Ia\u0219i in Moldavia, and only at Constan\u021ba on the Black Sea.\nTemperate; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow and fog; sunny summers with frequent showers and thunderstorms. Winters generally are from November to March. The springs are short, occasionally turning right into summer. Summer lasts from May to August. They have a prolonged Autumn, from September to November. The average January temperature is and the average July temperature is .\nFacts: Record High Temperature: - August 10, 1951 South-Eastern Romania; Record Low Temperature: - January 24, 1942 (Central Romania)\nLocation.\nSoutheastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea and Danube, with the Carpathian mountains in its center. Controls most easily traversable land route between the Balkans, Moldova and Ukraine\nGeographic coordinates:\nExtreme points of Romania:\nArea.\nTotal: \nTerrain.\nCentral Transylvanian Basin is separated from the Plain of Moldavia on the east by the Carpathian Mountains and separated from the Wallachian Plain on the south by the Transylvanian Alps.\nElevation extremes:\nNatural resources\nLand use:\nIrrigated land:\nNatural hazards\":\" earthquakes are most severe in south and southwest; geologic structure and climate promote landslides\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25638", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25638", "title": "Demographics of Romania", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Romania include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population.\nAbout 89.3% of the people of Romania are ethnic Romanians (as per 2021 census), whose native language, Romanian, is an Eastern Romance language, descended from Latin (more specifically from Vulgar Latin) with some Slavic, French, Turkish, German, Hungarian, Greek and Italian borrowings.\nRomanians are by far the most numerous group of speakers of an Eastern Romance language today. It has been said that they constitute \"an island of Latinity\" in Eastern Europe, surrounded on all sides either by Slavic peoples (namely South Slavic and East Slavic peoples) or by the Hungarians. The Hungarian minority in Romania constitutes the country's largest minority, or as much as 6.0 per cent of the entire population. With a population of about 19,054,267 people in 2022, Romania received 989,357 Ukrainian refugees on 27 May 2022, according to the United Nations (UN).\nThe 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine that began on 24 February 2022 triggered a major refugee crisis in Europe. In connection with the Russian invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022, as part of the Russian-Ukrainian war, by 15 May 2022, more than 6,223,821 Ukrainian refugees left the territory of Ukraine, moving to the countries closest to the west of Ukraine, of which more than 188,270 people fled to neighbouring Romania.\nPopulation evolution.\nRomania's population has declined steadily in recent decades, from a peak of 23.2 million in 1990 to 19.12 million in 2021. Among the causes of population decline are high mortality, a low fertility rate since 1990, and tremendous levels of emigration.\nIn 1990, Romania's population was estimated at 23.21 million. Between 1990 and 2006, the estimated population loss exceeded 1.5 million, though the actual figure is likely higher due to the surge in labor migration after 2001 and the tendency of some migrants to settle permanently in their host countries.\nSources give varied estimates for Romania's historical population. The National Institute for Research and Development in Informatics (NIRDI) gives the following numbers (the figure for 2020 was provided by the National Institute of Statistics \u2013 INS):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nEthnic groups.\nSlightly more than 10% of the population of Romania is formed of minorities in Romania. The principal minorities are Hungarians and Roma, although other smaller ethnic groups exist too. Before World War II, minorities represented more than 28% of the total population. During the war that percentage was halved, largely by the loss of the border areas of Bessarabia and northern Bukovina (to the former Soviet Union, now Moldova and Ukraine) and southern Dobrudja (to Bulgaria). Two-thirds of the ethnic German population either left or were deported after World War II, a period that was followed by decades of relatively regular (by communist standards) migration. During the interwar period in Romania, the total number of ethnic Germans amounted to as much as 786,000 (according to some sources and estimates dating to 1939), a figure which had subsequently fallen to circa 36,000 as of 2011 in contemporary Romania. One reason for the decline of Romanian Germans is that after the Romanian Revolution there has been a mass migration of Transylvania Saxons to Germany, in what was referred by British daily newspaper \"Guardian\" to as 'the most astonishing, and little reported, ethnic migration in modern Europe'.\nOf a total population of three quarter million Jews before World War II, about a third were killed during the Holocaust. Mass emigration, mostly to Israel and United States, has reduced the surviving Jewish community to less than 6,000 in 2002 (it is estimated that the real numbers could be 3\u20134 times higher).\nHungarians (Magyars; \"see Hungarians in Romania\", especially in Harghita, Covasna, and Mure\u0219 counties) and Roma (\"see Romani people in Romania\") are the principal minorities, with a declining German population (Banat Swabians in Timi\u0219; Transylvanian Saxons in Sibiu, Bra\u0219ov and elsewhere), and smaller numbers of Czechs, Slovaks, Serbs, Croats, and Banat Bulgarians (in Banat), Ukrainians (especially in Maramure\u0219 and Bukovina), Greeks of Romania (especially in Br\u0103ila and Constan\u021ba), Turks and Tatars (mainly in Constan\u021ba), Armenians, Russians (Lipovans, Old Believers in Tulcea), Jews and others. Since the Romanian Revolution of 1989, Bucharest and other cities have again become increasingly cosmopolitan, including identifiable presences from outside the EU (Chinese, Turks, Moldovans, Syrians, Iraqis, Africans) as well as from the EU (French, Italians, Germans, British, Greeks). In Romania, there are also guest workers from countries such as Vietnam and Nepal.\nMinority populations are greatest in Transylvania and the Banat, areas in the north and west of the country, which were part of the Kingdom of Hungary (after 1867 Austria-Hungary) until the end of World War I. Even before the union with Romania, ethnic Romanians comprised the overall majority in Transylvania. However, ethnic Hungarians and Germans were the dominant urban population until relatively recently, while Hungarians still constitute the majority in Harghita and Covasna counties.\nThe Roma constitute one of Romania's largest minorities. According to the 2011 Romanian census, they number 621,573 people or 3.08% of the total population, being the second-largest ethnic minority in Romania after Hungarians, with significant populations in Mure\u0219 (8.9%) and C\u0103l\u0103ra\u0219i (7,47%) counties. There are different estimates about the size of the total population of people with Roma ancestry in Romania because a lot of people of Roma descent do not declare themselves as Roma. The number of the Roma is usually underestimated in official statistics and may represent 5\u201311% of Romania's population.\nIn 2007, the Council of Europe (CoE) estimated that approximately 1.85 million Roma lived in Romania, based on an average between the lowest estimate (1.2 to 2.2 million people) and the highest estimate (1.8 to 2.5 million people) with a maximum percentage of 12%, available at the time; the highest estimate, generated for the year 1991 and originating from a Securitate report, is considered unreliable, and Romanian post-communist censuses have consistently produced far lower figures. The CoE's average estimate is equivalent to 8.32% of the population, a figure difficult to verify due to the mobility of Romani and the reluctance of some to disclose their ethnicity.\nAfter the Hungarians and the Roma, the Ukrainians of Romania are the third-largest minority. According to the 2011 Romanian census they number 51,703 people, making up 0.3% of the total population. Ukrainians mainly live in northern Romania, in areas close to the Ukrainian border. Over 60% of all Romanian Ukrainians live in Maramure\u0219 County (where they make up 6.77% of the population).\nVital statistics.\nTotal Fertility Rate from 1850 to 1899.\nThe total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.\nBefore WWI.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nInterwar Period (between WWI and WWII).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nAfter WWII.\nMain sources:\nSource: National Institute of Statistics\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nNote: The 2011 Romanian census gave a figure of 20,121,641.\nThe 2021 Romanian census gave a figure of 19,053,815.\nCurrent vital statistics.\nThe current vital statistics of Romania are as follows\nTotal fertility rates by region and county.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021) (Provisional Estimates): \nLife expectancy 1950\u20132020.\nAverage life expectancy at age 0 of the total population.\nBirth rates by counties.\nRomania has 41 counties and one city with a special status, namely Bucharest. Ilfov County has the highest crude birth rate (12.0\u2030), while V\u00e2lcea County has the lowest crude birth rate (6.6\u2030). Birth rates are generally higher in rural areas compared to urban areas.\nDemographics statistics.\nDemographic statistics according to the World Population Review in 2019.\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\nPopulation.\nc. 19,000,000 (January 2023 est.)\ntotal: 42.4 years. \nmale: 40.6 years\nfemale: 44.1 years (2021 census)\n8.7 births/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 211th\n12 deaths/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 17th\n1.71 children born/woman (2017) Country comparison to the world: 154th\n\u22120.2 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 113th\n\u22120.13 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2006 est.)\n27.7 years (2024 est.)\n\u22120.35% (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 219th\n\u22120.127% (2007 estimate).\nUrban\u2013rural ratio.\nRomania is one of the least urbanised countries in Europe. Just a slight majority, 54.7% lives in urban areas (est. 2023), and the rate of urbanization is -0.15% annual rate of change (2020-25 est.)\nInfant mortality rate.\n5.5 deaths/1,000 live births (2024); down from\n9.2 deaths/1,000 live births (May 2010); down from 17.3 deaths/1,000 live births in 2002.\nLiteracy.\ndefinition: age 14 and over can read and write (2021 Census)\ntotal population: 99.17%\nmale: 99.03%\nfemale: 99.29%\ntotal: 14 years\nmale: 14 years\nfemale: 15 years (2016)\ntotal: 20.6%. Country comparison to the world: 62nd\nmale: 19.9%\nfemale: 21.8% (2016 est.)\nNationality.\nThe noun form is Romanian(s), and the adjectival form is Romanian.\nAge structure.\nAs a consequence of the pro-natalist policies of the Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu regime (see Decree 770), Romania has a higher proportion of its population born in the late 1960s and 1970s than any other Western country except Slovenia. The generations born in 1967 and 1968 were the largest, although fertility remained relatively high until 1990. 8.55% of the Romanian population was born in the period from 1976 to 1980, compared with 6.82% of Americans and 6.33% of Britons.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nAge structure by ethnicity.\nPopulation by ethnicity based on age groups, according to the 2011 census:\nImmigration.\nForeign-born population (according to Eurostat):\nReligion.\nReligious affiliation tends to follow ethnic lines, with most ethnic Romanians identifying with the Romanian Orthodox Church. The Greek Catholic or Uniate church, reunified with the Orthodox Church by fiat in 1948, was restored after the 1989 revolution. The 2002 census indicates that 0.9% of the population is Greek Catholic, as opposed to about 10% prior to 1948. Roman Catholics, largely ethnic Hungarians and Germans, constitute 4.7% of the population; Calvinists, Baptists (see Baptist Union of Romania and Convention of the Hungarian Baptist Churches of Romania), Pentecostals, and Lutherans make up another 5%. There are smaller numbers of Unitarians, Muslims, and other religions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25639", "revid": "46959423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25639", "title": "Politics of Romania", "text": "Romania's political framework is a semi-presidential representative republic where the Prime Minister is the head of government while the President, according to the Constitution, has at least in theory a more symbolic role, is responsible for the foreign policy, signs certain decrees, approves laws promulgated by the parliament, and nominates the head of government (i.e. Prime Minister). Romania has a multi-party system, with legislative power vested in the government and the two chambers of the Parliament, more specifically the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature in theory. From 1948 until 1989, the communist rule political structure took place in the framework of a one-party socialist republic governed by the Romanian Communist Party (PCR) as its only legal party.\nRomania's 1991 constitution (amended in 2003) proclaims it a democratic and social republic, deriving its sovereignty from the people. According to the constitution, \"Human dignity, civic rights and freedoms, the unhindered development of human personality, justice, and political pluralism are supreme and guaranteed values.\"\nThe constitution provides for a President, a Parliament, a Constitutional Court, and a separate court system which includes the High Court of Cassation and Justice. The right to vote is granted to all citizens over 18 years of age.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Romania as a \"flawed democracy\" in 2023. As of 2025, it could be classified as a hybrid regime behind a constitutional facade. Romania was fully admitted to the Schengen area on 1 January 2025.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is elected by popular vote for a maximum of two five-year terms (four-year terms until 2004). The president is head of state (charged with safeguarding the constitution, foreign affairs, and the proper functioning of public authority), supreme commander of the armed forces, and chairperson of the Supreme Council of National Defense. According to the constitution, the president acts as a mediator among the state's power centers and between the state and society. The president nominates the prime minister after consultation with the party holding an absolute majority in Parliament or, if there is no such majority, with all the parties in Parliament.\nAmbiguity in the Constitution of Romania (Article 85 (1), Article 103 (1)) may lead to situations where a coalition of parties obtaining an absolute majority in Parliament, or a party holding a relative majority in Parliament, would be unable to nominate a prime minister because the president would refuse the nomination (with no party holding an absolute majority in Parliament). According to Article 103 (1), \"unless no such majority exists\", is interpreted by the president as \"unless no such party exists\" (although an absolute majority may be formed by one party, a coalition of parties, or an alliance).\nIn the 2008 parliamentary elections, the Alliance PSD+PC won 33.1% of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 34.2% of the seats in the Senate. The PNL won 18.6% of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 18.7% of the seats in the Senate, giving both parties a majority in the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. However, the president nominated a member of the PDL (which won less than 32.4% of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 33.5% of the seats in the Senate. The nominated prime minister chooses the other members of the government, and the government and its program must be confirmed by a vote of confidence from Parliament.\nLegislative branch.\nThe national legislature is a bicameral parliament (), consisting of the Chamber of Deputies () and the Senate (). Members are elected to four-year terms by universal suffrage in a party-list proportional representation electoral system. Beginning in 2008, members are elected by mixed-member proportional representation.\nThe number of senators and deputies has varied in each legislature, reflecting population changes. In 2008, there were 137 senatorial seats and 334 seats in the Chamber of Deputies; of the 334 deputy seats, 18 were held by ethnic minority representatives which would not meet the five-percent electoral threshold required for other parties and organizations.\nClassification of political parties.\nRomania has a multiparty political system, which makes a majority government virtually impossible (unless a very high score is achieved in the legislative election by one particular political party). Smaller parliamentary parties have sometimes merged with larger ones during previous legislatures before 2020 (or created/were part of several electoral alliances). Currently, there are five main parliamentary parties (excluding the 18 ethnic-minority parties which have one representative each) as follows:\nThe main four non-parliamentary parties (the first two around the five-percent threshold) with local representatives are as follows:\nUnlike other former Soviet-bloc countries (such as, most notably, neighbouring Republic of Moldova), no political party claiming to be the successor of the Romanian Communist Party (PCR) has been or is currently a significant player on the political scene, although the main continuator of FSN, more specifically PSD, has many times raised suspicions and accusations from electoral contenders regarding the past political careers of many of its current and former members who were first tier, high-ranking members of the PCR before the 1989 Romanian Revolution. The PNL also has many former Securitate members, former PCR members, or their relatives, in part through the merger with the PDL in 2014 but not only.\nLatest elections.\nPresidential election.\nThe last presidential election took place on May 4 and May 18, 2025, respectively. Following the events that occurred during the first round of voting and the finding of foreign interference in the November 2024 presidential elections, the Constitutional Court annulled the elections, so they were repeated in May 2025.\nLegislative election.\nThe latest legislative election was held on 1 December 2024. The two tables below are represented the results for both the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies:\nLocal election.\nThe latest general local election was held on 27 September 2020.\nJudicial branch.\nThe Romanian legal system, based on the Napoleonic Code, is inquisitorial. The judiciary is independent, and judges appointed by the president are not removable. The president and other judges of the Supreme Court are appointed for six-year terms and may serve consecutive terms. Proceedings are public, except in special circumstances provided for by law.\nJudicial power is vested in a hierarchical system of courts, culminating with the supreme court: \u00cenalta Curte de Justi\u021bie \u0219i Casa\u021bie (High Court of Cassation and Justice), whose judges are appointed by the president on the recommendation of the Superior Council of Magistrates.\nThe Ministry of Justice represents the general interests of society and defends the rule of law and citizens' rights and freedoms. The ministry exercises its power through independent, impartial public prosecutors.\nConstitutional issues.\nThe (Constitutional Court) judges issues of constitutionality invoked in any court and judges the compliance of laws (or other state regulations) with the Romanian Constitution. The court, outside the judicial branch, follows the tradition of the French Constitutional Council with nine judges serving nine-year, non-renewable terms. Since the 2003 revision of the constitution, its decisions cannot be overturned by a parliamentary majority.\nRegional institutions.\nFor territorial and administrative purposes, Romania is divided into 41 counties (\"jude\u021be\", singular \"jude\u021b\") and the city of Bucharest. Each county is governed by an elected council. Local councils and elected mayors are the public authorities in villages and towns. The county council coordinates the activities of village and town councils.\nThe central government appoints a prefect for each county and Bucharest, who represents the government at the local level and directs the ministries and other central agencies at the county level. A prefect may block the action of a local authority if he deems it unlawful or unconstitutional, with the matter then adjudicated by an administrative court.\nUnder legislation enacted in January 1999, local councils control the spending of their allocations from the central government budget and have the authority to raise additional revenue locally. Although centrally-appointed prefects formerly had significant authority over the budget, this is now limited to a review of expenditures to determine their constitutionality.\nSince 1989.\nRomania has made considerable progress in institutionalizing democratic principles, civil liberties, and respect for human rights since the Romanian Revolution in December 1989. Nevertheless, many present-day Romanian politicians are former members of the Romanian Communist Party (PCR) and have also had ties with the Romanian secret police (i.e. Securitatea). Since membership in the party was a requirement for advancement before 1989, many people joined to get ahead rather than because of ideological conviction; however, the communist past of some Romanian politicians remains highly controversial to the current day.\n1990\u20131992.\nThe Romanian Communist Party (PCR) officially ceased to exist after the December 1989 Romanian Revolution. An ad interim/acting government swiftly took office starting in late December 1989 which consisted of National Salvation Front (FSN) members and would eventually govern Romania well up until 1992. The FSN had initially not decided to run in the 1990 elections but subsequently retracted their initial position and opted to participate in the 1990 Romanian general election, having the full support of state-owned media and an overwhelming majority of the voters during the electoral campaign, thereby eventually securing a landslide win.\nPrior to the 1990 Romanian general election, over 200 new political parties sprang up just after 1989, most of them gravitating towards their leaders rather than revolving around political programs or full-fledged geopolitical agendas. Nevertheless, all major political parties espoused democracy and free market reforms to varying degrees or extents. The largest political party by far, the governing National Salvation Front (FSN), proposed slow, cautious economic reforms, and an artificial, weak social safety net (mostly for the working class of the still operating factories of the heavy industries).\nIn stark contrast, the main opposition parties, more specifically the National Liberal Party (PNL) and the Christian Democratic National Peasants' Party (PN\u0162CD), favored rapid, sweeping economic reforms, immediate privatization (which would have caused a shock therapy) as well as a drastic reduction and even total exclusion of former Communist Party (PCR) members from public Romanian political life. Apart from PCR members, the early demands of the Romanian historical democratic parties were also the reduction of the undercover members of the former Securitate (which could have been PCR members as well) from all areas of public life (thereby endorsing the Proclamation of Timi\u0219oara and the lustration law against the former Romanian secret police).\nIn the 1990 presidential and legislative elections, the FSN and its presidential candidate, Ion Iliescu, won with a large majority of the votes (67% and 85.1%, respectively). The strongest opposition parties in the Senate were the Hungarian minority-oriented Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR/RMDSZ) (with 7.2%) and the National Liberal Party (PNL) (with 7.1%), followed by the Christian Democratic National Peasants' Party (PN\u021aCD) with only 2.5% and the Romanian Ecologist Party (with only 1.4%) as well other minor centre-right parties (e.g. Liberal Union\u2013Br\u0103tianu, National Reconstruction Party of Romania, and the Democratic Group of the Centre) with less than one per cent.\nAfter FSN Prime Minister Petre Roman's dismissal a few months before the 1992 general elections (following a late 1991 Mineriad), the FSN split in two. President Iliescu's supporters formed a new political party, namely the Democratic National Salvation Front (FDSN) which will later turn into PDSR and then PSD, while Roman's supporters retained the FSN name (which will later turn into PD and then PDL respectively).\n1992\u20131996.\nThe 1992 local, legislative, and presidential elections indicated a major political rift between the urban centres and the countryside. Rural voters, grateful for the restoration of most agricultural land to farmers but fearful of change, strongly favored Iliescu and the FDSN; the urban electorate favored the CDR (a coalition of several parties \u2013 the strongest of which were the PN\u0162CD and the PNL \u2013 and several other civic organizations as well) and quicker reform. Iliescu easily won re-election from a field of five other candidates, and the FDSN won a plurality/relative majority of seats in both chambers of the Romanian Parliament.\nWith the CDR, the second-largest parliamentary group, reluctant to participate in a national-unity coalition, the FDSN (now the PDSR) formed a government under prime minister and economist Nicolae V\u0103c\u0103roiu with parliamentary support on behalf of the nationalists Romanian National Unity Party (PUNR) and Greater Romania Party (PRM) as well as the extreme left-wing Socialist Party of Labour (PSM) led by former PCR Prime Minister Ilie Verde\u021b. The future coalition would be labeled by the press as the \"Red Quadrilateral\" (originally known in Romanian as \"Patrulaterul Ro\u0219u\").\nIn January 1994, the governing coalition's stability became problematic when the PUNR threatened to withdraw its support unless it received cabinet portfolios. After intense negotiations, two PUNR members received cabinet portfolios in the V\u0103c\u0103roiu government in August of the same year. The following month, the incumbent Justice Minister also joined the PUNR. Nevertheless, subsequently, the PRM and the PSM left the coalition in October and December 1995, respectively.\n1996\u20132000.\nThe 1996 local elections indicated a major shift in the political orientation of the Romanian electorate, with opposition parties sweeping Bucharest and most of the larger cities in Transylvania, Banat, Bukovina, and Dobruja. The trend continued in that year's legislative and presidential elections when the opposition dominated the cities and made strong inroads into rural areas previously dominated by President Iliescu and the PDSR (which lost many voters in their traditional stronghold constituencies outside Transylvania).\nThe opposition campaign emphasized the need to squelch corruption and introduce economic reform favoring liberalization and the free market. This message resonated with voters, resulting in a historical victory for the CDR coalition and the election of Emil Constantinescu as president (partly due to Corneliu Coposu's death as well). To secure its electoral majority, the CDR invited Petre Roman's Democratic Party (the former FSN) and the UDMR/RMDSZ (representing the Hungarian minority) to join the government. Although over the next four years, Romania had three prime ministers (and despite internal frictions), the governing parties preserved their coalition and initiated a series of much-needed reforms.\n2000\u20132004.\nConstantinescu stated in 2000 that he is no longer running for a second term, claiming that the system had defeated him. The CDR-led coalition with its new candidate Mugur Is\u0103rescu lost the first round of presidential elections held in November 2000 as a result of popular dissatisfaction with infighting among the constituent parties during the preceding four years and the economic hardship brought about by structural reforms. In the second round, Ion Iliescu, running again as the Social Democratic Party (PSD) candidate, won by a wide margin over extreme nationalist Greater Romania Party (PRM) candidate Corneliu Vadim Tudor. Iliescu subsequently appointed Adrian N\u0103stase Prime Minister. In the Parliament, the PSD government (like its predecessor) relied on the support of the UDMR/RMDSZ, which did not join the cabinet but negotiated annual packages of legislation and other measures favoring Romania's ethnic Hungarians (essentially through a confidence and supply agreement).\nN\u0103stase, in his four years as prime minister, continued the previous government's pro-Western foreign policy. The period was characterized by political stability unprecedented in post-communist Romania and consistent economic growth. Romania joined NATO in the spring of 2004 and signed an accession treaty to join the EU in 2007. However, the PSD government was plagued by allegations of corruption which would be significant factors in its eventual defeat in local and national elections in 2004.\nIn September 2003, the Democratic Party (PD) and the National Liberal Party (PNL) formed an electoral alliance, more specifically the Justice and Truth (DA) Alliance, as a mainstream opposition bloc to the ruling PSD. The DA Alliance agreed, among other measures, to vote as a bloc in the parliament and local councils and run common candidates in national and local elections. In October 2003, the country held a referendum on several constitutional amendments deemed necessary for EU accession. The amendments included provisions to allow foreigners to own land in Romania and to change the president's term from four to five years.\n2004\u20132008.\nIn 2004, Traian B\u0103sescu, the then-leader of the Democratic Party (PD), won the presidential election by a narrow margin. B\u0103sescu subsequently appointed former national liberal leader C\u0103lin Popescu-T\u0103riceanu as prime minister. Popescu-T\u0103riceanu headed a government composed of the PNL, PD, UDMR/RMDSZ, and PC (formerly known as the Romanian Humanist Party or PUR). In order to secure a parliamentary majority, the coalition government relied on the support of 18 parliamentary seats reserved for ethnic-minority representatives.\nThe government's narrow majority in the Parliament led to calls for early elections. In July 2005, Prime Minister Popescu-T\u0103riceanu voiced plans to resign, prompting new elections; he then backtracked, noting his and the cabinet's need to focus on relief efforts for summer floods. During its first year, the government was also tested by a successfully resolved hostage crisis involving three Romanian journalists kidnapped in Iraq and avian influenza in several parts of the country, transmitted by wild birds migrating from Asia.\nThe government's overriding objective was the accession of Romania to the European Union (EU), and on 1 January 2007 Romania became the 26th member of the EU. The government also maintained good relations with the United States, signing an agreement in December 2005 which would allow American troops to train and serve at several Romanian military facilities. B\u0103sescu and Popescu-T\u0103riceanu pledged to combat high-level corruption and implement broader reforms to modernize sectors such as the judicial system and healthcare.\nOn 19 April 2007, the Romanian Parliament suspended President B\u0103sescu on charges of unconstitutional conduct. The suspension, passed by a 322\u2013108 vote, opened the way for a national referendum on impeachment which failed by a large popular vote, and as such B\u0103sescu was reinstated as President.\n2008\u20132012.\nThe November 2008 parliamentary elections were close, with the Social Democrats (PSD) winning 33.9% of the vote, President Traian B\u0103sescu's centre-right Liberal Democrats (PDL) taking 32.3%, and the ruling National Liberals (PNL) receiving 18.6%. The Liberal Democrats and Social Democrats formed a coalition after the election. Former prime minister Theodor Stolojan withdrew his candidacy for the premiership and President B\u0103sescu nominated Emil Boc, president of the Liberal Democrats, as prime minister.\nWith the onset of the Great Recession, the Romanian political scene saw tensions between the president and the prime minister on the one hand as well as between the general population on the other hand. Tensions escalated with a 2012 political crisis and another attempt to impeach President B\u0103sescu. In the referendum, more than 7.4 million people (nearly 90%) supported B\u0103sescu's removal from office. However, the Constitutional Court invalidated the referendum because the majority of the population did not vote (the voter turnout was 46%); B\u0103sescu had called the referendum a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" and asked the public to boycott it. All these events have been heavily criticized by international political figures, most notably by German chancellor Angela Merkel.\n2012\u20132016.\nThe legislative elections of 9 December 2012 were seen by the public as an opportunity for change and to oust B\u0103sescu. The Social Liberal Union (USL) received a large majority in the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate (60.07 and 58.61 percent of the vote, respectively) and a record 395 seats. The new prime minister, Victor Ponta, quickly formed a government but the failure to adopt reforms quickly triggered a wave of protests against a government seen as not fulfilling the promises of the 2012 electoral campaign. Two other projects of national interest (shale drilling and the Ro\u0219ia Montan\u0103 mining project) unleashed more protests. The demonstrations, initially ecological in focus, became anti-government protests.\nIn early 2014, the PNL broke away from the USL and entered opposition. Along with the PDL, the PNL formed the Christian Liberal Alliance (ACL) to support the candidature of Klaus Iohannis as President of Romania and later agreed on a future merger that would retain the name of the National Liberal Party (PNL). Iohannis won a surprise victory in front of the incumbent PM Victor Ponta in the second round of the 2014 presidential elections, by a margin of 54.43%. At that time, many voters abroad were rightfully angry because they were not all given the right to cast their ballots, which represented one of the key reasons for Ponta's defeat.\nIn late 2015, another series of nationwide protests ultimately prompted Prime Minister Victor Ponta's resignation. Shortly afterward, President Iohannis appointed then independent-technocrat Dacian Ciolo\u0219 as Prime Minister, who led a likewise independent-technocratic government between late 2015 and early 2017.\n2016\u20132020.\nThe legislative elections of 11 December 2016 saw a predictable comeback of the PSD as the major party in the Romanian Parliament, as most opinion polls gave them an electoral score of at least 40%. Alongside ALDE (a main splinter group from the PNL), the PSD initially formed a governing coalition under Prime Minister Sorin Grindeanu.\nIn early 2017, a series of massive nationwide protests (the greatest in Romania's history) requested Grindeanu's resignation and early elections because of the government's secret procedure of giving an ordinance modifying the Penal Code and Penal Procedure Code on the night of 31 January. The PM along with the entire government refused to step down but decided to withdraw the decrees that started the protests on 5 February at the protests' peak.\nApproximately four months later, tensions arose between PM Sorin Grindeanu and PSD leader Liviu Dragnea, which ultimately resulted in the loss of political support for the government on behalf of the PSD-ALDE coalition. The PM refused to resign but was eventually dismissed by a motion of no confidence passed by the Parliament with 241 votes (233 minimum needed).\nQuickly afterward, Mihai Tudose was proposed by the socialists for the position of prime minister and was subsequently accepted by president Iohannis. However, just after 6 months of governance, he resigned from this dignity. Consequently, the ruling coalition nominated a new Prime Minister candidate in the person of Viorica D\u0103ncil\u0103, a former socialist MEP in 2014\u201319 who was also accepted by the state president. She was also the first female Prime Minister of Romania. Subsequently, on 4 November 2019, after a motion of no confidence, the PSD minority government was replaced by a minority cabinet led by the National Liberal Party under Ludovic Orban. Furthermore, in November 2019, President Klaus Iohannis was re-elected by a landslide (with FDGR/DFDR, USR PLUS, and PMP support in the second round).\nThis period (i.e. the two years spanning between 2017 and 2019) was marked by governmental mayhem produced by the previous PSD-ALDE ruling coalition regarding their change of PMs as well as their intentions of changing both the Penal Code and the Penal Procedure Code, the Romanian society took to the streets of Bucharest and many other major cities of the country in huge numbers for more than 500 consecutive days in order to oppose the modification of these law packages, prompt early elections, as well as a referendum on the topic of justice.\n2020\u20132024.\nThe 2020 Romanian local elections which were held on 27 September were won by the PNL. Nonetheless, on 6 December, the PNL finished second in the 2020 Romanian legislative election. The election was won by the oppositional Social Democrats (PSD) who came in first. Shortly after the official results came out, Orban resigned from his position as PM and was replaced by Nicolae Ciuc\u0103 as acting/ad interim PM.\nIn the meantime, the national liberals proceeded to negotiate the formation of a coalition government alongside USR PLUS and UDMR for a reportedly stable center-right governance for the next four years in Romania. The newly designated PM was therefore Florin C\u00ee\u021bu, a member of the National Liberal Party (PNL), who took office on 23 December 2020, after forming a three-party, center-right coalition consisting of the PNL, the USR PLUS, and the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR/RMDSZ).\nSubsequently, in early September 2021, USR PLUS decided to exit the C\u00ee\u021bu Cabinet and so the three centre-right party alliance was officially disbanded, inadvertently leading to the major 2021 Romanian political crisis which lasted for nearly three months, until Nicolae Ciuc\u0103 was invested PM along with the CNR cabinet in late November 2021. On 15 June 2023, Marcel Ciolacu (PSD) was sworn in as the new Romanian Prime Minister. Rotating premiership had been long agreed as part of a deal by the ruling coalition. Since the investment of the CNR cabinet, Romania has been experiencing a clear shift towards authoritarianism, illiberalism and has the characteristics of a hybrid regime behind a constitutional facade.\n2024\u2013present.\nIn 2024, all 4 types of elections took place in Romania, a first in the post-December history of the country. European Parliament election and the local election took place simultaneously on June 9, the European Parliament election being won by the PSD-PNL Alliance, and the local ones by the Social Democratic Party (which ran separately from the liberals in most counties). The European Parliament and local elections also provided positive results for the nationalist parties such as the Alliance for the Union of Romanians (AUR) which sent 5 MEPs to the European Parliament and the more radical formation S.O.S. Romania which sent 2 MEPs. Also, in these elections, AUR strengthened its position in the territory by winning important seats in the county and local councils. Also, the simultaneous organization of the 2 elections on the same day was also met with problems and reports related to electoral fraud, the biggest scandals that came to the surface after the election were in sector 1 and sector 2 of Bucharest.\nThe first round of the 2024 presidential election was held on 24 November, with independent candidate C\u0103lin Georgescu winning the first round with 22.9% and USR candidate Elena Lasconi finishing second with 19.2%.\nAfter accusations of Russian interference in the election, the CCR called on 28 November for a recount of all 1st round votes, after which it validated the results five days later. However, the CCR reversed its validation on 6 December following new CSAT documents declassified by Iohannis two days previously.\nThe 2024 parliamentary election took place on 1 December. They took place within a relatively tense context and polarization in society as a result of the events that followed the 1st round of the presidential elections on 24 November such as the anti-extremism demonstrations and the counter-demonstrations of C\u0103lin Georgescu's supporters. The parliamentary election were won by the ruling social-democrats, but with a lower score compared to the previous election in 2020. The official results indicated a hung parliament that requires the formation of a broad governing coalition for a stable majority. In the first days after the parliamentary election, there was discussion about the formation of a cordon sanitaire to isolate the so-called sovereignist block (consisting of the parties AUR, SOS RO and POT) and the formation of a stable pro-European coalition formed by PSD, PNL, USR, UDMR and ethnic minority parties. As a result of the annulment of the first round of presidential election, REPER requested the Central Electoral Office to annul the parliamentary election emphasizing that the reasons that led to the decision of the CCR are also valid for the parliamentary election. Vlad Gheorghe, the leader of the party DREPT, also called for the annulment of the parliamentary elections citing (the same \"causes\"): \"Russian interference\", \"manipulation and disinformation of the population\u201d.\nMeanwhile, the negotiations between PSD, PNL, USR and UDMR have reached an impasse, USR making several requests to the potential coalition partners such as tax cuts, the resignation of the president Klaus Iohannis, the rapid adoption of the new budget, the start of the procedures for the initiation of the referendum \"no convicted criminals from holding public office\" and the resignation of the heads of the intelligence services. In the end, the USR stayed out of the negotiations on the future governing coalition thus the return of the old PSD-PNL-UDMR-minorities formula that was between 2021 and 2023 during the Ciuc\u0103 Cabinet materialized. On 23 December 2024, the new government was invested with a fragile majority (a little over 50%), Second Ciolacu cabinet. In January 2025, the 2025 presidential election was scheduled for May. In the runoff on 18 May, Nicu\u0219or Dan defeated George Simion, with his presidency beginning on 26 May 2025.\nForeign relations.\nOn 1 January 2007, Romania became a member of the European Union (EU) in the fifth wave of EU enlargement. During the 2000s, Romania implemented a number of reforms to prepare for EU accession, including the consolidation of its democratic systems, the institution of the rule of law, the acknowledgement of respect for human rights, the commitment to personal freedom of expression, and the implementation of a functioning free-market economy.\nRomania joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 29 March 2004, following the decision taken at the Prague Summit, in November 2002. Romania was a partner to the allied forces during the Gulf War, particularly during its service as president of the UN Security Council. Romania has been active in peacekeeping operations in UNAVEM in Angola, IFOR/SFOR in Bosnia, Albania, in Afghanistan and sent 860 troops to Iraq after the invasion led by the United States.\nRomania has developed strong relations with Hungary, with the latter playing a key role in supporting Romania's bid to join the EU. Romania's ethnic Hungarian party also participated in all the government coalitions between 1996 and 2008 and from 2009. In 1996, Romania signed and ratified a basic bilateral treaty with Hungary that settled outstanding disagreements, laying the foundation for closer, more cooperative relations.\nBulgarian relations with Romania feature regular official visits by the two presidents. In the first half of the 20th century, Romania and Bulgaria had a serious conflict over the Dobruja region. This dispute, while now largely forgotten, escalated into all out war in 1913. The territorial dispute between the two countries ended with the Treaty of Craiova.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25640", "revid": "47404959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25640", "title": "Economy of Romania", "text": "Romania has a high-income market economy that has achieved rapid convergence toward European Union standards since joining in 2007, with per capita income rising from 26% of the EU average in 2000 to 78% by 2024, driven by foreign direct investment in manufacturing and services amid post-communist reforms.\nRomania's nominal GDP reached approximately $423 billion in 2024, reflecting real growth of 0.9% that year after 2.1% in 2023, propelled by sectors such as automotive industry, information technology outsourcing, and agriculture, though constrained by weak private investment and a widening trade deficit.\nKey achievements include sustained employment expansion and innovation in high-value industries, yet defining challenges persist, including high fiscal deficits projected at 8.6% of GDP in 2025, corruption hindering institutional efficiency, and significant labor emigration exacerbating skills shortages and demographic pressures.\nHistory.\nBefore World War II.\nThe economy of Romania entered modernity with the Treaty of Adrianople in 1829, ending centuries of Turkish control. Economic growth was stimulated by several milestones: the discovery and industrial exploitation of oil in 1857, the political union between Wallachia and Moldavia in 1859, land reforms, adoption of a local currency, the leu (1867), the state independence (1877), as well as the building of an extensive rail-road system under king Carol I.\nAfter the dissolution of neighbouring Russian and Austro-Hungarian empires following World War I, several Romanian-speaking provinces (Transylvania, Bessarabia, Banat, Bukovina) united with the Kingdom of Romania, forming the Romanian state in its modern form. The application of radical agricultural reforms and the passing of a new constitution created a democratic framework and allowed for quick economic growth (industrial production doubled between 1923 and 1938, despite the effects of the Great Depression in Romania).\nUntil World War II, Romania was Europe's second-largest oil and food producer.\nCommunist period.\nAfter 1945, Soviet-occupied Romania became a member of the Eastern Bloc and switched to a Soviet-style command economy. During this period the country experienced rapid industrialisation in an attempt to create a \"multilaterally developed socialist society\". Economic growth was further fuelled by foreign credits in the 1970s, eventually leading to a growing foreign debt, which peaked at $11\u201312 billion.\nRomania's debt was completely paid off during the 1980s by implementing severe austerity measures which deprived Romanians of basic consumer goods. In 1989, before the Romanian Revolution, Romania had a GDP of about 800 billion lei, or $53.6 billion. Around 58% of the country's gross national income came from industry, and another 15% came from agriculture. The minimum wage was 2,000 lei, or approx. $57.\nFree market transition.\nThe end of the communist period marked the beginning of a sharp economic downturn. Romania's weight in the global economy dropped to 0.3% in 1993, down from 0.8% in 1983.\nPrivatisation of industry started with the 1992 transfer of 30% of the shares of some 6,000 state-owned enterprises to five private ownership funds, in which each adult citizen received certificates of ownership. The remaining 70% ownership of the enterprises was transferred to a state ownership fund, with a mandate to sell off its shares at the rate of at least 10% per year. The privatisation law also called for direct sale of some 30 specially selected enterprises and the sale of \"assets\" (i.e., commercially viable component units) of larger enterprises.\nAs of 2008, inflation stood at 7.8%, up from 4.8% in 2007 estimated by the BNR at coming within 6% for the year 2006 (the year-on-year CPI, published in March 2007, is 3.66%). Also, since 2001, the economy has grown steadily at around 6\u20138%. Therefore, the PPP per capita GDP of Romania in 2008 was estimated to be between $12,200 and $14,064.\nRomania was the largest U.S. trading partner in Central-Eastern Europe until Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu's 1988 renunciation of Most Favored Nation (non-discriminatory) trading status, which resulted in higher U.S. tariffs on Romanian products. Congress approved restoration of the MFN status effective 8 November 1993, as part of a new bilateral trade agreement. Tariffs on most Romanian products dropped to zero in February 1994 with the inclusion of Romania in the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP). Major Romanian exports to the U.S. include shoes and clothing, steel, and chemicals.\nRomania signed an Association Agreement with the EU in 1992 and a free trade agreement with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) in 1993, codifying Romania's access to European markets and creating the basic framework for further economic integration. Romania formally joined the EU in 2007.\nDuring the later part of the Ceau\u0219escu period, Romania had earned significant contracts from several developing countries, notably Iraq, for oil-related projects. In August 2005 Romania agreed to forgive 43% of the US$1.7\u00a0billion debt owed by an Iraq still largely occupied by the military forces of the U.S.-led \"Coalition of the Willing\", making Romania the first country outside of the Paris Club of wealthy creditor nations to forgive Iraqi debts.\nGrowth in 2000\u201307 was supported by exports to the EU, primarily to Italy and Germany, and a strong recovery of foreign and domestic investment. Domestic demand is playing an ever more important role in underpinning growth as interest rates drop and the availability of credit cards and mortgages increases. Current account deficits of around 2% of GDP are beginning to decline as demand for Romanian products in the European Union increases. Accession to the EU gives further impetus and direction to structural reform.\nIn early 2004 the government passed increases in the value-added tax (VAT) and tightened eligibility for social benefits with the intention to bring the public finance gap down to 4% of GDP by 2006, but more difficult pension and healthcare reforms will have to wait until after the next elections. Privatisation of the state-owned bank Banca Comercial\u0103 Rom\u00e2n\u0103 took place in 2005. Intensified restructuring among large enterprises, improvements in the financial sector, and effective use of available EU funds is expected to accelerate economic growth. However, the Romanian economy was affected by the 2008 financial crisis and contracted in 2009.\nAfter communism, Romania needed capital infusion, entrepreneurial and managerial skills, the fastest way to obtain that was through foreign direct investment (FDI). As of 2018, total FDI in Romania was 81\u00a0billion EUR, 63% of total (51\u00a0billion) are greenfield investments. Top ten FDI stock by country of origin in 2018 were: Netherlands (23.9%), Germany (12.7%), Austria (12.2%), Italy (9.5%), Cyprus (6.2%), France (6%), Switzerland (4.5%), Luxembourg (4.2%), Belgium (2.2%) and United Kingdom (2.1%).\nInvestments in Romania.\nThe level of investment remains above EU average. Investment accounts for almost 25% of GDP in Romania as opposed to 19% of GDP in the EU, in 2016.\nLocally, UniCredit, one of the region's leading banking firms, announced in October 2023 that it will merge its Romanian affiliate with the recently purchased Alpha bank in Romania (for \u20ac300 million), creating Romania's third-largest lender.\nRomania's Recovery and Resilience Plan dedicates over \u20ac6 billion to digitalisation efforts, encompassing public administration, connectivity, cybersecurity, digital skills, and the development of an integrated e-health and telemedicine system. The European Investment Bank Project Advisory Support programme aids Romania in advancing digitalisation through collaborations with the National Agency for Public Procurement and the Ministry of Research, Innovation, and Digitalisation\nThis assistance includes evaluating ICT projects and supporting the rollout of a \u20ac600 million government cloud initiative, aimed at enhancing interoperability, reducing bureaucracy, and bolstering cybersecurity.\nEU membership (2007).\nOn 1 January 2007 Romania and Bulgaria entered the EU, giving the Union access to the Black Sea. This led to some immediate international trade liberalisation. Romania is part of the European single market which represents more than 447 million consumers. Several domestic commercial policies are determined by agreements among European Union members and by EU legislation. This is to be contrasted with enormous current account deficits. Low interest rates guarantee availability of funds for investment and consumption. For example, a boom in the real estate market started around 2000 and has not subsided yet. At the same time annual inflation in the economy is variable and during the mid-2000s (2003\u20132008) has seen a low of 2.3% and high of 7.8%.\nRomania adopted 1 January 2005 a flat tax of 16% to improve tax collection rates. Romania subsequently enjoyed the lowest fiscal burden in the European Union, until Bulgaria also switched to a flat tax of 10% in 2007. Since 2018 the flat rate was lowered to 10%.\nRomania posted 6% economic growth in 2016, the highest among European Union member states. According to Bloomberg, the country's economic growth advanced at the fastest pace since 2008. It is now considered the next tech-startup hub country in EU. Nowadays, that Romania's digital infrastructure ranks higher than other eastern and central European countries makes it an attractive place to start a tech business. \nEconomy.\nGDP.\nIMF for 2022 (October) published the following data:\nIn the Romanian press the economy has been referred to as the \"Tiger of the East\" during the 2000s. Romania is a country of considerable economic potential: over 10 million hectares of agricultural land, diverse energy sources (coal, oil, natural gas, hydro, nuclear, and wind), a substantial, if aging, manufacturing base and opportunities for expanded development in tourism on the Black Sea and in the mountains.\nInvestments.\nNet investments in Romania's economy totaled RON 33.6 billion (EUR 7.2 billion) in the first half of 2018, up by 5.8% compared to the same period of 2017, according to the National Statistics Institute (INS).\nIn the same year (2018) foreign direct investment (FDI) was 81 billion, 63% (51 billion) being \"green field\"\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132022 (with IMF staff estimates in 2023\u20132028). Inflation under 5% is in green.\nNational budget.\nThe planned national budget for 2017 is 422 billion lei ($103 billion), with an estimated budget deficit to GDP of 1.1%.\nGrowing middle class.\nRomania has a growing middle and upper classes with relatively high per-capita income. World Bank estimated that in 2002 99% of the urban and 94% of the rural population had access to electricity. In 2004, 91% of the urban and only 16% of the rural population had access to improved water supply and 94% of the urban population had access to improved sanitation. In 2017 there were about 22.5 million mobile phone users in Romania and about 18 million with internet access.\nIn February 2024, the gross average monthly wage was RON 8,871 (\u20ac1910), and the net average monthly wage was RON 5,556 (\u20ac1180).\nNeighbours.\nCountries tend to benefit from sharing borders with developed markets as this facilitates trade and development. Below is a table of Romania's neighbouring countries, their GDP per capita, and trade values between the pairs. In 2017, 11.58% of Romanian exports went to its neighbours; while 12.95% of imports came from these five countries. For comparison, Germany alone accounted for 23% of Romania's exports and 20.1% of its imports.\nLabour.\nIn 2022, the economically active population was of 8270.8 thousand persons, of which 94.4% were employed persons and 5.6% unemployed.\nThe employment rate of working age population (15-64 years) was 63.1%, having higher values for men (71.5%, as against 54.4% for women) and urban area (68.6% in urban area, as against 56.3% in rural area). 19.7% of young people (aged 15-24 years) and 46.7% of elderly people (aged 55-64 years) were employed. The employment rate for persons aged 15-64 was higher for those with superior level of education (89.5%) than for those with medium level (64.6%) and those with low education (36.6%). The employment rate for the population aged 20-64 years was 68.5%. Employment rate had higher values for men (77.7% as against only 59.1% for women) and for persons in urban area (74.0% as against 61.8% for persons in rural area).\nThe unemployment rate was 5.6%. By gender, the gap between the two rates was 1.0 percentage point (6.0% for men as against 5.0% for women), while by residential area it was 5.7 percentage points (8.9% for rural area as compared to 3.2% for urban area). The unemployment rate had the highest level (22.8%) among young people (aged 15-24 years). The unemployment affects to a greater extent the graduates of medium and low level of education, for which the unemployment rate was 5.2%, respectively 14.2% higher as compared with the rate registered for unemployed with superior level of education (1.7%).\n5,7 \n3,2 \n4,5 \n3,0 \n2,7 \n8,5 \n4,2 \n6,0 \n5,5 \n3,2 \n3,9 \n2,3 \n5,3 \n5,3 \n0,5 \n1,0 \n3,4 \n8,3 \n3,6 \n3,2 \n2,2 \n6,2 \n7,3 \n3,2 \n3,5 \n7,3 \n3,1 \n4,3 \n3,9 \n2,4 \n2,4 \n3,8 \n1,2 \n5,2 \n1,3 \n3,8 \n2,2 \n3,1 \n1,1 \n0,6 \n2,5 \n3,9 \nAccording to the latest monthly report of the National Institute of Statistics in Romania, the average monthly salary in August 2025 was 9,002 lei (1,777 euros) gross or 5,387 lei (1,063 euros) net.\n\u20ac834 \n\u20ac819 \n\u20ac863 \n\u20ac1057 \n\u20ac1018 \n\u20ac919 \n\u20ac833 \n\u20ac963 \n\u20ac905 \n\u20ac886 \n\u20ac899 \n\u20ac967 \n\u20ac905 \n\u20ac884 \n\u20ac905 \n\u20ac1397 \n\u20ac896 \n\u20ac843 \n\u20ac1072 \n\u20ac913 \n\u20ac988 \n\u20ac991 \n\u20ac958 \n\u20ac818 \n\u20ac930 \n\u20ac871 \n\u20ac987 \n\u20ac843 \n\u20ac851 \n\u20ac1065 \n\u20ac1095 \n\u20ac934 \n\u20ac1314 \n\u20ac913 \n\u20ac925 \n\u20ac863 \n\u20ac849 \n\u20ac861 \n\u20ac996 \n\u20ac1227 \n\u20ac931 \n\u20ac873 \nMinimum wage in Romania.\nThe minimum gross wage in the Romanian economy amounts to RON 4050 (\u2248EUR 814) from 1 January 2025. The same minimum wage applies to employees with a seniority of over 15 years.\nWealth per adult.\nIn 2021, the median wealth per adult in Romania was estimated by Credit Suisse at USD 20,389. Average wealth per adult was USD 42,351.\n35% of the 15.1 million Romanian adults had a wealth of less than USD 10,000. This is an improvement from 40% in 2018.\nTourism.\nRomania is a popular tourist destination, with more than 15.7\u00a0million domestic and foreign tourists in 2018.\nRomania's tourism took a great hit during the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, with a drop of as much as 68.7% of foreign visitors in 2020, but it's beginning to recover in 2022.\nRomania has cities of great cultural interest (Sibiu, Bucharest, Constan\u021ba, Bra\u0219ov, Ia\u0219i, Timi\u0219oara, Cluj-Napoca, Alba Iulia, Oradea), beaches and seaside resorts, ski resorts, and well-preserved rural regions appreciated for their beauty and tranquillity. Romania is also the destination of many religious pilgrimages, hosting several thousands visitors each year.\nCurrency.\nThe leu (pronounced ), plural: lei (); (ISO 4217 code RON; numeric code 946), \"leo\" (lion) in English is the currency of Romania. It is subdivided into 100 \"bani\" (singular: \"ban\"). On 1 July 2005, Romania underwent a currency reform, switching from the previous leu (ROL) to a new leu (RON). 1 RON is equal to 10,000 ROL. Romania joined the European Union on 1 January 2007 and initially hoped to adopt the euro in 2014, but with the deepening of the Euro crisis and with its own problems, such as a low workforce productivity, postponed its adoption plans indefinitely.\nAs of April 2025, 1 RON is worth about 0.2006 EUR and US$0.2278. Romania is expected to adopt the euro in 2026.\nFulfillment of the Maastricht criteria.\nRomania, as a member state of the European Union, is required to adopt the common European currency, the Euro. For this reason Romania must fulfil the five Maastricht criteria, of which it met none as of June 2020.\nNatural resources.\nRomania is an oil and gas producer. The pipeline network in Romania included 2,427\u00a0km for crude oil, 3,850\u00a0km for petroleum products, and 3,508\u00a0km for natural gas in 2006. Several major new pipelines are planned, especially the Nabucco Pipeline for Caspian oilfields, the longest one in the world. Romania could cash in four billion dollars from the Constanta-Trieste pipeline.\nRomania has considerable natural resources for a country of its size, including coal, iron ore, copper, chromium, uranium, antimony, mercury, gold, barite, borate, celestine (strontium), emery, feldspar, limestone, magnesite, marble, perlite, pumice, pyrites (sulfur), clay, arable land and hydropower.\nEnergy needs are also met by importing bituminous and anthracite coal and crude petroleum. In 2019 over 21 million metric tonnes of coal, an estimated 1300 tonnes of zinc, 460,000 tonnes of alumina and 3.4 million tonnes of crude steel were mined. Lesser amounts of copper, lead, gold, silver and kaolin were also mined.\nEnergy.\nThe energy sector is dominated by state-owned companies such as Termoelectrica, Hidroelectrica and Nuclearelectrica. Fossil fuels are the country's primary source of energy, followed by hydroelectric power.\nNuclear energy in Romania.\nDue to dependency on oil and gas imports from Russia, the country has placed an increasingly heavy emphasis on nuclear energy since the 1980s. The Cernavod\u0103 Nuclear Power Plant is the only one of its kind in Romania, although there are plans to build a second one in Transylvania, possibly after 2020.\nFor domestic heating and cooking 48% of rural and small-town households use directly burned solid fuel (almost exclusively domestically produced wood) as the main energy source.\nWind power had an installed capacity of 76\u00a0MW in 2008, and 3028 MW in 2016. The country has the largest wind power potential in Southeast Europe, with Dobruja listed as the second-best place in Europe to construct wind farms. As a result, there are currently investor connection requests for over 12,000 MW. There are also plans to build a number of solar power stations, such as the Covaci Solar Park, which will be one of the largest in the world.\nPhysical infrastructure.\nThe volume of traffic in Romania, especially goods transportation, has increased in recent years due to its strategic location in South-East Europe. In the past few decades, much of the freight traffic shifted from rail to road. A further strong increase of traffic is expected in the future.\nAs of 11 July 2025, there are 1,314.472\u00a0km of highways in service (of which 1,181.435\u00a0km motorways and 133.037\u00a0km expressways), with another 753.882\u00a0km with signed contracts in various stages of execution, and another 669.3\u00a0km being tendered (29 May 2025).\nBucharest is the only city in Romania which has an underground railway system, comprising both the Bucharest Metro and the light rail system managed by Regia Autonom\u0103 de Transport Bucure\u0219ti. Although construction was planned to begin in 1941, due to geo-political factors, the Bucharest Metro was only opened in 1979. The Bucharest Metro system is long and has 64 stations. The Bucharest Metro has five lines (M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5). The newest metro line, M5, was opened in 2020. A sixth metro line, M6 line, is currently under construction. A second metro system, the Cluj-Napoca Metro, is under construction.\nSectors of the economy.\nIn 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Romania is Services with 351,621 companies followed by Retail Trade with 239,404 companies.\nGas and natural resources.\nRomania has become a natural gas exporter. Romanian Scientist, Lazar Edeleanu, had managed, for the first time in the world, to refine oil based products with sulphur dioxide, in other words separation from the oil of some hydrocarbon groups, without their chemical alteration.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture employs about 26% of the population (one of the highest rates in Europe) and contributes about 4.3% of GDP. The B\u0103r\u0103gan is characterized by large wheat farms. Dairy products, pork, poultry, and apple production are concentrated in the western region.\nBeef production is located in central Romania, while the production of fruits, vegetables, and wine ranges from central to southern Romania. Romania is a large producer of many agricultural products and is currently expanding its forestry and fishery industries. The implementation of the reforms and the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) have resulted in reforms in the agricultural sector of the economy.\nFishing.\nFishing is an economic mainstay in parts of eastern Romania and along the Black Sea coast, with important fish markets in places such as Constanta, Gala\u021bi and Tulcea. Fish such as European anchovy, sprat, pontic shad, mullet, goby, whiting, garfish, Black-Sea Turbot or horse mackerel are landed at ports such as Constanta.\nThere has been a large scale decrease in employment in the fishing industry within Romania due to the EU's Common Fisheries Policy, which places restrictions on the total tonnage of catch that can be landed, caused by overfishing in the Black Sea. Along with the decline of sea-fishing, commercial fish farms \u2013 especially in salmon, have increased in prominence in the rivers and lochs of the east of Romania. Inland waters are rich in fresh water fish such as salmon, trout, and in particular, carp which traditionally has been the most popular fish, including its eggs (\"icre\"), fresh or canned.\nIndustry.\nIT and other Industry.\nRomania has been successful in developing its industrial sector in recent years. Industry and construction accounted for 32% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2003, a comparatively large share even without taking into account related services. The sector employed 26.4% of the workforce. Romania excels in the production of automobiles, machine tools, and chemicals. In 2013, some 410,997 automobiles were produced in Romania, up from 78,165 in 2000. As of 2018, the turnover generated by Romania's automobile industry was estimated at 28 billion Euros, with 230,000 Romanians employed in the sector.\nIn 2004 Romania enjoyed one of the largest world market share in machine tools (5.3%). Romanian-based companies such as Dacia, Petrom, Rompetrol, Bitdefender, Romstal and Mobexpert have expanded operations throughout the region. However, small- to medium-sized manufacturing firms form the bulk of Romania's industrial sector.\nIndustrial output growth was 6.9% year-on-year in December 2009, making it the highest in the EU-27 zone which averaged \u22121.9%.\nRomania has the third-highest percentage of women working in information and communications technologies (ICT) in Europe. 29% of their workforce is made up of women.\nServices.\nIn 2003 the service sector constituted 55% of gross domestic product (GDP), and employed 51.3% of the workforce. The subcomponents of services are financial, renting, and business activities (20.5%); trade, hotels and restaurants, and transport (18%); and other service activities (21.7%). The service sector in Romania has expanded in recent years, employing some 47% of Romanians and accounting for slightly more than half of GDP.\nThe largest employer is the retail sector, employing almost 12% of Romanians. The retail industry is mainly concentrated in a relatively small number of chain stores clustered together in shopping malls. In recent years the rise of big-box stores, such as Cora (hypermarket) (of France) and Carrefour (a French subsidiary), have led to fewer workers in this sector and a migration of retail jobs to the suburbs.\nBiotechnology industry.\nRomania is aggressively promoting and developing its biotechnology industry. Hundred of millions of dollars were invested into the sector to build up infrastructure, fund research and development and to recruit top international scientists to Romania. Romania features one of the world's newest competitive bio-industries, in key areas as pharmacogenomics, protein engineering, glyco-engineering, tissue engineering, bio-informatics, genome medicine and preventive medicine. Romania is devoting substantial resources to developing universities and R&amp;D facilities, increasing biotech startups, growing bio-clusters (communities of biotechnology companies and institutions) and developing human resources, all with the goal of making it one of the world's most advanced biotechnology regions.\nRegional variation.\nThe strength of the Romanian economy varies from region to region. PPP, and GDP per capita is the highest in Bucharest. The following table shows the highest GDP per capita of the other 4 counties, with data supplied by CNP. \nThe highest GDP per capita is found in Bucharest and surrounding Ilfov County. Values well above the national average are found in Timi\u0219, Arge\u0219, Bra\u0219ov, Cluj, Constan\u021ba, Arad, Sibiu and Prahova. Values well below the national average are found in: Vaslui, Boto\u0219ani, C\u0103l\u0103ra\u0219i, Neam\u021b, Vrancea, Suceava, Giurgiu, Mehedin\u021bi, Olt and Teleorman.\nForeign trade.\nIn 2017, Romania's largest trading partner was Germany, followed by Italy. Romania's main imports and exports are electrical machinery, motor vehicles &amp; parts and industrial machinery. While Romania imports substantial quantities of grain, it is largely self-sufficient in other agricultural products and food stuffs, due to the fact that food must be regulated for sale in the Romania retail market, and hence imports almost no food products from other countries.\nRomania imported in 2006 food products of 2.4 billion euros, up almost 20% versus 2005, when the imports were worth slightly more than 2 billion euros. The EU is Romania's main partner in the trade with agri-food products. The exports to this destination represent 64%, and the imports from the EU countries represent 54%. Other important partners are the CEFTA countries, Turkey, Republic of Moldova and the USA. Despite a decline of the arms industry in the post-communist era, Romania is a significant exporter of military equipment, accounting for 3\u20134% of the world total in 2007. EU members are represented by a single official at the World Trade Organization.\nDuring the first trimester of 2010, Romanian exports increased by 21%, one of the largest rates in the European Union. The trade deficit stood at roughly 2 billion EUR, the eighth largest in the EU. The annual trade deficit has widened every year since 2014, standing at about EUR 18.77B in 2020.\nMiscellaneous data.\nHouseholds with access to fixed and mobile telephone access\nBroadband penetration rate\nIndividuals using computer and internet\nSee also.\nGeneral:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25641", "revid": "48740244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25641", "title": "Mass media in Romania", "text": "The mass media in Romania refers to mass media outlets based in Romania. Television, magazines, and newspapers are all operated by both state-owned and for-profit corporations which depend on advertising, subscription, and other sales-related revenues. The Constitution of Romania guarantees freedom of speech. As a country in transition, the Romanian media system is under transformation.\nReporters Without Borders ranks Romania 42nd in its Worldwide Press Freedom Index, from 2013. Freedom House ranked it as \"partly free\" in 2014.\nHistory.\nRomania's newspaper market thrived after the 1989 revolution, but many newspapers subsequently closed because of rising costs. Most households in Bucharest have cable TV. There are hundreds of cable distributors offering access to Romanian, European and other stations.\nAccording to europaworld.com, in 2004 there were:\nLegislative framework.\nThe 2003 Constitution of Romania upholds freedom of expression and prohibits censorship. The Constitution states that \"Freedom of the press also involves the free setting up of publications,\" and that \"No publication shall be suppressed, establishes free access to information and the autonomy of the public radio and TV.\nNo specific Press Law is in force in Romania. Hate speech is forbidden when it insults state symbols or religion, and when it promotes fascist or racist ideologies. Small fines are imposed: in 2014, the president Traian Basescu was fined for an anti-Roma comment, and a Facebook user was also fined after he had posted a Nazi slogan that was then quoted by a local newspaper.\nIn 2007 the media rights body Reporters Without Borders praised reforms to the criminal code; journalists can no longer be jailed on defamation charges. Defamation was decriminalised in 2010 by a Supreme Court ruling, but this was later overturned by a 2013 Constitutional Court decision. Civil defamation lawsuits often target journalists.\nFreedom of access to information is guaranteed by the Constitution and by a specific law (Law on Free Access to Information of Public Interest, adopted in 2001). Public bodies are required to release information to the public, and journalists are afforded special privileges to obtain them faster. Yet, cases of officials obstructing access to information have been reported.\nOn 25 June 2008 the Senate adopted a draft amendment that would have obliged television and radio broadcasters to have a 50% of \"good\" or \"positive\" news. The Constitutional Court, however, ruled the bill unconstitutional before promulgation, so it never became law.\nStatus and self-regulation of journalists.\nJournalists have opposed initiatives for a Law on the Press, fearing that it would impose restrictions rather than granting freedoms. A 2009 study by CIJ, ActiveWatch and IMAS (The Institute for Marketing and Polls) reports that most journalists say that professional norms are not respected, mostly due to political and business pressures.\nThe Romanian Press Club has an Ethics Code and a Council of Honour to inquire journalists and media outlets found in breach of professional norms \u2013 although its decisions have often been criticised as arbitrary. The Convention of Media Organisations (COM) also adopted a deontological code; COM-member organisations have developed self-regulation guidelines for an increased accountability in the Romanian media. A \"Unique Code\" was issued in October 2009 by COM, MediaSind trade union and the Association of Journalists in Romania, to be adopted for the whole profession.\nAmong the broadcast media, regulation is managed by the National Broadcasting Council (\"Consiliul National al Audiovizualului\"), issuing warnings and fines for non lack of fairness and accuracy, as well as forcing media to display public acknowledgements for promoting indecent language and behaviour.\nJournalists in Romania have to deal with job insecurity due to low and delayed salaries, as well as commercial and political pressures from media owners and advertisers. Collective labour contracts for the mass media sector expired in early 2014. Reporters in Romania also often face verbal abuse, intimidation, and occasionally even physical aggressions.\nMedia outlets.\nRomania has one of the most dynamic media markets in southeastern Europe. TV is the medium of choice for most Romanians. State-owned TVR and the private stations Pro TV and Antena 1 command the lion's share of viewing, however there is a large number of smaller, private stations, some of them part of local networks. The state broadcaster, TVR, operates a second national network, TVR 2, and a pan-European satellite channel. Pay TV channels have a smaller but significant audience.\nThe public television company Televiziunea Rom\u00e2n\u0103 and the public radio Societatea Rom\u00e2n\u0103 de Radiodifuziune cover all the country and have also international programs. The state also owns a public news agency ROMPRES. The private media is grouped in media companies such as Intact Media Group, Media Pro, Realitatea-Ca\u0163avencu, Ringier, SBS Broadcasting Group, Centrul Na\u021bional Media and other smaller independent companies. Cable television is widely available in almost all localities, and some have even adopted digital television. It offers besides the national channels a great number of international and specialized channels. FM stations cover most cities and most of them belong to national radio networks. Overall readership of most newspapers is slowly declining due to increasing competition from television and the Internet. Tabloids and sport newspapers are among the most read national newspapers. In every large city there is at least one local newspaper, which usually covers the rest of the county. An http:// was established in 1998 and today represents a large number of publications.\nThe parliamentary majority controls appointments in the leadership of the public broadcaster Televiziunea Rom\u00e2n\u0103, thus ensuring a constant pro-governmental bias. In the private sector, owners' interests in other economic sectors usually define the editorial line of the media.\nThe print sector has suffered heavily from the economic crisis, and the TV sector is also facing contraction. Few media are profitable, and they increasingly depend on advertising. The distribution of public advertising funds is politicised, and that of advertising funds from the European Union (the biggest advertisement buyer) has not been transparent in the wake of the 2014 Romanian presidential election. Ownership structure of Romanian media is often obfuscated through intermediaries. Foreign media have a presence in the country but have recently scaled it down\nPrint media.\nThe Romanian print press market is rich and diversified.\nThe National Institute of Statistics (NIS) counted up to 300 newspaper publishers in 2007, of which 159 dailies, and over 350 magazine publishers. 300 of them are audited by the Romanian Audit Bureau of Circulation (BRAT), hence gaining in credibility and advertising revenues.\nThe quality segment includes title such as Adev\u0103rul, G\u00e2ndul (MediaPro), Evenimentul zilei (Ringier), Rom\u00e2nia liber\u0103 (WAZ/Dan Adamescu), Jurnalul Na\u021bional (Intact). Their circulation numbers remain low in relation to popular tabloids such as \"Click\" (Adevarul Holding), that in 2009 distributed 236,000 copies (more than all the quality press combined), \"Can Can\" or \"Libertatea\" (Ringier). Sport newspapers include Gazeta Sporturilor, owned by Intact, and ProSport, belonging to MediaPro. Business dailies include Ziarul Financiar, published by MediaPro, \"Business Standard\" (Realitatea-Catavencu) and Financiarul (Intact).\nLocal newspapers are usually not backed by big investors, and thus remain vulnerable to political and commercial pressures. The main ones include Gazeta de Sud in Craiova, Tribuna in Sibiu, Ziarul in Ia\u0219i, Via\u021ba liber\u0103 in Gala\u021bi and Transilvania Expres in Brasov. Readership has been in decline, among lacking professionalisation and poor distribution.\nMagazines are a thriving segment. Some are spin-offs of popular newspapers, such as Libertatea or Click. Women's weeklies, TV guides and business weeklies (Business Magazin, Money Express, Saptamana financiara, Capital) also make good revenues. Glossy magazines and international franchises complete the scene. Academia Catavencu is a cult satirical weekly.\nRadio broadcasting.\nThe first private radio stations appeared in 1990; there are now more than 100 of them. State-run Radio Romania operates four national networks and regional and local stations. BBC World Service is available on 88 FM in the capital, and is relayed in Timi\u0219oara (93.9), Sibiu (88.4) and Constanta (96.9).\nPrivate FM stations dominate the market in Romania, with more than 700 licenses from the National Broadcasting Council by 2009. Two networks achieved national coverage: Europa FM (owned by the French group Lagardere) and Info Pro (CME).\nThe most popular private networks are Radio Zu (Intact), Radio 21 (Lagardere), ProFM (CME), Kiss FM (ProSiebenSat1), relying mostly on advertisement revenues, and broadcasting musical hits, entertainment, and short news bulletins.\nThe public company Radio Rom\u00e2nia manages five national stations: Radio Rom\u00e2nia Actualit\u0103\u0163i (news), Radio Rom\u00e2nia Cultural (culture and arts), Radio Rom\u00e2nia Muzical (music), Radio Antena Satelor (farming and rural communities), and Radio 3Net \u2013 \"Florian Pitti\u015f\" (a youth station broadcasting online). It also holds an international station (Radio Romania International) and a regional network of 12 stations (Radio Rom\u00e2nia Regional), including Radio Ia\u0219i and Radio Cluj. Radio Rom\u00e2nia also includes the news agency \"Rador\", a publishing house, a radio theatre production department, several orchestras and choirs.\nTelevision broadcasting.\nTelevision is the most popular entertainment media in Romania, and it gathers two thirds of all advertising funds (337 million euro in 2008). The National Study of TV Audience has registered almost 50 TV stations distributed nationwide, including general audience and specialised channels.\nRomanian television is dominated by a small number of corporations, owning multiple TV channels as well as radio stations, newspapers and media agencies. Their television business is structured around a flagship channel and a number of smaller specialized, niche channels. The biggest corporations of this kind are:\nThere are many localized or franchised international channels (such as HBO, MTV, Cinemax, AXN, Cartoon Network). Furthermore, there are a few independent and local broadcasters.\nThe TV public service broadcaster is Televiziunea Rom\u00e2n\u0103, with five channels (TVR 1, TVR 2, TVR 3 TVR Cultural and TVR Info). TVRi is the international channel. TVR also hosts regional stations based in Timi\u0219oara, Cluj, Targu Mures, Craiova and Iasi. TVR usually is slammed for being politicised (its president and board are nominated by the parliamentary majority) and for being based on a hybrid financing system, drawing from the state budget, a special TV tax, and advertising too. Civil society pressures to achieve depoliticisation of TVR have not yet been fruitful\nTwo private stations, Pro TV (owned by the Bermuda-based Central European Media Enterprises) and Antena 1 (owned by Dan Voiculescu's daughter), are market leaders, sharing about 32% of the market, with public television in the third place. A feature of Romanian Television after 2000 was the boom of specialized channels.\nTelevision broadcasts and cable television, frequency allocations, content monitoring and license allocation are done by the National Audiovisual Council (Consiliul Na\u021bional al Audiovizualului, CNA).\nRomania has very high penetration rates for cable television in Europe, with over 79% of all households watching television through a CATV network in 2007. The market is extremely dynamic, and dominated by two giant companies \u2013 Romanian based RCS&amp;RDS and United States based UPC-Astral. Broadcast television is very limited because of the high penetration of cable. In the early 1990s, only two state owned TV channels were available, one only in about 20% of the country. Private TV channels were slow to appear, because of lack of experience and high start-up costs. In this environment, cable TV companies appeared and thrived, providing 15-20 foreign channels for a very low price. Many small, startup firms gradually grew, and coverage increased (coverage wars were frequent in the early period). However, this period soon ended, with consolidation around 1995\u20131996 with gentlemen agreements between larger companies over areas of control and pricing, with claims of monopoly abounding. This process of consolidation was completed around 2005\u20132006, when only two big suppliers of cable remained: UPC-Astral and RDS. Cable TV is now available in most of the country, including most rural areas. Satellite digital TV appeared in 2004.\nCinema.\nCinema is one of the least popular forms of entertainment in Romania, and over 100 cinema theatres have closed down since 1989. Romania has the lowest number of cinema goers in Europe. 75 active cinemas were counted in 2008 (down from 155 in 2004), more than half being outdated theatres owned by the public company Romaniafilm. New multiplex cinemas have been opening in shopping malls, including Hollywood Multiplex, Movieplex Cinema, and Cinema City Romania. Over 85% of tickets are for US blockbusters, with only 3.6% in 2008 for domestic Romanian film productions.\nTelecommunications.\nRomania has rapidly improving domestic and international services, especially in wireless telephony.\nThe domestic network offers good, modern services in urban areas; 98% of telephone network is automatic while 71% is digitized; trunk network is mostly fiber-optic cable and radio relay; about 80% of exchange capacity is digital. Roughly 3,300 villages have outdated or no service.\nInternational service data:\nThe combined (fixed+mobile) telephone penetration rate is 108.3%.\nLand lines.\nThere are 4,106,000 main lines in use (June 2007).\nRomtelecom (owned by the Greek company OTE and the Romanian state) is the dominant fixed line provider (around 80% of the market share) and the only POTS provider. Other providers are RCS&amp;RDS and UPC Romania.\nMobile.\nThe penetration rate of mobile telephony exceeded 100 percent in 2007 and reached 126 percent in 2008.\nThere were 22.600.000 SIM cards active by December 2013. There are three GSM cellular networks (Orange, Vodafone and Cosmote) covering more than 85% of the territory (about 98% of the population), one UMTS only (Digi.Mobil) as well as one CDMA2000 only network (Romtelecom). Five networks, meaning Vodafone, Orange, Digi.Mobil, Cosmote and Zapp also provide UMTS (3G) services. Vodafone, Orange, Digi.Mobil provides voice and data services over their UMTS (3G) networks, as long as Zapp provives only data services Cosmote provides voice and data services via Zapp UMTS network. Mobile telephony had a 108% penetration rate in March 2008.\nInternet.\nIn November 2008, the number of registered .ro domains was over 340,000, of which 315,000 were active. This represents an increase of 50% in a single year.\nOver 50% of the Romanian population used internet in 2014.\nNewspapers' websites are the main sources of information online. Online-only news outlets (such as HotNews.ro, ziare.com, ziare.ro, news.ro, liberalist.ro, corectnews.com, psnews.ro, activenews.ro, stiripesurse.ro) are more and more common, but they usually do not have the resources to produce original and quality journalistic contents.\nTrade unions.\nThe largest federation of Romanian trade unions in the media sector is MediaSind, claiming around 9,000 members, of which 7,500 journalists. Most of Romania's 30,000 journalist remain unaffiliated.\nMediaSind has negotiated with the employers' organisations the collective contract, binding for the entire profession, although this is often not respected in practice. It also supported journalists in legal cases against arbitrary dismissals and mistreatment.\nSeveral journalists' associations exist, including The Association of Journalists in Romania, formed by 70 prominent Bucarest-based journalists.\nThe Romanian Press Club gathers the owners and managers of media outlets, pushing the interests of the media organisations. Local publishers are grouped into the Ownership Association of Local Publishers (APEL).\nNGOs dealing with the media sector take part in the umbrella organisation called the Convention of Media Organisations (Conventia Organizatiilor de Media \u2013 COM). Its most active members are the Center for Independent Journalism, and ActiveWatch\u2014The Media Monitoring Agency, both dealing with training and advocacy to improve the quality of journalism in Romania.\nRegulatory authorities.\nPrint and online media have no particular regulatory authority. The Culture and Mass Media Committees of the two chambers of Parliament are competent on the issue but do not exercise monitoring and control.\nTelevision broadcasts and cable television, frequency allocations, content monitoring and license allocation are done by the National Audiovisual Council (Consiliul Na\u021bional al Audiovizualului, CNA). The CNA is the main regulatory authority for the broadcast media in Romania, being the guardian of public interest. It is tasked with the implementation of the Audiovisual Law and of all by-laws, including the Code of Regulations for the Broadcasting Content, and it issues recommendations and instructions. The CNA is composed of 11 members, appointed for six years: three by each Chamber of Parliament, two by the President of Romania, and three by the government; all have to be confirmed by the Parliament. The appointments to its board are politicised, and the body thus often acts in a biased and ineffective way.\nThe National Authority for Communications (ANCOM) is the regulatory body for the TLC market, setting and enforcing market rules.\nThe National Cinematography Centre (\"Centrul National al Cinematografiei\" \u2013 CNC), part of the Ministry of Culture, supervises the cinema industry and organises competitions to finance film projects.\nMedia ownership.\nTransparency.\nEven though the Romanian legislation in the field of media ownership transparency is fully aligned with the European standards, in practice sufficient information to assess who effectively owns and ultimately controls the media is not always available.\nConcentration and pluralism.\nThere are many media outlets in the Romanian market, but few media conglomerates control most of the audience, leaving pluralism only on the surface. Media ownership is highly concentrated and state advertising also poses a risk.\nLegal framework.\nAudiovisual Law\nThe Audiovisual Law (RP 2002) applies to television and radio: (1) Article 44 establishes that concentration of media ownership and increase in audience shares must not generate dominant positions in the formation of public opinion. A media company is considered in a dominant position if its share from the national sector-based market is over 30%. Public service broadcaster is exempted. (2) The law \"limits the number of media companies in which an owner can hold a majority of shares to one, with the additional possibility to hold an amount not larger than 20% from another company in the field of audiovisual communication.\" (3) A \"transfer of an audiovisual license is only possible with the approval of the NCA and results in a complete shift of responsibilities to the new license owner (Art. 56). This is particularly relevant for cases of mergers or acquisitions, in which the NCA can intervene by not approving the transfer of license.\"\nThe National Audiovisual Council appears however \"more concerned with the regulation of content than with that of the market\" The Audiovisual Law does not target vertical concentration/cross-media ownership.\nCompetition Law\nThe Competition Law (RP 1996, amended in 2001) applies to all economic sectors. Its focuses mainly on preventing market dominance. Concentration is not illegal in itself, but only when it creates or consolidates a dominant position. Still, it is allowed in some cases, such as when it improves efficiency. The law also targets vertical concentration/cross-ownership. The Competition Council (\"Consiliul Concuren\u021bei\") is in charge. The law also applies to print media. However, the CC policies are only based on economic principles, without attention for media pluralism.\nPractice.\nThere are many media outlets in Romania, but a few of them got most of the audience, making pluralism just an illusion.\nIn 2015 the Centre for Media Pluralism and Media Freedom (CMPF) assessed a medium risk for \"Concentration of media ownership\" and a high risk for the \"Concentration of cross-media ownership\".\nIn recent years there was a decrease in transnational investments and the so-called \"mogulisation\", a consolidation of local capital, often connected with unclear interests, both economical and political. Owners use media outlets in the interest of other business or political purposes. Over 55% of generalists and news channels are directly or indirectly politically affiliated. In 2015 the CMPF assessed a high risk of \"Politicisation of control over media outlets\" and a medium risk of \"Political bias in the media\".\nAlso, several cases of blackmail involving media can be cited. Some owners had connections with Securitate, the secret police of the Socialist Republic of Romania.\nIn 2017, Romanian media watchdog ActiveWatch warned that the private media sector was increasingly influenced by political interests. According to the NGO, \"With job-insecurity and low pay commonplace, many Romanian journalists face the stark choice between obeying orders that effectively come from corporate or financial masters, or \u2013 if refusing and asking too many questions \u2013 being sacked.\"\nPublic funds\nFor many years after the 1990 public funds were granted \"in the form of rescheduling and cancelling tax liabilities for several groups of companies\" in a way that \"created advantages for the existing players in the market and raised obstacles for potential newcomers and for those who did not benefited from masked subsidies\".\nMassive public support to media outlets cabinet was given particularly during Adrian N\u0103stase's government (but the example was followed also on lower levels), either directly or through state companies, often with the mean of advertising. And while now public subsidies are close to zero, indirect ones, such as state advertising, are high. According to the CMPF state advertising represents a medium risk.\nMedia conglomerates.\nThis table gives an overview of the main media conglomerates in Romania. More details about some groups are below:\nMediaPro\nBermudan Central European Media Enterprises (CME), founded by Ronald Lauder, entered the Romanian market in 1995, with Adrian S\u00e2rbu's Media Pro as a local partner, something that was required for operating an audiovisual license. S\u00e2rbu was also appointed as chief executive and chairman of CME. However, in February 2014 he was charged with tax evasion, money laundering and embezzlement, sold his shares in CME and withdrew from all positions. He was detained for 30 days in February 2015. Meanwhile, Lauder withdrew from CME board. In 2014 CME was bought by Time Warner and Pro FM was sold to RCS &amp; RDS.\nAccording to 2007 informations in terms of ownership the group controls 26% of the television market, 9% of the urban radio market and 5% of the print market. Its main outlet is ProTV which was launched in 1994, but it owns a total of five television stations, two national radio, the main news agency Mediafax, national and local newspaper, publishing company Publimedia. It is also the Romanian publisher of some international media outlets, namely \"Maxim Romania\", \"Playboy Romania\" and MTV Rom\u00e2nia.\nThe European Community defined ProTV as being dependent on the goodwill of Romanian government, because it is claimed it has granted huge loans to the media, thus allowing its rapid growth. In fact it has given the government more airtime than to the opposition in the 2004 general election.\nIntact Group\nIntact Group is owned by the family of Dan Voiculescu, former collaborator of Securitate, founder and former president of the Conservative Party (formerly Humanist Party), senator from 2004 to 2012. Before 2004 general election Voiculescu's party was allied to the Social Democratic Party (PSD) and Antena 1 was favourable to the party during the campaign. He was sentenced to 10 years of prison on money laundering charges. He is cited as an example of \"Berlusconization\" in Romania.\nAccording to 2007 informations 15% of the print market, 2% of the urban radio market and 15% of the TV market. Antena 1 was founded in 1993 and is the main competitor of ProTV. The group owns a total of five television channel, others being Antena 2, Antena 3, Antena International, and Euforia TV, radio station Radio Romantic, news agency Amos News, many printed periodicals, a publishing and a production house.\nRealitatea Media\nBusinessman Sorin Ovidiu V\u00e2ntu was revealed in 2006 as being the key owner of Realitatea Media, which was formally controlled by Cypriot Bluelink Comunicazioni. The company also launched a news agency, NewsIn, but was not able to challenge MediaFax. V\u00e2ntu has been an informer for Securitate. Sebastian Ghi\u021b\u0103 has been involved with Realitatea, but he left after a clash with V\u00e2ntu and went on founding Rom\u00e2nia TV.\nAccording to 2007 informations 4% it has of the television market.\nDo\u011fan Holding\nDo\u011fan Holding is a Turkish conglomerate founded by Ayd\u0131n Do\u011fan. It owns Kanal D Romania.\nRingier Romania\nIn the 1990s Swiss media group Ringier was an exception to the lack of foreign investments.\nRingier controls 56% of the print market, publishing newspapers like \"Libertatea\" and magazines like \"Capital\". From 2003 to 2010 it was also the publisher of \"Evenimentul Zilei\".\nPrima Broadcasting Group\nCristian Burci founded Prima TV in 1997. Later he associated himself with international conglomerate SBS Broadcasting Group. In 2012 Burci bought Adev\u0103rul Holding from Dinu Patriciu (Patriciu had bought \"Adev\u0103rul\" newspaper in 2006).\nAccording to 2007 informations it has 4% of the television market. It used to control also Kiss TV, which is now owned by Antenna Group.\nLagard\u00e8re\nFrench group Lagard\u00e8re entered the Romanian market in 2000 with the launch of Europa FM. \"Lagard\u00e8re also owned a stake in Radio XXI together with Funda\u0163ia Secolul XXI\", which has amongst its member politicians of the Social Democratic Party.\nCentrul Na\u021bional Media\nCentrul Na\u021bional Media is owned by Ioan and Viorel Micula, CEOs of European Drinks &amp; Foods. According to 2007 informations it has 4% of the television market.\nPublic Service Broadcasters\nThe board of TVR is appointed by parliament. In 2015 the CMPF assessed a high risk for the \"Independence of [Public Service Media] governance and funding\". Romanian Television gave the government more airtime than to the opposition in the 2004 general election.\nThe national news agency Agerpres is publicly funded (\u20ac3.1 million in 2014). It was reorganized by Law 19/2003. According to 2007 informations it has 22% of television market share.\nCensorship.\nArticle 30 of the Constitution of Romania, adopted in 1991 and amended in 2003, is dedicated to freedom of expression:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;#Freedom of expression of thoughts, opinions, or beliefs, and freedom of any creation, by words, in writing, in pictures, by sounds or other means of communication in public are inviolable.\nSelf-censorship.\nA 2008 report on \"Labor Relations and Media\" in South East European Network for Professionalization of Media (SEENPM) member countries noted that while in Romania there were no cases of direct censorship in mass media, there were indeed cases of \"indirect censorship\" or self-censorship.\nJournalists risk their jobs in they do not respect the editorial policy decided by media owner, who might be a businessman protecting its business. Journalists who stay in line are rewarded.\nIn its report \"The State of Romanian Mass Media 2020\", the Center for Independent Journalism reiterated that self-censorship continues to be a problem in many newsrooms, wherein journalists are forced to tow a certain political line. The end result is that \"less and less original stories come from reporters.\"\nInternet censorship.\nLaw 124/2015, passed on June 12, 2015, held that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Providers of networks and services of electronic communications [...] are obliged to respect the decisions of the Supervisory Board of [National Office for Gambling (ONJN)] on restricting access to the websites of gambling unauthorized in Romania, as well as those on advertising gambling organized by a gambling operator which is unlicensed in Romania.\u2014\u200a\nAccording to the Civil Liberties Union for Europe this amount as establishing internet censorship. The most serious fact are that the decision can be taken by an administrative authority, without court intervention, and that the measures targets not only unauthorized gambling websites themselves, but also those advertising them. European Digital Rights (EDRi) advocacy group questions whether Facebook, YouTube or Google could become a target, too.\nSince the restriction is operated by Internet service providers (ISP) through block and redirect to the ONJN website, which is the able to collect data about users who attempted to navigate to an unauthorized gambling website.\nWhile DNS blocking can be bypassed, according to ICANN it can damage internet security. Moreover, while at the moment the infrastructure is used only for unauthorized gambling website, it could be potentially used for other purposes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25642", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25642", "title": "Transport in Romania", "text": " \nTransportation infrastructure in Romania is the property of the state, and is administered by the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure, Constructions and Tourism, except when operated as a concession, in which case the concessions are made by the Ministry of Administration and Interior.\nThe country's most important waterway is the river Danube. The largest port is that of Constan\u021ba, which is the second largest port in the Black Sea.\nWith over 13 million passengers Bucharest Airport is a major international airport and European transportation hub. Air travel is used for greater distances within Romania but faces extreme competition from the state-owned CFR's rail network. Public transport is available in most areas.\nHistory.\nRomania has a system of large, navigable rivers, such as the Danube, Olt and Mure\u0219 that cross the country.\nThe first important human improvements were the Roman roads linking major settlements and providing quick passage for marching armies.\nRailway transport.\nA fast-growing number of Romania's major cities have modern tram or light rail networks, including Bucharest, Timi\u0219oara, Cluj-Napoca and Oradea. Recently the tram has seen a very big revival with many experiments such as ground level power supply in Oradea.\nRoads and automotive transport.\nAccording to the CIA Factbook, in 2022 Romania had a total road network of 85,387\u00a0km, ranking 59 in the world. \nRomania's National Institute of Statistics (INS) 2022 transport report stated that total road network is 86,336 km: 41,653\u00a0km (48,2%) modernized roads (94,1% with asphalt pavements of heavy/medium type and 5.9% with concrete), 20,956 \u00a0km (24.3%) with light asphalt road clothing, 15,713\u00a0km (18,2%) stone paving (such as sett paving or cobblestone roads) and 8,014 \u00a0km (9,3%) dirt roads.\nMotorways.\nMotorways are identified by A followed by a number. As of December 2024, Romania has 1,217.77\u00a0km of highway completed with more under planning or construction. In recent years, a master plan for the national motorway network has been developed and approved by the European Commission in July 2015.\nCurrently the A1 motorway, part of the northern branch of the Pan European IV Corridor, is open on 456\u00a0km. Under construction are the segments Curtea de Arge\u0219\u2014Pite\u0219ti (30\u00a0km). Margina\u2014Holdea (13\u00a0km) and Boi\u021ba\u2014Curtea de Arge\u0219 (73\u00a0km) have yet to start construction. It has a total length of 576\u00a0km.\nThe A2 motorway was the first motorway in Romania opened on all its segments, with a length of 205\u00a0km. It links Bucharest to Constan\u021ba (junction with A4)\nThe A3 motorway, which is the largest motorway project in Eastern Europe with a length of 588\u00a0km from Bucharest to Oradea (near the Hungarian border), is open on 173\u00a0km. The segment Che\u021bani\u2014C\u00e2mpia Turzii (15.7\u00a0km) is under construction. All segments between N\u0103d\u0103\u0219elu and Oradea have been tendered by the end of 2020. The remaining sections are still in the planned phase.\nThe A4 motorway is operational on 22\u00a0km, from Ovidiu to Agigea (also known as the Constan\u021ba bypass). Another 45\u00a0km are planned, from Agigea to Vama Veche (at the border with Bulgaria).\nThe A6 motorway is also part of the Pan European IV Corridor, but near Lugoj it starts as the southern branch, that connects the cities of Sofia, Istanbul and Athens. It has a length of 270\u00a0km, of which 11.4\u00a0km between A1 and Lugoj bypass are open.\nThe A7 motorway starts from the A3 (near Ploie\u0219ti), linking it to the region of Moldavia and further to the Ukrainian border. From its planned 450\u00a0km, 16\u00a0km are open near Bac\u0103u, which serve as the bypass for that city.\nThe A10 motorway is the first motorway which links two motorways in Romania: A1 (near Sebe\u0219) and A3 (near Turda). It has 70\u00a0km, and since 2021, it has been operational on its entire length.\nThe A11 motorway is a 135\u00a0km motorway, the second to connect A1 with A3 this time between Arad and Oradea, of which a 2.4\u00a0km stretch near Arad called the Arad bypass is open.\nStatistics.\nAccording to the Romanian \"Direc\u0163ia Regim Permise de Conducere \u015fi \u00cenmatriculare a Vehiculelor\", in 2017 there were 7,635,000 vehicles (of which 1,320,230 in Bucharest), and 8,900,000 in 2019. It is estimated that by 2021 there will be more than 10 million registered cars in Romania.\nIn 2016 62% of road fatalities occurred in urban area, Romania has 1189 fatalities in urban area, that is 60 killed in urban area per million inhabitants, or times more than EU average of 19. This makes Romania the EU member state with the most fatalities per million population, % more fatalities than the second country, Hungary.\nMetro.\nBucharest is the only city in Romania which has an underground railway system, comprising both the Bucharest Metro and the Bucharest Light rail system of the Regia Autonom\u0103 de Transport Bucure\u0219ti. \nThe Bucharest Metro forms the backbone of Bucharest public transport network. Bucharest has a fairly extensive subway system consisting of five lines (M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5) run by Metrorex. In total, the network is long and has 64 stations, with average distance between stops. It is one of the fastest ways to get around the city. The oldest metro line is M1, which was opened in 1979. The newest metro line is M5, which was opened in 2020. A sixth metro line, M6 line, is currently under construction.\nAs of 2024, Bucharest Metro is the only metro system in Romania; with a second one, the Cluj-Napoca Metro, being under construction.\nAir transport.\nThe air traffic in Romania reached 20.28 million passengers in 2017 and 21 million passengers in 2022.\nThe national carrier of Romania is TAROM, while Wizz Air has the largest share of Romania's air transport market.\nAirports.\nThere are 20 airports in Romania (estimated as of 2006).\n\"see: List of airlines of Romania and List of airports in Romania\"\nWater transport.\nRomanian companies operate over 700 ships of which 400 are registered in Romania. Romania's 110 shipping firms employ 12,500 personnel at sea and 15,500 on shore. Each year, 105 million tonnes of goods and 1 million passengers are transported by sea. Marine transport is responsible for 52% of Romania's imports and exports.\nWaterways.\nAs of 2006, there are 1,731\u00a0km of navigable waterways of which:\nIn 2004, according to europaworld.com, 19 million passenger-km and 4 billion ton-km were carried through these waterways.\nMerchant fleet.\nThe merchant marine has seen a dramatic drop in capacity during the first decade of the 21st century:\nThese include: 13 cargo ships, 1 passenger ship, 2 passenger/cargo ships, 2 petroleum tankers, 1 roll-on/roll-off.\n50 other ships are registered in other countries: Cambodia 1, Georgia 15, North Korea 6, Malta 10, Marshall Islands 1, Panama 8, Sierra Leone 2, Saint Kitts and Nevis 1, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 1, Syria 4, Tuvalu 1, unknown 4.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25644", "revid": "42975076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25644", "title": "Foreign relations of Romania", "text": "The foreign relations of Romania is the policy arm of the government of Romania which guides its interactions with other nations, their citizens, and foreign organizations, as well as its status as a member of the European Union (EU), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and other key international organizations. Since the end of the Cold War and the 1989 Romanian Revolution, Romania has pursued a foreign policy centered on Euro-Atlantic integration, joining NATO in 2004 and the EU in 2007. Prioritizing multilateralism, collective security, and democratic values, Romania maintains active diplomatic relations with neighboring states, including Ukraine, Moldova, Hungary, and Bulgaria, while fostering regional cooperation through initiatives such as the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) and the Three Seas Initiative. \nRomania is classified by scholars and international relations experts as a middle power, a designation reflecting its moderate but influential role in international relations and regional relations. Analysts highlight Romania's strategic geographic position, growing economic capacity, and active participation in multilateral institutions as key factors underpinning this status.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Romania maintains diplomatic relations with:\nRelations by continent.\nEurope (Inside the European Union).\nRomania joined the European Union (EU) on January 1, 2007.\nInternational organisations.\nRomania is a member of the following international organisations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25645", "revid": "51046572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25645", "title": "Rwanda", "text": "Country in East Africa\nRwanda, officially the Republic of Rwanda, is a landlocked country in East Africa. Known as the \"Land of a Thousand Hills\" for its high elevation and rolling terrain, its geography is dominated by mountains in the west and savanna in the southeast. The largest and most notable lakes are mainly in the western and northern regions of the country, and several volcanoes that form part of the Virunga volcanic chain are primarily in the northwest. The climate is considered tropical highland, with two rainy seasons and two dry seasons each year. Its capital and largest city is Kigali, located at the centre of the country, at 1,567 metres above sea level. \nRwanda lies a few degrees south of the Equator in the Great Rift Valley of East Africa, where the African Great Lakes and Southeast Africa converge. Going clockwise Rwanda is bordered by Uganda to the north, Tanzania to the east, Burundi to the south, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the west.\nWith a population of about 14\u00a0million people living within a total area of , of which land accounts for about 93.7%, Rwanda is the 21st\u00a0most densely populated country in the world, with an average of about 578 people per square kilometre (1,500 per square mile).\nHunter-gatherers settled the territory in the Stone and Iron Ages, followed later by Bantu peoples. The population coalesced first into clans, and then into kingdoms. In the 15th century, one kingdom, under King Gihanga, managed to incorporate several of its close neighbor territories establishing the Kingdom of Rwanda. The Kingdom of Rwanda dominated from the mid-eighteenth century, with its Tutsi kings conquering others militarily, centralising power, and enacting unifying policies. In 1897, Germany colonized Rwanda as part of German East Africa, followed by Belgium, which took control in 1916 during World War I. Both European nations ruled through the Rwandan king and perpetuated a pro-Tutsi policy. \nThe Hutu population revolted in 1959. They massacred numerous Tutsi and ultimately established an independent, Hutu-dominated republic in 1962 led by President Gr\u00e9goire Kayibanda. A 1973 military coup overthrew Kayibanda and brought Juv\u00e9nal Habyarimana to power, who retained the pro-Hutu policy. The Tutsi-led Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) launched a civil war in 1990. Habyarimana was assassinated in April 1994 by unknown parties. Social tensions erupted in the Rwandan genocide carried out by Hutu Power extremists against the Tutsis. RPF ended the genocide with a military victory in July 1994.\nRwanda has been governed by the RPF as a \"de facto\" one-party state since 1994 with former commander Paul Kagame as president since 2000. The country has been governed by a series of centralized authoritarian governments since precolonial times. Although Rwanda has low levels of corruption compared with neighbouring countries, it ranks among the lowest in international measurements of government transparency and civil liberties, despite recent gains that have elevated it to the medium category on the Human Development Index. The population is young and predominantly rural; Rwanda has one of the youngest populations in the world. Rwandans are drawn from just one cultural and linguistic group, the Banyarwanda. However, within this group there are three subgroups: the Hutu, Tutsi, and Twa. The Twa are a forest-dwelling Central African foragers and are often considered descendants of Rwanda's earliest inhabitants. Christianity is the largest religion in the country; the principal and national language is Kinyarwanda, spoken by native Rwandans, with English, French, and Swahili serving as additional official foreign languages.\nRwanda's economy is based on services, agricultural exports, and manufacturing. Coffee and tea are the major cash crops that it exports, although it is surpassed in banana production. Tourism is a fast-growing sector and is now the country's leading foreign exchange earner. As of the most recent survey in 2024, 30.5% of the population is affected by multidimensional poverty with 27.4% under the national poverty line. The country is a member of the African Union, the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations (one of few member states that does not have any historical links with the British Empire), COMESA, OIF, and the East African Community.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Rwanda\" derives from the word Ku-aanda, meaning \"expansion\" or \"spreading out from the centre\", reflecting the historical growth of the Kingdom of Rwanda.\nHistory.\nModern human settlement of what is now Rwanda dates from, at the latest, the last glacial period, either in the Neolithic period around 8,000 BC, or in the long humid period which followed, up to around 3,000 BC. Archaeological excavations have revealed evidence of sparse settlement by hunter-gatherers in the late Stone Age, followed by a larger population of early Iron Age settlers, who produced dimpled pottery and iron tools. These early inhabitants were the ancestors of the Twa, aboriginal pygmy hunter-gatherers who remain in Rwanda today. Then by 3,000 BC, Central Sudanic and Kuliak farmers and herders began settling into Rwanda, followed by South Cushitic\u2013speaking herders in 2,000 BC. The forest-dwelling Twa lost much of their habitat and moved to the mountain slopes. Between 800 BC and 1500 AD, a number of Bantu groups migrated into Rwanda, clearing forest land for agriculture. Historians have several theories regarding the nature of the Bantu migrations; one theory is that the first settlers were Hutu, while the Tutsi migrated later to form a distinct racial group, possibly of Nilo-hamitic origin. An alternative theory is that the migration was slow and steady, with incoming groups integrating into rather than conquering the existing society. Under this theory, the Hutu and Tutsi distinction arose later and was a class distinction rather than a racial one.\nThe earliest form of social organisation in the area was the clan (\"ubwoko\"). The clans were not limited to genealogical lineages or geographical area, and most included Hutu, Tutsi, and Twa. From the 15th century, the clans began to merge into kingdoms. One kingdom, under King Gihanga, managed to incorporate several of its close neighbor territories establishing the Kingdom of Rwanda. By 1700, around eight kingdoms had existed in the present-day Rwanda. One of these, the Kingdom of Rwanda ruled by the Tutsi Nyiginya clan, became increasingly dominant from the mid-18th century. The kingdom reached its greatest extent during the 19th century under the reign of King Kigeli Rwabugiri. Rwabugiri conquered several smaller states, expanded the kingdom west and north, and initiated administrative reforms; these included , in which Tutsi patrons ceded cattle, and therefore privileged status, to Hutu or Tutsi clients in exchange for economic and personal service, and , a corv\u00e9e system in which Hutu were forced to work for Tutsi chiefs. Rwabugiri's changes caused a rift to grow between the Hutu and Tutsi populations. The Twa were better off than in pre-Kingdom days, with some becoming dancers in the royal court, but their numbers continued to decline.\nThe Berlin Conference of 1884 assigned the territory to the German Empire, who declared it to be part of German East Africa. In 1894, explorer Gustav Adolf von G\u00f6tzen was the first European to cross the entire territory of Rwanda; he crossed from the south-east to Lake Kivu and met the king. In 1897, Germany established a presence in Rwanda with the formation of an alliance with the king, beginning the colonial era. The Germans did not significantly alter the social structure of the country, but exerted influence by supporting the king and the existing hierarchy, and delegating power to local chiefs.\nBelgian forces invaded Rwanda and Burundi in 1916, during World War I, and later, in 1922, they started to rule both Rwanda and Burundi as a League of Nations mandate called Ruanda-Urundi and started a period of more direct colonial rule. The Belgians simplified and centralised the power structure, introduced large-scale projects in education, health, public works, and agricultural supervision, including new crops and improved agricultural techniques to try to reduce the incidence of famine. Both the Germans and the Belgians, in the wake of New Imperialism, promoted Tutsi supremacy, considering the Hutu and Tutsi different races. In 1935, Belgium introduced an identity card system, which labelled each individual as either Tutsi, Hutu, Twa or Naturalised. While it had been previously possible for particularly wealthy Hutu to become honorary Tutsi, the identity cards prevented any further movement between the classes.\nBelgium continued to rule Ruanda-Urundi (of which Rwanda formed the northern part) as a UN trust territory after the Second World War, with a mandate to oversee eventual independence. Tensions escalated between the Tutsi, who favoured early independence, and the Hutu emancipation movement, culminating in the 1959 Rwandan Revolution: Hutu activists began killing Tutsi and destroying their houses, forcing more than 100,000 people to seek refuge in neighbouring countries. In 1961, the suddenly pro-Hutu Belgians held a referendum in which the country voted to abolish the monarchy. Rwanda was separated from Burundi and gained independence on 1 July 1962, which is commemorated as Independence Day, a national holiday. Cycles of violence followed, with mainly Tutsi exile rebels attacking from neighbouring countries and the Hutu-led government retaliating with large-scale slaughter and repression of the Tutsi civilians inside Rwanda. In 1973, Juv\u00e9nal Habyarimana took power in a military coup. Pro-Hutu discrimination continued, but there was greater economic prosperity and a reduced amount of violence against the Tutsi. The Twa remained marginalised, and by 1990 were almost entirely forced out of the forests by the government; many became beggars. Rwanda's population had increased from 1.6\u00a0million people in 1934 to 7.1\u00a0million in 1989, leading to competition for land.\nIn 1990, the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), a rebel group composed of Tutsi refugees, invaded northern Rwanda from their base in Uganda, initiating the Rwandan Civil War. The group condemned the Hutu-dominated government for failing to democratize and confront the problems facing these refugees. Neither side was able to gain a decisive advantage in the war, but by 1992 it had weakened Habyarimana's authority; mass demonstrations forced him into a coalition with the domestic opposition and eventually to sign the 1993 Arusha Accords with the RPF.\nRwandan genocide.\nThe cease-fire ended on 6 April 1994 when Habyarimana's plane was shot down near Kigali Airport, killing him. The shooting down of the plane served as the catalyst for the Rwandan genocide, which began within a few hours. Over the course of approximately 100 days, between 500,000 and 1,000,000 Tutsi and politically moderate Hutu were killed in well-planned attacks on the orders of the interim government. Many Twa were also killed, despite not being directly targeted.\nThe Tutsi RPF restarted their offensive, and took control of the country methodically, gaining control of the whole country by mid-July. The international response to the genocide was limited, with major powers reluctant to strengthen the already overstretched UN peacekeeping force. When the RPF took over, approximately two million Hutu fled to neighbouring countries, in particular Za\u00efre, fearing reprisals; additionally, the RPF-led army was a key belligerent in the First and Second Congo Wars. Within Rwanda, a period of reconciliation and justice began, with the establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the reintroduction of , a traditional village court system. Since 2000 Rwanda's economy, tourist numbers, and Human Development Index have grown rapidly; between 2006 and 2011 the poverty rate reduced from 57% to 45%, while life expectancy rose from 46.6 years in 2000 to 65.4 years in 2021.\nSince 1994.\nIn 2009, Rwanda joined the Commonwealth of Nations, although the country was never part of the British Empire.\nOn 25 January 2025, Rwanda broke off diplomatic ties with its neighbor, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in support of the country's rebel groups, including the M23 Movement.\nPolitics and government.\nRwanda is a \"de facto\" one-party state ruled by the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) and its leader Paul Kagame continuously since the end of the civil war in 1994. Although Rwanda is nominally democratic, elections are manipulated in various ways, which include banning opposition parties, arresting or assassinating critics, and electoral fraud. The RPF is a Tutsi-dominated party but receives support from other communities as well.\nThe constitution was adopted following a national referendum in 2003, replacing the transitional constitution which had been in place since 1994. The constitution mandates a multi-party system of government, with politics based on democracy and elections. However, the constitution places conditions on how political parties may operate. Article 54 states that \"political organizations are prohibited from basing themselves on race, ethnic group, tribe, clan, region, sex, religion or any other division which may give rise to discrimination\". The president of Rwanda is the head of state, and has broad powers including creating policy in conjunction with the Cabinet of Rwanda, commanding the Rwandan Defence Force, negotiating and ratifying treaties, signing presidential orders, and declaring war or a state of emergency. The president is elected every five years, and appoints the prime minister and all other members of the Cabinet. The Parliament consists of two chambers. It makes legislation and is empowered by the constitution to oversee the activities of the president and the Cabinet. The lower chamber is the Chamber of Deputies, which has 80 members serving five-year terms. Twenty-four of these seats are reserved for women, elected through a joint assembly of local government officials; another three seats are reserved for youth and disabled members; the remaining 53 are elected by universal suffrage under a proportional representation system.\nRwanda's legal system is largely based on German and Belgian civil law systems and customary law. The judiciary is independent of the executive branch, although the president and the Senate are involved in the appointment of Supreme Court judges. Human Rights Watch has praised the Rwandan government for progress made in the delivery of justice including the abolition of the death penalty, but also alleges interference in the judicial system by members of the government, such as the politically motivated appointment of judges, misuse of prosecutorial power, and pressure on judges to make particular decisions. The constitution provides for two types of courts: ordinary and specialised. Ordinary courts are the Supreme Court, the High Court, and regional courts, while specialised courts are military courts and a system of commercial courts created in 2011 to expedite commercial litigations. Between 2004 and 2012, a system of \"Gacaca\" courts was in operation. , a Rwandan traditional court operated by villages and communities, was revived to expedite the trials of genocide suspects. The court succeeded in clearing the backlog of genocide cases, but was criticised by human rights groups as not meeting legal fair standard.\nRwanda has low corruption levels relative to most other African countries; in 2014, Transparency International ranked Rwanda as the fifth-cleanest out of 47 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and 55th-cleanest out of 175 in the world. The constitution provides for an ombudsman, whose duties include prevention and fighting of corruption. Public officials (including the president) are required by the constitution to declare their wealth to the ombudsman and to the public; those who do not comply are suspended from office. Despite this, Human Rights Watch notes extensive political repression throughout the country, including illegal and arbitrary detention, threats or other forms of intimidation, disappearances, politically motivated trials, and the massacre of peacefully protesting civilians.\nRwanda is a member of the United Nations, African Union, Francophonie, East African Community, and the Commonwealth of Nations. For many years during the Habyarimana regime, the country maintained close ties with France, as well as Belgium, the former colonial power. Under the RPF government, however, Rwanda has sought closer ties with neighbouring countries in the East African Community and with the English-speaking world. Diplomatic relations with France were suspended in 2006 following the indictment of Rwandan officials by a French judge, and despite their restoration in 2010, as of 2015[ [update]] relations between the countries remain strained. Relations with the Democratic Republic of the Congo were tense following Rwanda's involvement in the First and Second Congo Wars; the Congolese army alleged Rwandan attacks on their troops, while Rwanda blamed the Congolese government for failing to suppress Hutu rebels in North and South Kivu provinces. In 2010, the United Nations released a report accusing the Rwandan army of committing wide scale human rights violations and crimes against humanity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo during the First and Second Congo Wars, charges denied by the Rwandan government. Relations soured further in 2012, as Kinshasa accused Rwanda of supporting the M23 rebellion, an insurgency in the eastern Congo. In 2015 peace had been restored and relations were improving, but by January 2025 renewed Rwandan support for the M23 rebellion caused DR Congo to sever diplomatic relations in the wake of the 2025 Goma offensive.\nRwanda's relationship with Uganda was also tense for much of the 2000s following a 1999 clash between the two countries' armies as they backed opposing rebel groups in the Second Congo War, but improved significantly in the early 2010s. In 2019, relations between the two countries deteriorated, with Rwanda closing its borders with Uganda.\nAdministrative divisions.\nBefore western colonization, the Rwandan government system had a quasi-system of political pluralism and power sharing. Despite there being a strict hierarchy, the pre-colonial system achieved an established, combined system of \"centralized power and decentralized autonomous units.\" Under the monarch, the elected Chief governed a province that was divided into multiple districts. Two other officials appointed by head Chief governed the districts; one official was allocated power over the land while the other oversaw cattle. The king () exercised control through a system of provinces, districts, hills, and neighbourhoods.\nAs of 2003, the constitution divided Rwanda into provinces (), districts (), cities, municipalities, towns, sectors (), cells (), and villages (); the larger divisions, and their borders, are established by Parliament. In January 2006, Rwanda was reorganized such that twelve provinces were merged to create five, and 106 districts were merged into thirty. The present borders drawn in 2006 aimed at decentralising power and removing associations with the old system and the genocide. The previous structure of twelve provinces associated with the largest cities was replaced with five provinces based primarily on geography. These are Northern Province, Southern Province, Eastern Province, Western Province, and the Municipality of Kigali in the centre.\nThe five provinces act as intermediaries between the national government and their constituent districts to ensure that national policies are implemented at the district level. The Rwanda Decentralisation Strategic Framework developed by the Ministry of Local Government assigns to provinces the responsibility for \"coordinating governance issues in the Province, as well as monitoring and evaluation\". Each province is headed by a governor, appointed by the president and approved by the Senate. The districts are responsible for coordinating public service delivery and economic development. They are divided into sectors, which are responsible for the delivery of public services as mandated by the districts. Districts and sectors have directly elected councils, and are run by an executive committee selected by that council. The cells and villages are the smallest political units, providing a link between the people and the sectors. All adult resident citizens are members of their local cell council, from which an executive committee is elected. The city of Kigali is a provincial-level authority, which coordinates urban planning within the city.\nGeography.\nRwanda is located in East Africa, in the east-central part of the African continent, between 1\u00b0 and 3\u00b0 S latitude and between 29\u00b0 and 31\u00b0 E longitude. Its geography is characterized by rolling highlands, mountains, and numerous lakes. At , Rwanda is the world's 144th-largest country, and the fourth smallest on the African mainland after Gambia, Eswatini, and Djibouti. It is comparable in size to Burundi, Haiti and Albania. The entire country is at a high altitude: the lowest point is the Rusizi River at above sea level.\nThe watershed between the major Congo and Nile drainage basins runs from north to south through Rwanda, with around 80% of the country's area draining into the Nile and 20% into the Congo via the Rusizi River and Lake Tanganyika. The country's longest river is the Nyabarongo, which rises in the south-west, flows north, east, and southeast before merging with the Ruvubu to form the Kagera; the Kagera then flows due north along the eastern border with Tanzania. The Nyabarongo-Kagera eventually drains into Lake Victoria, and its source in Nyungwe Forest is a contender for the as-yet undetermined overall source of the Nile. Rwanda has many lakes, the largest being Lake Kivu. This lake occupies the floor of the Albertine Rift along most of the length of Rwanda's western border, and with a maximum depth of , it is one of the twenty deepest lakes in the world. Other sizeable lakes include Burera, Ruhondo, Muhazi, Rweru, and Ihema, the last being the largest of a string of lakes in the eastern plains of Akagera National Park.\nMountains dominate central and western Rwanda and the country is sometimes called \"\" in French (\"Land of a thousand hills\"). They are part of the Albertine Rift Mountains that flank the Albertine branch of the East African Rift, which runs from north to south along Rwanda's western border. The highest peaks are found in the Virunga volcano chain in the northwest; this includes Mount Karisimbi, Rwanda's highest point, at . This western section of the country lies within the Albertine Rift montane forests ecoregion. It has an elevation of . The centre of the country is predominantly rolling hills, while the eastern border region consists of savanna, plains and swamps.\nClimate.\nRwanda has a temperate tropical highland climate, with lower temperatures than are typical for equatorial countries because of its high elevation. Precipitation usually ranges from 1,000 to 1,400 millimetres per year, depending on the area. Kigali, in the centre of the country, has a typical daily temperature range between , with little variation through the year. There are some temperature variations across the country; the mountainous west and north are generally cooler than the lower-lying east. There are two rainy seasons in the year; the first runs from February to June and the second from September to December. These are separated by two dry seasons: the major one from June to September, during which there is often no rain at all, and a shorter and less severe one from December to February. Rainfall varies geographically, with the west and northwest of the country receiving more precipitation annually than the east and southeast. Global warming has caused a change in the pattern of the rainy seasons. According to a report by the Strategic Foresight Group, change in climate has reduced the number of rainy days experienced during a year, but has also caused an increase in frequency of torrential rains. Both changes have caused difficulty for farmers, decreasing their productivity. Strategic Foresight also characterise Rwanda as a fast warming country, with an increase in average temperature of between 0.7\u00a0\u00b0C to 0.9\u00a0\u00b0C over fifty years.\nBiodiversity.\nIn prehistoric times, montane forest occupied one-third of the territory of present-day Rwanda. Naturally occurring vegetation is now mostly restricted to the three national parks, with terraced agriculture dominating the rest of the country. Nyungwe, the largest remaining tract of forest, contains 200 species of tree as well as orchids and begonias. Vegetation in the Volcanoes National Park is mostly bamboo and moorland, with small areas of forest. By contrast, Akagera has a savanna ecosystem in which acacia dominates the flora. There are several rare or endangered plant species in Akagera, including \"Markhamia lutea\" and \"Eulophia guineensis\".\nThe greatest diversity of large mammals is found in the three national parks, which are designated conservation areas. Akagera contains typical savanna animals such as giraffes and elephants, while Volcanoes is home to an estimated one-third of the worldwide mountain gorilla population. Nyungwe Forest boasts thirteen primate species including common chimpanzees and \"Ruwenzori colobus\" arboreal monkeys; th\"e Ruwenzori colobus\" move in groups of up to 400 individuals, the largest troop size of any primate in Africa.\nRwanda's population of lions was destroyed in the aftermath of the genocide of 1994, as national parks were turned into camps for displaced people and the remaining animals were poisoned by cattle herders. In June 2015, two South African parks donated seven lions to Akagera National Park, reestablishing a lion population in Rwanda. The lions were held initially in a fenced-off area of the park, and then collared and released into the wild a month later.\nEighteen endangered black rhinos were brought to Rwanda in 2017 from South Africa. After positive results, five more black rhinos were delivered to Akagera National Park from zoos all over Europe in 2019.\nSimilarly, the white rhino population is growing in Rwanda. In 2021, Rwanda received 30 white rhinos from South Africa with the goal of Akagera being a safe breeding ground for the near-threatened species.\nThere are 670 bird species in Rwanda, with variation between the east and the west. Nyungwe Forest, in the west, has 280 recorded species, of which 26 are endemic to the Albertine Rift; endemic species include the \"Rwenzori turaco\" and handsome spurfowl. Eastern Rwanda, by contrast, features savanna birds such as the black-headed gonolek and those associated with swamps and lakes, including storks and cranes.\nRecent entomological work in the country has revealed a rich diversity of praying mantises, including a new species \"Dystacta tigrifrutex\", dubbed the \"bush tiger mantis\".\nRwanda contains three terrestrial ecoregions: Albertine Rift montane forests, Victoria Basin forest-savanna mosaic, and Ruwenzori-Virunga montane moorlands. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 3.85/10, ranking it 139th globally out of 172 countries.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Rwanda has expanded consistently since the 1994 genocide, with real GDP growth of 8.2% in 2023 and 8.9% in 2024, according to the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda. Growth is projected at 7.1% in 2025 and 7.5% in 2026, and the government is actively pursuing policies to encourage industrial growth, such as the \"Made In Rwanda\".\nAs of the most recent survey in 2024, 30.5% of the population are affected by multidimensional poverty with 27.4% of the population under the national poverty line (monetary poverty), a significant drop from the monetary poverty of 60.3% in 2000. Rwanda was classified in 2024 on the list of Least developed countries by the United Nations, despite its graduation in the human assets aspect, Rwanda's GNI per capita (as an average over three years) and Economic Vulnerability Index (agricultural dependence and landlocked status) are below the graduation threshold.\nRwanda's economy is mainly driven by services, agriculture and industry, although agriculture (subsistence and cash crops) holds a larger share of employment than the other sectors (64.5%). The share of GDP from different sectors (2024) is as follows: Services constituted 44.3%, Industry constituted 21.5% and agriculture constituted 27.1%.\nIn 2023 its major export partners include United Arab Emirates, Democratic Republic of the Congo, China, India and the United States, with the major exports being precious stones/metals, coffee, ores, oil and manufactured goods (agro-processing, cement, furniture, textiles and plastic pipes). Its major import partners were China, Tanzania, Kenya, India and the United Arab Emirates, with its major imports being oil, electric machinery, metals and industrial machinery. Its monetary policy and financial management is controlled by the central National Bank of Rwanda and the currency is the Rwandan franc; in August 2025, the exchange rate was 1445 francs to one United States dollar, a currency which it created in 1964 Rwanda joined the East African Community in 2007, and has ratified a plan for monetary union amongst the seven member nations, which could eventually lead to a common East African shilling.\nRwanda's economy suffered heavily during the 1994 genocide, with widespread loss of life, failure to maintain infrastructure, looting, and neglect of important cash crops. This caused a large drop in GDP and heavily damaged the country's ability to attract private and external investment. However, in the 2000s Rwanda witnessed an economic boom which improved the standard of living for many Rwandans.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture is prominent in Rwanda and approximately 59% of the land is used for agricultural processes. Farming techniques are basic, with small plots of land and steep slopes. Despite at least five agriculture-related institutes, mechanisation levels are moderate to low. Although Rwanda has experienced notable growth in agricultural output, rapid population growth has placed more pressure on food security and increased the population's reliance on food imports. Despite a fertile landscape, the country possesses limited natural resources.\nCrops grown in the country include matoke (green bananas), which occupy more than a third of the country's farmland, potatoes, beans, sweet potatoes, cassava, wheat and maize. Coffee and tea are the major cash crops for export, with the high altitudes, steep slopes and volcanic soils providing favourable conditions. Reports have established that more than 400,000 Rwandans make their living from coffee plantation. Reliance on agricultural exports makes Rwanda vulnerable to shifts in their prices. Animals raised in Rwanda include cows, goats, sheep, pigs, chicken, and rabbits, with geographical variation in the numbers of each. Production systems are mostly traditional, although there are a few intensive dairy farms around Kigali. Shortages of land and water, insufficient and poor-quality feed, and regular disease epidemics with insufficient veterinary services are major constraints that restrict output. Fishing takes place on the country's lakes, but stocks are very depleted, and live fish are being imported in an attempt to revive the industry.\nIndustry and manufacturing.\nThe industrial sector is currently experiencing growth, contributing 21.5% of GDP in 2014. Products manufactured include cement, agricultural products, small-scale beverages, soap, furniture, shoes, plastic goods, textiles and cigarettes. Rwanda's mining industry is an important contributor, generating US$93\u00a0million in 2008. Minerals mined include cassiterite, wolframite, gold, and coltan, which is used in the manufacture of electronic and communication devices such as mobile phones.\nRwanda's service sector suffered during the late-2000s recession as bank lending, foreign aid projects and investment were reduced. The sector rebounded in 2010, becoming the country's largest sector by economic output and contributing 43.6% of the country's GDP. Key tertiary contributors include banking and finance, wholesale and retail trade, hotels and restaurants, transport, storage, communication, insurance, real estate, business services and public administration including education and health.\nRwanda was ranked 104th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nTourism.\nTourism is one of Rwanda\u2019s fastest-growing economic sectors and remains the country\u2019s leading foreign exchange earner. In 2023, Rwanda recorded over 1.4 million international visitors, generating about US$620 million in revenue, according to the Rwanda Development Board. The World Travel &amp; Tourism Council reported that in 2024, the sector supported nearly 386,000 jobs in Rwanda and contributed over 10% of GDP. \nA major draw for visitors is mountain gorilla tracking in Volcanoes National Park, one of only three places worldwide where mountain gorillas can be seen in the wild. Other attractions include Nyungwe Forest National Park, known for its chimpanzees and canopy walkway, the resorts of Lake Kivu, and Akagera National Park, a savanna reserve in the east home to elephants, lions, and giraffes.\nThe government, through the Rwanda Development Board, has promoted tourism as a pillar of economic growth. Visitor numbers have increased steadily since the early 2000s, with international arrivals often linked to conferences in Kigali as well as ecotourism. In 2018, Rwanda launched the \"Visit Rwanda\" campaign, including sponsorship deals with European football clubs such as Arsenal F.C., Paris Saint-Germain F.C., and Atl\u00e9tico Madrid, to raise the country\u2019s profile as a travel destination.\nIn 2025, Visit Rwanda expanded its sports marketing into the United States, entering multi-year agreements with the Los Angeles Clippers (NBA) and the Los Angeles Rams (NFL). As part of the Clippers partnership, Visit Rwanda became the exclusive jersey patch sponsor and the official coffee sponsor of the team\u2019s Intuit Dome arena. In the Rams deal, Visit Rwanda is an official international tourism sponsor of the team, SoFi Stadium, and Hollywood Park, and will secure prominent advertising and entitlement placements within the stadium complex.\nTourism in Rwanda has been praised for its emphasis on sustainability and conservation.\nMedia and communications.\nThe largest radio and television stations are state-run, and the majority of newspapers are owned by the government. Most Rwandans have access to radio; during the 1994 genocide, the radio station Radio T\u00e9l\u00e9vision Libre des Mille Collines broadcast across the country, and helped to fuel the killings through anti-Tutsi propaganda. As of 2015[ [update]], the state-run Radio Rwanda was the largest station and the main source of news throughout the country. Television access was limited, with most homes not having their own set. The government rolled out digital television in 2014, and a year later there were seven national stations operating, up from just one in the pre-2014 analogue era. The press is tightly restricted, and newspapers routinely self-censor to avoid government reprisals. Nonetheless, publications in Kinyarwanda, English, and French critical of the government are widely available in Kigali. Restrictions were increased in the run-up to the Rwandan presidential election of 2010, with two independent newspapers, \"Umuseso\" and \"Umuvugizi\", being suspended for six months by the High Media Council.\nThe country's oldest telecommunications group, Rwandatel, went into liquidation in 2011, having been 80% owned by Libyan company LAP Green. The company was acquired in 2013 by Liquid Telecom, a company providing telecommunications and fibre optic networks across eastern and southern Africa. In 2015, Liquid Telecom provided landline service to 30,968 subscribers, with mobile operator MTN Rwanda serving an additional 15,497 fixed line subscribers. Landlines are mostly used by government institutions, banks, NGOs and embassies, with private subscription levels low. In 2015, mobile phone penetration in the country was 72.6%, up from 41.6% in 2011. MTN Rwanda is the leading provider, with 3,957,986 subscribers, followed by Tigo with 2,887,328, and Bharti Airtel with 1,336,679. Rwandatel has also previously operated a mobile phone network, but the industry regulator revoked its licence in April 2011, following the company's failure to meet agreed investment commitments. Internet penetration is low but rising rapidly; in 2015 there were 12.8 internet users per 100 people, up from 2.1 in 2007. In 2011, a fibre-optic telecommunications network was completed, intended to provide broadband services and facilitate electronic commerce. This network is connected to SEACOM, a submarine fibre-optic cable connecting communication carriers in southern and eastern Africa. Within Rwanda the cables run along major roads, linking towns around the country. Mobile provider MTN also runs a wireless internet service accessible in most areas of Kigali via pre-paid subscription. As of 2024, the largest internet providers are MTN and Airtel. MTN Rwanda has shown impressive growth in its subscriber base. As of the first quarter of 2024, MTN Rwanda had approximately 7.4 million mobile subscribers. (Additionally, their Mobile Money platform, MoMo, had around 5.1 million users), compared to Airtel Rwanda's 5,792,046 active mobile-cellular telephone subscriptions.\nIn October 2019, Mara Corporation launched the first African-made smartphone in Rwanda. Following its launch in 2024, Airtel Rwanda, in cooperation with the Rwandan government, released the most affordable smartphone in the world, the Airtel Imagine 4G. The phone was introduced as part of the ConnectRwanda 2.0 initiative. It costs only 20,000 RWF (approximately US$14.49).\nInfrastructure.\nThe Rwandan government prioritised funding of water supply development during the 2000s, significantly increasing its share of the national budget. This funding, along with donor support, caused a rapid increase in access to safe water; in 2015, 74% of the population had access to safe water, up from about 55% in 2005; the government has committed to increasing this to 100% by 2017. The country's water infrastructure consists of urban and rural systems that deliver water to the public, mainly through standpipes in rural areas and private connections in urban areas. In areas not served by these systems, hand pumps and managed springs are used. Despite rainfall exceeding annually in most of the country, little use is made of rainwater harvesting, and residents are forced to use water very sparingly, relative to usage in other African countries. Access to sanitation remains low; the United Nations estimates that in 2006, 34% of urban and 20% of rural dwellers had access to improved sanitation, with this statistic increasing to 92% for the total population (95% urban and 91% rural) in 2022. Kigali is one of the cleanest cities in Africa. Government policy measures to improve sanitation are limited, focusing only on urban areas. The majority of the population, both urban and rural, use public shared pit latrines.\nRwanda's electricity supply was, until the early 2000s, generated almost entirely from hydroelectric sources; power stations on Lakes Burera and Ruhondo provided 90% of the country's electricity. A combination of below average rainfall and human activity, including the draining of the Rugezi wetlands for cultivation and grazing, caused the two lakes' water levels to fall from 1990 onwards; by 2004 levels were reduced by 50%, leading to a sharp drop in output from the power stations. This, coupled with increased demand as the economy grew, precipitated a shortfall in 2004 and widespread loadshedding. As an emergency measure, the government installed diesel generators north of Kigali; by 2006 these were providing 56% of the country's electricity, but were very costly. The government enacted a number of measures to alleviate this problem, including rehabilitating the Rugezi wetlands, which supply water to Burera and Ruhondo and investing in a scheme to extract methane gas from Lake Kivu, expected in its first phase to increase the country's power generation by 40%. Only 18% of the population had access to electricity in 2012, though this had risen from 10.8% in 2009. The government's Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy for 2013\u201318 aims to increase access to electricity to 70% of households by 2017.\nThe government has increased investment in the transport infrastructure of Rwanda since the 1994 genocide, with aid from the United States, European Union, Japan, and others. The transport system consists primarily of the road network, with paved roads between Kigali and most other major cities and towns in the country. Rwanda is linked by road to other countries in the East African Community, namely Uganda, Tanzania, Burundi and Kenya, as well as to the eastern Congolese cities of Goma and Bukavu; the country's most important trade route is the road to the port of Mombasa via Kampala and Nairobi, which is known as the Northern Corridor. The principal form of public transport in the country is the minibus, accounting for more than half of all passenger carrying capacity. Some minibuses, particularly in Kigali, operate an unscheduled service, under a shared taxi system, while others run to a schedule, offering express routes between the major cities. There are a smaller number of large buses, which operate a scheduled service around the country. The principal private hire vehicle is the motorcycle taxi; in 2013 there were 9,609 registered motorcycle taxis in Rwanda, compared with just 579 taxicabs. Coach services are available to various destinations in neighbouring countries. The country has an international airport at Kigali that serves several international destinations, the busiest routes being those to Nairobi and Entebbe; there is one domestic route, between Kigali and Kamembe Airport near Cyangugu. In 2017, construction began on the Bugesera International Airport, to the south of Kigali, which will become the country's largest when it opens, complementing the existing Kigali airport. The national carrier is RwandAir, and the country is served by seven foreign airlines. As of 2015[ [update]] the country had no railways, but there is a project underway, in conjunction with Burundi and Tanzania, to extend the Tanzanian Central Line into Rwanda; the three countries have invited expressions of interest from private firms to form a public private partnership for the scheme. There is no public water transport between the port cities on Lake Kivu, although a limited private service exists and the government has initiated a programme to develop a full service. The Ministry of Infrastructure is also investigating the feasibility of linking Rwanda to Lake Victoria via shipping on the Akagera River.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs of 2025[ [update]], Rwanda's estimated population is around 14.6 million, although estimates vary. A decade earlier, in 2015, the estimated population was 11,262,564 (according to the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda), and the 2012 census recorded a population of 10,515,973. The population is young: as of 2024\u20132025, estimates of the median age ranged from 19.9 to 20.8, with 42.9% of the population under the age of 15, and 54.7% between 15 and 64. In 2015, according to the CIA \"World Factbook\", the annual birth rate was estimated at 40.2 births per 1,000 inhabitants, and the death rate at 14.9. The current life expectancy is between 68.2 and 70.54 years (71 years for females and 66 years for males), placing it 156th out of 224 countries and territories. The overall sex ratio of the country is 95.9 males per 100 females.\nAt , Rwanda's population density is amongst the highest in Africa. Historians such as G\u00e9rard Prunier believe that the 1994 genocide can be partly attributed to the population density. The population is predominantly rural, with a few large towns; dwellings are evenly spread throughout the country. The only sparsely populated area of the country is the savanna land in the former province of Umutara and Akagera National Park in the east. Kigali is the largest city, with a population of around one million. Its rapidly increasing population challenges its infrastructural development. According to the 2012 census, the second largest city is Gisenyi, which lies adjacent to Lake Kivu and the Congolese city of Goma, and has a population of 126,000. Other major towns include Ruhengeri, Butare, and Muhanga, all with populations below 100,000. The urban population rose from 6% of the population in 1990, to 16.6% in 2006; by 2011, however, the proportion had dropped slightly, to 14.8%.\nRwanda has been a unified state since pre-colonial times, and the population is drawn from just one cultural and linguistic group, the Banyarwanda; this contrasts with most modern African states, whose borders were drawn by colonial powers and did not correspond to ethnic boundaries or pre-colonial kingdoms. Within the Banyarwanda people, there are three separate groups, the Hutu, Tutsi and Twa. The CIA \"World Factbook\" gives estimates that the Hutu made up 84% of the population in 2009, the Tutsi 15% and Twa 1%. The Twa are a pygmy people who descend from Rwanda's earliest inhabitants, but scholars do not agree on the origins of and differences between the Hutu and Tutsi. Anthropologist Jean Hiernaux contends that the Tutsi are a separate race, with a tendency towards \"long and narrow heads, faces and noses\"; others, such as Villia Jefremovas, believe there is no discernible physical difference and the categories were not historically rigid. In precolonial Rwanda the Tutsi were the ruling class, from whom the kings and the majority of chiefs were derived, while the Hutu were agriculturalists. The current government discourages the Hutu/Tutsi/Twa distinction, and has removed such classification from identity cards. The 2002 census was the first since 1933 which did not categorise Rwandan population into the three groups.\nEducation.\nPrior to 2012, the Rwandan government provided nine years of free basic education in state-run schools, consisting of six years of primary and three years of lower secondary education (known as the \"Tronc Commun\"). In 2012, this policy was expanded to cover twelve years of free basic education, including upper secondary. \nA 2015 study noted that while primary school enrollment was nearly universal, completion rates remained low and repetition rates high. Although schooling is officially fee free, parents are expected to contribute to certain costs such as school materials, teacher support, and infrastructure maintenance. The government maintains that these contributions should not prevent any child from attending school. \nThere are also many private and church affiliated schools that follow the national curriculum but charge tuition fees. From 1994 until 2009, secondary education was offered in either French or English. Following Rwanda\u2019s accession to the East African Community and the Commonwealth, English became the main medium of instruction from 2009 onward. \nThe country has several institutions of higher learning. In 2013, the government established the University of Rwanda (UR) through the merger of the National University of Rwanda and other public higher education institutions. In 2023, the gross enrollment ratio for tertiary education was 8.89%, up from 3.6% in 2006. Rwanda\u2019s adult literacy rate, defined as the share of those aged 15 and above who can read and write, rose from 38% in 1978 to 58% in 1991, 71% in 2009, and 78.8% in 2022.\nHealth.\nThe quality of healthcare in Rwanda has historically been very low, both before and immediately after the 1994 genocide. In 1998, more than one in five children died before their fifth birthday, often from malaria.\nPresident Kagame has made healthcare one of the priorities for the Vision 2020 development programme, boosting spending on health care to 6.5% of the country's gross domestic product in 2013, compared with 1.9% in 1996. The government has devolved the financing and management of healthcare to local communities, through a system of health insurance providers called \"mutuelles de sant\u00e9\". The \"mutuelles\" were piloted in 1999, and were made available nationwide by the mid-2000s, with the assistance of international development partners. Premiums under the scheme were initially US$2 per annum; since 2011 the rate has varied on a sliding scale, with the poorest paying nothing, and maximum premiums rising to US$8 per adult. As of 2014[ [update]], more than 90% of the population was covered by the scheme. The government has also set up training institutes including the Kigali Health Institute (KHI), which was established in 1997 and is now part of the University of Rwanda. In 2005, President Kagame also launched a program known as \"The Presidents' Malaria Initiative\". This initiative aimed to help get the most necessary materials for prevention of malaria to the most rural areas of Rwanda, such as mosquito nets and medication.\nIn recent years Rwanda has seen improvement on a number of key health indicators. Between 2005 and 2013, life expectancy increased from 55.2 to 64.0, under-5 mortality decreased from 106.4 to 52.0 per 1,000 live births, and incidence of tuberculosis has dropped from 101 to 69 per 100,000 people. The country's progress in healthcare has been cited by the international media and charities. \"The Atlantic\" devoted an article to \"Rwanda's Historic Health Recovery\". Partners In Health described the health gains \"among the most dramatic the world has seen in the last 50 years\".\nDespite these improvements, however, the country's health profile remains dominated by communicable diseases, and the United States Agency for International Development has described \"significant health challenges\", including the rate of maternal mortality, which it describes as \"unacceptably high\", as well as the ongoing HIV/AIDS epidemic. According to the American Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, travellers to Rwanda are highly recommended to take preventive malaria medication as well as make sure they are up to date with vaccines such as yellow fever.\nRwanda also has a shortage of medical professionals, with only 0.84 physicians, nurses, and midwives per 1,000 residents. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is monitoring the country's health progress towards Millennium Development Goals 4\u20136, which relate to healthcare. A mid-2015 UNDP report noted that the country was not on target to meet goal 4 on infant mortality, despite it having \"fallen dramatically\"; the country is \"making good progress\" towards goal 5, which is to reduce by three quarters the maternal mortality ratio, while goal 6 is not yet met as HIV prevalence has not started falling.\nReligion.\nThe largest faith in Rwanda is Catholicism, but there have been significant changes in the nation's religious demographics since the genocide, with many conversions to evangelical Christianity, and, to a lesser degree, Islam. According to the 2012 census, Catholic Christians represented 43.7% of the population, Protestants (excluding Seventh-day Adventists) 37.7%, Seventh-day Adventists 11.8%, and Muslims 2.0%; 0.2% claimed no religious beliefs and 1.3% did not state a religion. Traditional religion, despite officially being followed by only 0.1% of the population, retains an influence. Many Rwandans view the Christian God as synonymous with the traditional Rwandan God \"Imana\".\nLanguages.\nThe country's principal and national language is Kinyarwanda, which is spoken by almost the entire population (about 98%). Inhabitants of Rwanda's Nkombo Island speak Mashi, a language closely related to Kinyarwanda. \nDuring the colonial era, German was the first European language introduced to Rwanda, though it was never widely used or taught. After 1916, French became dominant under Belgian administration and was used in government and education. The 1962 Constitution made French an official language alongside Kinyarwanda. Dutch was also used in limited administrative contexts during the Belgian period.\nThe return of English-speaking Rwandan refugees from Uganda, Kenya, and Tanzania in the 1990s reshaped the country's linguistic landscape and accelerated the shift toward English. As Rwanda deepened its ties with the East African Community and joined the Commonwealth, English became increasingly important in education, business, and administration. In 2008, the government changed the medium of instruction in schools from French to English to strengthen regional integration. Since then, the starting point of English instruction in schools has been adjusted several times. Private schools may still choose to teach in either English or French.\nToday, Kinyarwanda, English, French, and Swahili are all official languages. Kinyarwanda serves as the national and unifying language, while English is now the primary language of government, education, and business. French remains in limited use in diplomacy and cultural contexts, and Swahili, the lingua franca of the East African Community, is taught in schools and used in regional trade. Swahili was introduced as a compulsory subject in secondary schools in 2015.\nAccording to the 2012 Census of Rwanda, literacy among residents aged 15 and above was 67.7% in Kinyarwanda, 14.7% in English, and 11.4% in French. A decade later, the 2022 Census showed notable shifts: literacy in Kinyarwanda had risen to 78.3%, English to 21.2%, French had decreased to 8.2%, and Swahili reached 4.0%. These results reflect the steady growth of English and Swahili literacy and a continuing decline in the proportion of French-literate speakers. Kinyarwanda remains the mother tongue of nearly all Rwandans, while English and Swahili use continue to expand, particularly in urban areas and schools. As in many postcolonial societies, proficiency in European languages is closely linked to education, migration background, and social class.\nHuman rights.\nHomosexuality is generally considered a taboo topic, and there is no significant public discussion of this issue in any region of the country. Some lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) Rwandans have reported being harassed and blackmailed. Same-sex sexual activity is not specifically illegal in Rwanda. Some cabinet-level government officials have expressed support for the rights of LGBT people; however, no special legislative protections are afforded to LGBT people, who may be arrested by the police under various laws dealing with public order and morality. Same-sex marriages are not recognized by the state, as the constitution provides that \"[o]nly civil monogamous marriage between a man and a woman is recognized\".\nSince 2006, Human Rights Watch has documented that Rwandan authorities round up and detain street children, street vendors, sex workers, homeless people, and beggars. They have also documented the use of torture in safe houses and other facilities, such as Kami military camp, Kwa Gacinya and Gikondo prison.\nCulture.\nThe culture of Rwanda is varied. Unlike many other countries in Africa, Rwanda has been a unified state since precolonial times, populated by the Banyarwanda people who share a single language and cultural heritage.\nArts.\nMusic and dance are an integral part of Rwandan ceremonies, festivals, social gatherings and storytelling. The most famous traditional dance is a highly choreographed routine consisting of three components: the \"umushagiriro\", or cow dance, performed by women; the \"intore\", or dance of heroes, performed by men; and the drumming, also traditionally performed by men, on drums known as \"ingoma\". The best-known dance group is the National Ballet. It was established by President Habyarimana in 1974, and performs nationally and internationally. Traditionally, music is transmitted orally, with styles varying between the social groups. Drums are of great importance; the royal drummers enjoyed high status within the court of the King (\"Mwami\"). Drummers play together in groups of varying sizes, usually between seven and nine in number. The country has a growing popular music industry, influenced by African Great Lakes, Congolese, and American music. The most popular genre is hip hop, with a blend of dancehall, rap, ragga, R&amp;B and dance-pop.\nTraditional arts and crafts are produced throughout the country, although most originated as functional items rather than purely for decoration. Woven baskets and bowls are especially common, notably the basket style of the agaseke. \"Imigongo\", a unique cow dung art, is produced in the southeast of Rwanda, with a history dating back to when the region was part of the independent Gisaka kingdom. The dung is mixed with natural soils of various colours and painted into patterned ridges to form geometric shapes. Other crafts include pottery and wood carving. Traditional housing styles make use of locally available materials; circular or rectangular mud homes with grass-thatched roofs (known as \"nyakatsi\") are the most common. The government has initiated a programme to replace these with more modern materials such as corrugated iron.\nRwanda does not have a long history of written literature, but there is a strong oral tradition ranging from poetry to folk stories. Many of the country's moral values and details of history have been passed down through the generations. The most famous Rwandan literary figure was Alexis Kagame (1912\u20131981), who carried out and published research into oral traditions as well as writing his own poetry. The Rwandan Genocide resulted in the emergence of a literature of witness accounts, essays and fiction by a new generation of writers such as Benjamin Sehene and Mfuranzima Fred. A number of films have been produced about the Rwandan Genocide, including the Golden Globe-nominated \"Hotel Rwanda\", \"100 Days\", \"Shake Hands with the Devil\", \"Sometimes in April\", and \"Shooting Dogs\", the last four having been filmed in Rwanda and having featured survivors as cast members.\nFourteen regular national holidays are observed throughout the year, with others occasionally inserted by the government. The week following Genocide Memorial Day on 7 April is designated an official week of mourning. The victory for the RPF over the Hutu extremists is celebrated as Liberation Day on 4 July. The last Saturday of each month is \"umuganda\", a national morning of mandatory community service lasting from 8am to 11am, during which all able bodied people between 18 and 65 are expected to carry out community tasks such as cleaning streets or building homes for vulnerable people. Most normal services close down during \"umuganda\", and public transportation is limited.\nCuisine.\nRwanda's cuisine consists of staple foods produced by subsistence agriculture (plantains, pulses, sweet potatoes, beans, cassava) and reflects other East African foods (mandazi, chapati). For those who live near lakes and have access to fish, tilapia is popular. The potato, thought to have been introduced to Rwanda by German and Belgian colonialists, is very popular. Ugali, locally known as \"Ubugari\" (or \"umutsima\") is common, a paste made from cassava or maize and water to form a porridge-like consistency that is eaten throughout the African Great Lakes. \"Isombe\" is made from mashed cassava leaves and can be served with dried fish, rice, ugali, potatoes etc. Lunch is usually a buffet known as \"m\u00e9lange\", consisting of the above staples and sometimes meat. Brochettes are the most popular food when eating out in the evening, usually made from goat but sometimes tripe, beef, or fish. It's important to note however that many children in Rwanda are malnourished (1/3rd for children under five).\nIn rural areas, many bars have a brochette seller responsible for tending and slaughtering the goats, skewering and barbecuing the meat, and serving it with grilled bananas. Milk, particularly in a fermented yoghurt form called \"ikivuguto\", is a common drink throughout the country. Other drinks include a traditional beer called Ikigage made from sorghum and \"urwagwa\", made from bananas, and a soft drink called Umutobe which is banana juice; these popular drinks feature in traditional rituals and ceremonies. The major drinks manufacturer in Rwanda is Bralirwa, which was established in the 1950s, a Heineken partner, and is now listed on the Rwandan Stock Exchange. Bralirwa manufactures soft drink products from The Coca-Cola Company, under licence, including Coca-Cola, Fanta, and Sprite, and a range of beers including Primus, M\u00fctzig, Amstel, and Turbo King. In 2009 a new brewery, Brasseries des Mille Collines (BMC) opened, manufacturing Skol beer and a local version known as Skol Gatanu; BMC is now owned by Belgian company Unibra. East African Breweries also operate in the country, importing Guinness, Tusker, and Bell, as well as whisky and spirits.\nSport.\nThe Rwandan government, through its Sports Development Policy, promotes sport as a strong avenue for \"development and peace building\", and the government has made commitments to advancing the use of sport for a variety of development objectives, including education. The most popular sports in Rwanda are association football, volleyball, basketball, athletics and Paralympic sports. Cricket has been growing in popularity, as a result of refugees returned from Kenya, where they had learned to play the game. \nCycling, traditionally seen largely as a mode of transport in Rwanda, is also growing in popularity as a sport; and Team Rwanda have been the subject of a book, \"Land of Second Chances: The Impossible Rise of Rwanda's Cycling Team\" and a film, \"Rising from Ashes\". The UCI Road World Championships took place in Kigali in September 2025.\nRwandans have been competing at the Olympic Games since 1984, and the Paralympic Games since 2004. The country sent seven competitors to the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, representing it in athletics, swimming, mountain biking and judo, and 15 competitors to the London Summer Paralympics to compete in athletics, powerlifting and sitting volleyball. The country has also participated in the Commonwealth Games since joining the Commonwealth in 2009. The country's national basketball team has been growing in prominence since the mid-2000s, with the men's team qualifying for the final stages of the African Basketball Championship four times in a row since 2007. The country bid unsuccessfully to host the 2013 tournament. Rwanda's national football team has appeared in the African Cup of Nations once, in the 2004 edition of the tournament, but narrowly failed to advance beyond the group stages. The team have failed to qualify for the competition since, and have never qualified for the World Cup. Rwanda's highest domestic football competition is the Rwanda National Football League; as of 2015[ [update]], the dominant team is APR FC of Kigali, having won 13 of the last 17 championships. Rwandan clubs participate in the Kagame Interclub Cup for Central and East African teams, sponsored since 2002 by President Kagame.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGovernment\nGeneral\nTourism"}
{"id": "25648", "revid": "50801929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25648", "title": "Demographics of Rwanda", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Rwanda include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.\nRwanda's population density is among the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa at . This country has few villages, and nearly every family lives in a self-contained compound on a hillside. The urban concentrations are grouped around administrative centers.\nOver half of the adult population is literate, but no more than 5% have received secondary education.\nPopulation.\nIn 1950, Rwanda had a very narrow population pyramid, with less than 250,000 males and females between 0\u201310 years old. The graph only gets narrower as it goes up with virtually no-one living past 50 years of age. In 2017, the population of Rwanda increased dramatically from 1950 with about 750,000 people between 0\u201320 years old; the graph remains very narrow in the older ages section but has improved from 1950. By 2050, it is predicted that more people will be living longer and the structure will broaden overall. By 2100, it is predicted that there will be more people aged between 30 and 60 than between 0\u201320, as previous years have shown.\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 2,072,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 42.6%, 54.7% were between 15 and 65 years of age, and 2.7% was 65 years or older\nStructure of the population.\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2012) (Data refer to national projections.):\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2019) (Projections based on the 2012 Population Census.):\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of vital events is in Rwanda not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates:\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nFertility data as of 2014\u201315 (DHS Program):\nLife expectancy.\nSource: UN\nEthnic groups.\nThe Rwandan population largely consists of three ethnic groups. The Hutus, who comprise the majority of the population (85%), are farmers of Bantu origin. The Tutsis (14% before the Genocide, probably less than 10% now) are a pastoral people who arrived in the area in the 15th century. Until 1959, they formed the dominant caste under a feudal system based on cattle-holding, and ruled in the pre-colonial Kingdom of Rwanda.\nThe Twa (pygmies) (1%) are thought to be the remnants of the earliest settlers of the region.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25649", "revid": "50570293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25649", "title": "Politics of Rwanda", "text": "The Republic of Rwanda is politically a \"de facto\" one-party republic governed by the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) and its leader, Paul Kagame, who was formally elected in 2000, since the RPF played the primary role in ending the 1994 genocide. Although Rwanda is nominally democratic, elections are manipulated in various ways, which include banning opposition parties, arresting or assassinating critics, and electoral fraud.\nRwandan legislation has developed from Belgian and German civil law systems, with the country's customary law taking place in a framework of a semi-presidential republic, whereby the president of Rwanda serves as the head of state, possessing significant executive power, together with the prime minister of Rwanda serving as the constitutional head of government.\nLegislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of parliament, the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies. On 5 May 1995, the Transitional National Assembly adopted a new constitution that incorporates elements of the 18 June 1991 constitution as well as provisions of the 1993 Arusha Accords and the November 1994 multiparty protocol of understanding.\nNational legislature.\nIn Rwanda, the Chamber of Deputies is composed of eighty Deputies. Among them, fifty-three Deputies are elected by direct universal suffrage in secret, from a fixed list of names of candidates proposed by political organizations or independent candidates; twenty-four women are elected by specific electoral colleges in accordance with the national administrative entities; two Deputies are elected by the National Youth Council; one Deputy is elected by the National Council of Persons with Disabilities.\nThe Senate is composed of twenty-six members. Among them, there are twelve Senators elected by the specific councils in accordance with the administrative entities; eight Senators appointed by the President of the Republic; four Senators designated by the National Forum of Political organizations; one Senator elected among lecturers and researchers of Public Universities and higher learning institutions; and one Senator elected among lecturers and researchers of Private Universities and higher learning institutions.\nHistorical background.\nAfter its military victory in July 1994, the Rwandese Patriotic Front organized a coalition government similar to that established by President Juv\u00e9nal Habyarimana in 1992. Called The Broad Based Government of National Unity, its fundamental law is based on a combination of the constitution, the Arusha accords, and political declarations by the parties. The MRND party was banned.\nPolitical organizing was banned until 2003. The first post-genocide presidential and legislative elections were held in August and September 2003, respectively.\nThe biggest problems facing the government were the reintegration of more than 2 million refugees returning from as long ago as 1959; the end of the insurgency and counter-insurgency among ex-military and Interahamwe militia and the Rwandan Patriotic Army, which is concentrated in the north and south west; and the shift away from crisis to medium- and long-term development planning. The prison population will continue to be an urgent problem for the foreseeable future, having swelled to more than 100,000 in the 3 years after the war. \nThe government prohibits any form of discrimination by gender, ethnicity, race or religion. The government has passed laws prohibiting emphasis on Hutu or Tutsi identity in most types of political activity.\nPolitical-economical focus.\nFrom 2005 to 2010. the political headcount ratio on national poverty lines decreased by more than 10 percent, while life expectancy increased to approximately 64 years, which is higher than that of similar Sub-Saharan African countries and other low-income countries.\nIn 2011, Rwanda's CO2 emissions totaled 0.1 metric tons per capita, which was significantly lower than those of similar Sub-Saharan African countries as well as other low income countries. Rwanda's school enrollment rate is much higher than that of similar Sub-Saharan African countries, as well as other low-income countries.\nAs of 2014, Rwanda was still considered a low-income country with a GDP of $7.890 billion, based on U.S. dollars, with a total population of 11.34 million people.\nAs of 2015, Rwanda had made a shift towards economic improvement, centralizing its foreign exchange around coffee and tea production, \"helping to reduce poverty and inequality.\" The World Bank has praised Rwanda's efforts.\nKagame has reached out to large companies, such as Costco and Starbucks, which, as of 2015, were the two largest buyers of Rwandan coffee beans.\nBranches.\nExecutive.\nThe President of Rwanda is elected for a five-year term by the people. The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers are appointed by the president. The president has numerous powers that include creating policy in conjunction with the Cabinet, signing presidential orders, put into effect the prerogative of mercy, negotiating and passing treaties, commanding the armed forces, and declaring war or a state of crisis. \nLegislative.\nThe Parliament (\"Inteko Ishinga Amategeko \"or\" Parlement\") has two chambers. The Chamber of Deputies \"(Umutwe w'Abadepite/Chambre des D\u00e9put\u00e9s)\" has 80 members, 53 of them elected for a five-year term by proportional representation with a 5% threshold, 24 (female members) elected by provincial councils, 2 by the National Youth Council and 1 by the Federation of the Associations of the Disabled. It is the only legislative chamber in the world where women (45) outnumber men (35).\nThe Senate \"(Umutwe wa Sena \"or\" S\u00e9nat)\" has 26 members elected or appointed for an eight-year term: 12 elected by provincial and sectoral councils, 8 appointed by the president to ensure the representation of historically marginalized communities, 4 by the Forum of political formations and 2 elected by the staff of the universities. Additional former presidents can request to be member of the senate. Rwanda is a one party dominant state with the Rwandan Patriotic Front in power. Opposition parties are allowed, and are represented in Parliament, but are widely considered to have no real chance of gaining power.\nJudiciary.\nThe Supreme Court of Rwanda is the highest judicial power in Rwanda. Together with the High Council of the Judiciary, it is responsible for overseeing Rwanda's courts of lower ordinary jurisdictions and courts of the special jurisdictions. The Supreme Court consists of the Court President, Vice President, and 12 judges.\nEstablished in 2001, the Gacaca Court was established by the National Unity Government to try cases of genocide against the Tutsis.\nMoreover, judges are nominated by the president of the republic, after consulting with the Cabinet and the Superior Council of the Judiciary. Afterwards, they must receive the Senate's approval. The court president and vice president are appointed for 8-year nonrenewable terms.\nRegarding the legal profession, although the Rwanda Bar Association has been in existence and operational since at least 1997, there has been a lack of clear indications as to how certain demographic groups, such as women, have fared in the legal field.\nCurrent Presidential Overview.\nThe current president of Rwanda is Paul Kagame. The 6th president of Rwanda, he was first elected in 2003. In 2007, the former president, Pasteur Bizimungu, was released from prison on a presidential pardon. Kagame was re-elected in 2010, receiving 93.1 percent of the cast votes. Since taking office, Kagame has raised business, reduced crime and corruption, and attracted many foreign investors.\nAdditionally, Kagame has not groomed anyone to be his successor, so there is nothing that points to who his successor could or should be.\nPresident Paul Kagame and his Rwandan Patriotic Front are the dominant political forces in Rwanda. There is only one registered opposition party, while many political opponents have fled into exile.\nPresident Kagame received military training in Uganda, Tanzania, and the United States. He was a founding member of current Ugandan President, Yoweri Museveni's rebel army in 1979 and headed its intelligence wing, assisting Museveni in taking power in 1986.\nPoliticians.\nKey ministers.\nhttps://\nDecentralization system.\nRwanda is composed of 4 provinces and capital city, 30 districts, 416 sectors, 2,148 cells and 14,837 villages. The four provinces, headed by a governor include the Northern, Southern, Eastern and the Western Provinces. The districts, formerly known as communes, are headed by mayors, two vice mayors, and a district council. As of 2006, Kigali has 3 districts, the Northern Province has 5, the Southern Province has 8, and both the Eastern and Western Provinces have 7 districts. Sectors are responsible for implementing and developing programs which deliver services for the social welfare of the population and promote good governance. Sectors are governed by an Executive Secretary and Sector Council. The council includes representatives of cells; members representing persons with disabilities, women, and youth; members representing all primary and secondary schools; members representing health service organizations; and members representing NGOs and cooperative societies. Cells are administrative providers of public services and development. They are governed by an Executive Secretary and Cell Council, whose membership is similar to that of the Sector Council. Villages are governed by a village council, executive committee, and a village head. The village council is composed of all residents above the age of 18. The executive committee are elected members who provide services to the community, such as information and training, social welfare, and security.\nInternational organization participation.\nRwanda is member of\nACCT,\nACP,\nAfDB,\nC,\nCCC,\nCEEAC,\nCEPGL,\nECA,\nFAO,\nG-77,\nIBRD,\nICAO,\nICFTU,\nICRM,\nIDA,\nIFAD,\nIFC,\nIFRCS,\nILO,\nIMF,\nIntelsat,\nInterpol,\nIOC,\nIOM\u00a0(observer),\nITU,\nNAM,\nOPCW,\nUN,\nUNCTAD,\nUNESCO,\nUNIDO,\nUPU,\nWCL,\nWHO,\nWIPO,\nWMO,\nWToO,\nWTrO\nRwanda joined the Commonwealth of Nations in 2009, making the country one of only two in the Commonwealth without a British colonial past; the other being the former Portuguese colony Mozambique.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25650", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25650", "title": "Economy of Rwanda", "text": "The economy of Rwanda is a frontier developmental state (low income) based on services, agriculture and industry. It has been described as undergoing early industrialisation due newer government policies. It has a mixed economy. Since the early-2000s, Rwanda has witnessed an economic boom, which improved the living standards of many Rwandans. The President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, has noted his ambition to make Rwanda the \"Singapore of Africa\". The industrial sector is growing, contributing 16% of GDP in 2012.\nHistory.\nBefore the civil war and genocide.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, Rwanda's prudent financial policies, coupled with generous external aid and relatively favorable terms of trade, resulted in sustained growth in per capita income and low inflation rates. However, when world coffee prices fell sharply in the 1980s, growth became erratic.\nCompared to an annual GDP growth rate of 6.5% from 1973 to 1980, growth slowed to an average of 2.9% a year from 1980 through 1985 and was stagnant from 1986 to 1990. The crisis peaked in 1990 when the first measures of an IMF structural adjustment programme were carried out. While the programme was not fully implemented before the war, key measures such as two large devaluations and the removal of official prices were enacted. The consequences on salaries and purchasing power were rapid and dramatic. This crisis particularly affected the educated elite, most of whom were employed in civil service or state-owned enterprises.\nDuring the 5 years of civil war that culminated in the 1994 genocide, GDP declined in 3 out of 5 years, posting a rapid decline at more than 40% in 1994, the year of the genocide. The 9% increase in real GDP for 1995, the first postwar year, signalled the resurgence of economic activity.\nAfter the genocide (1994\u20132005).\nThe 1994 genocide destroyed Rwanda's fragile economic base, severely impoverished the population, particularly women, and eroded the country's ability to attract private and external investment. However, Rwanda has made significant progress in stabilizing and rehabilitating its economy. In June 1998, Rwanda signed an Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility with the International Monetary Fund. Rwanda has also embarked upon an ambitious privatization programme with the World Bank.\nIn the immediate postwar period\u2014mid-1994 through 1995\u2014emergency humanitarian assistance of more than $307.4 million was largely directed to relief efforts in Rwanda and in the refugee camps in neighbouring countries where Rwandans fled during the war. In 1996, humanitarian relief aid began to shift to reconstruction and development assistance.\nThe United States, Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, France, the People's Republic of China, the World Bank, the UN Development Programme and the European Development Fund will continue to account for the substantial aid. Rehabilitation of government infrastructure, in particular the justice system, was an international priority, as well as the continued repair and expansion of infrastructure, health facilities, and schools.\nAfter the Rwandan Genocide, the Tutsi-led government began a major programme to improve the country's economy and reduce its dependence on subsistence farming. The failing economy had been a major factor behind the genocide, as was overpopulation and the resulting competition for scarce farmland and other resources. The government focused primarily on building up its manufacturing and service industries and eliminating barriers to trade and development.\nThe Government of Rwanda posted a 13% GDP growth rate in 1996 through improved collection of tax revenues, accelerated privatization of state enterprises to stop the drain on government resources, and continued improvement in export crop and food production. Tea plantations and factories continue to be rehabilitated, and coffee, always a smallholder's crop, is being more seriously rehabilitated and tended as the farmers' sense of security returns.\nCoffee production of 14,578,560 tonnes in 2000 compares to a pre-civil war variation between 35,000 and 40,000 tonnes. By 2002 tea became Rwanda's largest export, with export earnings from tea reaching US$18 million equating to 15,000 tonnes of dried tea. Rwanda's natural resources are limited. A small mineral industry provides about 5% of foreign exchange earnings. Concentrates exist of the heavy minerals cassiterite (a primary source of tin), and coltan (used to manufacture electronic capacitors, used in consumer electronics products such as cell phones, DVD players, video game systems and computers).\nBy mid-1997, up to 75% of the factories functioning before the war had returned to production, at an average of 75% of their capacity. Investments in the industrial sector continue to mostly be limited to the repair of existing industrial plants. Retail trade, devastated by the war, has revived quickly, with many new small businesses established by Rwandan returnees from Uganda, Burundi, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.\nIndustry received little external assistance from the end of the war through 1995. Beginning in 1996\u201397, the government became increasingly active in helping the industrial sector to restore production through technical and financial assistance, including loan guarantees, economic liberalization, and the privatization of state-owned enterprises. In early 1998, the government set up a one-stop investment promotion centre and implemented a new investment code that created an enabling environment for foreign and local investors. An autonomous revenue authority also has begun operation, improving collections and accountability.\nCassiterite production peaked at 1,000 tonnes in 1990, but was under 700 tonnes in 2000. Recorded coltan production has soared from 147 tonnes in 1999 to 1,300 tonnes in 2001, and coltan was the country's biggest single export earner in 2001. At least part of the increase in production is because of new mines opening up in Rwanda. However it is true, as has frequently been observed, that the increase is also because of the fraudulent re-export of Congolese coltan. In addition to the well-publicised involvement in this trade of the Rwandan Defence Force (RDF), another important factor in the coltan re-export is that international dealers are under pressure not to buy from the DRC, thus increasing the incentive for DRC coltan to be re-exported as Rwanda's. Rwanda is also alleged to be trading in fraudulently exported gold and diamonds from the DRC.\n2006\u2013present.\nThe country entered a high period of economic growth in 2006, and the following year managed to register 8% economic growth, a record it has sustained since, turning it into one of the fastest-growing economies in Africa. This sustained economic growth has succeeded in reducing poverty and also reducing fertility rates, with growth between 2006 and 2011 reducing the percentage of the country's population living in poverty from 57% to 45%.The country's infrastructure has also grown rapidly, with connections to electricity going from 91,000 in 2006 to 215,000 in 2011. Rwanda wants to achieve Middle Income Country status by 2035 and High-Income Country status by 2050.\nExisting foreign investment is concentrated in commercial establishments, mining, tea, coffee, and tourism. Minimum wage and social security regulations are in force, and the four prewar independent trade unions are back in operation. The largest union, CESTRAR, was created as an organ of the government but became fully independent with the political reforms introduced by the 1991 constitution.\nIn 2016, Rwanda was ranked 42nd and second best country in Africa to do business in the Mara Foundation-The Ashish J Thakkar Global Entrepreneurship Index report.\nHowever, a recent research in the UK-based political science journal, \"Review of African Political Economy\", indicates that economic growth may be slower than what official figures suggest. Researchers stated that average consumption per household closely followed growth in GDP per capita from 2000 to 2005, but diverged afterwards when average consumption per household stagnated despite huge improvements in GDP per capita from 2005 to 2013.\nAgriculture and primary resources.\nCrops grown in the country include coffee, tea, pyrethrum, bananas, beans, sorghum and potatoes. Coffee and tea are the major cash crops for export, with the high altitudes, steep slopes and volcanic soils providing favourable conditions. Reliance on agricultural exports makes Rwanda vulnerable to shifts in their prices.\nIn 2019 agriculture accounted for 29% of the economy of Rwanda.\nRwanda produced in 2019: Bananas, pineapples, tea, coffee, and tobacco are high-value, export-oriented products. \nRwanda's economy suffered heavily during the 1994 Genocide, with widespread loss of life, failure to maintain the infrastructure, looting, and neglect of important cash crops. This caused a large drop in GDP and destroyed the country's ability to attract private and external investment. The economy has since strengthened, with per-capita GDP (PPP) estimated at $2,225 in 2018, compared with $416 in 1994.\nMajor export markets include China, Germany, and the United States. The economy is managed by the central National Bank of Rwanda and the currency is the Rwandan franc; in June 2010, the exchange rate was 588 francs to the United States dollar. Rwanda joined the East African Community in 2007 and there were plans for a common East African shilling, which it had been hoped would be in place by 2015, but have not yet reached fruition (2020).\nRwanda is a country of few natural resources, and the economy is based mostly on subsistence agriculture by local farmers using simple tools. An estimated 90% of the working population farms, and agriculture comprised an estimated 42.0% of GDP in 2010. Since the mid-1980s, farm sizes and food production have been decreasing, due in part to the resettlement of displaced people. Despite Rwanda's fertile ecosystem, food production often does not keep pace with population growth, and food imports are required.\nAgricultural animals raised in Rwanda include cows, goats, sheep, pigs, chicken, and rabbits, with geographical variation in the numbers of each. Production systems are mostly traditional, although there are a few intensive dairy farms around Kigali. Shortages of land and water, insufficient and poor-quality feed, and regular disease epidemics with insufficient veterinary services are major constraints that restrict output. A \"One Cow per Poor Family Programme\" (Girinka), implemented in 2006, distributed 341,065 cows in 2018.\nFishing takes place on the country's lakes, but stocks are very depleted, and live fish are being imported in an attempt to revive the industry.\nMining.\nRwanda's mining industry is an important contributor, generating US$93\u00a0million in 2008. Minerals mined include cassiterite, wolframite, sapphires, gold, and coltan, which is used in the manufacture of electronic and communication devices such as mobile phones.\nProduction of methane from Lake Kivu began in 1983, but to date has been used only by the Bralirwa Brewery.\nIn 2019, the country was the 7th largest world producer of tungsten and the 12th largest world producer of tin.\nEnergy and electrification.\nRwanda has made tremendous strides in improving electrification in the 21st century. A great number of new areas has become electrified through an expansion of infrastructure.\nDepletion of the forests will eventually pressure Rwandans to turn to fuel sources other than charcoal for cooking and heating. Given the abundance of mountain streams and lakes, the potential for hydroelectric power is substantial. Rwanda is exploiting these natural resources through joint hydroelectric projects with Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.\nManufacturing.\nRwanda's manufacturing sector is dominated by the production of import substitutes for internal consumption. The larger enterprises produce beer, soft drinks, cigarettes, hoes, wheelbarrows, soap, mattresses, plastic pipe, roofing materials, and bottled water. Other products manufactured include agricultural products, small-scale beverages, soap, furniture, shoes, cement, plastic goods, textiles and cigarettes.\nTourism and services.\nRwanda's service sector suffered during the late-2000s recession as banks reduced lending and foreign aid projects and investment were reduced. The sector rebounded in 2010, becoming the country's largest sector by economic output and contributing 43.6% of the country's GDP. Key tertiary contributors include banking and finance, wholesale and retail trade, hotels and restaurants, transport, storage, communication, insurance, real estate, business services and public administration including education and health.\nTourism is one of the fastest-growing economic resources and became the country's leading foreign exchange earner in 2011. In spite of the genocide's legacy, the country is increasingly perceived internationally as a safe destination; The Directorate of Immigration and Emigration recorded 405,801 people visiting the country between January and June 2011; 16% of these arrived from outside Africa. Revenue from tourism was US$115,600,000 between January and June 2011; holidaymakers contributed 43% of this revenue, despite being only 9% of the numbers.\nRwanda is one of only two countries in which mountain gorillas can be visited safely; gorilla tracking in the Volcanoes National Park attracts thousands of visitors per year, who are prepared to pay high prices for permits. Other attractions include: Nyungwe Forest, home to chimpanzees, Ruwenzori colobus and other primates, the resorts of Lake Kivu, and Akagera, a small savanna reserve in the east of the country.\nRwanda's tourism is centred on the attractions of Volcanoes National Park (PNV) with its six volcanoes and the protected population of mountain gorillas made famous by Dian Fossey. Additionally, tourism is drawn to central Africa's largest protected wetland Akagera National Park, with its populations of hippopotami, cape buffalo, zebras, elephants, elands, and other big game animals. Birdwatching-related tourism has a potential to develop as well, especially in Nyungwe National Park, among the largest uncut forest reserves in Africa. Nyungwe National Park is home to over 300 species of birds. And a vast variety of wild life as well.\nSeveral memorial sites associated with the Rwandan genocide have begun to generate significant dark tourism. For example, the Gisozi Genocide Memorial Site in the Gasabo District of Kigali\u2014the burial place of approximately 300,000 victims of the genocide\u2014has a related genocide exhibition area and library and has plans to develop a teaching centre on the history of the genocide. Another major genocide-related memorial centre attracting tourists is the Murambi Genocide Memorial Site housed in the former Murambi Technical School where 45,000 people were murdered and 850 skeletons and mummified remains of the victims are on display.\nTwo other major memorial sites associated with the genocide are in Kicukiro District: Rebero Genocide Memorial Site where 14,400 victims are buried and the Nyanza-Kicukiro Genocide Memorial Site where 5,000 victims were killed after Belgian soldiers who serving in the United Nations peacekeeping forces abandoned them. In Kibungo Province, the site of the Nyarubuye Massacre is home to the Nyarubuye Genocide Memorial Site where an estimated 20,000 victims were killed after seeking refuge in the Roman Catholic church and homes of the nuns and priest there.\nHistorical statistics.\nGDP per capita (nominal).\nHistorical evolution of GDP per capita (Nominal) of Rwanda during the period 1980-2030\nSource: International Monetary Fund (IMF)\nGDP per capita (PPP).\nHistorical evolution of GDP per capita (PPP) of Rwanda during the period 1980-2030\nSource: International Monetary Fund (IMF)\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132023.\nSee also.\nGeneral:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25651", "revid": "50875319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25651", "title": "Telecommunications in Rwanda", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Rwanda include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRegulation.\nTwo government-appointed regulatory bodies, the Rwanda Information Technology Authority under the Rwanda Development Board, and the Rwanda Utilities Regulatory Agency (RURA), supervise the regulatory frameworks and implementation of the county's policies and strategies in the telecommunications sector. RURA is a national body with autonomy in its administrative and financial management. However, its seven board members, supervisory board, and the managing director are nominated by and work under full control of the government.\nThe telecommunications sector was liberalized in 2001, and the number of companies providing telephone and Internet services increased from one, the state-run Rwandatel, to 10 in 2012. These providers are all privately owned, with the exception of Rwandatel. Rwandatel had the largest market share of fixed broadband subscriptions as of September 2012.\nRadio and Television.\nState TV and radio reach the largest audiences, radio is the main source of news, and the international radio stations BBC World Service, Voice of America (VOA), and Deutsche Welle (DW) are available. Most radio stations are accessible online, either through their own websites and blogs, or through social media.\nRadio, and in particular the \"hate\" station Radio T\u00e9l\u00e9vision Libre des Mille Collines (RTLM), played a role in the 1994 genocide.\nInternet.\nRwanda ranked in first place in Africa for broadband download speeds and 62nd globally with a speed of 7.88\u00a0Mbit/s in February 2013.\nThe Internet has been available from mobile cellular phones since 2007, but the high cost of phones and limited bandwidth restrained its popularity for several years. With completion of the government-sponsored fiber-optic cable expansion project in 2011, telecommunication services throughout the country have improved and the amount of mobile cellular Internet access and use has increased.\nIn 2009, RURA set up the Rwanda Internet Exchange (RINEX) to connect ISPs and enable the routing of local Internet traffic through a central exchange point without having to pass through international networks. ISPs can also opt to connect via RINEX to the international Internet. As of the end of 2013, only five ISPs exchange Internet traffic via RINEX, and the price for national access remained the same as for international access.\nInternet access is limited mostly to Kigali, the capital city, and remains beyond the economic capacity of most citizens, particularly those in rural areas who are limited by low disposable incomes and a low level of digital literacy. More than 90% of the population lives in rural areas, with most engaged in subsistence agriculture. Between 70% and 90% of the population speaks only Kinyarwanda, making Internet content in English unavailable to the majority of Rwandans. In 2015, the Internet penetration rate was about 25% of the population.\nDigital Progress.\nThe 2021 UNDP report highlights Rwanda's advancements in incorporating technology in education, specifically aiding students with disabilities. Smart e-learning technology, including smart boards and internet access, has been introduced to support students with visual and hearing impairments.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nRwanda was rated \"partly free\" in \"Freedom on the Net 2013\" by Freedom House with a score of 48, somewhat past the midway point between the end of the range for \"free\" (30) and the start of the range for \"not free\" (60).\nThe law does not provide for government restrictions on access to the Internet, but there are reports that the government blocks access to Web sites within the country that are critical of the government.\nIn 2012 and 2013, some independent online news outlets and opposition blogs were intermittently inaccessible. It is uncertain whether the disruptions are due to government blocking, as was the case in past years, or to technical issues. Some opposition sites continue to be blocked on some ISPs in early 2013, including Umusingi and Inyenyeri News, which were first blocked in 2011. Social-networking sites such as YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, and international blog hosting services are freely available.\nThe websites of international human rights organizations such as Freedom House, Amnesty International, and Human Rights Watch, as well as the online versions of media outlets such as the BBC, Le Monde, Radio France Internationale, \"The New York Times\", and many others are freely accessible. Websites of national news outlets are also easily accessible. These include the web versions of state-run media and pro-government outlets as well as independent outlets such as The Rwanda Focus, Rushyashya, The Chronicles, Umusanzu, and Rwanda Dispatch.\nThe constitution provides for freedom of speech and press \"in conditions prescribed by the law.\" The government at times restricts these rights. The government intimidates and arrests journalists who express views that are deemed critical on sensitive topics. Laws prohibit promoting divisionism, genocide ideology, and genocide denial, \"spreading rumors aimed at inciting the population to rise against the regime\", expressing contempt for the Head of State, other high-level public officials, administrative authorities or other public servants, and slander of foreign and international officials and dignitaries. These acts or expression of these viewpoints sometimes results in arrest, harassment, or intimidation. Numerous journalists practice self-censorship.\nIn June 2011 a court convicted journalist Jean Bosco Gasasira in absentia of displaying contempt for the head of state and incitement to civil disobedience for his writings in the online publication Umuvugizi and sentenced him to two and a half years in prison.\nThe constitution and law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence; however, there are numerous reports the government monitors homes, telephone calls, e-mail, Internet chat rooms, other private communications, movements, and personal and institutional data. In some cases monitoring has led to detention and interrogation by State security forces (SSF).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25652", "revid": "12396222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25652", "title": "Transport in Rwanda", "text": "The transport system in Rwanda centres primarily around the road network. Paved roads lie between the capital, Kigali, and most other major cities and towns in the country. Rwanda is also linked by road with other countries in the African Great Lakes, via which the majority of the country's imports and exports are made.\nThe country has an international airport at Kigali, serving one domestic and several international destinations, and also has limited transport between the port cities on Lake Kivu.There are currently no railways in Rwanda.\nA large amount of investments in the transport infrastructure has been made by the government since the 1994 genocide, with aid from the European Union, China, Japan and others.\nThe road network.\nRwanda has a total of of roads, of which are paved. The remainder are dirt roads with quality varying from smooth hard surfaces with drainage to rutted, extremely uneven tracks passable only with a four-wheel drive vehicle.\nVehicles in the country drive on the right-hand side of the road. However, the three largest members of the East African Community (EAC) to which Rwanda is a part of, including neighbouring Tanzania and Uganda, drive on the left. It is significantly cheaper to import vehicles designed to drive on the left than on the right, possibly due to the second hand market from India and Japan being cheaper than that of Europe, so more of these cars were imported until the government banned their import in 2005 due to safety concerns. Due to the difference in car price, and the potential to better economically integrate with other EAC and Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa countries, the government has considered switching the country to driving on the left.\nPaved roads.\nMost of the main towns in the country are now connected by paved road. The condition of these roads was until recently very poor, with numerous pot-holes and vehicles often driving on the dirt verges since these were deemed smoother than the road itself. A recent government programme of upgrading and resurfacing means that most major routes are now in good condition.\nThe major urban arteries of Kigali, as well as the high streets in Ruhengeri, Kibuye, and Gisenyi are dual carriageways, but all national long distance roads are single carriageway. There are no motorways in Rwanda.\nThe principal routes are (refer to map for number references):\nThere is also one road that is currently a quite poor-quality dirt road, but it may soon be upgraded to paved status:\nPublic transport.\nInternational.\nThere are several daily coach services from Rwanda to destinations in the African Great Lakes:\nIn addition the national express share taxi services (see below) to Gisenyi and Cyangugu often cross the DRC border to carry passengers to Goma and Bukavu respectively.\nNational.\nThe main form of public transport within Rwanda is the express bus, which has superseded the share taxi on the main routes.\nShare taxi.\nShare taxis run between two termini (known as taxi parks), but stop frequently en route to pick up and drop off passengers. They are known locally simply as \"taxi\" or, colloquially, \"twegerane\", which means 'let's sit together' in the Kinyarwanda language (a conventional private taxi is referred to as a \"special hire\" or \"taxi voiture\").\nThey almost always wait until full before departing, and can also wait for long periods in locations along the route if not enough people are on board.\nThe vehicles are usually Toyota minibuses owned by a private individual who employs a driver (Fr: \"chauffeur\") and a conductor (Fr: \"convoyeur\") to operate and maintain the vehicle on a day-to-day basis. Most have four rows of seats, each of which seats four adults (babies and children not being counted as they are expected to sit on the lap of an adult). Additionally there are two front passenger seats, so the vehicle can carry a total of up to eighteen passengers, in addition to the driver and the conductor.\nThe conductor is responsible for opening and closing the main sliding door and collecting money from passengers, and will stand in the space by the door if all seats re occupied. No tickets are issued on this form of taxi.\nMoto taxis\nA large portion of the vehicles on roads in Rwanda, especially Kigali, are moto taxis. A motorbike or scooter is driven and a single passenger can hop on and off the back and pay the required fare. \nExpress bus.\nThese run to a set timetable (usually each 30 minutes) between major towns, only stopping at official stops near the destination(s). Even if alighting earlier, the price to the next major stop has to be paid. Almost all routes pass through Nyabugogo in Kigali.\nThe buses are run by private companies and issue tickets in advance with a price set by the government. As tickets are paid and printed at the offices (major stops) or by an employee along the road (smaller stops), there is no need for a conductor to collect the money in the bus. Tickets can be issued in advance, so they might be sold out quickly at busy times (especially Fridays, Sundays and at the beginning/end of school holidays).\nIn contrast to the Share Taxi, this form of transport respects the schedule rather than waiting to be full. Also, they are almost never overfilled and rather depart earlier.\nThe size ranges from Toyota Coaster to big coaches. Most coaches are run by Ritco, on which the government holds a share. It is also the only company to have stops all across the country, while its private competitors are limited to specific regions. When it was founded it replaced Onatracom, another public company.\nComparison.\nAs of 2018, share taxis are still the main form of transport in remote areas, while express buses are used wherever available. This is due to the almost equal price and increased comfort and speed of the express buses.\nUrban.\nPublic transport in Kigali takes the form of the stopping share taxis mentioned above, but running much more frequently due to greater demand. While the national ones are typically unmarked, Kigali taxis have a yellow stripe running round the vehicle, on which is imprinted the start and end points of its route. Most services start or finish either in the city centre or at Nyabugogo, the city's main national bus station.\nA recent survey carried out by the Transport Companies Association in Kigali\ngives us the following statistics:\nThere are 19 bus companies operating a total of 1633 buses of various makes,\nmodels and sizes in various parts of Rwanda. In Kigali City itself there are 622\nbuses operating. Of these 622, 90.6% of them are small Toyota Hiace vehicles, mostly more than\n10 years old, and many much older. Of the larger type vehicles carrying up to 30 passengers or so there are 58 units of which 34.4% are new vehicles owned and operated by Kigali Bus Services Ltd.\nAir transport.\nThe country's main aviation hub is Kigali International Airport, which is located at Kanombe, a suburb approximately from Kigali city centre. The airport has international flights to: Lagos, Brazzaville, Dubai, Nairobi, Entebbe, Addis Ababa, Bujumbura, Johannesburg, Amsterdam, Brussels and Doha and is the main airport for the national carrier RwandAir.\nThere are plans being discussed to build a new airport at Nyamata in Bugesera district, approximately from Kigali which would be larger and could act as a hub for the entire region. \nThe only other airport in the country with passenger service is Kamembe Airport, which is in the city of Cyangugu. RwandAir operates a service between Kigali and Kamembe, which serves southwestern Rwanda and the Congolese city of Bukavu.\nWater transport.\nLake Kivu.\nThis is by far the largest of Rwanda's lakes, forming the border with the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). There are occasional boat services between the major ports of Cyangugu, Kibuye and Gisenyi but these do not run to a regular timetable and often have to be chartered. There are also boats used to ferry people to some of the islands in the lake, but these also do not run regularly. Local fishermen operate along the entirety of the lakeshore, usually in dug-out canoes or other hand-crafted boats. The Rwandan navy operates a few boats on the lake to protect the country against infiltrators from the Congolese side.\nOther lakes.\nTransport on Rwanda's other major lakes is mostly limited to ferries, usually local boats similar to those used to fishing, which transport people from one side to the other. Some lakes have resort bars and hotels, such as Jambo Beach on Lake Muhazi, which can offer a pleasure cruise to their customers in their own speed boat. Local fishermen operate on most lakes.\nRailways.\nThere are currently no railways in Rwanda.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25653", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25653", "title": "Military of Rwanda", "text": ""}
{"id": "25654", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25654", "title": "Foreign relations of Rwanda", "text": "Rwanda has diplomatic relations with most members of the United Nations and with the Holy See.\nAccepting refugees.\nRwanda has accepted tens of thousands of refugees from neighboring African countries like Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Eritrea, Somalia and South Sudan. It has also accepted hundreds of African refugees from Israel and Afghan schoolgirls.\nAs of 2015, Rwanda hosted 75,000 Burundian refugees according to UNHCR. When credible reports surfaced that Rwanda recruited and trained Burundi refugees including children to remove Burundian President Nkurunziza, Rwanda announced to relocate Burundian refugees to third countries.\nSince September 2019, Rwanda has also taken in Libyan refugees and asylum-seekers, operating a refugee center at Gashora, Rwanda, which houses up to 700 refugees from eight African countries (Eritrea, Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon) and is financed by UNHCR until 31 December 2023.\nIn 2021 Denmark signed a deal to establish an asylum center in Kigali, and since April 2022, the UK has sought to shift its asylum responsibilities, considering Rwanda a safe third country by offering 120 million pounds in economic development programs in return for accepting refugees.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Rwanda maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nSeveral west European and African nations, Canada, People's Republic of China, Egypt, Libya, Russia, the Holy See, and the European Union maintain diplomatic missions in Kigali.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25655", "revid": "13728979", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25655", "title": "Rockall", "text": "Uninhabited islet in the North Atlantic Ocean\nRockall () is a , uninhabitable granite islet in the North Atlantic Ocean. It is west of Soay, St Kilda, Scotland; north-west of Tory Island, Ireland; and south of Iceland. The nearest permanently inhabited place is in North Uist, east in Scotland's Outer Hebrides.\nRockall was formed during the Paleogene period, by magmatism as part of the North Atlantic Igneous Province. Rockall and Hasselwood Rock, 200 metres north, are the only emergent parts of Helen's Reef and the Rockall Plateau. Twenty-nine-metre waves just east of Rockall were reported in 2006 as the largest ever recorded by scientific instruments in the open ocean. Rockall's first named geographic location and only occupiable area is Hall's Ledge.\nRockall has appeared on maps since at least 1550 and in literature since at least 1698. Marine surveyors, scientists, adventurers, amateur radio operators, and environmental activists have variously landed on or briefly occupied the islet. The earliest documented landing on Rockall was in 1811 by a small Royal Navy party led by Basil Hall. The longest-known continuous occupation is 45 days, achieved solo in 2014 by Nick Hancock.\nPossession of Rockall was for many decades deemed imperative to claims to the vast surrounding fisheries and oil-rich Atlantic seabed. The Irish Times claims to have reported on the economic value of Rockall's fisheries as long ago as 1861. Driven by Cold War national security concerns, the United Kingdom claimed Rockall in 1955 and incorporated it as part of Scotland in 1972. The UK claims a territorial sea at Rockall. While never claiming sovereignty of Rockall, Ireland claims that UK rights to Rockall are invalid. Denmark (on behalf of the Faroes) and Iceland have lodged claims of the adjoining seabed.\nIn 2021, officers on a Marine Scotland patrol boat boarded an Irish fishing boat and ordered it to leave Rockall's 12-nautical-mile zone. In 2024, the Irish and Scottish governments bilaterally proposed to allow Irish fishing boats to return to the 12-nautical-mile zone. The UK's Foreign Secretary at the time, David Cameron, vetoed the proposal.\nEtymology.\nThe origin and meaning of the name \"Rockall\" is uncertain. The name is used in Scots Gaelic folklore for a mythical rock that is supposed to appear three times, its last appearance being at the end of the world: \"\". ('When Rocabarra returns, the world will likely come to be destroyed'). Another idea is the name \"Rockall\" derives from the Gaelic , meaning 'skerry of roaring' or 'sea rock of roaring', although can also be translated as 'tearing' or 'ripping'. \nThe Scottish Gaelic name for Rockall, , may derive from an Old Norse name that may contain the element , meaning 'mountain'. It is also suggested the name \"Rockall\" is from the Norse , meaning 'foaming sea', and , meaning 'bald head'\u2014a word that appears in other place names in Scandinavian-speaking areas.\nIrish mythology giant Fionn mac Cumhaill (Finn McCool) allegedly scooped up a chunk of what is now Ulster to fling at a Scottish rival. It missed, instead landing in the Irish Sea to become the Isle of Man. The void left behind filled with water to become Lough Neagh. McCool is then alleged to have thrown a pebble that became what is now widely known as Rockall\u2014alternatively, the pebble flew off north-west as he lifted the chunk of land or when it landed into the sea.\nRockall appears on a 1550 Portuguese chart as 'Rochol', and on one of 1606 as 'Rocol'. The map \"Nova Francia alio nomine dicta Terranova, anno 1504\" (c. 1594), by Cornelis Claeszoon, Jan Doetecom, and Petrus Plancius, shows Rockall named \"Rookol\".\nRockall is named \"Rokol\" in its first-known literary reference, Martin Martin's 1698-published \"A Late Voyage to St Kilda\". The book states: \"...\u00a0and from it lies Rokol, a small rock to the westward of St Kilda; the inhabitants of this place call it \"Rokabarra\".\"\nLocation.\nIn 1956, British scientist James Fisher referred to Rockall as \"the most isolated small rock in the oceans of the world\". An all round navigational beacon was first installed on Rockall's summit in 1972. Rockall's location was precisely determined by Nick Hancock during his 2014 expedition.\nRockall's nearest land point is the uninhabited Soay, east in Scotland's St Kilda archipelago. Rockall's nearest inhabited area is Hirta, St. Kilda's largest island, east and populated intermittently at a single military base. Rockall's nearest permanently inhabited settlement is near Hogha Gearraidh crofting township, west on North Uist's Aird an R\u00f9nair headland, at ().\nRockall is north-west of Tory Island, County Donegal, Ireland. Rockall is also south of Iceland.\nHistory.\nEarliest mentions.\nWhat is now known as Rockall appears in Scots and Irish mythology (see \"Etymology\" section above). Rockall appears on maps from 1550 onward. The first-known literary reference to the islet is in Martin Martin's \"A Late Voyage to St. Kilda\", published in 1698 (see \"Etymology\" section above).\nShipping disasters.\nThere have been various disasters on the neighbouring Hasselwood Rock and Helen's Reef (the latter having been named in 1830).\nRecorded visits to Rockall.\nIn 1971, Lord Kennet remarked, \"There can be no place more desolate, despairing and awful.\"\nThe website for The Rockall Club as at July 2025 states, \"Total authenticated Rockall landings to date: 146 individuals\".\nHMS Endymion \u2013 Rockall's first landing.\nThe earliest recorded landing on Rockall is often dated 8 July 1810. Royal Navy officer Basil Hall has been reported leading a small landing party from the frigate to the summit. However, research by James Fisher (see \"Location\" section above), in the log of \"Endymion\" and elsewhere, reports the actual date for this first landing was Sunday 8 September 1811.\nThe landing party left \"Endymion\" for the rock by boat. \"Endymion\", while taking depth measurements around Rockall, lost visual contact with the rock as a haze descended. The ship drifted away, stranding the landing party. The party attempted a return to the ship, but in the haze could not find \"Endymion\", and soon gave up to return to Rockall.\nThe haze became a fog. The lookout sent to the top of Rockall re-spotted the ship, but it turned away from Rockall before the party in their boats reached it. Finally, just before sunset, \"Endymion\" was again spotted from the top of Rockall, and the party was able to re-board. The \"Endymion\" crew reported they had searched for five or six hours, firing their cannon every ten minutes. Hall related this and other adventures in his book \"Fragment of Voyages and Travels Including Anecdotes of a Naval Life\".\n19th-century surveying and scientific visits.\nThe exact position of Rockall and the size and shape of the Rockall Bank were first charted in 1831. This was by Captain A. T. E. Vidal, a Royal Navy surveyor. It is uncertain if this visit produced a landing.\nIn the summer of 1862, Mr Johns of landed on Rockall but did not reach the summit. This was whilst the ship was surveying the seabed prior to the laying of a transatlantic telegraph cable.\nMiller Christy in 1896 led Rockall's first scientific expedition. The Royal Irish Academy chartered the \"Granuaile\", and sponsored Christy's study of the flora and fauna. Two landing attempts were unsuccessful.\nBritish annexation.\nThe initial incentive for UK annexation of Rockall was the test-firing of the UK's first guided nuclear weapon, the American-made Corporal missile. The missile was to be launched over the North Atlantic from South Uist. The Ministry of Defence was concerned that the unclaimed Rockall could give the Soviet Union opportunity to spy on the test. Thus, in April 1955, the Admiralty was ordered to seize Rockall and declare UK sovereignty, lest it became a foreign observers' outpost.\nOn 18 September 1955, Rockall was annexed by the British Crown. To do so, four men were winched onto the islet by a Royal Navy helicopter from (coincidentally named after the man who first charted the islet). The four were Lieutenant-Commander Desmond Scott RN, Sergeant Brian Peel RM, Corporal AA Fraser RM, and James Fisher (a civilian naturalist and former Royal Marine). The Admiralty announced the annexation on 21 September 1955.\nThe landing team cemented in a brass plaque on Hall's Ledge and hoisted the Union Flag to stake the UK's claim. The plaque inscription read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;BY AUTHORITY OF HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH THE SECOND, BY THE GRACE OF GOD OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND OF HER OTHER REALMS AND TERRITORIES, QUEEN, HEAD OF THE COMMONWEALTH, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, ETC. ETC. ETC. AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH HER MAJESTY'S INSTRUCTIONS DATED 14. 9. 55. A LANDING WAS EFFECTED ON THIS DAY UPON THE ISLAND OF ROCKALL FROM H.M.S. VIDAL. THE UNION FLAG WAS HOISTED AND POSSESSION OF THE ISLAND WAS TAKEN IN THE NAME OF HER MAJESTY. [Signed] R H Connell, CAPTAIN, H.M.S. VIDAL, 18 SEPTEMBER 1955\nAuthor Ian Mitchell opined Rockall was \"terra nullius\" (owned by no one), until the 1955 British claim. Rockall was the British Empire's final territorial expansion.\nOn 7 November 1955, J. Abrach Mackay, an 84-year-old local councilor and member of the Clan Mackay, protested the annexation; he declared: \"My old father, God rest his soul, claimed that islet for the Clan of Mackay in 1846 and I now demand that the Admiralty hand it back. It's no' theirs.\" The British Government ignored his protest.\nDeploying an all-round light beacon.\nIn 1971, Captain T. R. Kirkpatrick RE led the landing party on a British government expedition named \"Exercise Top Hat\". Top Hat was mounted from with two aims:\nBoth aims were achieved. The landing party included Royal Engineers, Royal Marines, and civilian members from the Institute of Geological Sciences in London. The party was landed by winch line from the Wessex 5 helicopters of the Royal Naval Air Services Commando Headquarters Squadron, commanded by Lt Cmdr Neil Foster RN.\nAs well as collecting samples of the aegirine granite, \"rockallite\", for later analysis in London, the top of the rock was blown off using a newly developed blasting technique, precision pre-splitting. This created a level area that was drilled to take the anchorages for the light beacon installed the following year. Two phosphor bronze plates were chased into the wall above Hall's Ledge, each secured by four 80-tonne rock-anchor bolts. UK authorities sent teams in 1973 on RFA \"Tidepool\" and in 1974 on HMS \"Tiger\", to land on the rock to repair the navigational beacon. They also sent a team by Chinook helicopter to update the beacon in July 1982.\nTom McClean stays 40 days solo.\nDublin-born adventurer and ex-SAS member Tom McClean lived on the islet from 26 May 1985 to 4 July 1985. This solo visit set a new record stay of 40 days.\nThe first female landings \u2013 Sue Hiscock and Christine Howson.\nThe second landing of 1988 was the Nature Conservancy Council landing from FPV Noma. Sue Hiscock at this point became the first female to land on Rockall. Christine Howson in the same expedition became the second female to land on Rockall. Hiscock's husband Eric also landed as part of this expedition.\nGreenpeace visits and a 42-day record.\nIn 1997, three members of the environmentalist organisation Greenpeace occupied the islet for 42 days. Among the three was John Vidal, unrelated to Vidal mentioned in a previous visit.\nThe Greenpeace team called Rockall Waveland, to protest against oil exploration. Greenpeace declared the islet to be a \"new Global State\" (as a spoof micronation) and offered citizenship to anyone willing to take their pledge of allegiance. The British Government's response was to state that \"Rockall is British territory. It is part of Scotland and anyone is free to go there and can stay as long as they please\".\nVidal claimed that the Greenpeace team unscrewed the 1955 plaque and re-fixed it back to front. They also positioned a solar-powered beacon on the existing navigation aid frame.\nGreenpeace returned for a second landing, this time in 1998 with eight people (three of whom stayed overnight). They upgraded the beacon. This light though succumbed to an Atlantic storm two years later. Greenpeace added their own plaque that read, \"Let the sun and wind do their work. Leave the oil beneath the waves.\" Vidal stated in 2010, \"I am told that the British plaque has now disappeared.\"\nRadio hams.\nRockall was the last of the unnumbered Islands On The Air (IOTA) in Europe. On 16 June 2005, the first amateur radio (ham radio) activation of Rockall took place. The club station MS0IRC/P was set up and operated on HF frequencies. The IOTA number EU-189 was issued to Rockall as a result of this activation. The 9-person landing team, plus safety and radio equipment, was from Islands Radio Club Outer Hebrides. They included two radio operators, James Cameron and David Woods. The two worked with 262 stations in the three-and-a-half hours in which they broadcast. The team cut short their landing to 9 hours due to incoming bad weather, unfulfilling their plan to stay overnight.\nIn 2011 a group of 7 Belgian amateur radio operators traveled on CDT Fourcault to Rockall. Two of them, Patrick Godderie and Rudi Marleen, landed on the rock on 1 October to set up a radio station transmitting for 15 hours. They used HF frequencies under the call sign \"MM0RAI/P\". They stayed one night unsheltered on the islet.\nNick Hancock stays 45 days solo.\nOn 31 May 2013, Chartered Surveyor and adventurer Nick Hancock from Edinburgh and a TV crew from BBC's \"The One Show\" sailed to the islet aboard \"Orca III\". He planned to survive solo on Rockall for 60 days, raising money for Help for Heroes. He unsuccessfully attempted to land and survive on the islet. He had landed for the first time the previous year on a reconnaissance expedition coinciding with Queen Elizabeth II's Diamond Jubilee. The weather conditions at the time \"were not favourable\" according to a Maritime and Coastguard Agency official.\nOn 5 June 2014, Hancock landed on Rockall to begin his 60-day attempt. After losing supplies in a force-9 storm, he left Rockall after 45 days. He thus surpassed McClean's 40 day solo record by five days, and the 42-day record set by the Greenpeace group by three days.\nRigid inflatable boat landing.\nIn 2016 Neil McGrigor led the first landing done by rigid inflatable boat (RIB). This group installed a new navigation beacon and used a drone to record a 60-second video featuring overhead views of Rockall.\nCam Cameron rescue after 30 days.\nIn May 2023, Chris \"Cam\" Cameron from Buckie, a science teacher and former Gordon Highlander, began an attempt to stay 60 days on Rockall. He was raising funds for military charities. He was accompanied by a radio operator, Adrian Styles, and Bulgarian mountaineer Emil Bergmann. Styles and Bergmann planned to leave after a week. The group landed on Rockall on 30 May, having sailed from Inverkip on the Firth of Clyde. The attempt ended after 30 days when deteriorating weather conditions required Cameron's rescue by HM Coastguard.\nCircumnavigations.\nThe \"Round Rockall\" sailing race, sponsored by Galway Bay Sailing Club, runs from Galway, Ireland, around Rockall and back. It was held in 2012 to coincide with the finish of the 2011\u201312 Volvo Ocean Race around the world.\nThe 2015\u20132016 Clipper Round the World Yacht Race race 12 from New York to Derry was extended around Rockall despite previous promises to crew from Sir Robin Knox-Johnston that this would not happen again after the race to Danang. In July, 2022, the 2019\u20132020 Clipper Round the World Race (delayed for 2 years by COVID) was again extended on Leg 8 to go around Rockall before completing the leg at the mouth of the River Foyle in Ireland. The fleet had crossed the Atlantic in record time, and the City docks in Derry had no room for the fleet of 11 boats to berth. The race organizers sent the fleet around Rockall in order to extend the leg by approximately one day's sailing time to clear the docks in Derry.\nIn 2017, the Safehaven Marine team led by Frank Kowalski set a world record for the Long Way Round Circumnavigation of Ireland via Rockall. The Barracuda-style naval patrol, search, and rescue vessel \"Thunder Child\" completed the route in 34 hours, 1 minute, and 47 seconds. Set in an anti-clockwise direction, the new record \u2013 the first of its kind \u2013 is now subject to ratification by Irish Sailing and the Union Internationale Motonautique, the world governing board for all powerboat activity.\nGeography.\nDimensions.\nRockall rises sheer to a height of . Rockall is about wide and long at its base.\nHall's Ledge and other features.\nOcean swell hitting Rockall from the west was described by Nick Hancock as \"exactly where you don't want it\", for a successful landing attempt. A small step in the cliff on the western flank acts as a landing \"platform\". From there, anyone landing commences a fast, vertical scramble to safety out of the ocean swell zone. A traverse across the west face is then needed to reach the summit.\nIn 1971, Exercise Top Hat by the Corp of Royal Engineers blew the top off Rockall. That left a flat area of 12 feet by 5 feet at its longest and widest. This is the area cleared for an all-round navigation beacon (see \"Deploying an all round light beacon\" above).\nHall's Ledge on the south face is both Rockall's first-named location and only occupiable area. It was named in 1955 after Basil Hall, the first recorded person to land on Rockall (see \"History\" section above). The ledge measures just and is just from Rockall's summit. William Dick in 1975 named a second feature on Rockall, Paul's Cave.\nThe British Geological Survey (BGS) reports that \"a sill, 0.5 to 1.0 m thick and dipping at 30\u00b0 to 35\u00b0 to the east-north-east intrudes the lower part of the island,\" that, \"on the south face, can be seen to bifurcate.\" The BGS add that Rockall is \"cut by a series of joints, one set of which is responsible for the north\u2013south orientation of the near-vertical east-facing cliff\".\nHelen's Reef and other surrounding features.\nMarine Scotland detailed underwater mapping of the area around Rockall in 2011\u20132012. The mapping showed that Rockall is a minor pinnacle of the surrounding Helen's Reef. Helen's Reef extends in a sweeping arc of fissures and ridges to the north-west of the islet. Between Rockall and Helen's Reef is a deeper trench much used by squid fishermen.\nHasselwood Rock, 200 metres north, and several other pinnacles of Helen's Reef, are smaller at half the size of Rockall or less. While similarly remote, those other formations are legally not islands nor points on land. That is because they are often submerged completely, only revealed momentarily above certain types of ocean surface waves.\nRockall Bank is Rockall's surrounding elevated seabed. Rockall Bank lies directly south of the Rockall Plateau. It is separated from the Outer Hebrides by the Rockall Trough, itself located within the Rockall Basin (also known as the Hatton Rockall Basin).\nClimate and weather.\nAlthough Rockall does not sustain a weather station, Rockall's isolated setting dictates an extremely oceanic climate without heat or cold extremes. The North Atlantic Current influences waters near Rockall.\nRockall's name is given to one of the 31 sea areas named in the British Meteorological Office's shipping forecast. It was reported in 2006 that those onboard a British oceanographic research vessel just east of Rockall in February 2000 experienced the largest waves ever recorded by scientific instruments in the open ocean. A shipborne wave recorder measured individual waves up to from crest to trough, and a maximum significant wave height of . Those measurements are higher than Rockall's summit.\nGeology.\nRockall is made of a type of peralkaline granite that is relatively rich in sodium and potassium. Within this granite are darker bands richer in iron because they contain two iron-sodium silicate minerals called aegirine and riebeckite. The darker bands are a type of granite that geologists have named \"rockallite\", although use of this term is now discouraged.\nIn 1975, a mineral new to science was discovered in a rock sample from Rockall. The mineral is called bazirite, named after the chemical elements barium and zirconium. Bazirite has the chemical formula of .\nRockall forms part of the deeply eroded Rockall Igneous Centre that was formed as part of the North Atlantic Igneous Province. It was formed approximately million years ago based on rubidium\u2013strontium dating, as part of the breakup of Laurasia. Greenland and Europe separated and the north-east Atlantic Ocean was formed between them, eventually leaving Rockall as an isolated islet.\nThe RV \"Celtic Explorer\" surveyed the Rockall Bank in 2003. The Irish light vessel \"Granuaile\" (the same name as the steamer on the RIA 1896 botany survey) was chartered by the Geological Survey of Ireland, on behalf of the Department of Communications, Marine and Natural Resources, to conduct a seismic survey of the Rockall Bank and the Hatton Bank in July 2004, as part of the Irish National Seabed Survey.\nEcology.\nRockall's only permanent multicellular inhabitants are common periwinkles and other marine molluscs. Small numbers of seabirds, mainly fulmars, northern gannets, black-legged kittiwakes, and common guillemots, use the rock for resting in summer. Gannets and guillemots occasionally breed successfully if the summer is calm with no storm waves washing over the rock. In total there have been just over twenty species of seabird and six other animal species observed (including the aforementioned molluscs) on or near the islet.\nCold-water coral biogenic reefs have been identified on the wider Rockall Bank, which are contributing features for the East Rockall Bank and North-West Rockall Bank SACs.\nDiscovery of new species.\nIn December 2013, surveys by Marine Scotland discovered four new species of animal in the sea around Rockall. These are believed to live in an area where hydrocarbons are released from the seabed, known as a cold seep. The discovery has raised the issue of restricting some forms of fishery to protect the sea bed. The species are:\nOwnership.\nEconomic background.\nPossession of Rockall was for many decades deemed imperative to claims to the vast surrounding fisheries and oil-rich Atlantic seabed. \"The Irish Times\" claims to have reported on the economic value of Rockall's fisheries, as long ago as 1861.\n20th century.\nUntil 1955, Rockall was legally \"terra nullius\". The UK claimed Rockall on 18 September 1955 when \"Two Royal Marines and a civilian naturalist, led by Royal Navy officer Lieutenant Commander Desmond Scott, raised a Union flag on the islet and cemented a plaque into the rock\". UK motivations behind the 1955 decision to claim Rockall as UK territory were revealed in documents subsequently declassified in May 2017: the UK Government had Cold War worries that Rockall could be used by \"hostile agents\" to spy on the future South Uist missile testing range.\nThe British Island of Rockall Act 1972 (c. 2) formally annexed Rockall to the United Kingdom. The UK considers Rockall administratively part of the Isle of Harris.\nIn 1988, the UK and Ireland signed an exclusive economic zone (EEZ) boundary agreement ignoring the rock per the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). The agreement stated, \"the location of Rockall was irrelevant to the determination of the boundary\". Irish Deputy Prime Minister Peter Barry opined Rockall as irrelevant when determining the boundaries of the EEZ, since the rock is uninhabitable. This bilateral agreement is disputed by Denmark (on behalf of the Faroes) and Iceland.\nIn 1994, two Scottish fishery inspectors were \"kidnapped\" by a Donegal vessel after they boarded it off Rockall. The ship's captain had been instructed to proceed to the nearest Scottish port for an alleged fishery offence. Instead he decided to steam for Killybegs with the two inspectors onboard. This caused a chase in the north Atlantic. After the Irish Department of Foreign Affairs intervened, the two officers were returned to their mother ship.\nOn 25 July 1997, the UK ratified UNCLOS, that states that \"Rocks which cannot sustain human habitation or economic life of their own shall have no exclusive economic zone or continental shelf\". This limits territorial sea claims to a radius, and therefore allows free passage in waters beyond this. The UK claims Rockall along with a 12-nautical-mile-radius territorial sea around the islet inside the country's EEZ. The UK also claims \"a circle of UK sovereign airspace over the islet of Rockall\". As the rock lies within the United Kingdom's EEZ, the UK claims sovereign rights for the purpose of exploring and exploiting, conserving and managing the natural resources of the area, including jurisdiction over the protection and preservation of the marine environment.\nThe Scottish Adjacent Waters Boundaries Order 1999 declared the area around Rockall to be under the jurisdiction of Scots law rather than English law.\n21st century.\nIn 2011, Eamon Gilmore stated, \"While Ireland has not recognised British sovereignty over Rockall, it has never sought to claim sovereignty for itself. The consistent position of successive Irish Governments has been that Rockall and similar rocks and skerries have no significance for establishing legal claims to mineral rights in the adjacent seabed and to fishing rights in the surrounding seas.\"\nOn 12 October 2012, Irish Navy ship L\u00c9 \"R\u00f3is\u00edn\" was reported exercising a \"showing the flag\" patrol around the rock.\nWith effect from 31 March 2014, the UK and Ireland published EEZ limits which include Rockall within the UK's EEZ.\nOn 25 June 2019, Simon Coveney supplemented the previous positions of Peter Barry and Eamon Gilmore by stating, \"Rockall and similar rocks and skerries should have no significance for establishing legal claims to continental shelf. This position is now reflected in the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea which provides at Article 121, paragraph 3 that 'Rocks which cannot sustain human habitation or economic life of their own shall have no exclusive economic zone or continental shelf.'\" He did so in the context of, \"present difficulties between Ireland and Scotland over fishing within 12 miles of Rockall.\"\nAfter the UK left the EU, the EU\u2013UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement came into force on 1 January 2021. Three days later the \"Northern Celt\", an Irish fishing boat based out of Greencastle, County Donegal, was boarded and ordered to leave the 12-nautical-mile zone around Rockall by officers of a Marine Scotland patrol boat. \nSince 2021, fishing licences issued by the UK to EU vessels have excluded access to the 12-nautical-mile zone around Rockall. In 2023, Irish Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Charlie McConalogue stated that this action was costing the Irish fishing industry up to \u20ac7 million per year.\nIn 2024, a proposed bilateral agreement between the governments of Ireland and Scotland would have allowed Irish fishing vessels to return to the 12-nautical-mile zone. The proposal was vetoed by the United Kingdom's Foreign Secretary, David Cameron.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25656", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25656", "title": "Roman number system", "text": ""}
{"id": "25657", "revid": "25059116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25657", "title": "Roman numerals", "text": "Numbers in the Roman numeral system\nRoman numerals are a numeral system that originated in ancient Rome and remained the usual way of writing numbers throughout Europe well into the Late Middle Ages. Numbers are written with combinations of letters from the Latin alphabet, each with a fixed integer value. The modern style uses only these seven:\nThe use of Roman numerals continued long after the decline of the Roman Empire. From the 14th century on, Roman numerals began to be replaced by Arabic numerals; however, this process was gradual, and the use of Roman numerals persisted in various places, including on clock faces. For instance, on the clock of Big Ben (designed in 1852), the hours from 1 to 12 are written as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII\nThe notations IV and IX can be read as \"one less than five\" (4) and \"one less than ten\" (9), although there is a tradition favouring the representation of \"4\" as \"IIII\" on Roman numeral clocks.\nOther common uses include year numbers on monuments and buildings and copyright dates on the title screens of films and television programmes. MCM, signifying \"a thousand, and a hundred less than another thousand\", means 1900, so 1912 is written MCMXII. For the years of the current () century, MM indicates 2000; this year is (2025).\nDescription.\nRoman numerals use different symbols for each power of ten, and there is no zero symbol, in contrast with the place value notation of Arabic numerals (in which place-keeping zeros enable the same digit to represent different powers of ten).\nThis allows some flexibility in notation, and there has never been an official or universally accepted standard for Roman numerals. Usage varied greatly in ancient Rome and became thoroughly chaotic in medieval times. The more recent restoration of a largely \"classical\" notation has gained popularity among some, while variant forms are used by some modern writers as seeking more \"flexibility\". Roman numerals may be considered legally binding expressions of a number, as in U.S. copyright law before the Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988 (where an \"incorrect\" or ambiguous numeral in a copyright notice could invalidate a copyright claim or affect the termination date of the copyright period).\nStandard form.\nThe following table displays how Roman numerals are usually written in modern times:&lt;br&gt;\n The numerals for 4 (IV) and 9 (IX) are written using subtractive notation, where the smaller symbol (I) is \"subtracted\" from the larger one (V or X), instead of IIII and VIIII. Subtractive notation is also used for 40 (XL), 90 (XC), 400 (CD) and 900 (CM). These are the only subtractive forms in standard use.\nA number containing two or more decimal digits is built by appending the Roman numeral equivalent for each, from highest to lowest, as in the following examples:\nAny missing place (represented by a zero in the place-value equivalent) is omitted, as in Latin (and English) speech:\nThe largest number that can be represented in this manner is 3,999 (MMMCMXCIX), but this is sufficient for the values for which Roman numerals are commonly used today, such as year numbers:\nFor larger numbers (4,000 and larger): Both before and after the introduction of Arabic numerals in the West, from ancient times through medieval and modern, users of Roman numerals have used various means to write larger numbers &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nOther forms.\nForms exist that vary in one way or another from the general standard represented above.\nOther additive forms.\nWhile subtractive notation for 4, 40, and 400 (IV, XL, and CD) has been the usual form since Roman times , additive notation to represent these numbers (IIII, XXXX, and CCCC) very frequently continued to be used, including in compound numbers like 24 (XXIIII), 74 (LXXIIII), and 490 (CCCCLXXXX). The additive forms for 9, 90, and 900 (VIIII, LXXXX, and DCCCC) have also been used, although less often.\nThe two conventions could be mixed in the same document or inscription, even in the same numeral. For example, on the numbered gates to the Colosseum, IIII is systematically used instead of IV, but subtractive notation is used for XL; consequently, gate 44 is labelled XLIIII.\nEspecially on tombstones and other funerary inscriptions, 5 and 50 have been occasionally written IIIII and XXXXX instead of V and L, and there are instances such as IIIIII and XXXXXX rather than VI or LX.\nModern clock faces that use Roman numerals still very often use IIII for four o'clock but IX for nine o'clock, a practice that goes back to very early clocks such as the Wells Cathedral clock of the late 14th century. However, this is far from universal: for example, the clock on the Palace of Westminster tower (commonly known as Big Ben) uses a subtractive IV for 4 o'clock.\nSeveral monumental inscriptions created in the early 20th century use variant forms for \"1900\" (usually written MCM). These vary from MDCCCCX for 1910 as seen on Admiralty Arch, London, to the more unusual, if not unique MDCDIII for 1903, on the north entrance to the Saint Louis Art Museum.\nOther subtractive forms.\nThere are numerous historical examples of IIX being used for 8; for example, XIIX was used by officers of the XVIII Roman Legion to write their number. The notation appears prominently on the cenotaph of their senior centurion Marcus Caelius (c.\u200945 BC \u2013 9 AD). On the publicly displayed official Roman calendars known as Fasti, XIIX is used for the 18 days to the next Kalends, and XXIIX for the 28 days in February. The latter can be seen on the sole extant pre-Julian calendar, the Fasti Antiates Maiores.\nThere are historical examples of other subtractive forms: IIIXX for 17, IIXX for 18, IIIC for 97, IIC for 98, and IC for 99. A possible explanation is that the word for 18 in Latin is \u200d\u2014\u2009literally \"two from twenty\"\u2060\u2014\u2009while 98 is (two from hundred) and 99 is (one from hundred). However, the explanation does not seem to apply to IIIXX and IIIC, since the Latin words for 17 and 97 were (seven ten) and (ninety seven), respectively.\nThe function in Microsoft Excel supports multiple subtraction modes depending on the \"Form\" setting. For example, the number \"499\" (usually CDXCIX) can be rendered as LDVLIV ((500-50)+(50-5)+(5-1)), XDIX ((500-10)+(10-1)), VDIV ((500-5)+(5-1)) or ID (500-1). The relevant Microsoft help page offers no explanation for this function other than to describe its output as \"more concise\".\nNon-standard variants.\nThere are also historical examples of other additive and multiplicative forms, and forms which seem to reflect spoken phrases. Some of these variants may have been regarded as errors even by contemporaries.\nNon-numeric combinations.\nAs Roman numerals are composed of ordinary alphabetic characters, there may sometimes be confusion with other uses of the same letters. For example, \"XXX\" and \"XL\" have other connotations in addition to their values as Roman numerals, while \"IXL\" more often than not is a gramogram of \"I excel\", and is in any case not an unambiguous Roman numeral.\nZero.\nAs a non-positional numeral system, Roman numerals have no \"place-keeping\" zeros. Furthermore, the system as used by the Romans lacked a numeral for the number zero itself (that is, what remains after 1 is subtracted from 1). The word (the Latin word meaning \"none\") was used to represent 0, although the earliest attested instances are medieval. For instance Dionysius Exiguus used alongside Roman numerals in a manuscript from 525 AD. About 725, Bede or one of his colleagues used the letter N, the initial of or of (the Latin word for \"nothing\") for 0, in a table of epacts, all written in Roman numerals.\nThe use of N to indicate \"none\" long survived in the historic apothecaries' system of measurement: used well into the 20th century to designate quantities in pharmaceutical prescriptions.\nIn later times, the Arabic numeral \"0\" has been used as a zero to open enumerations with Roman numbers. Examples include the 24-hour Shepherd Gate Clock from 1852 and tarot packs such as the 15th-century Sola Busca and the 20th century Rider\u2013Waite packs.\nFractions.\nThe base \"Roman fraction\" is S, indicating &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442. The use of S (as in VIIS to indicate &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7+1\u20442) is attested in some ancient inscriptions and in the now rare apothecaries' system (usually in the form SS): but while Roman numerals for whole numbers are essentially decimal, S does not correspond to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5\u204410, as one might expect, but &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;6\u204412.\nThe Romans used a duodecimal rather than a decimal system for fractions, as the divisibility of twelve (12 = 22 \u00d7 3) makes it easier to handle the common fractions of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 than does a system based on ten (10 = 2 \u00d7 5). Notation for fractions other than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 is mainly found on surviving Roman coins, many of which had values that were duodecimal fractions of the unit . Fractions less than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 are indicated by a dot (\u00b7) for each \"twelfth\", the source of the English words \"inch\" and \"ounce\"; dots are repeated for fractions up to five twelfths. Six twelfths (one half), is S for \"half\". \"Uncia\" dots were added to S for fractions from seven to eleven twelfths, just as tallies were added to V for whole numbers from six to nine. The arrangement of the dots was variable and not necessarily linear. Five dots arranged like (\u2059) (as on the face of a die) are known as a quincunx, from the name of the Roman fraction/coin. The Latin words and are the source of the English words \"sextant\" and \"quadrant\".\nEach fraction from &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204412 to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;12\u204412 had a name in Roman times; these corresponded to the names of the related coins:\nOther Roman fractional notations included the following:\nFractions could also be indicated with a slash through the last letter in a numeral (e.g. \u0197), which subtracted the number by an amount less than one (usually &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442).\nLarge numbers.\nThe modern form can only write numbers up to 3999, and without M in early Roman times only numbers up to 899 could be written. Various schemes have been used over time to write larger numbers.\nApostrophus.\nUsing the method, 500 is written as I\u2183, while 1,000 is written as CI\u2183. This system of encasing numbers to denote thousands (imagine the Cs and \u2183s as parentheses) had its origins in Etruscan numeral usage.\nEach additional set of C and \u2183 surrounding CI\u2183 raises the value by a factor of ten: CCI\u2183\u2183 represents 10,000 and CCCI\u2183\u2183\u2183 represents 100,000. Similarly, each additional \u2183 to the right of I\u2183 raises the value by a factor of ten: I\u2183\u2183 represents 5,000 and I\u2183\u2183\u2183 represents 50,000. Numerals larger than CCCI\u2183\u2183\u2183 do not occur.\nSometimes I\u2183 (500) is reduced to D, CI\u2183 (1,000) to \u2180, I\u2183\u2183 (5,000) to \u2181; CCI\u2183\u2183 (10,000) to \u2182; I\u2183\u2183\u2183 (50,000) to \u2187; and CCCI\u2183\u2183\u2183 (100,000) to \u2188. It is likely CI\u2183 (1000) influenced the later M.\nJohn Wallis is often credited with introducing the \u27e8\u221e\u27e9 symbol for infinity, and one conjecture is his basing it on \u2180, since 1,000 was hyperbolically used to represent very large numbers.\nVinculum.\nUsing the , conventional Roman numerals are multiplied by 1,000 by adding a \"bar\" or \"overline\", thus:\nThe \"vinculum \"came into use in the late Republic, and it was a common alternative to the apostrophic \u2180 during the Imperial era around the Roman world (M for '1000' was not in use until the Medieval period). It continued in use in the Middle Ages, though it became known more commonly as , and it appears in modern editions of classical and medieval Latin texts.\nIn an extension of the , a three-sided box (now sometimes printed as two vertical lines and a ) is used to multiply by 100,000, thus:\n notation is distinct from the custom of adding an overline to a numeral simply to indicate that it is a number. Both usages can be seen on Roman inscriptions of the same period and general location, such as on the Antonine Wall.\nOrigin.\nThe system is closely associated with the ancient city-state of Rome and the Empire that it created. However, due to the scarcity of surviving examples, the origins of the system are obscure and there are several competing theories, all largely conjectural.\nEtruscan numerals.\nRome was founded sometime between 850 and 750 BC, next to the southern edge of the Etruscan domain, which covered a large part of north-central Italy.\nThe Roman numerals, in particular, are directly derived from the Etruscan number symbols: \u27e8\ud800\udf20\u27e9, \u27e8\ud800\udf21\u27e9, \u27e8\ud800\udf22\u27e9, \u27e8\ud800\udf23\u27e9, and \u27e8\ud800\udf1f\u27e9 for 1, 5, 10, 50, and 100 (they had more symbols for larger numbers, but it is unknown which symbol represents which number). As in the basic Roman system, the Etruscans wrote the symbols that added to the desired number, from higher to lower value. Thus, the number 87, for example, would be written 50 + 10 + 10 + 10 + 5 + 1 + 1 = \ud800\udf23\ud800\udf22\ud800\udf22\ud800\udf22\ud800\udf21\ud800\udf20\ud800\udf20 (this would appear as \ud800\udf20\ud800\udf20\ud800\udf21\ud800\udf22\ud800\udf22\ud800\udf22\ud800\udf23 since Etruscan was written from right to left.)\nThe symbols \u27e8\ud800\udf20\u27e9 and \u27e8\ud800\udf21\u27e9 resembled letters of the Etruscan alphabet, but \u27e8\ud800\udf22\u27e9, \u27e8\ud800\udf23\u27e9, and \u27e8\ud800\udf1f\u27e9 did not. The Etruscans used the subtractive notation, too, but not like the Romans. They wrote 17, 18, and 19 as \ud800\udf20\ud800\udf20\ud800\udf20\ud800\udf22\ud800\udf22, \ud800\udf20\ud800\udf20\ud800\udf22\ud800\udf22, and \ud800\udf20\ud800\udf22\ud800\udf22, mirroring the way they spoke those numbers (\"three from twenty\", etc.); and similarly for 27, 28, 29, 37, 38, etc. However, they did not write \ud800\udf20\ud800\udf21 for 4 (nor \ud800\udf22\ud800\udf23 for 40), and wrote \ud800\udf21\ud800\udf20\ud800\udf20, \ud800\udf21\ud800\udf20\ud800\udf20\ud800\udf20 and \ud800\udf21\ud800\udf20\ud800\udf20\ud800\udf20\ud800\udf20 for 7, 8, and 9, respectively.\nEarly Roman numerals.\nThe early Roman numerals for 1, 10, and 100 were the Etruscan ones: \u27e8\ud800\udf20\u27e9, \u27e8\ud800\udf22\u27e9, and \u27e8\ud800\udf1f\u27e9. The symbols for 5 and 50 changed from \u27e8\ud800\udf21\u27e9 and \u27e8\ud800\udf23\u27e9 to \u27e8V\u27e9 and \u27e8\u2186\u27e9 at some point. The latter had flattened to \u27e8\u22a5\u27e9 (an inverted T) by the time of Augustus, and soon afterwards became identified with the graphically similar letter \u27e8\u27e9.\nThe symbol for 100 was written variously as \u27e8\ud800\udf1f\u27e9 or \u27e8\u2183IC\u27e9, and was then abbreviated to \u27e8\u27e9 or \u27e8\u27e9, with \u27e8\u27e9 (which matched the Latin letter \"C\") finally winning out. It might have helped that \"C\" was the initial letter of , Latin for \"hundred\".\nThe numbers 500 and 1000 were denoted by V or X overlaid with a box or circle. Thus, 500 was like a \u0186 superimposed on a \u22cc or \u22a2, making it look like \u00de. It became D or \u00d0 by the time of Augustus, under the graphic influence of the letter D. It was later identified as the letter D; an alternative symbol for \"thousand\" was a CI\u2183, and half of a thousand or \"five hundred\" is the right half of the symbol, I\u2183, and this may have been converted into D.\nThe notation for 1000 was a circled or boxed X: \u24cd, \u2297, \u2295, and by Augustan times was partially identified with the Greek letter \u03a6 \"phi\". Over time, the symbol changed to \u03a8 and \u2180. The latter symbol further evolved into \u221e, then \u22c8, and eventually changed to M under the influence of the Latin word \"mille\" \"thousand\".\nAccording to Paul Kayser, the basic numerical symbols were I, X, \ud800\udf1f and \u03a6 (or \u2295) and the intermediate ones were derived by taking half of those (half an X is V, half a \ud800\udf1f is \u2186 and half a \u03a6/\u2295 is D). Then \ud800\udf1f and \u2186 developed as mentioned above.\nClassical Roman numerals.\nThe Colosseum was constructed in Rome in CE 72\u201380, and while the original perimeter wall has largely disappeared, the numbered entrances from XXIII (23) to LIIII (54) survive, to demonstrate that in Imperial times Roman numerals had already assumed their classical form: as largely standardised in current use. The most obvious anomaly (a common one that persisted for centuries) is the inconsistent use of subtractive notation - while XL is used for 40, IV is avoided in favour of IIII: in fact, gate 44 is labelled XLIIII.\nUse in the Middle Ages and Renaissance.\nLower case, or \"minuscule\", letters were developed in the Middle Ages, well after the demise of the Western Roman Empire, and since that time lower-case versions of Roman numbers have also been commonly used: i, ii, iii, iv, and so on.\nSince the Middle Ages, a \"j\" has sometimes been substituted for the final \"i\" of a \"lower-case\" Roman numeral, such as \"iij\" for 3 or \"vij\" for 7. This \"j\" can be considered a swash variant of \"i\". Into the early 20th century, the use of a final \"j\" was still sometimes used in medical prescriptions to prevent tampering with or misinterpretation of a number after it was written.\nNumerals in documents and inscriptions from the Middle Ages sometimes include additional symbols, which today are called \"medieval Roman numerals\". Some simply substitute another letter for the standard one (such as \"A\" for \"V\", or \"Q\" for \"D\"), while others serve as abbreviations for compound numerals (\"O\" for \"XI\", or \"F\" for \"XL\"). Although they are still listed today in some dictionaries, they are long out of use.\nA superscript \"o\" (sometimes written directly above the symbol) was sometimes used as an ordinal indicator.\nChronograms, messages with dates encoded into them, were popular during the Renaissance era. The chronogram would be a phrase containing the letters I, V, X, L, C, D, and M. By putting these letters together, the reader would obtain a number, usually indicating a particular year.\nModern use.\nBy the 11th century, Arabic numerals had been introduced into Europe from al-Andalus, by way of Arab traders and arithmetic treatises. Roman numerals, however, proved very persistent, remaining in common use in the West well into the 14th and 15th centuries, even in accounting and other business records (where the actual calculations would have been made using an abacus). Replacement by their more convenient \"Arabic\" equivalents was quite gradual, and Roman numerals are still used today in certain contexts. A few examples of their current use are:\nSpecific disciplines.\nIn astronautics, United States rocket model variants are sometimes designated by Roman numerals, e.g. Titan I, Titan II, Titan III, Saturn I, Saturn V.\nIn astronomy, the natural satellites or \"moons\" of the planets are designated by capital Roman numerals appended to the planet's name. For example, Titan's designation is Saturn VI.\nIn chemistry, Roman numerals are sometimes used to denote the groups of the periodic table, but this has officially been deprecated in favour of Arabic numerals. They are also used in the IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry, for the oxidation number of cations which can take on several different positive charges. They are also used for naming phases of polymorphic crystals, such as ice.\nIn education, school grades (in the sense of year-groups rather than test scores) are sometimes referred to by a Roman numeral; for example, \"grade IX\" is sometimes seen for \"grade 9\".\nIn entomology, the broods of the thirteen- and seventeen-year periodical cicadas are identified by Roman numerals.\nIn graphic design, stylised Roman numerals may represent numeric values.\nIn law, Roman numerals are commonly used to help organize legal codes as part of an alphanumeric outline. \nIn mathematics (including trigonometry, statistics, and calculus), when a graph includes negative numbers, its quadrants are named using I, II, III, and IV. These quadrant names signify positive numbers on both axes, negative numbers on the x-axis, negative numbers on both axes, and negative numbers on the y-axis, respectively. The use of Roman numerals to designate quadrants avoids confusion, since Arabic numerals are used for the actual data represented in the graph.\nIn military unit designation, Roman numerals are often used to distinguish between units at different levels. This reduces possible confusion, especially when viewing operational or strategic level maps. In particular, army corps are often numbered using Roman numerals (for example, the American XVIII Airborne Corps or the Nazi III Panzerkorps) with Arabic numerals being used for divisions and armies.\nIn music, Roman numerals are used in several contexts:\nIn pharmacy, Roman numerals were used with the now largely obsolete apothecaries' system of measurement: including SS to denote \"one half\" and N to denote \"zero\".\nIn photography, Roman numerals (with zero) are used to denote varying levels of brightness when using the Zone System.\nIn seismology, Roman numerals are used to designate degrees of the Mercalli intensity scale of earthquakes.\nIn sport the team containing the \"top\" players and representing a nation or province, a club or a school at the highest level in (say) rugby union is often called the \"1st XV\", while a lower-ranking cricket or American football team might be the \"3rd XI\".\nIn tarot, Roman numerals (with zero) are often used to denote the cards of the Major Arcana.\nIn Ireland, Roman numerals were used until the late 1980s to indicate the month on postage Franking. In documents, Roman numerals are sometimes still used to indicate the month to avoid confusion over day/month/year or month/day/year formats.\nIn theology and biblical scholarship, the Septuagint is often referred to as LXX, as this translation of the Old Testament into Greek is named for the legendary number of its translators (\"septuaginta\" being Latin for \"seventy\").\nModern use in European languages other than English.\nSome uses that are rare or never seen in English-speaking countries may be relatively common in parts of continental Europe and in other regions (e.g. Latin America) that use a European language other than English. For instance:\nCapital or small capital Roman numerals are widely used in Romance languages to denote centuries, e.g. the French ' and the Spanish ' (not \"\") for \"18th century\". Some Slavic and Turkic languages (especially in and adjacent to Russia) similarly favour Roman numerals (e.g. Russian , Azeri or Polish ). On the other hand, in Turkish and some Central European Slavic languages, like most Germanic languages, one writes \"18.\" (with a period) before the local word for \"century\" (e.g. Turkish , Czech ).\nWhen typing on Russian typewriters, the Roman-numeral \"V\" was replaced with \"\u0423\" because the letter \"V\" was absent in the Russian Cyrillic alphabet. Additionally, the Roman-numeral \"I\" was replaced with \"1\", since this letter had been removed from the Russian alphabet by the 1918 reform of orthography. For example, XVIII was typed as \u0425\u0423111. This style is sometimes maintained even when typing on a computer, either out of habit or due to the inconvenience of switching between Latin and Russian script for one or two letters.\nMixed Roman and Arabic numerals are sometimes used in numeric representations of dates (especially in formal letters and official documents, but also on tombstones). The month is written in Roman numerals, while the day is in Arabic numerals: \"4.VI.1789\" and \"VI.4.1789\" both refer unambiguously to 4 June 1789.\nRoman numerals are sometimes used to represent the days of the week in hours-of-operation signs displayed in windows or on doors of businesses, and sometimes in railway and bus timetables. Monday, taken as the first day of the week, is represented by I. Sunday is represented by VII. The hours of operation signs are tables composed of two columns where the left column is the day of the week in Roman numerals and the right column is a range of hours of operation from starting time to closing time. In the example case (left), the business opens from 10 AM to 7 PM on weekdays, 10 AM to 5 PM on Saturdays and is closed on Sundays. Note that the listing uses 24-hour time.\nRoman numerals may also be used for floor numbering. For instance, apartments in central Amsterdam are indicated as 138-III, with both an Arabic numeral (number of the block or house) and a Roman numeral (floor number). The apartment on the ground floor is indicated as .\nIn Italy, where roads outside built-up areas have kilometre signs, major roads and motorways also mark 100-metre subdivisionals, using Roman numerals from I to IX for the smaller intervals. The sign thus marks 17.9\u00a0km.\nCertain romance-speaking countries use Roman numerals to designate assemblies of their national legislatures. For instance, the composition of the Italian Parliament from 2018 to 2022 (elected in the 2018 Italian general election) is called the XVIII Legislature of the Italian Republic (or more commonly the \"XVIII Legislature\").\nA notable exception to the use of Roman numerals in Europe is in Greece, where Greek numerals (based on the Greek alphabet) are generally used in contexts where Roman numerals would be used elsewhere.\nUnicode.\nThe \"Number Forms\" block of the Unicode computer character set standard has a number of Roman numeral symbols in the range of code points from U+2160 to U+2188. This range includes both upper- and lowercase numerals, as well as pre-combined characters for numbers up to 12. One justification for the existence of pre-combined numbers is to facilitate the setting of multiple-letter numbers (such as VIII) on a single horizontal line in Asian vertical text. The Unicode standard, however, includes special Roman numeral code points for compatibility only, stating that \"[f]or most purposes, it is preferable to compose the Roman numerals from sequences of the appropriate Latin letters\". The block also includes some symbols for large numbers, an old variant of \"L\" (50) similar to the Etruscan character, the Claudian letter \"reversed C\", etc.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25658", "revid": "50278403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25658", "title": "Rem", "text": "Rem or REM may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "25661", "revid": "40943757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25661", "title": "Rammstein", "text": "German metal band\nRammstein (, lit. \"ramming stone\") is a German band formed in Berlin in 1994. The band's lineup\u2014consisting of lead vocalist Till Lindemann, lead guitarist Richard Kruspe, rhythm guitarist Paul Landers, bassist Oliver Riedel, drummer Christoph Schneider, and keyboardist Christian \"Flake\" Lorenz\u2014has remained unchanged throughout their history, along with their approach to songwriting, which consists of Lindemann writing and singing the lyrics over instrumental pieces the rest of the band has completed beforehand. Prior to their formation, some members were associated with the punk rock acts Feeling B and First Arsch.\nAfter winning a local contest, Rammstein was able to record demos and send them to different record labels, eventually signing with Motor Music. Working with producer Jacob Hellner, they released their debut album \"Herzeleid\" in 1995. Though the album initially sold poorly, the band gained popularity through their live performances and the album eventually reached No. 6 in Germany. Their second album, \"Sehnsucht\", was released in 1997 and debuted at No. 1 in Germany, resulting in a worldwide tour lasting nearly four years and spawning the successful singles \"Engel\" and \"Du hast\" and the live album \"Live aus Berlin\" (1999). Following the tour, Rammstein signed with major label Universal Music and released \"Mutter\" in 2001. Six singles were released from the album, all charting in countries throughout Europe. The lead single, \"Sonne\", reached No. 2 in Germany. Rammstein released \"Reise, Reise\" in 2004 and had two more singles reach No. 2 in Germany: \"Mein Teil\" and \"Amerika\"; the former song reached No. 1 in Spain, becoming their first No. 1 single.\nTheir fifth album, \"Rosenrot\", was released in 2005, and the lead single, \"Benzin\", reached No. 6 in Germany. Their second live album, \"V\u00f6lkerball\", was released in 2006. The band released their sixth album, \"Liebe ist f\u00fcr alle da\", in 2009, with its lead single, \"Pussy\", becoming their first No. 1 hit in Germany despite having a controversial music video that featured hardcore pornography. The band then entered a recording hiatus and toured for several years, releasing the \"Made in Germany\" greatest hits album as well as the \"Rammstein in Amerika\" and \"\" live albums. After a decade without new music, Rammstein returned in 2019 with the song \"Deutschland\", which became their second No. 1 hit in Germany. Their untitled seventh studio album was released in May 2019 and reached No. 1 in 14 countries. While sheltering during COVID-19 lockdowns, the band spontaneously wrote and recorded their eighth studio album, \"Zeit\", which was released in April 2022.\nRammstein was one of the first bands to emerge within the genre, with their debut album leading the music press to coin the term, and their style of music has generally had a positive reception from music critics. Commercially, the band has been very successful, earning many No. 1 albums as well as gold and platinum certifications in countries around the world. Their grand live performances, which often feature pyrotechnics, have contributed to the growth in their popularity. Despite success, the band has been subject to some controversies, with their overall image having been criticized; for instance, the song \"Ich tu dir weh\" forced its parent album \"Liebe ist f\u00fcr alle da\" to be placed on the \"index\" maintained by the German Federal Review Board for Media Harmful to Minors and re-released in Germany with the song removed due to its sexually explicit lyrics.\nHistory.\nFounding and \"Herzeleid\" (1989\u20131996).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I don't want to be another KISS, where people talk about makeup and stuff like that and no one talks about the music.\"\n\u2014Richard Kruspe\nIn 1989, East German guitarist Richard Kruspe escaped to West Berlin and started the band Orgasm Death Gimmick. At that time, he was heavily influenced by US music, especially of hard rock band Kiss. After the Berlin Wall came down, he moved back home to Schwerin, where Till Lindemann worked as a basket-weaver and played drums in the band First Arsch (loosely translated as \"First Arse\" or \"First Ass\"). At this time, Kruspe lived with Oliver Riedel of The Inchtabokatables and Christoph Schneider of Die Firma.\nIn 1992, Kruspe made his first trip to the United States with Till Lindemann and Oliver \"Ollie\" Riedel. He realized that he did not want to make US music and concentrated on creating a unique German sound. Kruspe, Riedel and Schneider started working together on a new project in 1993. Finding it difficult to write both music and lyrics, Kruspe persuaded Lindemann, whom he had overheard singing while he was working, to join the fledgling group.\nThe band co-existed with the members' previous projects for about a year and a half. Members would invest the money raised with Feeling B shows in new project. They recorded their first songs in a building that had been squatted by Feeling B frontman Aljoscha Rompe. A contest was held in Berlin for amateur bands in 1994, the winner of which would receive access to a professional recording studio for a whole week. Kruspe, Riedel, Schneider, and Lindemann entered and won the contest with a 4-track demo tape with demo versions of songs from \"Herzeleid\", written in English. This sparked Paul Landers' attention, who wanted in on the project upon hearing their demo. To complete their sound, Rammstein attempted to recruit Christian \"Flake\" Lorenz, who had played with Landers in Feeling B. Though initially hesitant, Lorenz eventually agreed to join the band.\nUp to that point, the band was called Tempelprayers. The name Rammstein comes from an early idea of Schneider, Flake and Paul. They called themselves \"Rammstein-Flugschau\" (Rammstein Airshow) after the 1988 Ramstein air show disaster. They had that name already written inside their Robur LO during their time in Feeling B. Guitarist Paul Landers said the spelling of Ramstein with the extra \"m\" was a mistake. After the band became popular, the band members denied the connection to the air show disaster and said that their name was inspired by the giant doorstop-type devices found on old gates, called Rammsteine. The extra \"m\" in the band's name makes it translate literally as \"ramming stone\". In a 2019 feature, \"Metal Hammer\" explained that the band was named after one of their earliest songs, \"Ramstein\", written after the air show disaster at the American airbase in Ramstein. According to the band, people started to refer to them as \"the band with the 'Ramstein song'\" and later as the \"Ramstein band\". Before agreeing on the name \"Rammstein\", the band also had other names in mind: Milch (milk), Erde (earth) or Mutter (mother).\nLater, Rammstein was signed by Motor Music. Rammstein began to record their first studio album, \"Herzeleid\", in March 1995 with producer Jacob Hellner. They released their first single \"Du riechst so gut\" that August and released the album in September. Throughout October, the newly minted band gathered their first few significant waves of fans while opening 15 shows across Germany for Project Pitchfork. Later in that November, they opened two shows for Clawfinger in Warsaw and Prague. In December, they headlined a 17-show tour of Germany which helped expand the fanbase they had initially established while opening for Project Pitchfork and Clawfinger. This helped to boost the band's popularity and establish them as a credible live act. They went on several tours throughout early 1996, releasing their second single titled \"Seemann\" on 8 January. On 27 March 1996, Rammstein performed on MTV's \"Hanging Out\" in London, their first performance in the UK. Their first major boost in popularity outside Germany came when Nine Inch Nails frontman Trent Reznor chose two Rammstein songs, \"Heirate mich\" and \"Rammstein\", during his work as music director for the David Lynch 1997 film \"Lost Highway\". The soundtrack for the film was released in the U.S. in late 1996 and later throughout Europe in April 1997. In the middle of 1996, they headlined one tour of their own in small, sold-out venues. Rammstein went on to tour through Germany, Austria, and Switzerland from September to October 1996, performing an anniversary concert on 27 September called \"100 years of Rammstein\". Guests to the concert included Moby, Bobo, and the Berlin Session Orchestra, while Berlin director Gert Hof was responsible for the light show.\n\"Sehnsucht\" and \"Live aus Berlin\" (1996\u20132000).\nRammstein started recording \"Sehnsucht\" in November 1996 at the Temple Studios in Malta. The album was again produced by Jacob Hellner. \"Engel\", the first single from the album, was released on 1 April 1997 and reached gold status in Germany on 23 May. This prompted the release of a fan edition of the single, named \"Engel \u2013 Fan Edition\". This contained two previously unreleased songs, \"Feuerr\u00e4der\" and \"Wilder Wein\". Release of the second single from the album \"Sehnsucht\" was \"Du hast\", which hit the German single charts in August 1997 at No. 5. Rammstein then continued touring in the summer while \"Sehnsucht\" was released on 22 August 1997. The album reached No. 1 in Germany after two weeks in the charts. Simultaneously, \"Herzeleid\" and both \"Sehnsucht\" singles (\"Du hast\" and \"Engel\") were in the Top 20 of the German charts. Rammstein continued to headline sold-out shows throughout Europe in September and October. On 5 December 1997, they embarked on their first tour of the United States as the opening act for KMFDM. In July 1998, the band released a cover of the song \"Stripped\", originally released by Depeche Mode in early 1986; it was included on the tribute album \"For the Masses\", the Rammstein version obtained moderate success in Germany and Austria.\nOn 22\u201323 August 1998, Rammstein played to over 17,000 fans at the Wuhlheide in Berlin, the biggest show the band had played there up to that date. Supporting acts were Danzig, Nina Hagen, Joachim Witt and Alaska. The show was professionally filmed, intended to be released on their upcoming live DVD, \"Live aus Berlin\". Rammstein embarked on a live tour with Korn, Ice Cube, Orgy and Limp Bizkit called the Family Values Tour in September through to late October 1998. Continuing their success in the US, \"Sehnsucht\" received Gold record status there on 2 November. The band was nominated at the MTV European Music Awards for \"Best Rock Act\" and performed \"Du hast\" live on 12 November that year.\nRammstein had further success in 1999, starting in February with a nomination for Best Metal Performance at the 41st Annual Grammy Awards. A year after it was filmed, the \"Live aus Berlin\" concert was released on CD on 30 August 1999, with a limited edition double CD also available. Two weeks after it was released, \"Live aus Berlin\" went to No. 2 in the German Album Charts. On 13 September and 26 November 1999, the video and DVD versions of the concert were released respectively. Further popularity ensued when \"Du hast\" was included in \"\".\n\"Mutter\" (2000\u20132002).\nRammstein's album \"Mutter\" was recorded in the south of France in May and June 2000, and mixed in Stockholm in October of that year. During December 2000, Rammstein released an MP3 version of \"Links 2-3-4\" as a teaser for their new album. 2001 was a busy year for Rammstein, as the band needed to finish off the Sehnsucht Tour ending in January and February with the band playing the Big Day Out festival in Australia and New Zealand and some concerts in Japan. January also heralded the shooting of the video for their upcoming single, \"Sonne\", recorded in Potsdam at Babelsberger Filmstudios from 13 to 15 January 2001. The video was released on 29 January 2001. The single for \"Sonne\" was released on 12 February 2001 in Europe, featuring an instrumental version of the song, two remixes by Clawfinger and the song \"Adios\" from the upcoming album.\n\"Mutter\" was released on 2 April 2001, sparking another Rammstein tour through Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. On 14 May, the second single from the album, \"Links 2 3 4\", was released, along with a video of the single on 18 May. After a tour throughout Europe in June, the band then toured the U.S., Canada and Mexico from June to August 2001. \"Ich will\", the third single from the album, was released on 10 September 2001 and a Tour edition of the \"Mutter\" album (the cover of which is red) was released, featuring alternative artwork and live versions of \"Ich will\", \"Links 2 3 4\", \"Sonne\" and \"Spieluhr\".\nFrom 8 to 12 January 2002, Rammstein traveled to Prague to participate in a minor scene for the film \"XXX\". The band is seen in the opening scene, performing their song \"Feuer frei!\" in a concert. \"Feuer frei!\" was released across Europe as the first single from the \"XXX\" soundtrack on 14 October 2002. Rammstein released two remixes of the song. Furthermore, the single's track listing included \"Du hast\" and \"B\u00fcck dich\" cover versions by Battery. The video for the single was edited by Rob Cohen and contains part of Rammstein's performance at the beginning of the film and part snippets from the film itself.\n\"Reise, Reise\", \"Rosenrot\", and \"V\u00f6lkerball\" (2003\u20132006).\nRammstein recorded \"Reise, Reise\" (meaning \"journey, journey\", or as a command \"travel, travel\", but also an archaic Reveille) at the El Cortijo studio in southern Spain in November and December 2003; it was mixed at Toytown studio in Stockholm, Sweden in April and May 2004. The first single from the album was \"Mein Teil\", released on 26 July. The video was shot in the Arena, in the Treptow district of Berlin. Outdoor shooting took place at the Deutsche Oper (Opera House) U-Bahn station on Bismarckstrasse. The director was Zoran Bihac, who also filmed the \"Links 2 3 4\" video. The video for the second single, \"Amerika\", was filmed on 6 and 7 August 2004 in the ruins of the former cement works in R\u00fcdersdorf, near Berlin, under the direction of J\u00f6rn Heitmann (who also directed the \"Ich Will\" music video, among others). The space suits for the Moon scenes were borrowed from Hollywood and 240 tons of ash were needed to create the Moon landscape. The video premiered on 20 August, while the single was released on 13 September.\n\"Reise, Reise\" was released on 27 September 2004 and went straight into top 10 charts throughout Europe. According to the \"Billboard\" charts, Rammstein were at that stage the most successful German-language band of all time. Rammstein toured Germany through November and some of December 2004, releasing the single \"Ohne dich\" on 22 November. In February 2005, Rammstein toured Europe again. By 28 February, Rammstein had played 21 concerts in front of more than 200,000 spectators in ten countries. It was on this tour that the band was faced with several lawsuits resulting from severe fire breathing accidents involving audience members. \"Keine Lust\" the fourth single from \"Reise, Reise\", was released on 28 February 2005. From 27 May to 30 July 2005, Rammstein played music festivals across Europe. Footage from these concerts can be seen on Rammstein's live DVD \"V\u00f6lkerball\", released in November 2006.\nIn August 2005, Rammstein revealed that the follow-up album to \"Reise, Reise\" would be called \"Rosenrot\". Their first single from the album, \"Benzin\", was released on 5 October, with its video premiere on 16 September. \"Rosenrot\" was released worldwide on 28 October. Directly following the release, the album continued the success of its predecessor, \"Reise, Reise\", placing on top 10 charts in 20 countries. 16 December 2005 marked the release of the title track on \"Rosenrot\". The video for \"Mann gegen Mann\" was released on 6 February 2006, with the single being released on 3 March. On 19 February 2006, Rammstein had an asteroid named after them, 110393 Rammstein.\nOn 17 November, the first Rammstein Live DVD since \"Live aus Berlin\" from 1998 was released. \"V\u00f6lkerball\" shows concert performances by the band in England, France, Japan and Russia. The Special Edition is extended by a second DVD, which contains the documentaries \"Anaconda in the net\" by Mathilde Bonnefoy and the \"Making of the album Reise, Reise\" by the band's guitarist Paul Landers. The limited edition was released as a large black-and-white photo-book with photos by Frederic Batier, who had accompanied the band through their recent tours. The photo-book edition contains two DVDs and two live albums.\n\"Liebe ist f\u00fcr alle da\" (2007\u20132011).\nThe band took a hiatus in 2006 and began work again in 2007. The recording process reportedly took two years. In July 2009, the title track \"Liebe ist f\u00fcr alle da\" leaked onto the internet, along with promotional materials. This led Universal Music to take action against certain fan sites. It was confirmed in August 2009 that the new album would have 11 tracks, and mixing of the album \u2013 which was taking place in Stockholm \u2013 had been completed. On 1 September 2009, it was confirmed on the band's website that \"Pussy\" would be the first single from the album. On the same day, The Gauntlet posted a promotional video for it. The video also confirmed the album title, \"Liebe ist f\u00fcr alle da\". Later, the title was confirmed again in an interview with Paul Landers for RockOne magazine. The music video for \"Pussy\" was released on 16 September 2009, at 20:30 GMT, released especially for the adult website Visit-x. The video contains graphic scenes of male and female nudity as well as women engaging in sexual acts with the band members, although the actual sex scenes were performed by body doubles. The women featured in the video are German pornographic stars. Metal Hammer released an edited version of the video onto their website.\n\"Ich tu dir weh\" was confirmed as the second single from the album by Landers and Lorenz in an interview for Radio Eins. Although censorship of the song in Germany prohibits any advertisement, broadcast or public display, the video to \"Ich tu dir weh\" was released on 21 December 2009 on the adult website Visit-x, just like the video to \"Pussy\", after advertisement on the band's official German website; it depicts the band on stage in a similar configuration as on their 2009/10 tour. Any references to the video on the official website have since been deleted. In Europe, the single was released on 15 January 2010, and in the U.S. on 19 January 2010. Like the video \"Pussy,\" this video was also directed by Jonas \u00c5kerlund. On 23 April 2010, Rammstein released their video \"Haifisch\" on the band's MySpace page. Unlike the video for \"Ich tu dir weh\", it contains more of a narrative rather than a performance. The single was released during May and June 2010.\nOn 8 November 2009, Rammstein began the first leg of the Liebe ist f\u00fcr alle da Tour in Lisbon, Portugal. As part of their European summer tour, Rammstein performed at the 2010 Rock AM Ring Festival on 4\u20136 June 2010. They also headlined several shows across Europe on the Sonisphere Festival, including their first ever outdoor UK performance at Knebworth Park, performing the day before Iron Maiden. On Sunday 18 July 2010, Rammstein played in front of more than 130,000 people in Quebec City on the Plains of Abraham as the closing show for the Festival d'\u00e9t\u00e9 de Qu\u00e9bec. It was their first North American appearance in nine years. The band announced that their last tour dates of 2010 were to be in the Americas. After several South American dates, the band returned to the United States for a single show at the famous Madison Square Garden in New York City \u2013 their first US show in over ten years. The tickets sold out in a very short time (under 20 minutes).\nThey also performed at Bell Centre in Montreal, Canada on 9 December. This concert sold out within the first hour of tickets going on sale, indicating a high demand to see Rammstein in North America. The band then played at Big Day Out 2011 from 21 January to 6 February in New Zealand and Australia. The band also visited South Africa for the first time in early 2011 and played two sold-out concerts in Cape Town and Johannesburg respectively, indicating another territory eager for the opportunity to enjoy the band live. On 16 February 2011, Rammstein announced that, after the massive success of their sold out Madison Square Garden show on 11 December 2010, they would be touring North America after ten years.\nRammstein played in New Jersey (East Rutherford) Izod Center, Montreal Bell Centre, Toronto Air Canada Centre, Chicago Allstate Arena, Edmonton Rexall Place, Seattle Tacoma Dome, San Francisco (Oakland) Oracle Arena, Los Angeles The Forum, and Las Vegas Thomas and Mack Center, Mexico City's Palacio de los Deportes, Guadalajara's Arena VFG, and Monterrey's Auditorio Banamex to a total of six US dates, three Canadian dates, and four Mexican dates. Tickets went on sale 25 and 26 February to great response, with many shows completely selling out, making this tour a complete success. On 20 April 2011, the band also won the Revolver Golden God Award for Best Live Band, their first US award.\n\"Made in Germany\", video releases, and side projects (2011\u20132017).\nRammstein released a greatest hits album titled \"Made in Germany 1995\u20132011\" on 2 December 2011. It contains one previously unreleased track, \"Mein Land\" which was released as a single on 11 November 2011 with another track, \"Vergiss uns nicht\", that was released at a later date. The compilation is available in three editions: The standard edition; this includes a CD with normal songs from their back catalog. Special edition; has the same CD from the standard edition and an extra CD with Rammstein songs that have been remixed by different artists such as Scooter. Finally, the super deluxe edition; has the two previously mentioned CDs and three DVDs with interviews and the making of videos from different music videos. The video for the song \"Mein Land\" was filmed on 23 May 2011 at Sycamore Beach in Malibu, California. It premiered on the band's official website on 11 November 2011. A full European tour in support of \"Made in Germany\" began in November 2011 and spanned all the way to May 2012. It included a North American tour that began on 20 April 2012 in Sunrise, Florida and ended on 25 May 2012 in Houston, Texas that visited 21 cities throughout the US and Canada. The Swedish industrial band Deathstars supported the band during the first two legs of the European tour. DJ Joe Letz from Combichrist and Emigrate was the opening act for the North American Tour.\nRammstein, minus Till Lindemann, performed \"The Beautiful People\" with Marilyn Manson at the Echo Awards on 22 March 2012. On 21 September 2012, it was announced that Rammstein would be headlining Download Festival 2013, along with Iron Maiden and Slipknot. Twelve additional festival performances for summer 2013 were announced the same day, including Wacken Open Air festival and Rock Werchter. Rammstein announced new tour dates starting for spring 2013 in Europe, including a 2-day return to Kindl-B\u00fchne Wuhlheide, the location of their first (official) live DVD, \"Live Aus Berlin\". On 22 November 2012, Rammstein announced via Facebook that they will be releasing a video collection featuring all music videos entitled \"Videos 1995\u20132012\", plus two unreleased music videos for \"Mein Herz Brennt\", originally featured on the album \"Mutter\". The first video premiered on the band's Vimeo, while the second premiered on a promotional website. Both videos were directed by Zoran Bihac. The first was released on 7 December 2012, and featured the newly recorded piano version of \"Mein Herz Brennt\". A single of the song was released on the same day, which included an edited version of the original and a new song titled 'Gib Mir Deine Augen' as a b-side. The explicit version's video leaked onto the internet on 11 December 2012 but was officially released on 14 December, in conjunction with the video collection DVD.\nIn July 2013, guitarist Paul Landers revealed in an interview the possibility of a Rammstein documentary and a live DVD. He indicated that the band may \"start thinking\" about a new album in 2014. In September 2014, band co-founder Richard Kruspe (then working with his side band, Emigrate) said the band was preparing some more live DVDs and that they were taking some time off from the studio. The band would meet again in 2015 to decide if the time was right to return to the studio. In May 2015, Lindemann confirmed in an interview with MusikUniverse that Rammstein would start pre-production on a possible new album in September of that year, and that production would most likely go on until 2017. According to Peter T\u00e4gtgren \u2013 who works with frontman Till Lindemann on their side-project Lindemann \u2013 Till would be regrouping with his Rammstein bandmates later in 2015 to start pre-production on a new full-length album, which normally takes two years to be released.\nIn early August 2015, Rammstein released a trailer for an upcoming project, titled \"In Amerika\". On 15 August, the band announced \"Rammstein in Amerika\", a video release that includes a 2010 concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City and a documentary made from archived footage recorded during the band's career. Rammstein played several festivals in Europe and North America during 2016, and in November announced plans to perform at a similar string of European festivals in 2017. On 18 January 2017 Rammstein announced a new live video release titled \"Paris\", a recording of a March 2012 concert that took place at Palais Omnisports de Paris-Bercy in Paris. It premiered on 23 March in selected cinemas, and was released worldwide on DVD/Blu-ray and CD on 19 May 2017.\nUntitled seventh album and \"Zeit\" (2017\u2013present).\nIn an interview in March 2017, Richard Kruspe said that Rammstein had about 35 new songs that were close to completion, though the release date of the band's seventh studio album was still an open question. In May, Rammstein started touring once again. Also in May, it was revealed that Sky van Hoff would be working with the band on their next album. On 18 June 2018, it was announced via StubHub's ticketing website that Rammstein would play songs at their Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, show from their forthcoming album, then set for release late in 2018. On 17 September 2018, the band announced through Facebook that they were \"almost done\" recording the album, as they were recording orchestra and choirs in Minsk. On 2 January 2019, guitarist Richard Kruspe announced that the recording of the album wrapped in November 2018 and that the record would be released in April 2019, along with five music videos.\nRammstein released the first single from their seventh album, \"Deutschland\", on 28 March 2019 and announced the release date of their untitled seventh studio album, 17 May 2019. Rammstein also revealed the album cover which consisted of a single, unlit match which fans say represents their love of fire and simplicity. On 26 April 2019, Rammstein released the second single from the new album, \"Radio\". Shortly after its release, the album reached No. 1 in fourteen countries. On 28 May 2019, Rammstein released their third single and music video from the album, this time for \"Ausl\u00e4nder\". The band embarked on their Stadium Tour to support the album, beginning in May 2019. They were due to play shows in Europe and North America in 2020, but were forced to postpone them due to the COVID-19 pandemic impacting the two continents. The dates first were rescheduled for 2021 and, in March 2021, again rescheduled to 2022.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, which forced the band to remain sheltered during a lockdown in Germany, the band returned to writing music, which Christoph Schneider confirmed in a German podcast. It was reported in September 2020 that they had returned to La Fabrique Studios in France, where they recorded their untitled seventh album, to record new music, potentially for a new album. On 25 September, the 25th anniversary of their debut album \"Herzeleid\", they announced a remastered anniversary edition for the album, for release on 4 December. The release was made available both digitally and physically, as a CD housed in a digipak as well as a double heavyweight, colored vinyl.\nIn February 2021, Flake Lorenz confirmed to Motor Music that the band had finished recording an eighth studio album. Lorenz stated that the recording sessions were unplanned and that the quarantine caused by the pandemic allowed for \"less distraction\" and \"more time to think of new things\". In October 2021, a song from the album was premiered on the International Space Station to French astronaut Thomas Pesquet. According to composer Sven Helbig, who worked on the album, the album's release had been delayed due to the 2021\u20132023 global supply chain crisis, which impacted the album's physical releases. Richard Kruspe affirmed in an interview that Rammstein's eighth studio album would be released in the first half of 2022, prior to the slated resumption of their Stadium Tour that had been postponed to 2022.\nRammstein began teasing the first single from their eighth studio album on 8 March 2022, posting clips to their social media accounts with the hashtag \"#ZEITkommt\". On 10 March, they formally announced the album, titled \"Zeit\", revealing its release date of 29 April 2022. The release of the title track as the album's lead single, along with its music video, coincided with the announcement. The second single from \"Zeit\", \"Zick Zack\", was released on 7 April with its accompanying music video. The third single from \"Zeit\", \"Angst\", was released on 29 April with its accompanying music video. On 25 November 2022 Rammstein released the music video for the song \"Adieu\" on their official YouTube channel.\nMusical style and lyrics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBy comparison, American heavy metal bands seem clumsy, childish, and anemic.\n\u2014Claire Berlinski on Rammstein\n\"The Denver Post\" wrote that \"[Rammstein] proved that they not only synthesized the genre, but that they successfully made it an art.\" Pioneers of the genre, Rammstein's style blended \"alt-metal, groove and electronica\". \"The Guardian\" wrote, \"Ostensibly the world's biggest industrial metal band, Rammstein sound like a mixture of Laibach's situationist anthems, Front 242's 'electronic body music', German drinking songs, opera [and] T Rex-like riffs\". \"Loudwire\" wrote that the band's \"jawdropping, pyro-filled live shows have become as much a part of their identity as their gothy, distortion-saturated melodic electro-metal\". \"IGN\" said that \"The band alternates repetitive metal power chords and atmospheric tones for a mind-numbing blend of metal and electronic music.\" Rammstein were also described as a gothic metal band who are \"Marilyn Manson meets 'Sprockets'\". \"The Bulletin\" wrote that \"Rammstein crank out the kind of symphonic metal you'd expect from a country that boasts Wagner among its favourite sons.\" \"AllMusic\" described the band's music as blending \"industrial noise, grinding metal guitars, and operatic vocals\". \"PopMatters\" said that Rammstein was \"mistakenly lumped in with the nu-metal fad that was going on at the same time\" as the band's debut.\nRammstein was traditionally inspired by bands such as the Slovenian group \"Laibach\", known for its provocative songs, often citing political symbols of the far-right and whose music style also combines different genres, or the German rock band Oomph! However, the band members do not see a real connection to \"Laibach\" \u2013 apart from the similarity in vocal style which Flake Lorenz admitted in a \"Viva\" interview from 1997. In the same interview Richard Kruspe said: \"For me, \"Laibach\" is a very, very intellectual story. Rammstein is much more emotional for me \u2013 in the beginning. And I can't do anything with that intellect that \"Laibach\" uses.\"\nUnlike many bands from Berlin in the early 1990s, Rammstein did not want to imitate American or English bands. Flake Lorenz said in an interview: \"We found the style by knowing exactly what we didn't want. And we just didn't want to do American funky music or punk or anything we can't do. We realized that we can only do this music that we also play. And it's just very simple, dull, monotone.\"\nRammstein's style has received positive feedback from critics. New Zealand's \"Southland Times\" (17 December 1999) suggested that Till Lindemann's \"booming, sub-sonic voice\" would send \"the peasants fleeing into their barns and bolting their doors\", while \"The New York Times\" (9 January 2005) commented that on the stage, \"Mr. Lindemann gave off an air of such brute masculinity and barely contained violence that it seemed that he could have reached into the crowd, snatched up a fan, and bitten off his head\". Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic commented that \"their blend of industrial noise, grinding metal guitars, and operatic vocals is staggeringly powerful\". \"We just push boundaries\", said Till Lindemann in an interview with rock magazine \"Kerrang!\", \"We cannot help it if people don't like those boundaries being pushed\".\nNearly all of Rammstein's songs are in German. Educated in East German schools, the members were all taught Russian as a second language rather than English. In 2019, Flake commented: \"I saw a lot of East German bands that sung in very bad English to people who didn't understand English \u2013 it was absolutely stupid. But if you really want to tell your emotions, you have to speak in your mother tongue.\" Songs they have recorded entirely or partly in English include: a cover of Depeche Mode's 1986 song \"Stripped\" and English renditions of \"Engel\", \"Du hast\", and \"Amerika\". The original version of \"Amerika\" as well as \"Stirb nicht vor mir (Don't Die Before I Do)\" and \"Pussy\" also contain some lyrics in English. The song \"Moskau\" (\"Moscow\") contains a chorus in Russian, and Till Lindemann has an unofficial song called \"Schtiel\" (cover of song \"\u0428\u0442\u0438\u043b\u044c\" / \"Shtil\" by Russian popular heavy metal band Aria) entirely in Russian. \"Te quiero puta!\" is entirely in Spanish, \"Fr\u00fchling in Paris\" has a chorus in French, \"Zeig dich\" contains lyrics in Latin performed by a choir and \"Ausl\u00e4nder\" has lyrics in English, French, Spanish, Italian, and Russian. Oliver Riedel commented that \"[the] German language suits heavy metal music. French might be the language of love, but German is the language of anger\". In an interview with Ultimate Guitar, when asked whether Rammstein would ever create an original song entirely in English, Till Lindemann stated that they might not, because \"It's like asking the Buddha to kill a pig or something\".\nThe band's lyrics, as sung by Till Lindemann, are an essential element of their music, and shape the perception by fans and a wider public. Among other things that are seen as controversial, Rammstein also refers to classical German literature, e.g. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's famous poems \"Der Erlk\u00f6nig\" (1778) and \"Das Heidenr\u00f6slein\" (1771) for the songs \"Dalai Lama\" and \"Rosenrot\", respectively. Several of their songs are related to controversial and taboo subjects such as sadomasochism (\"Weisses Fleisch\", \"B\u00fcck dich\", \"Rein raus\" and \"Ich tu dir weh\"), homosexuality (Mann gegen Mann), intersexuality (\"Zwitter\"), incest (\"Laichzeit\", \"Tier\", \"Spiel mit mir\" and \"Wiener Blut\"), pedophilia (\"Weisses Fleisch\", \"Tier\", \"Halleluja\" and \"Hallomann\"), necrophilia (\"Heirate mich\"), zoophilia (\"Laichzeit\"), cannibalism (\"Mein Teil\"), pyromania (\"Benzin\" and \"Hilf mir\"), religion (\"Asche zu Asche\", \"Engel\", \"Bestrafe mich\" and \"Zeig dich\") and sexual violence (\"Wollt ihr das Bett in Flammen sehen\", \"Rein raus\" \"Stein um Stein\" and \"Liebe ist f\u00fcr alle da\"). Also several of their songs are allegedly inspired by real-life events. These songs include \"Rammstein\" (Ramstein air show disaster), \"Mein Teil\" (The Meiwes Case), \"Wiener Blut\" (Fritzl case) and \"Donaukinder\" (2000 Baia Mare cyanide spill). Their fourth album, \"Reise, Reise\", is loosely inspired by the crash of Japan Air Lines Flight 123. The band have also occasionally delved into politics with their lyrics. \"Amerika\" is a critique of the cultural and political imperialism of the United States all over the world. The lyrics of the song \"Deutschland\" contain the lines \"Deutschland! / Meine Liebe / kann ich dir nicht geben\" (Germany! / My love / [is what] I cannot give you), which conveys the band's inability to have unquestioned patriotic feelings.\nLive performances.\nSince their early years, Rammstein are particularly known for their over-the-top live performances, making such extensive use of pyrotechnics that fans eventually coined the motto, \"Other bands play, Rammstein burns!\" (a play on Manowar's song \"Kings of Metal\", which states that \"other bands play, Manowar kill\"). Following an accident in Berlin on 27 September 1996, in which some burning decorative parts of the stage collapsed, the band started using professionals to handle the pyrotechnics. Lindemann subsequently qualified as a licensed pyrotechnician, and often spends entire songs engulfed in flames. He has suffered multiple burns on his ears, head, and arms.\nThe band's stage costumes are also known for being outlandish. During the Reise, Reise Tour, they wore lederhosen, corsets, and military-inspired uniforms with German steel helmets; during the Mutter Tour, the group kept to the themes of the album artwork and descended onto the stage from a giant uterus while wearing diapers. During the \"V\u00f6lkerball\" concert, among others, Lindemann changed costumes between songs and dressed accordingly for each. For example, for the song \"Mein Teil\", he was dressed as a blood-soaked chef; in \"Reise, Reise\", he dressed as a sailor. The rest of the band each wore their own preferred costume, but none quite as bizarre as Till's. The band's flair for costumes is evident in their music videos as well as their live shows. In the \"Keine Lust\" video, all members except Lorenz are dressed in fat suits. In the \"Amerika\" video, all members of the band wear astronaut costumes.\nSince the Mutter Tour in 2001, Rammstein have worked with stage designer Roy Bennett, who helped the band in developing the look of the stages. With the Ahoi Tour in 2004/2005, the band began using a two-level stage, with half the band playing the lower level and the other half on the upper level. At this tour, the upper level rose over 2 meters above the stage floor and had an oval entrance just beneath the drums. At both sides of the upper level, a special lift made it possible for the band members to access both stage levels.\nOn the Liebe ist f\u00fcr alle da Tour in 2009, the new stage still had a two-level design. This time, however, the upper level only had about half the height as on the previous tour. Stage entrance was possible by a hydraulic ramp in the middle of the stage floor. At each end of the upper level, stairs were placed in order to gain access to both levels. This tour included not only the extensive use of pyrotechnics, but also a massive lighting show, such as the band's logo lit up as big lamps on four enormous collapsible towers, forming the industrial backdrop of the set and being capable of different lighting effects.\nDuring the arena shows of the Made in Germany 1995-2011 Tour, the stage was slightly altered with new set pieces such as a large industrial fan as well as new backdrops. The most noticeable addition was a long catwalk, connecting the main stage to a smaller stage in the middle of the audience. During the 2013 festival leg of the tour, the bridge and smaller stage were omitted. For the 2016 Festival Tour, the band kept the stage itself mostly unchanged, though had the entire lighting rig changed completely. According to Kruspe, the onstage antics are meant to get people's attention and have fun at the same time; Rammstein's motto, according to Schneider, is \"do your own thing and overdo it\".\nKruspe said of the stage show in July 1999, \"You have to understand that 99 per cent of the people don't understand the lyrics, so you have to come up with something to keep the drama in the show. We have to do something. We like to have a show; we like to play with fire. We do have a sense of humour. We do laugh about it; we have fun [...] but we're not Spinal Tap. We take the music and the lyrics seriously. It's a combination of humour, theatre, and our East German culture, you know?\"\nTheir antics have also garnered controversy. During the American Family Values Tour 1998, alongside acts such as rapper Ice Cube, Korn, and Limp Bizkit, the band was arrested for public indecency. In one of their more infamous moments, Lindemann engaged in simulated sodomy with Lorenz during their performance of \"B\u00fcck dich\" in Worcester, Massachusetts. They were subsequently arrested, fined $25 and spent one night in jail.\nControversies.\nImagery.\n\"The New York Times\" described Rammstein's music as a \"powerful strain of brutally intense rock... bringing gale-force music and spectacular theatrics together\". The members have not been shy about courting controversy and have periodically attracted condemnation from morality campaigners. Till and Flake's stage act earned them a night in jail in June 1999 after a liquid-ejecting dildo was used in a concert in Worcester, Massachusetts. Back home in Germany, the band faced repeated accusations of fascist sympathies because of the dark and sometimes militaristic imagery of their videos and concerts, including the use of excerpts from the film \"Olympia\" by Leni Riefenstahl in the video for their cover of Depeche Mode's song \"Stripped\". MTV Germany studied the lyrics, talked to the band and came away satisfied that Rammstein are apolitical; Peter Ruppert, then head of Music Programming at MTV Germany, stated that the band \"aren't in any way connected with any right-wing activities\".\nTheir cover of their debut album \"Herzeleid\", released in Germany in 1995, showed the band members bare-chested in a style that resembled Strength Through Joy in the eyes of some critics, who accused the band of trying to sell themselves as \"poster boys for the Master Race\". Rammstein have vehemently denied this and said they want nothing to do with politics or supremacy of any kind. Lorenz, annoyed by the claim, has remarked it is just a photo, and should be understood as such. \"Herzeleid\" has since been given a different cover in North America, depicting the band members' faces.\nThe video of \"Deutschland\", released in 2019, sparked further controversy, as it portrays black German actress Ruby Commey appearing as Germania, which has been described as \"a calculated affront to German nationalists\". The video also portrays the band members both as Nazi concentration camp executioners and as Jewish prisoners, sparking the complaints of Holocaust survivor groups; however, others defended the video and the song lyrics, which have been interpreted as \"express[ing] a love/hate relationship with Germany\".\nRelation to violent events.\nRammstein were cited in relation to the Columbine High School massacre in 1999, when a photo of Eric Harris wearing a Rammstein T-shirt in the 11th grade was revealed. There was no evidence to correlate the band and the massacre. In response to the shooting, the band issued a statement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The members of Rammstein express their condolences and sympathy to all affected by the recent tragic events in Denver. They wish to make it clear that they have no lyrical content or political beliefs that could have possibly influenced such behaviour. Additionally, members of Rammstein have children of their own, in whom they continually strive to instill healthy and non-violent values.\nCoincidentally, on 10 September 2001 the single and video clip of \"Ich will\" (\"I Want\") was released, which portrays the band as bank robbers who want to get a message across and receiving a Goldene Kamera (Golden Camera) award, a German version of the Emmy award, for their \"actions\". In the United States, the video clip was broadcast only late at night after the attacks of 11 September 2001, although many media officials and politicians requested the video to be pulled from broadcast completely.\nFollowing the conclusion of the Beslan school hostage crisis in Russia in September 2004, the Russian authorities claimed that the terrorists had \"listened to German hard rock group Rammstein on personal stereos during the siege to keep themselves edgy and fired up\". The claim has not been independently confirmed.\nBand members said this about the issue:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There's been a lot of talk about that, but if there are radical feelings in people anything can wake them \u2013 a painting, a picture, whatever. It's just a coincidence that it happened to be our music. It's important to think about what caused them to make their decisions, how they became animals, not their taste in music. Whenever something like this happens it's like 'Okay, let's blame the artist'. Such bullshit.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Our music is made to release aggression, and people listening to it are also needed to do that, but it's not our fault. Should we stop making hard music because bad people might like it?\u2014\u200a\nPekka-Eric Auvinen, the perpetrator of the Jokela school shooting in November 2007, also included Rammstein in one of his favorite bands. However, he noted that the music among other things was not to blame for his decisions.\nElliot Rodger, the perpetrator of the Isla Vista killings in May 2014, was also a fan of Rammstein according to his YouTube records. On a lyric video of Mein Herz brennt, Rodger wrote: \"[G]reat song to listen to while daydreaming about being a powerful ruler\". Even though Rodger wrote in his manifesto that he wished to become a dictator and punish all the people who rejected him, there was no direct link found between the band's music and the killing spree. Santa Barbara police later confirmed that Rodger's main motivations were sexual and social rejection.\nThe Trollh\u00e4ttan school attack perpetrator, Anton Lundin Pettersson, used a manipulated version of the band's logo that added Nazi Germany's eagle on his Facebook page.\nVideos.\nIn October 2004, the video for \"Mein Teil\" (\"My part\") caused controversy in Germany when it was released. It takes a darkly comic view of the Armin Meiwes cannibalism case, showing a cross-dressed Schneider holding the other five band members on a leash and rolling around in mud.\nThe band's own views of its image are sanguine; Landers has said: \"We like being on the fringes of bad taste\". Christian \"Flake\" Lorenz comments: \"The controversy is fun, like stealing forbidden fruit. But it serves a purpose. We like audiences to grapple with our music, and people have become more receptive\".\nThe video for \"Pussy\" was released September 2009. It features hardcore pornographic scenes of nudity along with women engaging in sexual activity with body doubles of the band members.\nPlacement on the \"Index\".\nOn 5 November 2009, their sixth studio album \"Liebe ist f\u00fcr alle da\" was placed on the \"Index\" of the Federal Department for Media Harmful to Young Persons (\"Bundespr\u00fcfstelle f\u00fcr jugendgef\u00e4hrdende Medien\", or \"BPjM\"), making it illegal in Germany to make the album accessible to minors or display it where it can be seen by people underage, effectively banning it from stores. According to the official statement of the BPjM, the depiction of lead guitarist Richard Kruspe holding a woman wearing only a mask over his knee and lifting his hand to strike her behind has given cause for offense, as well as the lyrics to \"Ich tu dir weh\" (meaning \"I hurt you\") which supposedly promoted dangerous BDSM techniques. Furthermore, the advisory board took into consideration the alleged promotion of unprotected sexual intercourse in the lyrics to \"Pussy\".\nThe band, as well as several members of the German press, reacted with astonishment to the decision. Keyboardist Christian Lorenz expressed surprise at the advisory board's \"parochial sense of art\" and regretted their apparent inability to detect irony. On 16 November 2009, a stripped-down version of \"Liebe ist f\u00fcr alle da\" was released. As of 31 May 2010, the administrative court in Cologne had decided to suspend the inclusion into the \"Index\" (case 22 L 1899/09). The German department deleted the record from the \"Index\" on 1 June (Decision No. A 117/10). On 9 June, the band announced that the original version of the album was available in their shop and that the single \"Ich tu dir weh\" would soon be released in Germany. In October 2011, the album was judged not harmful to minors and deleted from the \"Index\".\nIn 2016, Rammstein filed a lawsuit against the German state claiming \u20ac66,000 in compensation for damages that had allegedly resulted from the indexing, chiefly the destruction or withholding of 85,000 copies of the album that the band says would have otherwise sold.\nConcert misconduct allegations.\nIn May 2023, a woman claimed that her drink was spiked (drugged) during a Rammstein concert in Lithuania and was selected for an aftershow party, during which she was ushered into a small room underneath the stage for lead singer Till Lindemann. After making herself unavailable for sex, she claimed Lindemann reacted angrily and left. While emphasising that she was never assaulted, she believed there to be an \"organised system of funnelling girls.\" Although Vilnius prosecutors found no evidence of drugging, her story amplified the band's \"Row Zero\" practice, where young women would be pre-selected on social media by casting director Alena Makeeva to stand in an exclusive area closest to the stage dubbed Row Zero and attend pre-show and after-show parties, during which Lindemann would request to have sex with fans in attendance. Further claims against Lindemann prompted an investigation by German police for sexual offences and the distribution of narcotics. In response, the band denied all claims of illegal behavior, fired Makeeva and halted the \"Row Zero\" afterparties.\nIn view of the allegations, Rammstein's label Universal announced that it would be suspending all promotional activities for Rammstein's albums. Universal also confirmed a press report that it had confidentially requested the German Music Industry Association BVMI not to include the 25th anniversary re-release of \"Sehnsucht\" in the official album charts, regardless of its actual sales figures, and that the request had been authorized by the band itself. Various other companies including Kiepenheuer &amp; Witsch and Rossmann also halted joint ventures with the band.\nOn 29 August, the German prosecutors announced that they dropped the case, saying that the investigations did not unearth any evidence of a crime. The investigations were originally taken up because of complaints filed by unaffected third persons who were unable to identify any victim. While alleged victims sent sworn statements to journalists, none of those women filed a criminal complaint, and therefore the police were unable to contact and interview them. Also, the journalists had promised the alleged victims anonymity, and made use of their legal right to keep their sources secret.\nOn 30 October, the Rammstein Instagram account announced in its story that Shelby Lynn could not prove in court that she had been given drugs, and was therefore prohibited from continuing to claim this.\nPolitical views.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRammstein fights with sarcasm and satire against the \"bland americanization\" of local cultures in \"Amerika\" by attacking US Cultural imperialism in the form of popular culture, food, fashion, and yes, even politics.\n\u2014 Jill E. Twark, Axel Hildebrandt on the song \"Amerika\"\nEarly on, Rammstein were accused by media outlets in Germany of being neo-Nazis due to their imagery. The band released the song \"Links 2-3-4\" (\"Links\" being German for \"left\") in 2001 to affirm to the public that they reside on the left of the political spectrum. In a 2011 interview with \"Rolling Stone Germany\", when asked about Nazi accusations, Lindemann stated \"We come from the East and we have grown up as socialists. We used to be either punks or Goths \u2013 we hate Nazis! And then suddenly there is such a far-fetched accusation. We are doing exactly the same thing today, but no one in America or in Mexico would even get the idea to come up with something like that. This only happens in Germany. Our reply to this animosity was 'Links 2-3-4', and with that we had made it clear where we stand politically.\" Regarding the song, Kruspe said: \"'My heart beats on the left, two, three, four'. It's simple. If you want to put us in a political category, we're on the left side, and that's the reason we made the song\". The song's title refers to the refrain of the German Communist Party song \"Einheitsfrontlied\", written by Bertholt Brecht: \"Drum links, zwei, drei! Drum links, zwei, drei! / Wo dein Platz, Genosse ist! / Reih dich ein, in die Arbeitereinheitsfront / Weil du auch ein Arbeiter bist\". (Turn left, two, three! Turn left, two, three! / Here's the place, Comrade, for you! / So fall in with the Workers' united front / For you are a worker too.) Another key lyric expressing the band's allegiance to the left paraphrases the titles of newspaper columns published side by side for several years in the German newspaper \"Bild\": \"Mein Herz schl\u00e4gt links\" (\"My heart beats on the left\") by The Left Party co-chair and former Social Democratic Party of Germany chair Oskar Lafontaine, and \"Mein Herz schl\u00e4gt auf dem rechten Fleck\" (\"My heart beats in the right place\") by Peter Gauweiler of the conservative Christian Social Union. Lorenz stated that the song was created to show the band could write a harsh, evil, military-sounding song without being Nazis.\nThe band also wrote the song \"Amerika\" as a critique of the worldwide cultural and political imperialism of the United States. In their book \"Envisioning Social Justice in Contemporary German Culture\", Jill E. Twark and Axel Hildebrandt found that the song's text and most of its video's images point toward a critique of America's cultural imperialism, political propaganda, and self-assumed role as global police force. The song responds critically to the US invasion of Iraq in 2003. They also found that another song of theirs that is critical of the United States is \"Mein Land\", believing that it critiques American racism and nationalism.\nDuring the Eastern European leg of their Europe Stadium Tour, the band showed support for the LGBT community on several occasions. At a concert in Chorz\u00f3w, Poland on 24 July 2019, drummer Christoph Schneider surfed the crowd in a rubber boat, holding a rainbow flag. At their concert in Moscow five days later, guitarists Kruspe and Landers kissed onstage, while they embraced each other during a concert in Saint Petersburg on 2 August. The band's support for gay rights was met with criticism from some Russian politicians. Vitaly Milonov, a member of the State Duma, called the band \"idiots\" and said: \"If they think it possible to behave in such a way, they should also consider it possible to keep this garbage away from us.\"\nBand members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRammstein follow their own rhythm. We never give a shit about the people who think we need to get a record out every two years and that's one of the reasons why we're still together with the same lineup. We take care of each other, and if somebody needs to take the time off or do something else, we listen.\n Richard Kruspe\nSince forming in 1994, Rammstein have retained a constant line-up. Richard Kruspe had said in a \"Revolver Magazine\" interview that it is because of the band respecting each other's wishes to take a break, either for personal reasons or to focus on a side project. Members of the band have had side projects that they take part in during Rammstein's inactivity. Kruspe currently fronts the group Emigrate while Till Lindemann began his project Lindemann in 2015.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nAwards and honours.\nGrammy Awards\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25662", "revid": "20419583", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25662", "title": "Robert Falcon Scott", "text": "British Antarctic explorer (1868\u20131912)\nCaptain Robert Falcon Scott (6 June 1868\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200929 March 1912) was a British Royal Navy officer and explorer who led two expeditions to the Antarctic regions: the \"Discovery\" expedition of 1901\u201304 and the \"Terra Nova\" expedition of 1910\u201313.\nOn the first expedition, Scott set a new southern record by marching to latitude 82\u00b0S and discovered the Antarctic Plateau, on which the South Pole is located. On the second venture, Scott led a party of five which reached the South Pole on 17 January 1912, less than five weeks after Amundsen's South Pole expedition. On the return journey from the Pole, a planned meeting with supporting dog teams from the base camp failed, despite Scott's written instructions, and at a distance of from their base camp at Hut Point and approximately from the next depot, Scott and his companions died. When Scott and his party's bodies were discovered, they had in their possession the first Antarctic fossils discovered. The fossils were determined to be from the \"Glossopteris\" tree and proved that Antarctica was once forested and joined to other continents.\nBefore his appointment to lead the \"Discovery\" expedition, Scott had a career as a Royal Navy officer. In 1899, he had a chance encounter with Sir Clements Markham, the president of the Royal Geographical Society (RGS), and learned of a planned Antarctic expedition, which he soon volunteered to lead. His name became inseparably associated with the Antarctic, the field of work to which he remained committed during the final years of his life.\nFollowing the news of his death, Scott became a celebrated hero, a status reflected by memorials erected across the UK. However, in the last decades of the 20th century, questions were raised about his competence and character. Commentators in the 21st century have regarded Scott more positively after assessing the temperature drop below in March 1912, and after re-discovering Scott's written orders of October 1911, in which he had instructed the dog teams to meet and assist him on the return trip.\nEarly life.\nFamily.\nScott was born on 6 June 1868, the third of six children and elder son of John Edward, a brewer and magistrate, and Hannah (n\u00e9e Cuming) Scott of Stoke Damerel, near Devonport. There were also naval and military traditions in the family, Scott's grandfather and four uncles all having served in the army or navy. John Scott's prosperity came from the ownership of a small Plymouth brewery which he had inherited from his father and subsequently sold. Scott's early childhood years were spent in comfort, but some years later, when he was establishing his naval career, the family suffered serious financial misfortune. \nIn accordance with the family's tradition, Scott and his younger brother Archie were predestined for careers in the armed services. Scott spent four years at a local day school before being sent to Stubbington House School in Hampshire, a cramming establishment that prepared candidates for the entrance examinations to the naval training ship at Dartmouth. Having passed these exams Scott began his naval career in 1881, as a 13-year-old cadet. One of his older sisters was Ettie Ellison-Macartney.\nIn \"The Worst Journey in the World\", author Apsley Cherry-Garrard claims that \"physically Scott had been a delicate boy but developed into a strong man, 5 feet 9 inches in height, 11 stone 6 lbs. in weight, with a chest measurement of 39\u00bc inches.\"\nEarly naval career.\nIn July 1883, Scott passed out of \"Britannia\" as a midshipman, seventh overall in a class of 26. By October, he was en route to South Africa to join , the flagship of the Cape squadron, the first of several ships on which he served during his midshipman years. While stationed in St Kitts, West Indies, on , he had his first encounter with Clements Markham, then Secretary of the Royal Geographical Society, who would loom large in Scott's later career. On this occasion, 1 March 1887, Markham observed Midshipman Scott's cutter winning that morning's race across the bay. Markham's habit was to \"collect\" likely young naval officers with a view to their undertaking polar exploration work in the future. He was impressed by Scott's intelligence, enthusiasm and charm, and the 18-year-old midshipman was duly noted.\nIn March 1888 Scott passed his examinations for sub-lieutenant, with four first class certificates out of five. His career progressed smoothly, with service on various ships and promotion to lieutenant in 1889. In 1891, after a long spell in foreign waters, he applied for the two-year torpedo training course on , an important career step. He graduated with first class certificates in both the theory and practical examinations. A small blot occurred in the summer of 1893 when, while commanding a torpedo boat, Scott ran it aground, a mishap which earned him a mild rebuke.\nDuring the research for his dual biography of Scott and Roald Amundsen, polar historian Roland Huntford investigated a possible scandal in Scott's early naval career, related to the period 1889\u20131890 when Scott was a lieutenant on . According to Huntford, Scott \"disappears from naval records\" for eight months, from mid-August 1889 until 26 March 1890. Huntford hints at involvement with a married American woman, a cover-up, and protection by senior officers. Biographer David Crane reduces the missing period to eleven weeks, but is unable to clarify further. He rejects the notion of protection by senior officers on the grounds that Scott was not important or well-connected enough to warrant this. Documents that may have offered explanations are missing from Admiralty records.\nIn 1894, while serving as torpedo officer on the depot ship , Scott learned of the financial calamity that had overtaken his family. John Scott, having sold the brewery and invested the proceeds unwisely, had lost all his capital and was now virtually bankrupt. At the age of 63, and in poor health, he was forced to take a job as a brewery manager and move his family to Shepton Mallet, Somerset. Three years later, while Robert was serving with the Channel Squadron flagship , John Scott died of heart disease, creating a fresh family crisis. Hannah Scott and her two unmarried daughters now relied entirely on the service pay of Scott and the salary of younger brother Archie, who had left the army for a higher-paid post in the colonial service. Archie's own death in the autumn of 1898, after contracting typhoid fever, meant that the whole financial responsibility for the family rested on Scott.\nPromotion, and the extra income this would bring, now became a matter of considerable concern to Scott. In the Royal Navy however, opportunities for career advancement were both limited and keenly sought after by ambitious officers. Early in June 1899, while home on leave, he had a chance encounter in a London street with Clements Markham, who was now knighted and President of the Royal Geographical Society (RGS), and learned for the first time of an impending Antarctic expedition with , under the auspices of the RGS. It was the opportunity for early command and a chance to distinguish himself, rather than any predilection for polar exploration which motivated Scott, according to Crane. What passed between them on this occasion is not recorded, but a few days later, on 11 June, Scott appeared at the Markham residence and volunteered to lead the expedition.\n\"Discovery\" expedition, 1901\u20131904.\nThe British National Antarctic Expedition, later known as the \"Discovery\" Expedition, was a joint enterprise of the RGS and the Royal Society. A long-cherished dream of Markham's, it required all of his skills and cunning to bring the expedition to fruition, under naval command and largely staffed by naval personnel. Scott may not have been Markham's first choice as leader but, having decided on him, the older man remained a constant supporter. There were committee battles over the scope of Scott's responsibilities, with the Royal Society pressing to put a scientist in charge of the expedition's programme while Scott merely commanded the ship. Eventually, however, Markham's view prevailed; Scott was given overall command, and was promoted to the rank of commander before sailed for the Antarctic on 6 August 1901. King Edward VII, who showed a keen interest in the expedition, visited the \"Discovery\" the day before the ship left British shores in August 1901, and during the visit appointed Scott a Member Fourth Class of the Royal Victorian Order, his personal gift.\nExperience of Antarctic or Arctic waters was almost entirely lacking within the 50-strong party and there was very little special training in equipment or techniques before the ship set sail. Dogs were taken, as were skis, but the dogs succumbed to disease in the first season. Nevertheless, the dogs' performance impressed Scott, and, despite moral qualms, he implemented the principle of slaughtering dogs for dog food to increase the others' range. During an early attempt at ice travel, a blizzard trapped expedition members in their tent and their decision to leave it resulted in the death of George Vince, who slipped over a precipice on 11 March 1902. The expedition also experienced problems with scurvy, which affected Scott's domestic reputation.\nThe expedition had both scientific and exploration objectives; the latter included a long journey south, in the direction of the South Pole. This march, undertaken by Scott, Ernest Shackleton and Edward Wilson, took them to a latitude of 82\u00b017\u2032S, about from the pole. A harrowing return journey brought about Shackleton's physical collapse and his early departure from the expedition. The second year showed improvements in technique and achievement, culminating in Scott's western journey which led to the discovery of the Polar Plateau. This has been described by one writer as \"one of the great polar journeys\". The scientific results of the expedition included important biological, zoological and geological findings. Some of the meteorological and magnetic readings, however, were later criticised as amateurish and inaccurate.\nAt the end of the expedition it took the combined efforts of two relief ships and the use of explosives to free \"Discovery\" from the ice. Scott's insistence during the expedition on Royal Navy formalities had made for uneasy relations with the merchant navy contingent, many of whom departed for home with the first relief ship in March 1903. Second-in-command Albert Armitage, a merchant officer, was offered the chance to go home on compassionate grounds, but interpreted the offer as a personal slight, and refused. Armitage also promoted the idea that the decision to send Shackleton home on the relief ship arose from Scott's animosity rather than Shackleton's physical breakdown. Although there was later tension between Scott and Shackleton, when their polar ambitions directly clashed, mutual civilities were preserved in public; Scott joined in the official receptions that greeted Shackleton on his return in 1909 after the \"Nimrod\" Expedition, and the two exchanged polite letters about their respective ambitions in 1909\u20131910.\nBetween expeditions.\nPopular hero.\n\"Discovery\" returned to Britain in September 1904. The expedition had caught the public imagination, and Scott became a popular hero. He was awarded a cluster of honours and medals, including many from overseas, and was promoted to the rank of captain. He was invited to Balmoral Castle, and King Edward VII promoted him to Commander of the Royal Victorian Order.\nScott's next few years were crowded. For more than a year he was occupied with public receptions, lectures and the writing of the expedition record, \"The Voyage of the Discovery\". In January 1906, he resumed his full-time naval career, first as an assistant director of Naval Intelligence at the Admiralty and, in August, as flag-captain to Rear-Admiral Sir George Egerton on . He was now moving in ever more exalted social circles\u2014a telegram to Markham in February 1907 refers to meetings with Queen Am\u00e9lie of Orl\u00e9ans and Luis Filipe, Prince Royal of Portugal, and a later letter home reports lunching with the Commander-in-Chief of the Fleet and Prince Heinrich of Prussia. The telegram related to a collision involving Scott's ship, . Scott was cleared of blame. , a battleship commanded by Scott, collided with the battleship on 11 February 1907, suffering minor bow damage.\nDispute with Shackleton.\nBy early 1906, Scott queried the RGS about the possible funding of a future Antarctic expedition. It was therefore unwelcome news to him that Ernest Shackleton had announced his own plans to travel to \"Discovery\"'s old McMurdo Sound base and launch a bid for the South Pole from there. Scott claimed, in the first of a series of letters to Shackleton, that the area around McMurdo was his own \"field of work\" to which he had prior rights until he chose to give them up, and that Shackleton should therefore work from an entirely different area. In this, he was strongly supported by \"Discovery\"'s former zoologist, Edward Wilson, who asserted that Scott's rights extended to the entire Ross Sea sector. Shackleton refused to concede.\nAccording to a letter written to Stanfords bookshop owner Edward Stanford, Scott seemed to take offence with a map that was published that had shown how far south Scott and Shackleton had travelled during the Discovery Expedition. Scott implied in this letter, dated in 1907 and discovered in the shop archives in 2018, that having the two men's names together on this map indicated that there was \"dual leadership\" between Scott and Shackleton which was \"not in accordance with fact.\" After the owner replied with an apology over the issue, Scott expressed his regret at the nature of the previous letter and stated, \"I tried to be impartial in giving credit to my companions who one and all laboured honestly and well as I have endeavoured to record...I understand now of course that you had no personal knowledge of the wording and I must express regret that I failed to realise your identity when I first wrote.\"\nFinally, to end the impasse, Shackleton agreed, in a letter to Scott dated 17 May 1907, to work to the east of the 170\u00b0W meridian and therefore to avoid all the familiar \"Discovery\" ground. In the end it was a promise that he was unable to keep after his search for alternative landing grounds proved fruitless. With his only other option being to return home, he set up his headquarters at Cape Royds, close to the old \"Discovery\" base. For this he was roundly condemned by the British polar establishment at the time.\nAmong modern polar writers, Ranulph Fiennes regards Shackleton's actions as a technical breach of honour, but adds: \"My personal belief is that Shackleton was basically honest but circumstances forced his McMurdo landing, much to his distress.\" The polar historian Beau Riffenburgh states that the promise to Scott \"should never ethically have been demanded,\" and compares Scott's intransigence on this matter unfavourably with the generous attitudes of the Norwegian explorer Fridtjof Nansen, who gave freely of his advice and expertise to all, whether they were potential rivals or not.\nMarriage.\nScott, who because of his \"Discovery\" fame had entered Edwardian society, first met Kathleen Bruce early in 1907 at a private luncheon party. She was a sculptor, socialite and cosmopolitan who had studied under Auguste Rodin and whose circle included Isadora Duncan, Pablo Picasso and Aleister Crowley. Her initial meeting with Scott was brief, but when they met again later that year, the mutual attraction was obvious. A stormy courtship followed; Scott was not her only suitor\u2014his main rival was would-be novelist Gilbert Cannan\u2014and his absences at sea did not assist his cause. However, Scott's persistence was rewarded and, on 2 September 1908, at the Chapel Royal, Hampton Court Palace, the wedding took place. Their only child, Peter Markham Scott, born 14 September 1909, was to found the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).\n\"Terra Nova\" expedition, 1910\u20131913.\nPreparation.\nShackleton returned from the Antarctic having narrowly failed to reach the Pole and this gave Scott the impetus to proceed with plans for his second Antarctic expedition. On 24 March 1909, he took the Admiralty-based appointment of naval assistant to the Second Sea Lord, which placed him conveniently in London. In December, he was released on half-pay to take up the full-time command of the British Antarctic Expedition 1910, to be known as the \"Terra Nova\" expedition from its ship, .\nIt was the expressed hope of the RGS that this expedition would be \"scientific primarily, with exploration and the Pole as secondary objects\" but, unlike the \"Discovery\" expedition, neither they nor the Royal Society were in charge this time. In his expedition prospectus, Scott stated that its main objective was \"to reach the South Pole, and to secure for the British Empire the honour of this achievement\". Scott had, as Markham observed, been \"bitten by the Pole mania\".\nIn a memorandum of 1908, Scott presented his view that man-hauling to the South Pole was impossible and that motor traction was needed. Snow vehicles did not yet exist however and so his engineer Reginald Skelton developed the idea of a caterpillar track for snow surfaces. In the middle of 1909, Scott realised that motors were unlikely to get him all the way to the Pole and decided additionally to take horses (based on Shackleton's near success in attaining the Pole, using ponies), dogs and skis, after consultation with Nansen during trials of the motors in Norway in March 1910. Man-hauling would still be needed on the Polar Plateau, on the assumption that motors and animals could not ascend the crevassed Beardmore Glacier.\nDog expert Cecil Meares was going to Siberia to select the dogs and Scott ordered that, while he was there, he should deal with the purchase of Manchurian ponies. Meares was not an experienced horse-dealer and the ponies he chose proved mostly of poor quality and ill-suited to prolonged Antarctic work. Meanwhile, Scott also recruited Bernard Day, from Shackleton's expedition, as his motor expert.\nFirst season.\nOn 15 June 1910, Scott's ship, \"Terra Nova\", an old converted whaler, set sail from Cardiff, South Wales. Scott meanwhile was fundraising in Britain and joined the ship later in South Africa. Arriving in Melbourne, Australia in October 1910, Scott received a telegram from Amundsen stating: \"Beg leave to inform you \"Fram\" proceeding Antarctic Amundsen,\" possibly indicating that Scott faced a race to the pole.\nThe expedition suffered a series of early misfortunes which hampered the first season's work and impaired preparations for the main polar march. On its journey from New Zealand to the Antarctic, \"Terra Nova\" nearly sank in a storm and was then trapped in pack ice for 20\u00a0days, far longer than other ships had experienced, which meant a late-season arrival and less time for preparatory work before the Antarctic winter. At Cape Evans, Antarctica, one of the motor sledges was lost during its unloading from the ship, breaking through the sea ice and sinking.\nDeteriorating weather conditions and weak, unacclimatised, ponies affected the initial depot-laying journey, so that the expedition's main supply point, One Ton Depot, was laid north of its planned location at 80\u00b0S. Lawrence Oates, in charge of the ponies, advised Scott to kill ponies for food and advance the depot to 80\u00b0S, which Scott refused to do. Oates is reported as saying to Scott, \"Sir, I'm afraid you'll come to regret not taking my advice.\"\nOn its return to base, the expedition learned of the presence of Amundsen, camped with his crew and a large contingent of dogs in the Bay of Whales, to their east. Scott conceded that his ponies would not be able to start early enough in the season to compete with Amundsen's cold-tolerant dog teams for the pole and also acknowledged that the Norwegian's base was closer to the pole by .\nWilson was more hopeful, whereas Gran shared Scott's concern. Shortly afterwards, the death toll among the ponies increased to six, three drowning when sea-ice unexpectedly disintegrated, casting in doubt the possibility of reaching the pole at all. However, during the 1911 winter, Scott's confidence increased: on 2 August, after the return of a three-man party from their winter journey to Cape Crozier, Scott wrote, \"I feel sure we are as near perfection as experience can direct\".\nJourney to the Pole.\nScott outlined his plans for the southern journey to the entire shore party, leaving open who would form the final polar team, according to their performance during the polar travel. Eleven days before Scott's teams set off towards the pole, Scott gave the dog driver Meares the following written orders at Cape Evans, dated 20 October 1911, to secure Scott's speedy return from the pole using dogs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;About the first week of February I should like you to start your third journey to the South, the object being to hasten the return of the third Southern unit [the polar party] and give it a chance to catch the ship. The date of your departure must depend on news received from returning units, the extent of the depot of dog food you have been able to leave at One Ton Camp, the state of the dogs, etc\u00a0... It looks at present as though you should aim at meeting the returning party about March 1 in Latitude 82 or 82.30\nThe march south began on 1 November 1911, a caravan of mixed transport groups (motors, dogs, horses), with loaded sledges, travelling at different rates, all designed to support a final group of four men who would make a dash for the Pole. The southbound party steadily reduced in size as successive support teams turned back. Scott reminded the returning Surgeon-Lieutenant Atkinson of the order \"to take the two dog-teams south in the event of Meares having to return home, as seemed likely\". By 4 January 1912, the last two four-man groups had reached 87\u00b034\u2032S. Scott announced his decision: five men \u2014 himself, Wilson, Bowers, Oates and E. Evans \u2014 would go forward; the other three \u2014 Teddy Evans, William Lashly and Tom Crean \u2014 would return. The chosen group marched on, but on January 16 spotted the black flag of Amundsen in the distance, who had beaten them to their goal by five weeks.\nThe group finally reached the Pole on 17 January, where they found a tent left in place by Amundsen, in it containing a letter dated 18 December. Scott's anguish is indicated in his diary: \"The worst has happened\u00a0[...] All the day dreams must go\u00a0[...] Great God! This is an awful place\".\nLast march.\nThe deflated party began the return journey on 19 January. \"I'm afraid the return journey is going to be dreadfully tiring and monotonous\", wrote Scott on that day. The party made good progress despite poor weather, and had completed the Polar Plateau stage of their journey, approximately , by 7 February. In the following days, as the party made the descent of the Beardmore Glacier, the physical condition of Edgar Evans, which Scott had noted with concern as early as 23 January, declined sharply. A fall on 4 February had left Evans \"dull and incapable,\" and on 17 February, after another fall, he died near the glacier foot. Still needing to travel across the Ross Ice Shelf, the prospects of Scott's party steadily worsened as they struggled northward with deteriorating weather, a puzzling lack of fuel in the depots, hunger, and exhaustion.\nMeanwhile, back at Cape Evans, the \"Terra Nova\" arrived at the beginning of February, and Atkinson decided to unload the supplies from the ship with his own men rather than set out south with the dogs to meet Scott as ordered. When Atkinson finally did leave south for the planned rendezvous with Scott, he encountered the scurvy-ridden Edward (\"Teddy\") Evans who needed urgent medical attention. Atkinson therefore tried to send the experienced navigator Wright south to meet Scott, but chief meteorologist Simpson declared he needed Wright for scientific work. Atkinson then decided to send the short-sighted Cherry-Garrard on 25 February, who was not able to navigate, only as far as One Ton depot (which is within sight of Mount Erebus), effectively cancelling Scott's orders for meeting him at latitude 82 or 82.30 on 1 March.\nOn the return journey from the Pole, Scott reached the 82\u00b0S meeting point for the dog teams, from Hut Point, three days ahead of schedule, noting in his diary for 27 February 1912, \"We are naturally always discussing possibility of meeting dogs, where and when, etc. It is a critical position. We may find ourselves in safety at the next depot, but there is a horrid element of doubt.\" On 2 March, Oates began to suffer from the effects of frostbite and the party's progress slowed as he was increasingly unable to assist in the workload, eventually only able to drag himself alongside the men pulling the sledge. By 10 March the temperature had dropped unexpectedly to below .\nIn a farewell letter to Sir Edgar Speyer, dated 16 March, Scott wondered whether he had overshot the meeting point and fought the growing suspicion that he had in fact been abandoned by the dog teams: \"We very nearly came through, and it's a pity to have missed it, but lately I have felt that we have overshot our mark. No-one is to blame and I hope no attempt will be made to suggest that we had lacked support.\" On the same day, Oates, whose toes had become frostbitten, voluntarily left the tent and walked to his death. Scott wrote that Oates' last words were \"I am just going outside and may be some time\".\nAfter walking farther despite Scott's toes now becoming frostbitten, the three remaining men made their final camp on 19 March, approximately short of One Ton Depot. The next day a fierce blizzard prevented their making any progress. During the next nine days, as their supplies ran out, and with storms still raging outside the tent, Scott and his companions wrote their farewell letters. Scott gave up his diary after 23 March, save for a final entry on 29 March, with its concluding words: \"Last entry. For God's sake look after our people\". He left letters to Wilson's mother, Bowers' mother, a string of notables including his former commander, Sir George Egerton, his own mother and his wife.\nHe also wrote his \"Message to the Public\", primarily a vindication of the expedition's organisation and conduct in which the party's failure is attributed to weather and other misfortunes, but ending on an inspirational note, with these words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We took risks, we knew we took them; things have come out against us, and therefore we have no cause for complaint, but bow to the will of Providence, determined still to do our best to the last\u00a0... Had we lived, I should have had a tale to tell of the hardihood, endurance, and courage of my companions which would have stirred the heart of every Englishman. These rough notes and our dead bodies must tell the tale, but surely, surely, a great rich country like ours will see that those who are dependent on us are properly provided for.\nScott is presumed to have died on 29 March 1912, or possibly one day later. The positions of the bodies in the tent when it was discovered eight months later suggested that Scott was the last of the three to die.\nIn his final journal entry he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do not think we can hope for any better things now. We shall stick it out to the end, but we are getting weaker, of course, and the end cannot be far.\nIt seems a pity, but I do not think I can write more.\nR. SCOTT.\nFor God's sake look after our people.\nThe bodies of Scott and his companions were discovered by a search party on 12 November 1912. Tryggve Gran, who was part of the search party, described the scene as, \"snowcovered til up above the door, with Scott in the middle, half out of his bagg [\"sic\"]\u00a0... the frost had made the skin yellow &amp; transparent &amp; I've never seen anything worse in my life.\" Their final camp became their tomb; their records and personal belongings were retrieved before the tent roof was lowered over the bodies and a high cairn of snow was erected over it, topped by a roughly fashioned cross, erected using Gran's skis. Next to their bodies lay of \"Glossopteris\" tree fossils which they had dragged on hand sledges. These were the first ever discovered Antarctic fossils and proved that Antarctica had once been warm and connected to other continents.\nIn January 1913, before \"Terra Nova\" left for home, a large wooden cross was made by the ship's carpenters, inscribed with the names of the lost party and Tennyson's line from his poem \"Ulysses\": \"To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield\", and was erected as a permanent memorial on Observation Hill, overlooking Hut Point.\nReputation.\nRecognition.\nThe world was informed of the tragedy when \"Terra Nova\" reached Oamaru, New Zealand, on 10 February 1913. Within days, Scott became a national icon. A nationalistic spirit was aroused; the \"London Evening News\" called for the story to be read to schoolchildren throughout the land, to coincide with the memorial service at St Paul's Cathedral on 14 February. Robert Baden-Powell, founder of the Boy Scouts Association, asked: \"Are Britons going downhill? No!\u00a0... There is plenty of pluck and spirit left in the British after all. Captain Scott and Captain Oates have shown us that\".\nThe expedition's survivors were suitably honoured on their return, with polar medals and promotions for the naval personnel. In place of the knighthood that might have been her husband's had he survived, Kathleen Scott was granted the rank and precedence of a widow of a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath. In 1922, she married Edward Hilton Young, later Lord Kennet, and remained a doughty defender of Scott's reputation until her death, aged 69, in 1947.\nAn article in \"The Times\", reporting on the glowing tributes paid to Scott in the New York press, claimed that both Amundsen and Shackleton were \"[amazed] to hear that such a disaster could overtake a well-organised expedition\". On learning the details of Scott's death, Amundsen is reported to have said, \"I would gladly forgo any honour or money if thereby I could have saved Scott his terrible death\". Scott was the better wordsmith of the two, and the story that spread throughout the world was largely that told by him, with Amundsen's victory reduced in the eyes of many to an unsporting stratagem.\nThe response to Scott's final plea on behalf of the dependents of the dead was enormous by the standards of the day. The Mansion House Scott Memorial Fund closed at \u00a3. This was not equally distributed; Scott's widow, son, mother and sisters received a total of \u00a3. Wilson's widow received \u00a3 and Bowers's mother received \u00a3. Edgar Evans's widow, children, and mother received \u00a3 between them.\nIn the dozen years following the tragedy, more than 30 monuments and memorials were set up in Britain alone, including the foundation of the Scott Polar Research Institute at Cambridge. Many more were established in other parts of the world, including a statue sculpted by Scott's widow for his New Zealand base in Christchurch. A number of institutions have relics and personal belongings from the expedition. Scott's snow shoes, sledging goggles and the book bag for his diary are held in the National Maritime Museum at Greenwich. The Museum of Oxford contains among other items a marmalade tin gifted to Scott by an Oxford businessman which was recovered from the site of his death. The Museum of Timekeeping at Upton Hall, Nottinghamshire, England, has the pocket watch which was found with his body. Scott's sledging flag is held in Exeter Cathedral.\nModern reactions.\nScott's reputation survived the period after World War II, beyond the 50th anniversary of his death. In 1948, the film \"Scott of the Antarctic\" was released in cinemas and was the third most popular film in Britain the following year. It portrays the team spirit of the expedition and the harsh Antarctic environment, but also includes critical scenes such as Scott regarding his broken down motors and ruefully remembering Nansen's advice to take only dogs. Evans and Cherry-Garrard were the only surviving expedition members to refuse participation in the film, but both re-published their respective books in its wake.\nIn 1966, Reginald Pound, the first biographer given access to Scott's original sledging journal, revealed personal failings which cast a new light on Scott, although Pound continued to endorse his heroism, writing of \"a splendid sanity that would not be subdued\". Another book critical of Scott, David Thomson's \"Scott's Men\", was released in 1977. In Thomson's view, Scott was not a great man, \"at least, not until near the end\"; his planning is described as \"haphazard\" and \"flawed\", his leadership characterised by lack of foresight. Thus by the late 1970s, biographer Max Jones stated, \"Scott's complex personality had been revealed and his methods questioned\".\nIn 1979 came the first extreme attack on Scott, from Roland Huntford's dual biography \"Scott and Amundsen\" in which Scott is depicted as a \"heroic bungler\". Huntford's thesis had an immediate impact, becoming the contemporary orthodoxy. After Huntford's book, several other mostly negative books about Captain Scott were published; Francis Spufford, in a 1996 history not wholly antagonistic to Scott, refers to \"devastating evidence of bungling\", concluding that \"Scott doomed his companions, then covered his tracks with rhetoric\". Travel writer Paul Theroux summarised Scott as \"confused and demoralised\u00a0... an enigma to his men, unprepared and a bungler\". This decline in Scott's reputation was accompanied by a corresponding rise in that of his erstwhile rival Shackleton, at first in the United States but eventually in Britain as well. A 2002 nationwide poll in the United Kingdom to discover the \"100 Greatest Britons\" showed Shackleton in eleventh place, Scott well down the list at 54th.\nThe 21st century has seen a shift of opinion in Scott's favour, in what cultural historian Stephanie Barczewski calls \"a revision of the revisionist view\". Meteorologist Susan Solomon's 2001 account \"The Coldest March\" ties the fate of Scott's party to the extraordinarily adverse Barrier weather conditions of February and March 1912 rather than to personal or organisational failings and, while not entirely questioning any criticism of Scott, Solomon principally characterises the criticism as the \"Myth of Scott as a bungler\".\nIn 2005 David Crane published a new Scott biography in which he comes to the conclusion that Scott is possibly the only figure in polar history except Lawrence Oates \"so wholly obscured by legend\". According to Barczewski, he goes some way towards an assessment of Scott \"free from the baggage of earlier interpretations\". What has happened to Scott's reputation, Crane argues, derives from the way the world has changed since the \"hopeless heroism and obscene waste\" of the First World War. At the time of Scott's death, people clutched at the proof he gave that the qualities that made Britain, indeed the British Empire, great were not extinct. Future generations mindful of the carnage that started &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 years later, the ideals of unquestionable duty, self-sacrifice, discipline, patriotism and hierarchy associated with his tragedy take on a different and more sinister colouring.\nCrane's main achievement, according to Barczewski, is the restoration of Scott's humanity, \"far more effectively than either Fiennes's stridency or Solomon's scientific data.\" \"Daily Telegraph\" columnist Jasper Rees, likening the changes in explorers' reputations to climatic variations, suggests that \"in the current Antarctic weather report, Scott is enjoying his first spell in the sun for twenty-five years\". The \"New York Times Book Review\" was more critical, pointing out Crane's support for Scott's account regarding the circumstances of the freeing of the \"Discovery\" from the pack ice, and concluded that \"For all the many attractions of his book, David Crane offers no answers that convincingly exonerate Scott from a significant share of responsibility for his own demise.\"\nIn 2012, Karen May published her discovery that Scott had issued written orders, before his march to the Pole, for Meares to meet the returning party with dog-teams, in contrast to Huntford's assertion in 1979 that Scott issued those vital instructions only as a casual oral order to Evans during the march to the Pole. According to May, \"Huntford's scenario was pure invention based on an error; it has led a number of polar historians down a regrettable false trail\".\nThe expedition was the subject of \"Terra Nova\", a 1977 play by Ted Tally (who later wrote the screenplay for \"The Silence of the Lambs\"). Beryl Bainbridge's 1991 novel \"The Birthday Boys\" also gives a fictionalised account of the expedition, with monologues from the five men who died on the return from the pole.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25663", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25663", "title": "Raymond Chandler", "text": "American novelist and screenwriter (1888\u20131959)\nRaymond Thornton Chandler (July 23, 1888 \u2013 March 26, 1959) was an American-British novelist and screenwriter. In 1932, at the age of forty-four, Chandler became a detective fiction writer after losing his job as an oil company executive during the Great Depression. His first short story, \"Blackmailers Don't Shoot\", was published in 1933 in \"Black Mask,\" a pulp magazine. His first novel, \"The Big Sleep\", was published in 1939. In addition to his short stories, Chandler published seven novels during his lifetime (an eighth, in progress at the time of his death, was completed by Robert B. Parker). All but \"Playback\" have been made into motion pictures, some more than once. In the year before his death, he was elected president of the Mystery Writers of America.\nChandler had an immense stylistic influence on American popular literature. He is a founder of the hardboiled school of detective fiction, along with Dashiell Hammett, James M. Cain and other \"Black Mask\" writers. The protagonist of his novels, Philip Marlowe, like Hammett's Sam Spade, is considered by some to be synonymous with \"private detective\". Both were played in films by Humphrey Bogart, whom many consider to be the quintessential Marlowe.\n\"The Big Sleep\" placed second on the Crime Writers' Association poll of the 100 best crime novels; \"Farewell, My Lovely\" (1940), \"The Lady in the Lake\" (1943) and \"The Long Goodbye\" (1953) also made the list. The latter novel was praised in an anthology of American crime stories as \"arguably the first book since Hammett's \"The Glass Key\", published more than twenty years earlier, to qualify as a serious and significant mainstream novel that just happened to possess elements of mystery\". Chandler was also a perceptive critic of detective fiction; his \"The Simple Art of Murder\" is the canonical essay in the field. In it he wrote: \"Down these mean streets a man must go who is not himself mean, who is neither tarnished nor afraid. The detective must be a complete man and a common man and yet an unusual man. He must be, to use a rather weathered phrase, a man of honor\u2014by instinct, by inevitability, without thought of it, and certainly without saying it. He must be the best man in his world and a good enough man for any world.\"\nParker wrote that, with Marlowe, \"Chandler seems to have created the culminating American hero: wised up, hopeful, thoughtful, adventurous, sentimental, cynical and rebellious\u2014an innocent who knows better, a Romantic who is tough enough to sustain Romanticism in a world that has seen the eternal footman hold its coat and snicker. Living at the end of the Far West, where the American dream ran out of room, no hero has ever been more congruent with his landscape. Chandler had the right hero in the right place, and engaged him in the consideration of good and evil at precisely the time when our central certainty of good no longer held.\"\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nChandler was born in 1888 in Chicago, the son of Florence Dart (Thornton) and Maurice Benjamin Chandler. He spent his early years in Plattsmouth, Nebraska, living with his mother and father near his cousins and his aunt (his mother's sister) and uncle. Chandler's father, a civil engineer who worked for the railway, was alcoholic and abandoned the family in the early 1890s. To obtain the best possible education for Raymond, his mother, who was originally from Ireland, went to live in England with Raymond in 1900 (in Upper Norwood, now in the London Borough of Croydon). Raymond lived there with his mother, unmarried aunt, and maternal grandmother between 1901 and 1907. Another uncle, a successful lawyer in Waterford, Ireland, reluctantly supported them while they lived in London. Raymond was a first cousin to the actor Max Adrian, a founding member of the Royal Shakespeare Company; Max's mother Mabel was a sister of Florence Thornton. Chandler was classically educated at Dulwich College, London (a public school whose alumni include the authors P. G. Wodehouse and C. S. Forester). He spent some of his childhood summers in Waterford in Ireland with his mother's family. He did not go to university, instead spending time in Paris and Munich improving his foreign language skills. In 1907, he was naturalized as a British subject in order to take the civil service examination, which he passed. He then took an Admiralty job, lasting just over a year. His first poem was published during that time.\nChandler disliked the servility of the civil service and resigned, to the consternation of his family. He then became a reporter for the \"Daily Express\" and also wrote for \"The Westminster Gazette\". He was unsuccessful as a journalist, but he published reviews and continued writing romantic poetry. An encounter with the slightly older Richard Barham Middleton is said to have influenced him into postponing his career as writer. \"I met\u00a0... also a young, bearded, and sad-eyed man called Richard Middleton.\u00a0... Shortly afterwards he committed suicide in Antwerp, a suicide of despair, I should say. The incident made a great impression on me, because Middleton struck me as having far more talent than I was ever likely to possess; and if he couldn't make a go of it, it wasn't very likely that I could.\" Accounting for that time he said, \"Of course in those days as now there were\u00a0... clever young men who made a decent living as freelances for the numerous literary weeklies\", but \"I was distinctly not a clever young man. Nor was I at all a happy young man.\"\nIn 1912, at the age of 24, he borrowed money from his Waterford uncle, who expected it to be repaid with interest, and returned to America, visiting his aunt and uncle before settling in San Francisco for a time, where he took a correspondence course in bookkeeping, finishing ahead of schedule. His mother joined him there in late 1912. Encouraged by Chandler's attorney/oilman friend Warren Lloyd, they moved to Los Angeles in 1913, where he strung tennis rackets, picked fruit and endured a time of scrimping and saving. He found steady employment with the Los Angeles Creamery. In 1917, he traveled to Victoria, where in August he enlisted in the 50th Reinforcement Battalion Canadian Expeditionary Force. He saw combat in the trenches in France with the 7th Battalion C.E.F. (British Columbia Regiment). He was twice hospitalized with Spanish flu during the pandemic and was undergoing flight training in the fledgling Royal Air Force (RAF) when the war ended.\nAfter the armistice, he returned to Los Angeles by way of Vancouver, and soon began a love affair with Pearl Eugenie (\"Cissy\") Pascal, a married woman 18 years his senior and the stepmother of Gordon Pascal, with whom Chandler had enlisted. Cissy amicably divorced her husband, Julian, in 1920, but Chandler's mother disapproved of the relationship and refused to sanction the marriage. For the next four years Chandler supported both his mother and Cissy. After the death of Florence Chandler on September 26, 1923, he was free to marry Cissy. They were married on February 6, 1924. Having begun in 1922 as a bookkeeper and auditor, Chandler was by 1931 a highly paid vice president of the Dabney Oil Syndicate, but his alcoholism, absenteeism, promiscuity with female employees, and threatened suicides contributed to his dismissal a year later, after ten years with the company.\nAs a writer.\nIn straitened financial circumstances during the Great Depression, Chandler turned to his latent writing talent to earn a living, teaching himself to write pulp fiction by analyzing and imitating a novelette by Erle Stanley Gardner. Chandler's first professional work, \"Blackmailers Don't Shoot\", was published in \"Black Mask\" magazine in 1933. According to genre historian Herbert Ruhm, \"Chandler, who worked slowly and painstakingly, revising again and again, had taken five months to write the story. Erle Stanley Gardner could turn out a pulp story in three or four days\u2014and turned out an estimated one thousand.\"\nHis first novel, \"The Big Sleep\", was published in 1939, featuring the detective Philip Marlowe, speaking in the first person. In 1950, Chandler described in a letter to his English publisher, Hamish Hamilton, why he began reading pulp magazines and later wrote for them:\nWandering up and down the Pacific Coast in an automobile I began to read pulp magazines, because they were cheap enough to throw away and because I never had at any time any taste for the kind of thing which is known as women's magazines. This was in the great days of the \"Black Mask\" (if I may call them great days) and it struck me that some of the writing was pretty forceful and honest, even though it had its crude aspect. I decided that this might be a good way to try to learn to write fiction and get paid a small amount of money at the same time. I spent five months over an 18,000 word novelette and sold it for $180. After that I never looked back, although I had a good many uneasy periods looking forward.\nHis second Marlowe novel, \"Farewell, My Lovely\" (1940), became the basis for three movie versions adapted by other screenwriters, including the 1944 film \"Murder My Sweet\", which marked the screen debut of the Marlowe character, played by Dick Powell (whose depiction of Marlowe was applauded by Chandler). Literary success and film adaptations led to a demand for Chandler himself as a screenwriter. He and Billy Wilder co-wrote \"Double Indemnity\" (1944), based on James M. Cain's novel of the same title. The noir screenplay was nominated for an Academy Award. Said Wilder, \"I would just guide the structure and I would also do a lot of the dialogue, and he (Chandler) would then comprehend and start constructing too.\" Wilder acknowledged that the dialogue which makes the film so memorable was largely Chandler's.\nChandler's only produced original screenplay was \"The Blue Dahlia\" (1946). He had not written a denouement for the script and, according to producer John Houseman, Chandler concluded he could finish the script only if drunk, with the assistance of round-the-clock secretaries and drivers, which Houseman agreed to. The script gained Chandler's second Academy Award nomination for screenplay.\nChandler collaborated on the screenplay of Alfred Hitchcock's \"Strangers on a Train\" (1951), an ironic murder story based on Patricia Highsmith's novel, which he thought implausible. Chandler clashed with Hitchcock and they stopped talking after Hitchcock heard Chandler had referred to him as \"that fat bastard\". Hitchcock made a show of throwing Chandler's two draft screenplays into the studio trash can while holding his nose, but Chandler retained the lead screenwriting credit along with Czenzi Ormonde.\nIn 1946, the Chandlers moved to La Jolla, an affluent coastal neighborhood of San Diego, California, where Chandler wrote two more Philip Marlowe novels, \"The Long Goodbye\" and his last completed work, \"Playback\". The latter was derived from an unproduced courtroom drama screenplay he had written for Universal Studios.\nFour chapters of a novel, unfinished at his death, were transformed into a final Philip Marlowe novel, \"Poodle Springs\", by the mystery writer and Chandler admirer Robert B. Parker, in 1989. Parker shares the authorship with Chandler. Parker subsequently wrote a sequel to \"The Big Sleep\" entitled \"Perchance to Dream\", which was salted with quotes from the original novel. Chandler's final Marlowe short story, circa 1957, was entitled \"The Pencil\". It later provided the basis of an episode of the HBO miniseries (1983\u201386), \"Philip Marlowe, Private Eye\", starring Powers Boothe as Marlowe.\nIn 2014, \"The Princess and the Pedlar\" (1917), a previously unknown comic operetta, with libretto by Chandler and music by Julian Pascal, was discovered among the uncatalogued holdings of the Library of Congress. The work was never published or produced. It has been dismissed by the Raymond Chandler estate as \"no more than\u2026 a curiosity.\" A small team under the direction of the actor and director Paul Sand is seeking permission to produce the operetta in Los Angeles.\nThe University of Oxford preserves some of Chandler's papers in the archives of the Bodleian Library. These include correspondence with his publisher, Hamish Hamilton, Ltd.\nLater life and death.\nCissy Chandler died in 1954, after a long illness. Heartbroken and drunk, Chandler neglected to inter her cremated remains, and they sat for 57 years in a storage locker in the basement of Cypress View Mausoleum. \nAfter Cissy's death, Chandler's loneliness worsened his propensity for clinical depression; he returned to drinking alcohol, never quitting it for long, and the quality and quantity of his writing suffered. In 1955, he attempted suicide. In \"The Long Embrace: Raymond Chandler and the Woman He Loved\", Judith Freeman says it was \"a cry for help,\" given that he called the police beforehand, saying he planned to kill himself. Chandler's personal and professional life were both helped and complicated by the women to whom he was attracted, notably Helga Greene (his literary agent), Jean Fracasse (his secretary), Sonia Orwell (George Orwell's widow), and Natasha Spender (Stephen Spender's wife). Chandler regained his U.S. citizenship in 1956, while retaining his British rights.\nAfter a respite in England, he returned to La Jolla. He died at Scripps Memorial Hospital of pneumonial peripheral vascular shock and prerenal uremia (according to the death certificate) in 1959. Helga Greene inherited Chandler's $60,000 estate, after prevailing in a 1960 lawsuit filed by Fracasse contesting Chandler's holographic codicil to his will.\nChandler is buried at Mount Hope Cemetery, in San Diego, California. As Frank MacShane noted in his biography, \"The Life of Raymond Chandler\", Chandler wished to be cremated and placed next to Cissy in Cypress View Mausoleum. Instead, he was buried in Mount Hope, because he had left no funeral or burial instructions. When he died he was remembered as, \"the author of \u201c\"The Big Sleep\",\u201d and other mystery novels.\"\nIn 2010, Chandler historian Loren Latker, with the assistance of attorney Aissa Wayne (daughter of John Wayne), brought a petition to disinter Cissy's remains and reinter them with Chandler in Mount Hope. After a hearing in September 2010 in San Diego Superior Court, Judge Richard S. Whitney entered an order granting Latker's request.\nOn February 14, 2011, Cissy's ashes were conveyed from Cypress View to Mount Hope and interred under a new grave marker above Chandler's, as they had wished. About 100 people attended the ceremony, which included readings by the Rev. Randal Gardner, Powers Boothe, Judith Freeman and Aissa Wayne. The shared gravestone reads, \"Dead men are heavier than broken hearts\", a quotation from \"The Big Sleep\". Chandler's original gravestone, placed by Jean Fracasse and her children, is still at the head of his grave; the new one is at the foot.\nViews on pulp fiction.\nIn his introduction to \"Trouble Is My Business\" (1950), a collection of many of his short stories, Chandler provided insight on the formula for the detective story and how the pulp magazines differed from previous detective stories:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The emotional basis of the standard detective story was and had always been that murder will out and justice will be done. Its technical basis was the relative insignificance of everything except the final denouement. What led up to that was more or less passage work. The denouement would justify everything. The technical basis of the \"Black Mask\" type of story on the other hand was that the scene outranked the plot, in the sense that a good plot was one which made good scenes. The ideal mystery was one you would read if the end was missing. We who tried to write it had the same point of view as the film makers. When I first went to Hollywood a very intelligent producer told me that you couldn't make a successful motion picture from a mystery story, because the whole point was a disclosure that took a few seconds of screen time while the audience was reaching for its hat. He was wrong, but only because he was thinking of the wrong kind of mystery.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As to the emotional basis of the hard-boiled story, obviously it does not believe that murder will out and justice will be done-unless some very determined individual makes it his business to see that justice is done. The stories were about the men who made that happen. They were apt to be hard men, and what they did, whether they were called police officers, private detectives or newspaper men, was hard, dangerous work: It was work they could always get. There was plenty of it lying around. There still is. Undoubtedly the stories about them had a fantastic element. Such things happened, but not so rapidly, nor to so closeknit a group of people, nor within so narrow a frame of logic. This was inevitable because the demand was for constant action; if you stopped to think you were lost. When in doubt have a man come through a door with a gun in his hand. This could get to be pretty silly, but somehow it didn't seem to matter. A writer who is afraid to overreach himself is as useless as a general who is afraid to be wrong.\nChandler also described the struggle that writers of pulp fiction had in following the formula demanded by the editors of the pulp magazines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As I look back on my stories it would be absurd if I did not wish they had been better. But if they had been much better they would not have been published. If the formula had been a little less rigid, more of the writing of that time might have survived. Some of us tried pretty hard to break out of the formula, but we usually got caught and sent back. To exceed the limits of a formula without destroying it is the dream of every magazine writer who is not a hopeless hack.\nReputation.\nCritics and writers, including W. H. Auden, Evelyn Waugh and Ian Fleming, greatly admired Chandler's prose. In a radio discussion with Chandler, Fleming said that Chandler offered \"some of the finest dialogue written in any prose today\". Contemporary mystery writer Paul Levine has described Chandler's style as the \"literary equivalent of a quick punch to the gut\". Chandler's swift-moving, hardboiled style was inspired mostly by Dashiell Hammett, but his sharp and lyrical similes are original: \"The muzzle of the Luger looked like the mouth of the Second Street tunnel\"; \"He had a heart as big as one of Mae West's hips\"; \"Dead men are heavier than broken hearts\"; \"I went back to the seasteps and moved down them as cautiously as a cat on a wet floor\"; \"He was crazy as a pair of waltzing mice, but I liked him\"; \"I felt like an amputated leg\"; \"He was about as inconspicuous as a tarantula on a slice of angel food.\" Chandler's writing redefined the private eye fiction genre, led to the coining of the adjective \"Chandleresque\", and inevitably became the subject of parody and pastiche. Yet the detective Philip Marlowe is not a stereotypical tough guy, but a complex, sometimes sentimental man with few friends, who attended university, who speaks some Spanish and sometimes admires Mexicans and Blacks, and who is a student of chess and classical music. He is a man who refuses a prospective client's fee for a job he considers unethical.\nThe high regard in which Chandler is generally held today is in contrast to the critical sniping that stung the author during his lifetime. In a March 1942 letter to Blanche Knopf, published in \"Selected Letters of Raymond Chandler\", he wrote, \"The thing that rather gets me down is that when I write something that is tough and fast and full of mayhem and murder, I get panned for being tough and fast and full of mayhem and murder, and then when I try to tone down a bit and develop the mental and emotional side of a situation, I get panned for leaving out what I was panned for putting in the first time.\"\nAlthough his work enjoys general acclaim today, Chandler has been criticized for certain aspects of his writing. \"The Washington Post\" reviewer Patrick Anderson described his plots as \"rambling at best and incoherent at worst\" (notoriously, even Chandler did not know who murdered the chauffeur in \"The Big Sleep\") and Anderson criticized Chandler's treatment of black, female, and homosexual characters, calling him a \"rather nasty man at times\". Anderson nevertheless praised Chandler as \"probably the most lyrical of the major crime writers\".\nChandler's short stories and novels are evocatively written, conveying the time, place and ambiance of Los Angeles and environs in the 1930s and 1940s. The places are real, if pseudonymous: Bay City is Santa Monica, Gray Lake is Silver Lake, and Idle Valley a synthesis of wealthy San Fernando Valley communities.\n\"Playback\" is the only one of his novels not to have been made into a movie. Arguably the most notable adaptation is Howard Hawks \"The Big Sleep\" (1946), with Humphrey Bogart as Marlowe. William Faulkner and Leigh Brackett were co-writers of the screenplay. Chandler's few screenwriting efforts and the cinematic adaptation of his novels proved stylistically and thematically influential on the American film noir genre. Notable for its revised take on Marlowe is Robert Altman's 1973 neo-noir adaptation of \"The Long Goodbye\". Later in a review for \"The New Yorker\" discussing the film adaptation of \"The Long Goodbye,\" Pauline Kael describes Chandler as \"locked in the conventions of pulp writing\" and that he \"never found a way of dealing with that malaise.\"\nLegacy.\nIn 2014, the Hollywood Walk of Fame selection committee announced that Raymond Chandler would be included the following year, but as of 2025, he has not been.\nThe intersection of Hollywood Boulevard and Cahuenga Avenue in Hollywood, California is named Raymond Chandler Square, a tribute both to the author and to the belief that Philip Marlowe's office was located in Security Trust and Savings at the northeast corner of this intersection. In 1994, the Square was designated Los Angeles Historic Cultural Monument #597.\nThe lifetime achievement award of the Noir in Festival is named the Raymond Chandler Award. In 1991, Fulbright Program gave out a \"Raymond Chandler Mystery Writing Award\" and in 1994, they gave out a \"Raymond Chandler Award\".\nWorks.\nNovels and novellas.\nChandler left an unfinished novel when he died. This was completed by Robert B. Parker and published in 1989 as \"Poodle Springs\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25665", "revid": "35415410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25665", "title": "Rosaceae", "text": "Rose family of flowering plants\nRosaceae (), the rose family, is a family of flowering plants that includes 4,828 known species in 91 genera.\nThe name is derived from the type genus \"Rosa\". The family includes herbs, shrubs, and trees. Most species are deciduous, but some are evergreen. They have a worldwide range but are most diverse in the Northern Hemisphere.\nMany economically important products come from the Rosaceae, including various edible fruits, such as apples, pears, quinces, apricots, plums, cherries, peaches, raspberries, blackberries, loquats, strawberries, rose hips, hawthorns, and almonds. The family also includes popular ornamental trees and shrubs, such as roses, meadowsweets, rowans, firethorns, and photinias.\nAmong the most species-rich genera in the family are \"Alchemilla\" (270), \"Sorbus\" (260), \"Crataegus\" (260), \"Cotoneaster\" (260), \"Rubus\" (250), and \"Prunus\" (340), which contains the plums, cherries, peaches, apricots, and almonds. However, all of these numbers should be seen as estimates\u2014much taxonomic work remains.\nDescription.\nRosaceae can be woody trees, shrubs, climbers or herbaceous plants. The herbs are mostly perennials, but some annuals also exist, such as \"Aphanes arvensis\".\nLeaves.\nThe leaves are generally arranged spirally, but have an opposite arrangement in some species. They can be simple or pinnately compound (either odd- or even-pinnate). Compound leaves appear in around 30 genera. The leaf margin is most often serrate. Paired stipules are generally present and are considered a primitive feature within the family, though they have been independently lost in many groups of Amygdaloideae (previously called Spiraeoideae). The stipules are sometimes adnate (attached surface to surface) to the petiole. Glands or extrafloral nectaries may be present on leaf margins or petioles. Spines may be present on the midrib of leaflets and the rachis of compound leaves.\nFlowers.\nFlowers of plants in the rose family are generally described as \"showy\". They are radially symmetrical, and almost always hermaphroditic. Rosaceae generally have five sepals, five petals, and many spirally arranged stamens. The bases of the sepals, petals, and stamens are fused together to form a characteristic cup-like structure called a hypanthium. They can be arranged in spikes, or heads. Solitary flowers are rare. Rosaceae have a variety of color petals, but blue is almost completely absent.\nFruits and seeds.\nThe fruits occur in many varieties and were once considered the main characters for the definition of subfamilies amongst Rosaceae, giving rise to a fundamentally artificial subdivision. They can be follicles, capsules, nuts, achenes, drupes (\"Prunus\"), and accessory fruits, like the pome of an apple, the hip of a rose, or the receptacle-derived aggregate accessory fruit of a strawberry. Many fruits of the family are edible, but their seeds often contain amygdalin, which can release cyanide during digestion if the seed is damaged.\nTaxonomy.\nTaxonomic history.\nThe family was traditionally divided into six subfamilies: Rosoideae, Spiraeoideae, Maloideae (Pomoideae), Amygdaloideae (Prunoideae), Neuradoideae, and Chrysobalanoideae, and most of these were treated as families by various authors. Later (1971), Chrysobalanoideae was placed in Malpighiales and Neuradoideae has been assigned to Malvales. Schulze-Menz, in Engler's Syllabus edited by Melchior (1964), recognized Rosoideae, Dryadoideae, Lyonothamnoideae, Spireoideae, Amygdaloideae, and Maloideae. They were primarily diagnosed by the structure of the fruits. More recent work has identified that not all of these groups were monophyletic. Hutchinson (1964) and Kalkman (2004) recognized only tribes (17 and 21, respectively). Takhtajan (1997) delimited 21 tribes in 10 subfamilies: Filipenduloideae, Rosoideae, Ruboideae, Potentilloideae, Coleogynoideae, Kerroideae, Amygdaloideae (Prunoideae), Spireoideae, Maloideae (Pyroideae), Dichotomanthoideae. A more modern model comprises three subfamilies, one of which (Rosoideae) has largely remained the same.\nWhile the boundaries of the Rosaceae are not disputed, there is no general agreement as to how many genera it contains. Areas of divergent opinion include the treatment of \"Potentilla s.l.\" and \"Sorbus s.l.\". Compounding the problem is that apomixis is common in several genera. This results in an uncertainty in the number of species contained in each of these genera, due to the difficulty of dividing apomictic complexes into species. For example, \"Cotoneaster\" contains between 70 and 300 species, \"Rosa\" around 100 (including the taxonomically complex dog roses), \"Sorbus\" 100 to 200 species, \"Crataegus\" between 200 and 1,000, \"Alchemilla\" around 300 species, \"Potentilla\" roughly 500, and \"Rubus\" hundreds, or possibly even thousands of species.\nGenera.\nIdentified clades include:\nPhylogeny.\nThe phylogenetic relationships between the three subfamilies within Rosaceae are unresolved. There are three competing hypotheses:\nAmygdaloideae basal.\nAmygdaloideae has been identified as the earliest branching subfamily by Chin et al. (2014), Li et al. (2015), Li et al. (2016), and Sun et al. (2016). Most recently Zhang et al. (2017) recovered these relationships using whole plastid genomes:\nThe sister relationship between Dryadoideae and Rosoideae is supported by the following shared morphological characters not found in Amygdaloideae: presence of stipules, separation of the hypanthium from the ovary, and the fruits are usually achenes.\nDryadoideae basal.\nDryadoideae has been identified as the earliest branching subfamily by Evans et al. (2002) and Potter (2003). Most recently Xiang et al. (2017) recovered these relationships using nuclear transcriptomes:\nRosoideae basal.\nRosoideae has been identified as the earliest branching subfamily by Morgan et al. (1994), Evans (1999), Potter et al. (2002), Potter et al. (2007), T\u00f6pel et al. (2012), and Chen et al. (2016). The following is taken from Potter et al. (2007):\nThe sister relationship between Amygdaloideae and Dryadoideae is supported by the following shared biochemical characters not found in Rosoideae: production of cyanogenic glycosides and production of sorbitol.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe Rosaceae have a cosmopolitan distribution, being found nearly everywhere except for Antarctica. They are primarily concentrated in the Northern Hemisphere in regions that are not desert or tropical rainforest.\nUses.\nThe rose family is considered one of the six most economically important crop plant families, and includes apples, pears, quinces, medlars, loquats, almonds, peaches, apricots, plums, cherries, strawberries, blackberries, raspberries, sloes, and roses.\nMany genera are also highly valued ornamental plants. These include trees and shrubs (\"Cotoneaster\", \"Chaenomeles\", \"Crataegus\", \"Dasiphora\", \"Exochorda\", \"Kerria\", \"Photinia\", \"Physocarpus\", \"Prunus\", \"Pyracantha\", \"Rhodotypos\", \"Rosa\", \"Sorbus\", \"Spiraea\"), herbaceous perennials (\"Alchemilla\", \"Aruncus\", \"Filipendula\", \"Geum\", \"Potentilla\", \"Sanguisorba\"), alpine plants (\"Dryas\", \"Geum\", \"Potentilla\") and climbers (\"Rosa\").\nHowever, several genera are also introduced noxious weeds in some parts of the world, costing money to be controlled. These invasive plants can have negative impacts on the diversity of local ecosystems once established. Such naturalised pests include \"Acaena\", \"Cotoneaster\", \"Crataegus\", and \"Pyracantha\".\nIn Bulgaria and parts of western Asia, the production of rose oil from fresh flowers such as \"Rosa damascena\", \"Rosa gallica\", and other species is an important economic industry.\nGallery.\nThe family Rosaceae covers a wide range of trees, bushes and plants.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25666", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25666", "title": "R.J. Rummel", "text": ""}
{"id": "25667", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25667", "title": "Rock, paper, scissors", "text": ""}
{"id": "25668", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25668", "title": "Ruby language", "text": ""}
{"id": "25671", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25671", "title": "Ralph Nader", "text": "American lawyer and activist (born 1934)\nRalph Nader (; born February 27, 1934) is an American lawyer and political activist involved in consumer protection, environmentalism, and government reform causes. He is a perennial presidential candidate. His 1965 book \"Unsafe at Any Speed\", which criticized the automotive industry for its safety record, helped lead to the passage of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act in 1966.\nThe son of Lebanese immigrants to the United States, Nader attended Princeton University and Harvard Law School. He quickly developed an interest in vehicle designs that were hazardous and contributed to elevated levels of car accidents and fatalities. Published in 1965, \"Unsafe at Any Speed\" became a highly influential critique of the safety record of American automobile manufacturers, focusing on General Motors' (GM's) Corvair automobile in particular.\nFollowing the publication of \"Unsafe at Any Speed\", Nader led a group of volunteer law students\u2014dubbed \"Nader's Raiders\"\u2014in an investigation of the Federal Trade Commission, leading directly to that agency's overhaul and reform. In the 1970s, Nader leveraged his growing popularity to establish a number of advocacy and watchdog groups including the Public Interest Research Group, the Center for Auto Safety, and Public Citizen. Two of Nader's most notable targets were the Chevy Corvair and the Ford Pinto.\nNader made four bids to become President of the United States, running with the Green Party in 1996 and 2000 and as an independent in 2004 and 2008. In each campaign, Nader said he sought to highlight under-reported issues and a perceived need for electoral reform. He won nearly three million votes at the 2000 United States presidential election, but there were allegations that his campaign that year helped Republican candidate George W. Bush win a close election against Democratic candidate Al Gore. In 2006, \"The Atlantic Monthly\", calling Nader one of the hundred most influential Americans in history, said: \"He made the cars we drive safer; thirty years later, he made George W. Bush the president.\"\nA two-time Nieman Fellow, Nader is the author or co-author of more than two dozen books and was the subject of a documentary film on his life and work, \"An Unreasonable Man\", which debuted at the 2006 Sundance Film Festival. He has been repeatedly named to lists of the \"100 Most Influential Americans\", including those published by the magazines \"Life\", \"Time\", and \"The Atlantic\". He was described by \"The New York Times\" as a \"dissident\".\nEarly life and education.\nRalph Nader was born on February 27, 1934, in Winsted, Connecticut, to Rose (n\u00e9e Bouziane) and Nathra Nader, both of whom were Antiochian Greek Christian immigrants from Mount Lebanon and the Beqaa Valley in Southeastern Lebanon. After settling in Connecticut, Nathra Nader worked in a textile mill before opening a bakery and restaurant. Ralph Nader occasionally helped at his father's restaurant; he also worked as a newspaper delivery boy for the local paper, the Winsted \"Register Citizen\". Nader graduated from The Gilbert School in 1951, going on to attend Princeton University. Though he was offered a scholarship to Princeton, his father forced him to decline it on the grounds that the family was able to pay Nader's tuition and the funds should go to a student who could not afford it. Nader graduated \"magna cum laude\" and Phi Beta Kappa with a Bachelor of Arts from the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs in 1955 after completing a senior thesis titled \"Lebanese Agriculture\".\nAfter graduating from Princeton, Nader enrolled at Harvard Law School, though he quickly became bored by his courses. While at Harvard, Nader would frequently skip classes to hitchhike across the U.S. where he would engage in field research on Native American issues and migrant worker rights. He earned a Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.) from Harvard in 1958. Nader identified with libertarian philosophy in his youth, but gradually shifted away in his early 20s. Although Nader acknowledged that he \"didn't like public housing because it disadvantaged landlords unfairly\", his viewpoint changed when he \"saw the slums and what landlords did\". After graduating from Harvard, Nader served in the U.S. Army as a cook and was posted to Fort Dix.\nCareer.\nEarly history.\nIn 1959, Nader was admitted to the bar and began practice as a lawyer in Hartford, Connecticut, while also lecturing at the University of Hartford and traveling to the Soviet Union, Chile, and Cuba, where he filed dispatches for the \"Christian Science Monitor\" and \"The Nation\". In 1964, he moved to Washington, D.C., taking a position as a consultant to Assistant Secretary of Labor Daniel Patrick Moynihan.\n\"Unsafe at Any Speed\".\nNader gained national attention with the 1965 publication of his journalistic expos\u00e9 \"Unsafe at Any Speed\". The book, critical of the automotive industry, argued that many American automobiles were generally unsafe to operate. For the book, Nader researched case files from more than a hundred lawsuits then pending against General Motors' Chevrolet Corvair to support his assertions.\nThe book became an immediate bestseller, but also prompted a backlash from General Motors (GM), which attempted to discredit Nader. GM tapped Nader's phone in an attempt to obtain salacious information and, when that failed, GM hired prostitutes in an attempt to catch him in a compromising situation. Nader, by then working as an unpaid consultant to United States Senator Abe Ribicoff, reported to the senator that he suspected he was being followed. Ribicoff convened an inquiry that called GM CEO James Roche who admitted, when placed under oath, that the company had hired a private detective agency to investigate Nader. Nader sued GM for invasion of privacy, settling the case for $425,000 and using the proceeds to found the activist organization known as the Center for the Study of Responsive Law.\nA year following the publication of \"Unsafe at Any Speed\", Congress unanimously enacted the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act. Speaker of the United States House of Representatives John William McCormack said the passage of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act was brought about by the \"crusading spirit of one individual who believed he could do something: Ralph Nader\".\n\"Nader's Raiders\", Public Citizen and Center for Auto Safety.\nIn 1968, Nader recruited seven volunteer law students, dubbed \"Nader's Raiders\" by the Washington press corps, to evaluate the efficacy and operation of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). The group's ensuing report, which criticized the body as \"ineffective\" and \"passive\" led to an American Bar Association investigation of the FTC. Based on the results of that second study, Richard Nixon revitalized the agency and sent it on a path of vigorous consumer protection and antitrust enforcement for the rest of the 1970s.\nNader's Raiders became involved in such issues as nuclear safety, international trade, regulation of insecticides, meat processing, pension reform, land use, and banking.\nFollowing the publication of the report, Nader founded the watchdog group Public Citizen in 1971 to engage in public interest lobbying and activism on issues of consumer rights. He also served on its board of directors until 1980.\nNader founded the Center for Auto Safety, which for 40 years, published an annual guide on new car safety ratings, preventative maintenance and repair costs, fuel economy, insurance costs, warranty coverage, and complaints: \"The Car Book\".\n1970s\u20131990s.\nBy the early 1970s Nader had established himself as a household name. In a critical memo written by Lewis Powell to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Powell warned business representatives that Nader \"has become a legend in his own time and an idol of millions of Americans\".\nRalph Nader's name appeared in the press as a potential candidate for president for the first time in 1971, when he was offered the opportunity to run as the presidential candidate for the New Party, a progressive split-off from the Democratic Party. Chief among his advocates was author Gore Vidal, who touted a 1972 Nader presidential campaign in a front-page article in \"Esquire\" magazine in 1971.&lt;ref name=\"The Best Man/'72\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Nader declined the advances.\nIn 1973, Ralph Nader was plaintiff in the case against acting attorney general Robert Bork, who under orders of President Richard Nixon had fired special prosecutor Archibald Cox in the so-called Saturday Night Massacre, an action that was ultimately ruled illegal by federal judge Gerhard Gesell.\nIn 1974, Nader received the S. Roger Horchow Award for Greatest Public Service by a Private Citizen.\nIn the 1970s, Nader turned his attention to environmental activism, becoming a key leader in the antinuclear power movement, described by one observer as the \"titular head of opposition to nuclear energy\". The Critical Mass Energy Project was formed by Nader in 1974 as a national anti-nuclear umbrella group, growing to become the largest national anti-nuclear group in the United States, with several hundred local affiliates and an estimated 200,000 supporters. The organization's main efforts were directed at lobbying activities and providing local groups with scientific and other resources to campaign against nuclear power.\nThroughout the 1970s and 1980s, through his ongoing work with Public Citizen, Nader continued to be involved in issues of consumer rights and public accountability. His work testifying before Congress, drafting model legislation, and organizing citizen letter-writing and protest efforts, earned him direct credit for the enactment of the Freedom of Information Act, Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, Clean Water Act, Consumer Product Safety Act, and Whistleblower Protection Act.\nNader testified in the 1994 hearings for the nomination of Stephen Breyer to the Supreme Court, arguing against Breyer's confirmation. He criticized Breyer's record on antitrust law.\nIn the late 1990s, Nader accused Microsoft of being a monopoly and organized a conference featuring Microsoft's critics from the tech world.\nIn 1999, Nader was unsuccessfully approached by Nike to appear in an advertisement. The firm offered Nader $25,000 to say \"another shameless attempt by Nike to sell shoes\" while holding Air 120 sneakers. After Nader turned down the offer, the corporation hired filmmaker Spike Lee.\nPresidential campaigns.\n1972.\nRalph Nader's name appeared in the press as a potential candidate for president for the first time in 1971, when he was offered the opportunity to run as the presidential candidate for the New Party, a progressive split-off from the Democratic Party in 1972. Chief among his advocates was author Gore Vidal, who touted a 1972 Nader presidential campaign in a front-page article in \"Esquire\" magazine in 1971. Psychologist Alan Rockway organized a \"draft Ralph Nader for President\" campaign in Florida on the New Party's behalf. Nader declined their offer to run that year; the New Party ultimately joined with the People's Party in running Benjamin Spock in the 1972 presidential election. Spock had hoped Nader in particular would run, getting \"some of the loudest applause of the evening\" when mentioning him at the University of Alabama. Spock went on to try to recruit Nader for the party among over 100 others, and indicated he would be \"delighted\" to be replaced by any of them even after he accepted the nomination himself. Nader received one vote for the vice-presidential nomination at the 1972 Democratic National Convention.\n1980.\nIn the 1980 presidential election, the progressive-oriented Citizens Party approached Nader with the prospect of running as their presidential nominee. Nader declined their offer, stating \"I will never run for president\". The party ended up nominating biologist Barry Commoner instead.\n1992.\nNader stood in as a write-in for \"none of the above\" in both the 1992 New Hampshire Democratic and Republican primaries and received 3,054 of the 170,333 Democratic votes and 3,258 of the 177,970 Republican votes cast. He was also a candidate in the 1992 Massachusetts Democratic primary.\n1996.\nNader was drafted as a candidate for President of the United States on the Green Party ticket during the 1996 presidential election. He was not formally nominated by the Green Party USA, which was, at the time, the largest national Green group; instead he was nominated independently by various state Green parties (in some states, he appeared on the ballot as an independent). However, many activists in the Green Party USA worked actively to campaign for Nader that year. Nader qualified for ballot status in 22 states, garnering 685,297 votes or 0.71% of the popular vote (fourth place overall), although the effort did make significant organizational gains for the party. He refused to raise or spend more than $5,000 on his campaign, presumably to avoid meeting the threshold for Federal Election Commission reporting requirements. The unofficial Draft Nader committee could (and did) spend more than that, but the committee was legally prevented from coordinating in any way with Nader himself.\nNader received some criticism from gay rights supporters for calling gay rights \"gonadal politics\" and stating that he was not interested in dealing with such matters. In July 2004, however, he publicly stated that he supported same-sex marriage.\nHis 1996 running mates included: Anne Goeke (nine states), Deborah Howes (Oregon), Muriel Tillinghast (New York), Krista Paradise (Colorado), Madelyn Hoffman (New Jersey), Bill Boteler (Washington, D.C.), and Winona LaDuke (California and Texas).\n2000.\nIn the 2006 documentary \"An Unreasonable Man\", Nader described how he was unable to get the views of his public-interest groups heard in Washington, even by the Clinton Administration. Nader cited this as one of the primary reasons why he decided to actively run in the 2000 election as candidate of the Green Party, which had been formed in the wake of his 1996 campaign.\nIn June 2000, The Association of State Green Parties (ASGP) organized the national nominating convention that took place in Denver, Colorado, at which Green Party delegates nominated Ralph Nader and Winona LaDuke to be their party's candidates for president and vice president.\nOn July 9, the Vermont Progressive Party nominated Nader, giving him ballot access in the state. On August 12, the United Citizens Party of South Carolina chose Ralph Nader as its presidential nominee, giving him a ballot line in the state.\nIn October 2000, at the largest Super Rally of his campaign, held in New York City's Madison Square Garden, 15,000 people paid $20 each to hear Nader speak. Nader's campaign rejected both parties as institutions dominated by corporate interests, stating that Al Gore and George W. Bush were \"Tweedledee and Tweedledum\". A long list of notable celebrities spoke and performed at the event including Susan Sarandon, Ani DiFranco, Ben Harper, Tim Robbins, Michael Moore, Eddie Vedder and Patti Smith. The campaign also had some prominent union help: The California Nurses Association and the United Electrical Workers endorsed his candidacy and campaigned for him.\nNader and LaDuke received 2,883,105 votes, for 2.74 percent of the popular vote (third place overall), missing the 5 percent needed to qualify the Green Party for federally distributed public funding in the next election, yet qualifying the party for ballot status in many states.\nNader often openly expressed his hope for Bush's victory over Gore, saying it \"would mobilize us\", and that environmental and consumer regulatory agencies would fare better under Bush than Gore. When asked which of the two he would vote for if forced, Nader answered: \"Bush ... If you want the parties to diverge from one another, have Bush win.\" As to whether he would feel regret if he caused Gore's defeat, Nader replied: \"I would not\u2014not at all. I'd rather have a provocateur than an anesthetizer in the White House.\" On another occasion, Nader answered this question with: \"No, not at all ... There may be a cold shower for four years that would help the Democratic Party ... It doesn't matter who is in the White House.\"\nSpoiler controversy.\nIn the 2000 presidential election in Florida, George W. Bush defeated Al Gore by 537 votes. Nader received votes, which led to claims that he was responsible for Gore's defeat. Nader disputes that he helped Bush win. A 2003 study found that Nader's candidacy was a critical factor in Bush's victory. A 2004 study found that Nader voters had the profile of likely voters with a preference for Democratic candidates. They were therefore likely to vote for Gore over Bush in the absence of Nader's candidacy.\nA study by Harvard Professor B. C. Burden in 2005 showed Nader did \"play a pivotal role in determining who would become president following the 2000 election\", but that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Contrary to Democrats' complaints, Nader was not intentionally trying to throw the election. A spoiler strategy would have caused him to focus disproportionately on the most competitive states and markets with the hopes of being a key player in the outcome. There is no evidence that his appearances responded to closeness. He did, apparently, pursue voter support, however, in a quest to receive 5% of the popular vote.\nHowever, Jonathan Chait of \"The American Prospect\" and \"The New Republic\" notes that Nader did indeed focus on swing states disproportionately during the waning days of the campaign, and by doing so jeopardized his own chances of achieving the 5% of the vote he was aiming for.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen Nader, in a letter to environmentalists, attacked Gore for \"his role as broker of environmental voters for corporate cash\", and \"the prototype for the bankable, Green corporate politician\", and what he called a string of broken promises to the environmental movement, Sierra Club president Carl Pope sent an open letter to Nader, dated October 27, 2000, defending Al Gore's environmental record and calling Nader's strategy \"irresponsible\". He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You have also broken your word to your followers who signed the petitions that got you on the ballot in many states. You pledged you would not campaign as a spoiler and would avoid the swing states. Your recent campaign rhetoric and campaign schedule make it clear that you have broken this pledge ... Please accept that I, and the overwhelming majority of the environmental movement in this country, genuinely believe that your strategy is flawed, dangerous and reckless.\n2004.\nNader announced on December 23, 2003, that he would not seek the Green Party's nomination for president in 2004, but did not rule out running as an independent candidate.\nRalph Nader and Democratic candidate John Kerry held a widely publicized meeting early in the 2004 presidential campaign. Nader said that John Kerry wanted to work to win Nader's support and the support of Nader's voters, prompting Nader to provide Kerry more than 20 pages of issues that he felt were important. According to Nader, he asked John Kerry to choose any three of the issues and highlight them in his campaign; should Kerry meet these conditions Nader would not contest the election. On February 22, 2004, having not heard back from Kerry, Nader announced that he would run for president as an independent.\nDue to concerns about a possible spoiler effect, many Democrats urged Nader to abandon his 2004 candidacy. The chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Terry McAuliffe, stated that Nader had a \"distinguished career, fighting for working families\", and that McAuliffe \"would hate to see part of his legacy being that he got us eight years of George Bush\". Theresa Amato, Nader's national campaign manager in 2000 and 2004, later alleged that McAuliffe offered to pay off Nader if he would not campaign in certain states, an allegation confirmed by Nader and undisputed by McAuliffe.\nNader received 463,655 votes, for 0.38 percent of the popular vote, placing him in third place overall.\n2008.\nIn February 2007, Nader criticized Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton as \"a panderer and a flatterer\", later describing her as someone who had \"no political fortitude\". During a February 2008 appearance on \"Meet the Press\", Nader announced his intention to run for president as an independent, later naming Matt Gonzalez as his running-mate. Nader was endorsed by Howard Zinn, Jesse Ventura, Justin Jeffre, Tom Morello, Val Kilmer, Rocky Anderson, James Abourezk, Patti Smith, and Jello Biafra. The Nader campaign raised $4.3\u00a0million in campaign funds, primarily from small, individual donations. Nader/Gonzalez earned 738,475 votes and a third-place finish in the 2008 United States presidential election.\nCongressional Accountability Project.\nNader founded the Congressional Accountability Project to \"oppose corruption in the U. S. Congress\".\nLater activities.\nNader condemned the 2011 military intervention in Libya. He branded President Barack Obama as a \"war criminal\" and called for his impeachment.\nIn June 2019, Nader, who lost his 24-year-old grandniece in the Ethiopian Airlines crash, claimed that the Boeing 737 Max \"must never fly again... it's not a matter of software. It's a matter of structural design defect: the plane's engines are too much for the traditional fuselage\". Nader also called for Boeing top leaders to resign and said that the Federal Aviation Administration \"has been in the pockets of the Boeing company for years\".\nD.C. Library Renaissance Project.\nIn 2002, Nader founded the D.C. Library Renaissance Project, which has sought to halt the development of the West End Library in Washington, D.C., alleging that it \"violated affordable housing guidelines, undervalued the land, and didn't conform to the city's Comprehensive Plan\". The legal obstacles presented by the Library Renaissance Project have cost the D.C. government over one million dollars in legal fees. Nader has opposed the privatized development of D.C. libraries despite community support, citing a lack of oversight and competitive bidding process.\n\"Only the Super Rich Can Save Us\".\nIn 2009, Nader published his first work of fiction, \"Only the Super-Rich Can Save Us!\". Many of the characters were fictionalized versions of real-life persons including Ted Turner and Warren Buffett. The book's principal villain, a \"conservative evil genius\" named Brovar Dortwist, represents Grover Norquist. According to Norquist, Nader had called him prior to the book's publication and said he \"wouldn't be too unhappy, because the character was principled\".\nThe novel met with mixed reviews with \"The Wall Street Journal\" noting that the book \"reads less like a novel ... than a dream journal\" with a plot that victoriously concludes with \"American society thoroughly Naderized\", though \"The Globe and Mail\" called it \"a powerful idea by the perfect person at a fortuitous time\".\nNader also branched out into fiction with the fable collection \"Animal Envy\" in 2016.\n2012 debate moderator.\nDuring the 2012 United States presidential election, Nader moderated a debate for third-party candidates at Washington, D.C.'s Busboys and Poets. The debate was attended by Green Party presidential candidate Jill Stein, Libertarian Gary Johnson, Rocky Anderson of the Justice Party and Constitution Party candidate Virgil Goode. He later moderated a similar debate in a studio appearance broadcast by Russia Today.\nRalph Nader Radio Hour.\nSince March 2014, Nader has co-hosted the weekly Ralph Nader Radio Hour, produced at KPFK-FM in Los Angeles and distributed via the Pacifica Radio Network. The program features \"interviews with some of the nation's most influential movers and shakers\" and discussion of current events. Nader's co-hosts are Steve Skrovan and David Feldman.\nAmerican Museum of Tort Law.\nIn 2015, after a decade planning, Nader founded the American Museum of Tort Law in Winsted, Connecticut. The opening ceremonies were emceed by Phil Donahue. Nader personally donated $150,000 to the establishment of the museum, which was sited on two parcels of land rezoned by the town of Winsted to host it. At the time of its opening, some expressed skepticism that a museum dedicated to tort would have much interest to the general public, though Nader responded that he was \"astounded how a country can go over 200 years and not have a law museum\".\nCampaign for Harvard admissions reform.\nNader unsuccessfully sought a seat on the Harvard University Board of Overseers in 2016 as part of an insurgent candidate slate operating under the name \"Free Harvard, Fair Harvard\" which called for increased transparency by the university as to how it made athletic and legacy admissions decisions. In February of that year, while noting that he would not vote for him personally, he expressed support for Donald Trump making a third-party run for president, saying that such a move might help break-up the two party system.\nNewspapers.\nFollowing the closure of \"The Winsted Journal\" in 2017, Nader provided the first funds for \"The Winsted Phoenix\" in 2018 and then pulled backing. The newspaper folded in 2021. A year later, Nader announced he was financially backing the creation of another newspaper in his hometown called the \"Winsted Citizen\" and provided $15,000 for the first monthly issue printed February 2023.\nA month later it was reported Nader failed to provide funding as initially promised for the paper's second edition. He had agreed to cover 75% of the cost, with the newspaper covering the rest. However, the money had not been delivered by the time of the second edition's printing. Instead, at that time Nader offered to give a $8,000 loan, which the newspaper declined to accept.\nIn April 2022, Nader founded the print newspaper \"Capitol Hill Citizen\". According to \"Politico\", the publication's coverage centers on issues important to Nader, such as the growth of corporate influence on the federal government, corruption among lawmakers and the follies and failures of the mainstream political media.\nPersonal life.\nNader, whose family was Antiochian Greek Orthodox Christian, recalled that during his childhood his family had been \"embraced\" by a Methodist church where he attended Sunday school. In addition to English, Nader also speaks Spanish, Russian, Portuguese, Chinese, and conversational Arabic.\nNader defines his ideology not as left-wing or right-wing but as a \"moral empiricist\". He has lived in Washington D.C. since the 1960s, but is domiciled in Connecticut, where he is registered to vote. Nader has expressed admiration for Robert La Follette, Eugene Debs, and Edmund Burke.\nHis siblings are Laura (a professor of social and cultural anthropology at U.C. Berkeley), Claire, and late brother Shafeek. After his older brother Shafeek died of prostate cancer in 1986, Nader developed Bell's palsy, which paralyzed the left side of his mouth for several months. He commented on his partial facial paralysis to audiences during this time with the quip that \"at least my opponents can't say I'm talking out of both sides of my mouth\". Nader's grandniece Samya Stumo was among the 157 people killed in the crash of Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302 in March 2019.\nNader is a lifelong fan of the New York Yankees.\nPersonality and character traits.\nRupert Cornwell of \"The Independent\" described Nader as an \"ascetic ... bordering on self-righteous\". Despite access to respectable financial assets, he lives in a modest apartment and spends $25,000 annually on personal bills, conducting most of his writing on a typewriter. According to popular accounts of his personal life, he does not own a television, relies primarily on public transportation, and over a 25-year period, until 1983, exclusively wore one of a dozen pairs of shoes he had purchased at a clearance sale in 1959. His suits, which he reports he purchases at sales and outlet stores, have been the repeated subject of public scrutiny, being variously described as \"wrinkled\", \"rumpled\", and \"styleless\". A newspaper story once described Nader as a \"conscientious objector to fashion\".\nNader has never married. Karen Croft, a writer who worked for Nader in the late 1970s at the Center for Study of Responsive Law, once asked him if he had ever considered marriage, to which he responded that he had made a choice to dedicate his life to career rather than family.\nFinances.\nAccording to the mandatory fiscal disclosure report that he filed with the Federal Election Commission in 2000, Nader owned more than $3\u00a0million worth of stocks and mutual fund shares; his single largest holding was more than $1\u00a0million worth of stock in Cisco Systems, Inc. He also held between $100,000 and $250,000 worth of shares in the Magellan Fund.\nNader said he owned no car and owned no real estate directly in 2000, and said that he lived on $25,000 a year, giving most of his stock earnings to many of the over four dozen non-profit organizations he had founded.\nNader owns shares in Amazon and believes the corporation should be paying shareholders a dividend. He also believes that there should be an \"antitrust investigation\" looking into the company's business practices.\nNader is also an Apple Inc. shareholder. In 2018, he wrote an open letter to Tim Cook criticizing Apple's $100\u00a0billion share buyback.\nMedia appearances.\nFilm.\nIn the 2005 Jim Carrey film \"Fun with Dick and Jane\", Nader makes a cameo appearance as himself.\nThe Steve Skrovan documentary film \"An Unreasonable Man\" is about the life of Ralph Nader and uses both archival footage and original interviews. It debuted at the Sundance Film Festival in 2006.\nPeriodicals.\nNader was featured on the cover of the January 22, 1968, issue of \"Newsweek\"; the December 12, 1969, issue of \"Time\"; the June 1971 issue of \"Esquire\"; and the August 2016 issue of \"Pacific Standard\".\nTelevision.\nNader has been a guest on multiple episodes of \"Saturday Night Live\", \"Real Time with Bill Maher\", \"The Daily Show\", \"The O'Reilly Factor\", \"Meet the Press\", \"Democracy Now!\", and \"The Late Show with David Letterman\". In 2003 he appeared on \"Da Ali G Show\" and, in 2008, was interviewed by Triumph the Insult Comic Dog on \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\".\nIn 1988, Nader appeared on \"Sesame Street\" as \"a person in your neighborhood\", the episode also featuring Barbara Walters and Martina Navratilova. Nader's appearance on the show was memorable because it was the only time that the grammar of the last line of the song\u00a0\u2013 \"a person that you meet each day\"\u00a0\u2013 was questioned and changed. Nader refused to sing a line which he deemed grammatically improper, so a compromise was reached by which Nader sang the last line solo, with the modified words: \"a person \"whom\" you meet each day\"."}
{"id": "25674", "revid": "1312464618", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25674", "title": "Richard Bach", "text": "American spiritual writer (born 1936)\nRichard David Bach (born June 23, 1936) is an American writer. He has written numerous flight-related works of fiction and non-fiction. His works include \"Jonathan Livingston Seagull\" (1970) and \"Illusions: The Adventures of a Reluctant Messiah\" (1977), both of which were among the 1970s' biggest sellers.\nMost of Bach's books have been semi-autobiographical, using actual or fictionalized events from his life to illustrate his philosophy. His books espouse his philosophy that our apparent physical limits and mortality are merely appearance. Bach is noted for his love of aviation and his books related to flying in a metaphorical context. He has flown as a hobby since the age of 17. In late August 2012, Bach was severely injured when on approach to landing at Friday Harbor, Washington, his aircraft clipped some power lines and crashed upside down in a field.\nEarly life.\nBach was born in Oak Park, Illinois, to Roland R. and Ruth Shaw Bach. His father was an American Red Cross chapter manager. Bach graduated from California State University, Long Beach in 1955.\nBach's first airplane flight occurred at age 14, when his mother was campaigning for a seat on the council of Long Beach, California. Her campaign manager, Paul Marcus, mentioned that he flew airplanes and invited Richard on a flight in his Globe Swift.\nAviation career.\nBach served in the United States Navy Reserve, then in the New Jersey Air National Guard's 108th Fighter Wing, 141st Fighter Squadron (USAF), as a Republic F-84F Thunderstreak fighter pilot. He then worked at a variety of jobs, including as a technical writer for Douglas Aircraft and as a contributing editor for \"Flying\" magazine. He served in the USAF reserve and was deployed in France in 1960. He later became a barnstormer.\nDuring the summer of 1970, Bach and his friend Chris Cagle traveled to Ireland, where they participated in flying sequences for Roger Corman's film \"Von Richthofen and Brown\". They flew a variety of World War I aircraft of the Blue Max collection owned by ex-RCAF pilot Lynn Garrison. Bach and Garrison first met when Bach wrote articles for \"Avian\", Garrison's aviation publication.\nMost of Bach's books involve flight in some way, from the early stories which are purely about flying aircraft, to \"Stranger to the Ground\", his first book, to his later works, in which he used flight as a philosophical metaphor.\nLiterary career.\nIn 1963 Bach published his first book, \"Stranger to the Ground\", which describes a mission flight he undertook from Wethersfield, England, to Chaumont, France. It was favorably received by Martin Caidin in \"The New York Times Book Review\" and by Edmund Fuller in \"The Wall Street Journal\", and mixedly by Peter W. Brooks in \"The Journal of the Royal Aeronautical Society\". By 1972 it had sold 17,000 copies, making it the best-selling of Bach's first three books.\n\"Jonathan Livingston Seagull\", 1970s story about a seagull who flew for the love and passion of flying rather than merely to catch food, was released by Macmillan Publishers after the manuscript was turned down by several others. It had first been serialized in \"Private Pilot\" magazine, as well as in \"Soaring\", the magazine of the Soaring Society of America. The book, containing fewer than 10,000 words, and featuring photos of seagulls in flight by photographer Russell Munson, became a number-one bestseller, selling more than one million copies in 1972 alone. The surprising success of the book was widely reported in the media in the early 1970s.\nIn 1973, \"Jonathan Livingston Seagull\" was adapted into a film of the same name, produced by Paramount Pictures Corporation, with a soundtrack by Neil Diamond. Bach then filed a lawsuit against producer/director Hall Bartlett, alleging that Bartlett had destroyed Bach's screenplay for the film and that Bartlett had violated a clause in Bach's contract which stated that the film could not be released in theaters without Bach's approval. Associate producer Leslie Parrish was appointed to be a mediator between Bach and Bartlett, but the mediation failed. The lawsuit ended with the film being released in theaters with some changes made to the final cut, while Bach had his name removed from the film's screenwriting credits.\nIn 1975, Bach was the driving force behind \"Nothing by Chance\", a documentary film based on his book of the same name. The film centers on modern barnstorming around the United States in the 1970s. Bach recruited a group of his friends who were pilots to recreate the era of the barnstormer.\nThe second novel, \"Illusions: The Adventures of a Reluctant Messiah\", published in 1977, tells of an encounter with a modern-day messiah who has decided to quit.\nOn August 31, 2012, Bach was injured in an aircraft landing accident on San Juan Island in Washington. He was landing a 2008 Easton Gilbert G Searey (N346PE) that he had nicknamed \"Puff\" at a private airport when the landing gear clipped some power lines. He crashed upside down in a field about two miles from Friday Harbor, taking down two poles and sparking a small grass fire.\nThe day after the accident, Bach was reported to be in serious but stable condition with a head injury and broken shoulder. Bach was hospitalized for four months. He reported that his near-death experience inspired him to finish the fourth part of \"Jonathan Livingston Seagull\", which had been originally published in three parts.\nIn December 2012, \"Publishers Weekly\" reported that \"Travels with Puff\" had been sent to his publisher the day before his accident. \"Travels with Puff\" was released on March 19, 2013.\nIn 2014, Bach published his sequel to \"Illusions: The Adventures of a Reluctant Messiah\", which he called \"\". The book incorporates the story of Bach's real-life aircraft crash, with the author imagining he is being visited by the \"messiah\", Don Shimoda, who helps him through his difficult medical recovery.\nPersonal life.\nBach had six children with his first wife, Bette Jeanne Franks. Also a pilot, she is the author of \"Patterns: Tales of Flying and of Life\", a book about her life as a pilot and single mother. She typed and edited most of Richard's aviation writing. They divorced in 1970, and Bach spent years without seeing his children.\nHis and Bette's son Jonathan, named after the titular character in Bach's bestseller, \"Jonathan Livingston Seagull,\" is a software engineer and journalist. He wrote the 1993 book \"Above the Clouds,\" about growing up without knowing his father and then later meeting him as a college student. Richard gave his approval, although he noted that it included some personal history he would \"rather not see in print.\"\nTheir other children are Robert, Kristel, James Marcus Bach, Erika, and their youngest daughter, Bethany, who died in an accident at the age of 15 in 1985.\nIn 1981, Bach married the actress Leslie Parrish, whom he had met during the making of the film \"Jonathan Livingston Seagull\". She featured significantly in two of his subsequent books: \"The Bridge Across Forever\" and \"One\", which primarily focused on their relationship and Bach's concept of soulmates. They divorced in 1999.\nBach married his third wife, Sabryna Nelson-Alexopoulos, in April 1999. They divorced on April 1, 2011.\nBach has been married to his fourth wife, Melinda Kellogg, since November, 2020.\nThe book \"Curious Lives\" is in fact the above five \"Ferret Chronicles\" books collected in one volume, the only changes being changes to the titles of each of the five.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25675", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25675", "title": "RPG", "text": "RPG may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "25676", "revid": "34074157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25676", "title": "Radar", "text": "Object detection system using radio waves\nRadar is a system that uses radio waves to determine the distance (\"ranging\"), direction (azimuth and elevation angles), and radial velocity of objects relative to the site. It is a radiodetermination method used to detect and track aircraft, ships, spacecraft, guided missiles, motor vehicles, weather formations and terrain. The term \"RADAR\" was coined in 1940 by the United States Navy as an acronym for \"radio detection and ranging\". The term \"radar\" has since entered English and other languages as an anacronym, a common noun, losing all capitalization.\nA radar system consists of a transmitter producing electromagnetic waves in the radio or microwave domain, a transmitting antenna, a receiving antenna (often the same antenna is used for transmitting and receiving) and a receiver and processor to determine properties of the objects. Radio waves (pulsed or continuous) from the transmitter reflect off the objects and return to the receiver, giving information about the objects' locations and speeds. This device was developed secretly for military use by several countries in the period before and during World War II. A key development was the cavity magnetron in the United Kingdom, which allowed the creation of relatively small systems with sub-meter resolution.\nThe modern uses of radar are highly diverse, including air and terrestrial traffic control, radar astronomy, air-defense systems, anti-missile systems, marine radars to locate landmarks and other ships, aircraft anti-collision systems, ocean surveillance systems, outer space surveillance and rendezvous systems, meteorological precipitation monitoring, radar remote sensing, altimetry and flight control systems, guided missile target locating systems, self-driving cars, and ground-penetrating radar for geological observations. Modern high tech radar systems use digital signal processing and machine learning and are capable of extracting useful information from very high noise levels.\nOther systems which are similar to radar make use of other regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. One example is lidar, which uses predominantly infrared light from lasers rather than radio waves. With the emergence of driverless vehicles, radar is expected to assist the automated platform to monitor its environment, thus preventing unwanted incidents.\nHistory.\nFirst experiments.\nAs early as 1886, German physicist Heinrich Hertz showed that radio waves could be reflected from solid objects. In 1895, Alexander Popov, a physics instructor at the Imperial Russian Navy school in Kronstadt, developed an apparatus using a coherer tube for detecting distant lightning strikes. The next year, he added a spark-gap transmitter. In 1897, while testing this equipment for communicating between two ships in the Baltic Sea, he took note of an interference beat caused by the passage of a third vessel. In his report, Popov wrote that this phenomenon might be used for detecting objects, but he did nothing more with this observation.\nThe German inventor Christian H\u00fclsmeyer was the first to use radio waves to detect \"the presence of distant metallic objects\". In 1904, he demonstrated the feasibility of detecting a ship in dense fog, but not its distance from the transmitter. He obtained a patent for his detection device in April 1904 and later a patent for a related amendment for estimating the distance to the ship. He also obtained a British patent on 23 September 1904 for a full radar system, that he called a \"telemobiloscope\". It operated on a 50\u00a0cm wavelength and the pulsed radar signal was created via a spark-gap. His system already used the classic antenna setup of horn antenna with parabolic reflector and was presented to German military officials in practical tests in Cologne and Rotterdam harbour but was rejected.\nIn 1915, Robert Watson-Watt used radio technology to provide advance warning of thunderstorms to airmen and during the 1920s went on to lead the U.K. research establishment to make many advances using radio techniques, including the probing of the ionosphere and the detection of lightning at long distances. Through his lightning experiments, Watson-Watt became an expert on the use of radio direction finding before turning his inquiry to shortwave transmission. Requiring a suitable receiver for such studies, he told the \"new boy\" Arnold Frederic Wilkins to conduct an extensive review of available shortwave units. Wilkins would select a General Post Office model after noting its manual's description of a \"fading\" effect (the common term for interference at the time) when aircraft flew overhead.\nBy placing a transmitter and receiver on opposite sides of the Potomac River in 1922, U.S. Navy researchers A. Hoyt Taylor and Leo C. Young discovered that ships passing through the beam path caused the received signal to fade in and out. Taylor submitted a report, suggesting that this phenomenon might be used to detect the presence of ships in low visibility, but the Navy did not immediately continue the work. Eight years later, Lawrence A. Hyland at the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) observed similar fading effects from passing aircraft; this revelation led to a patent application as well as a proposal for further intensive research on radio-echo signals from moving targets to take place at NRL, where Taylor and Young were based at the time.\nSimilarly, in the UK, L. S. Alder took out a secret provisional patent for Naval radar in 1928. W.A.S. Butement and P. E. Pollard developed a breadboard test unit, operating at 50\u00a0cm (600\u00a0MHz) and using pulsed modulation which gave successful laboratory results. In January 1931, a writeup on the apparatus was entered in the \"Inventions Book\" maintained by the Royal Engineers. This is the first official record in Great Britain of the technology that was used in coastal defence and was incorporated into Chain Home as Chain Home (low).\nBefore World War II.\nBefore World War II, radar research was conducted in the United Kingdom, the United States, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Soviet Union, and the Netherlands.\nIn France in 1934, following systematic studies on the split-anode magnetron, the research branch of the Compagnie g\u00e9n\u00e9rale de la t\u00e9l\u00e9graphie sans fil (CSF) headed by Maurice Ponte with Henri Gutton, Sylvain Berline and M. Hugon, began developing an obstacle-locating radio apparatus, aspects of which were installed on the ocean liner \"Normandie\" in 1935.\nDuring the same period, Soviet military engineer P.K. Oshchepkov, in collaboration with the Leningrad Electrotechnical Institute, produced an experimental apparatus, RAPID, capable of detecting an aircraft within 3\u00a0km of a receiver. The Soviets produced their first mass production radars RUS-1 and RUS-2 Redut in 1939 but further development was slowed following the arrest of Oshchepkov and his subsequent gulag sentence. In total, only 607 Redut stations were produced during the war. The first Russian airborne radar, Gneiss-2, entered into service in June 1943 on Pe-2 dive bombers. More than 230 Gneiss-2 stations were produced by the end of 1944. The French and Soviet systems, however, featured continuous-wave operation that did not provide the full performance ultimately synonymous with modern radar systems.\nFull radar evolved as a pulsed system, and the first such elementary apparatus was demonstrated in December 1934 by the American Robert M. Page, working at the Naval Research Laboratory. The following year, the United States Army successfully tested a primitive surface-to-surface radar to aim coastal battery searchlights at night. This design was followed by a pulsed system demonstrated in May 1935 by Rudolf K\u00fchnhold and the firm GEMA in Germany and then another in June 1935 by an Air Ministry team led by Robert Watson-Watt in Great Britain.\nIn 1935, Watson-Watt was asked to judge recent reports of a German radio-based death ray and turned the request over to Wilkins. Wilkins returned a set of calculations demonstrating the system was basically impossible. When Watson-Watt then asked what such a system might do, Wilkins recalled the earlier report about aircraft causing radio interference. This revelation led to the Daventry Experiment of 26 February 1935, using a powerful BBC shortwave transmitter as the source and their GPO receiver setup in a field while a bomber flew around the site. When the plane was clearly detected, Hugh Dowding, the Air Member for Supply and Research, was very impressed with their system's potential and funds were immediately provided for further operational development. Watson-Watt's team patented the device in patent GB593017.\nDevelopment of radar greatly expanded in 1936, when Watson-Watt became superintendent of a new establishment under the British Air Ministry, Bawdsey Research Station located in Bawdsey Manor, near Felixstowe, Suffolk. Work there resulted in the design and installation of aircraft detection and tracking stations called \"Chain Home\" along the East and South coasts of England in time for the outbreak of World War II in 1939. This system provided the vital advance information that helped the Royal Air Force win the Battle of Britain; without it, significant numbers of fighter aircraft, which Great Britain did not have available, would always have needed to be in the air to respond quickly. The radar formed part of the \"Dowding system\" for collecting reports of enemy aircraft and coordinating the response.\nGiven all required funding and development support, the team produced working radar systems in 1935 and began deployment. By 1936, the first five Chain Home (CH) systems were operational and by 1940 stretched across the entire UK including Northern Ireland. Even by standards of the era, CH was crude; instead of broadcasting and receiving from an aimed antenna, CH broadcast a signal floodlighting the entire area in front of it, and then used one of Watson-Watt's own radio direction finders to determine the direction of the returned echoes. This fact meant CH transmitters had to be much more powerful and have better antennas than competing systems but allowed its rapid introduction using existing technologies.\nDuring World War II.\nA key development was the cavity magnetron in the UK, which allowed the creation of relatively small systems with sub-meter resolution. Britain shared the technology with the U.S. during the 1940 Tizard Mission.\nIn April 1940, \"Popular Science\" showed an example of a radar unit using the Watson-Watt patent in an article on air defence. Also, in late 1941 \"Popular Mechanics\" had an article in which a U.S. scientist speculated about the British early warning system on the English east coast and came close to what it was and how it worked. Watson-Watt was sent to the U.S. in 1941 to advise on air defense after Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor. Alfred Lee Loomis organized the secret MIT Radiation Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts which developed microwave radar technology in the years 1941\u201345. Later, in 1943, Page greatly improved radar with the monopulse technique that was used for many years in most radar applications.\nThe war precipitated research to find better resolution, more portability, and more features for radar, including small, lightweight sets to equip night fighters (aircraft interception radar) and maritime patrol aircraft (air-to-surface-vessel radar), and complementary navigation systems like Oboe used by the RAF's Pathfinder.\nApplications.\nThe information provided by radar includes the bearing and range (and therefore position) of the object from the radar scanner. It is thus used in many different fields where the need for such positioning is crucial. The first use of radar was for military purposes: to locate air, ground and sea targets. This evolved in the civilian field into applications for aircraft, ships, and automobiles.\nIn aviation, aircraft can be equipped with radar devices that warn of aircraft or other obstacles in or approaching their path, display weather information, and give accurate altitude readings. The first commercial device fitted to aircraft was a 1938 Bell Lab unit on some United Air Lines aircraft. Aircraft can land in fog at airports equipped with radar-assisted ground-controlled approach systems in which the plane's position is observed on precision approach radar screens by operators who thereby give radio landing instructions to the pilot, maintaining the aircraft on a defined approach path to the runway. Military fighter aircraft are usually fitted with air-to-air targeting radars, to detect and target enemy aircraft. In addition, larger specialized military aircraft carry powerful airborne radars to observe air traffic over a wide region and direct fighter aircraft towards targets.\nMarine radars are used to measure the bearing and distance of ships to prevent collision with other ships, to navigate, and to fix their position at sea when within range of shore or other fixed references such as islands, buoys, and lightships. In port or in harbour, vessel traffic service radar systems are used to monitor and regulate ship movements in busy waters.\nMeteorologists use radar to monitor precipitation and wind. It has become the primary tool for short-term weather forecasting and watching for severe weather such as thunderstorms, tornadoes, winter storms, precipitation types, etc. Geologists use specialized ground-penetrating radars to map the composition of Earth's crust. Police forces use radar guns to monitor vehicle speeds on the roads. Automotive radars are used for adaptive cruise control and emergency braking on vehicles by ignoring stationary roadside objects that could cause incorrect brake application and instead measuring moving objects to prevent collision with other vehicles. As part of Intelligent Transport Systems, fixed-position stopped vehicle detection (SVD) radars are mounted on the roadside to detect stranded vehicles, obstructions and debris by inverting the automotive radar approach and ignoring moving objects. Smaller radar systems are used to detect human movement. Examples are breathing pattern detection for sleep monitoring and hand and finger gesture detection for computer interaction. Automatic door opening, light activation and intruder sensing are also common.\nPrinciples.\nRadar signal.\nA radar system has a transmitter that emits radio waves known as \"radar signals\" in predetermined directions. When these signals contact an object they are usually reflected or scattered in many directions, although some of them will be absorbed and penetrate into the target. Radar signals are reflected especially well by materials of considerable electrical conductivity\u2014such as most metals, seawater, and wet ground. This makes the use of radar altimeters possible in certain cases. The radar signals that are reflected back towards the radar receiver are the desirable ones that make radar detection work. If the object is \"moving\" either toward or away from the transmitter, there will be a slight change in the frequency of the radio waves due to the Doppler effect.\nRadar receivers are usually, but not always, in the same location as the transmitter. The reflected radar signals captured by the receiving antenna are usually very weak. They can be strengthened by electronic amplifiers. More sophisticated methods of signal processing are also used in order to recover useful radar signals.\nThe weak absorption of radio waves by the medium through which they pass is what enables radar sets to detect objects at relatively long ranges\u2014ranges at which other electromagnetic wavelengths, such as visible light, infrared light, and ultraviolet light, are too strongly attenuated. Weather phenomena, such as fog, clouds, rain, falling snow, and sleet, that block visible light are usually transparent to radio waves. Certain radio frequencies that are absorbed or scattered by water vapour, raindrops, or atmospheric gases (especially oxygen) are avoided when designing radars, except when their detection is intended.\nIllumination.\nRadar relies on its own transmissions rather than light from the Sun or the Moon, or from electromagnetic waves emitted by the target objects themselves, such as infrared radiation (heat). This process of directing artificial radio waves towards objects is called \"illumination\", although radio waves are invisible to the human eye as well as optical cameras.\nReflection.\nIf electromagnetic waves travelling through one material meet another material, having a different dielectric constant or diamagnetic constant from the first,\nthe waves will reflect or scatter from the boundary between the materials. This means that a solid object in air or in a vacuum, or a significant change in atomic density between the object and what is surrounding it, will usually scatter radar (radio) waves from its surface. This is particularly true for electrically conductive materials such as metal and carbon fibre, making radar well-suited to the detection of aircraft and ships. Radar absorbing material, containing resistive and sometimes magnetic substances, is used on military vehicles to reduce radar reflection. This is the radio equivalent of painting something a dark colour so that it cannot be seen by the eye at night.\nRadar waves scatter in a variety of ways depending on the size (wavelength) of the radio wave and the shape of the target. If the wavelength is much shorter than the target's size, the wave will bounce off in a way similar to the way light is reflected by a mirror. If the wavelength is much longer than the size of the target, the target may not be visible because of poor reflection. Low-frequency radar technology is dependent on resonances for detection, but not identification, of targets. This is described by Rayleigh scattering, an effect that creates Earth's blue sky and red sunsets. When the two length scales are comparable, there may be resonances. Early radars used very long wavelengths that were larger than the targets and thus received a vague signal, whereas many modern systems use shorter wavelengths (a few centimetres or less) that can image objects as small as a loaf of bread.\nShort radio waves reflect from curves and corners in a way similar to glint from a rounded piece of glass. The most reflective targets for short wavelengths have 90\u00b0 angles between the reflective surfaces. A corner reflector consists of three flat surfaces meeting like the inside corner of a cube. The structure will reflect waves entering its opening directly back to the source. They are commonly used as radar reflectors to make otherwise difficult-to-detect objects easier to detect. Corner reflectors on boats, for example, make them more detectable to avoid collision or during a rescue. For similar reasons, objects intended to avoid detection will not have inside corners or surfaces and edges perpendicular to likely detection directions, which leads to \"odd\" looking stealth aircraft. These precautions do not totally eliminate reflection because of diffraction, especially at longer wavelengths. Half wavelength long wires or strips of conducting material, such as chaff, are very reflective but do not direct the scattered energy back toward the source. The extent to which an object reflects or scatters radio waves is called its radar cross-section.\nRadar range equation.\nThe power \"Pr\" returning to the receiving antenna is given by the equation:\nformula_1\nwhere\n*formula_3 = transmitted wavelength\n*\"G\"r = gain of receiving antenna\nIn the common case where the transmitter and the receiver are at the same location, \"R\"t = \"R\"r and the term \"R\"t\u00b2 \"R\"r\u00b2 can be replaced by \"R\"4, where \"R\" is the range.\nThis yields:\nformula_4\nAs an example, a Doppler weather radar with a pulse rate of 2\u00a0kHz and transmit frequency of 1\u00a0GHz can reliably measure weather speed up to at most , thus cannot reliably determine radial velocity of aircraft moving .\nPolarization.\nIn all electromagnetic radiation, the electric field is perpendicular to the direction of propagation, and the electric field direction is the polarization of the wave. For a transmitted radar signal, the polarization can be controlled to yield different effects. Radars use horizontal, vertical, linear, and circular polarization to detect different types of reflections. For example, circular polarization is used to minimize the interference caused by rain. Linear polarization returns usually indicate metal surfaces. Random polarization returns usually indicate a fractal surface, such as rocks or soil, and are used by navigation radars.\nLimiting factors.\nBeam path and range.\nA radar beam follows a linear path in vacuum but follows a somewhat curved path in atmosphere due to variation in the refractive index of air, which is called the radar horizon. Even when the beam is emitted parallel to the ground, the beam rises above the ground as the curvature of the Earth sinks below the horizon. Furthermore, the signal is attenuated by the medium the beam crosses, and the beam disperses.\nThe maximum range of conventional radar can be limited by a number of factors:\nNoise.\nSignal noise is an internal source of random variations in the signal, which is generated by all electronic components.\nReflected signals decline rapidly as distance increases, so noise introduces a radar range limitation. The noise floor and signal-to-noise ratio are two different measures of performance that affect range performance. Reflectors that are too far away produce too little signal to exceed the noise floor and cannot be detected. Detection requires a signal that exceeds the noise floor by at least the signal-to-noise ratio.\nNoise typically appears as random variations superimposed on the desired echo signal received in the radar receiver. The lower the power of the desired signal, the more difficult it is to discern it from the noise. The noise figure is a measure of the noise produced by a receiver compared to an ideal receiver, and this needs to be minimized.\nShot noise is produced by electrons in transit across a discontinuity, which occurs in all detectors. Shot noise is the dominant source in most receivers. There will also be flicker noise caused by electron transit through amplification devices, which is reduced using heterodyne amplification. Another reason for heterodyne processing is that for fixed fractional bandwidth, the instantaneous bandwidth increases linearly in frequency. This allows improved range resolution. The one notable exception to heterodyne (downconversion) radar systems is ultra-wideband radar. Here a single cycle, or transient wave, is used similar to UWB communications, see List of UWB channels.\nNoise is also generated by external sources, most importantly the natural thermal radiation of the background surrounding the target of interest. In modern radar systems, the internal noise is typically about equal to or lower than the external noise. An exception is if the radar is aimed upwards at clear sky, where the scene is so \"cold\" that it generates very little thermal noise. The thermal noise is given by \"k\"B \"T\" \"B\", where \"T\" is temperature, \"B\" is bandwidth (post matched filter) and \"k\"B is the Boltzmann constant. There is an appealing intuitive interpretation of this relationship in a radar. Matched filtering allows the entire energy received from a target to be compressed into a single bin (be it a range, Doppler, elevation, or azimuth bin). On the surface it appears that then within a fixed interval of time, perfect, error free, detection could be obtained. This is done by compressing all energy into an infinitesimal time slice. What limits this approach in the real world is that, while time is arbitrarily divisible, current is not. The quantum of electrical energy is an electron, and so the best that can be done is to match filter all energy into a single electron. Since the electron is moving at a certain temperature (Planck spectrum) this noise source cannot be further eroded. Ultimately, radar, like all macro-scale entities, is profoundly impacted by quantum theory.\nNoise is random and target signals are not. Signal processing can take advantage of this phenomenon to reduce the noise floor using two strategies. The kind of signal integration used with moving target indication can improve noise up to formula_5 for each stage. The signal can also be split among multiple filters for pulse-Doppler signal processing, which reduces the noise floor by the number of filters. These improvements depend upon coherence.\nInterference.\nRadar systems must overcome unwanted signals in order to focus on the targets of interest. These unwanted signals may originate from internal and external sources, both passive and active. The ability of the radar system to overcome these unwanted signals defines its signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). SNR is defined as the ratio of the signal power to the noise power within the desired signal; it compares the level of a desired target signal to the level of background noise (atmospheric noise and noise generated within the receiver). The higher a system's SNR the better it is at discriminating actual targets from noise signals.\nClutter.\nClutter refers to radio frequency (RF) echoes returned from targets which are uninteresting to radar operators. Such targets include man-made objects such as buildings and \u2014 intentionally \u2014 by radar countermeasures such as chaff. Such targets also include natural objects such as ground, sea, and \u2014 when not being tasked for meteorological purposes \u2014 precipitation, hail spike, dust storms, animals (especially birds), turbulence in the atmospheric circulation, and meteor trails. Radar clutter can also be caused by other atmospheric phenomena, such as disturbances in the ionosphere caused by geomagnetic storms or other space weather events. This phenomenon is especially apparent near the geomagnetic poles, where the action of the solar wind on the earth's magnetosphere produces convection patterns in the ionospheric plasma. Radar clutter can degrade the ability of over-the-horizon radar to detect targets.\nSome clutter may also be caused by a long radar waveguide between the radar transceiver and the antenna. In a typical plan position indicator (PPI) radar with a rotating antenna, this will usually be seen as a \"sun\" or \"sunburst\" in the center of the display as the receiver responds to echoes from dust particles and misguided RF in the waveguide. Adjusting the timing between when the transmitter sends a pulse and when the receiver stage is enabled will generally reduce the sunburst without affecting the accuracy of the range since most sunburst is caused by a diffused transmit pulse reflected before it leaves the antenna. Clutter is considered a passive interference source since it only appears in response to radar signals sent by the radar.\nClutter is detected and neutralized in several ways. Clutter tends to appear static between radar scans; on subsequent scan echoes, desirable targets will appear to move, and all stationary echoes can be eliminated. Sea clutter can be reduced by using horizontal polarization, while rain is reduced with circular polarization (meteorological radars wish for the opposite effect, and therefore use linear polarization to detect precipitation). Other methods attempt to increase the signal-to-clutter ratio.\nClutter moves with the wind or is stationary. Two common strategies to improve measures of performance in a clutter environment are:\n*Moving target indication, which integrates successive pulses\n*Doppler processing, which uses filters to separate clutter from desirable signals\nThe most effective clutter reduction technique is pulse-Doppler radar. Doppler separates clutter from aircraft and spacecraft using a frequency spectrum, so individual signals can be separated from multiple reflectors located in the same volume using velocity differences. This requires a coherent transmitter. Another technique uses a moving target indicator that subtracts the received signal from two successive pulses using phase to reduce signals from slow-moving objects. This can be adapted for systems that lack a coherent transmitter, such as time-domain pulse-amplitude radar.\nConstant false alarm rate, a form of automatic gain control (AGC), is a method that relies on clutter returns far outnumbering echoes from targets of interest. The receiver's gain is automatically adjusted to maintain a constant level of overall visible clutter. While this does not help detect targets masked by stronger surrounding clutter, it does help to distinguish strong target sources. In the past, radar AGC was electronically controlled and affected the gain of the entire radar receiver. As radars evolved, AGC became computer-software-controlled and affected the gain with greater granularity in specific detection cells.\nClutter may also originate from multipath echoes from valid targets caused by ground reflection, atmospheric ducting or ionospheric reflection/refraction (e.g., anomalous propagation). This clutter type is especially bothersome since it appears to move and behave like other normal (point) targets of interest. In a typical scenario, an aircraft echo is reflected from the ground below, appearing to the receiver as an identical target below the correct one. The radar may try to unify the targets, reporting the target at an incorrect height, or eliminating it on the basis of jitter or a physical impossibility. Terrain bounce jamming exploits this response by amplifying the radar signal and directing it downward. These problems can be overcome by incorporating a ground map of the radar's surroundings and eliminating all echoes which appear to originate below ground or above a certain height. Monopulse can be improved by altering the elevation algorithm used at low elevation. In newer air traffic control radar equipment, algorithms are used to identify the false targets by comparing the current pulse returns to those adjacent, as well as calculating return improbabilities.\nJamming.\nRadar jamming refers to radio frequency signals originating from sources outside the radar, transmitting in the radar's frequency and thereby masking targets of interest. Jamming may be intentional, as with an electronic warfare tactic, or unintentional, as with friendly forces operating equipment that transmits using the same frequency range. Jamming is considered an active interference source, since it is initiated by elements outside the radar and in general unrelated to the radar signals.\nJamming is problematic to radar since the jamming signal only needs to travel one way (from the jammer to the radar receiver) whereas the radar echoes travel two ways (radar-target-radar) and are therefore significantly reduced in power by the time they return to the radar receiver in accordance with inverse-square law. Jammers therefore can be much less powerful than their jammed radars and still effectively mask targets along the line of sight from the jammer to the radar (\"mainlobe jamming\"). Jammers have an added effect of affecting radars along other lines of sight through the radar receiver's sidelobes (\"sidelobe jamming\").\nMainlobe jamming can generally only be reduced by narrowing the mainlobe solid angle and cannot fully be eliminated when directly facing a jammer which uses the same frequency and polarization as the radar. Sidelobe jamming can be overcome by reducing receiving sidelobes in the radar antenna design and by using an omnidirectional antenna to detect and disregard non-mainlobe signals. Other anti-jamming techniques are frequency hopping and polarization.\nSignal processing.\nDistance measurement.\nTransit time.\nOne way to obtain a distance measurement (ranging) is based on the time-of-flight: transmit a short pulse of radio signal (electromagnetic radiation) and measure the time it takes for the reflection to return. The distance is one-half the round trip time multiplied by the speed of the signal. The factor of one-half comes from the fact that the signal has to travel to the object and back again. Since radio waves travel at the speed of light, accurate distance measurement requires high-speed electronics.\nIn most cases, the receiver does not detect the return while the signal is being transmitted. Through the use of a duplexer, the radar switches between transmitting and receiving at a predetermined rate.\nA similar effect imposes a maximum range as well. In order to maximize range, longer times between pulses should be used, referred to as a pulse repetition time, or its reciprocal, pulse repetition frequency.\nThese two effects tend to be at odds with each other, and it is not easy to combine both good short range and good long range in a single radar. This is because the short pulses needed for a good minimum range broadcast have less total energy, making the returns much smaller and the target harder to detect. This could be offset by using more pulses, but this would shorten the maximum range. So each radar uses a particular type of signal. Long-range radars tend to use long pulses with long delays between them, and short range radars use smaller pulses with less time between them. As electronics have improved many radars now can change their pulse repetition frequency, thereby changing their range. The newest radars fire two pulses during one cell, one for short range (about ) and a separate signal for longer ranges (about ).\nDistance may also be measured as a function of time. The radar mile is the time it takes for a radar pulse to travel one nautical mile, reflect off a target, and return to the radar antenna. Since a nautical mile is defined as 1,852\u00a0m, then dividing this distance by the speed of light (299,792,458\u00a0m/s), and then multiplying the result by 2 yields a result of 12.36\u00a0\u03bcs in duration.\nFrequency modulation.\nAnother form of distance measuring radar is based on frequency modulation. In these systems, the frequency of the transmitted signal is changed over time. Since the signal takes a finite time to travel to and from the target, the received signal is a different frequency than what the transmitter is broadcasting at the time the reflected signal arrives back at the radar. By comparing the frequency of the two signals the difference can be easily measured. This is easily accomplished with very high accuracy even in 1940s electronics. A further advantage is that the radar can operate effectively at relatively low frequencies. This was important in the early development of this type when high-frequency signal generation was difficult or expensive.\nThis technique can be used in continuous wave radar and is often found in aircraft radar altimeters. In these systems a \"carrier\" radar signal is frequency modulated in a predictable way, typically varying up and down with a sine wave or sawtooth pattern at audio frequencies. The signal is then sent out from one antenna and received on another, typically located on the bottom of the aircraft, and the signal can be continuously compared using a simple \"beat frequency\" modulator that produces an audio frequency tone from the returned signal and a portion of the transmitted signal.\nThe modulation index riding on the receive signal is proportional to the time delay between the radar and the reflector. The frequency shift becomes greater with greater time delay. The frequency shift is directly proportional to the distance travelled. That distance can be displayed on an instrument, and it may also be available via the transponder. This signal processing is similar to that used in speed detecting Doppler radar. Example systems using this approach are AZUSA, MISTRAM, and UDOP.\nTerrestrial radar uses low-power FM signals that cover a larger frequency range. The multiple reflections are analyzed mathematically for pattern changes with multiple passes creating a computerized synthetic image. Doppler effects are used which allows slow moving objects to be detected as well as largely eliminating \"noise\" from the surfaces of bodies of water.\nPulse compression.\nThe two techniques outlined above both have their disadvantages. The pulse timing technique has an inherent tradeoff in that the accuracy of the distance measurement is inversely related to the length of the pulse, while the energy, and thus direction range, is directly related. Increasing power for longer range while maintaining accuracy demands extremely high peak power, with 1960s early warning radars often operating in the tens of megawatts. The continuous wave methods spread this energy out in time and thus require much lower peak power compared to pulse techniques, but requires some method of allowing the sent and received signals to operate at the same time, often demanding two separate antennas.\nThe introduction of new electronics in the 1960s allowed the two techniques to be combined. It starts with a longer pulse that is also frequency modulated. Spreading the broadcast energy out in time means lower peak energies can be used, with modern examples typically on the order of tens of kilowatts. On reception, the signal is sent into a system that delays different frequencies by different times. The resulting output is a much shorter pulse that is suitable for accurate distance measurement, while also compressing the received energy into a much higher energy peak and thus improving the signal-to-noise ratio. The technique is largely universal on modern large radars.\nSpeed measurement.\nSpeed is the change in distance to an object with respect to time. Thus the existing system for measuring distance, combined with a memory capacity to see where the target last was, is enough to measure speed. At one time the memory consisted of a user making grease pencil marks on the radar screen and then calculating the speed using a slide rule. Modern radar systems perform the equivalent operation faster and more accurately using computers.\nIf the transmitter's output is coherent (phase synchronized), there is another effect that can be used to make almost instant speed measurements (no memory is required), known as the Doppler effect. Most modern radar systems use this principle into Doppler radar and pulse-Doppler radar systems (weather radar, military radar). The Doppler effect is only able to determine the relative speed of the target along the line of sight from the radar to the target. Any component of target velocity perpendicular to the line of sight cannot be determined by using the Doppler effect alone, but it can be determined by tracking the target's azimuth over time.\nIt is possible to make a Doppler radar without any pulsing, known as a continuous-wave radar (CW radar), by sending out a very pure signal of a known frequency. CW radar is ideal for determining the radial component of a target's velocity. CW radar is typically used by traffic enforcement to measure vehicle speed quickly and accurately where the range is not important.\nWhen using a pulsed radar, the variation between the phase of successive returns gives the distance the target has moved between pulses, and thus its speed can be calculated.\nOther mathematical developments in radar signal processing include time-frequency analysis (Weyl Heisenberg or wavelet), as well as the chirplet transform which makes use of the change of frequency of returns from moving targets (\"chirp\").\nPulse-Doppler signal processing.\nPulse-Doppler signal processing includes frequency filtering in the detection process. The space between each transmit pulse is divided into range cells or range gates. Each cell is filtered independently much like the process used by a spectrum analyzer to produce the display showing different frequencies. Each different distance produces a different spectrum. These spectra are used to perform the detection process. This is required to achieve acceptable performance in hostile environments involving weather, terrain, and electronic countermeasures.\nThe primary purpose is to measure both the amplitude and frequency of the aggregate reflected signal from multiple distances. This is used with weather radar to measure radial wind velocity and precipitation rate in each different volume of air. This is linked with computing systems to produce a real-time electronic weather map. Aircraft safety depends upon continuous access to accurate weather radar information that is used to prevent injuries and accidents. Weather radar uses a low PRF. Coherency requirements are not as strict as those for military systems because individual signals ordinarily do not need to be separated. Less sophisticated filtering is required, and range ambiguity processing is not normally needed with weather radar in comparison with military radar intended to track air vehicles.\nThe alternate purpose is \"look-down/shoot-down\" capability required to improve military air combat survivability. Pulse-Doppler is also used for ground based surveillance radar required to defend personnel and vehicles. Pulse-doppler signal processing increases the maximum detection distance using less radiation close to aircraft pilots, shipboard personnel, infantry, and artillery. Reflections from terrain, water, and weather produce signals much larger than aircraft and missiles, which allows fast moving vehicles to hide using nap-of-the-earth flying techniques and stealth technology to avoid detection until an attack vehicle is too close to destroy. Pulse-Doppler signal processing incorporates more sophisticated electronic filtering that safely eliminates this kind of weakness. This requires the use of medium pulse-repetition frequency with phase coherent hardware that has a large dynamic range. Military applications require medium PRF which prevents range from being determined directly, and range ambiguity resolution processing is required to identify the true range of all reflected signals. Radial movement is usually linked with Doppler frequency to produce a lock signal that cannot be produced by radar jamming signals. Pulse-Doppler signal processing also produces audible signals that can be used for threat identification.\nReduction of interference effects.\nSignal processing is employed in radar systems to reduce the radar interference effects. Signal processing techniques include moving target indication, Pulse-Doppler signal processing, moving target detection processors, correlation with secondary surveillance radar targets, space-time adaptive processing, and track-before-detect. Constant false alarm rate and digital terrain model processing are also used in clutter environments.\nPlot and track extraction.\nA track algorithm is a radar performance enhancement strategy. Tracking algorithms provide the ability to predict the future position of multiple moving objects based on the history of the individual positions being reported by sensor systems.\nHistorical information is accumulated and used to predict future position for use with air traffic control, threat estimation, combat system doctrine, gun aiming, and missile guidance. Position data is accumulated by radar sensors over the span of a few minutes.\nThere are four common track algorithms:\nRadar video returns from aircraft can be subjected to a plot extraction process whereby spurious and interfering signals are discarded. A sequence of target returns can be monitored through a device known as a plot extractor.\nThe non-relevant real time returns can be removed from the displayed information and a single plot displayed. In some radar systems, or alternatively in the command and control system to which the radar is connected, a radar tracker is used to associate the sequence of plots belonging to individual targets and estimate the targets' headings and speeds.\nEngineering.\nA radar's components are:\nAntenna design.\nRadio signals broadcast from a single antenna will spread out in all directions, and likewise a single antenna will receive signals equally from all directions. This leaves the radar with the problem of deciding where the target object is located.\nEarly systems tended to use omnidirectional broadcast antennas, with directional receiver antennas which were pointed in various directions. For instance, the first system to be deployed, Chain Home, used two straight antennas at right angles for reception, each on a different display. The maximum return would be detected with an antenna at right angles to the target, and a minimum with the antenna pointed directly at it (end on). The operator could determine the direction to a target by rotating the antenna so one display showed a maximum while the other showed a minimum.\nOne serious limitation with this type of solution is that the broadcast is sent out in all directions, so the amount of energy in the direction being examined is a small part of that transmitted. To get a reasonable amount of power on the \"target\", the transmitting aerial should also be directional.\nParabolic reflector.\nMore modern systems use a steerable parabolic \"dish\" to create a tight broadcast beam, typically using the same dish as the receiver. Such systems often combine two radar frequencies in the same antenna in order to allow automatic steering, or \"radar lock\".\nParabolic reflectors can be either symmetric parabolas or spoiled parabolas:\nSymmetric parabolic antennas produce a narrow \"pencil\" beam in both the X and Y dimensions and consequently have a higher gain. The NEXRAD Pulse-Doppler weather radar uses a symmetric antenna to perform detailed volumetric scans of the atmosphere. Spoiled parabolic antennas produce a narrow beam in one dimension and a relatively wide beam in the other. This feature is useful if target detection over a wide range of angles is more important than target location in three dimensions. Most 2D surveillance radars use a spoiled parabolic antenna with a narrow azimuthal beamwidth and wide vertical beamwidth. This beam configuration allows the radar operator to detect an aircraft at a specific azimuth but at an indeterminate height. Conversely, so-called \"nodder\" height finding radars use a dish with a narrow vertical beamwidth and wide azimuthal beamwidth to detect an aircraft at a specific height but with low azimuthal precision.\nSlotted waveguide.\nApplied similarly to the parabolic reflector, the slotted waveguide is moved mechanically to scan and is particularly suitable for non-tracking surface scan systems, where the vertical pattern may remain constant. Owing to its lower cost and less wind exposure, shipboard, airport surface, and harbour surveillance radars now use this approach in preference to a parabolic antenna.\nPhased array.\nAnother method of steering is used in a phased array radar.\nPhased array antennas are composed of evenly spaced similar antenna elements, such as aerials or rows of slotted waveguide. Each antenna element or group of antenna elements incorporates a discrete phase shift that produces a phase gradient across the array. For example, array elements producing a 5 degree phase shift for each wavelength across the array face will produce a beam pointed 5 degrees away from the centerline perpendicular to the array face. Signals travelling along that beam will be reinforced. Signals offset from that beam will be cancelled. The amount of reinforcement is antenna gain. The amount of cancellation is side-lobe suppression.\nPhased array radars have been in use since the earliest years of radar in World War II (Mammut radar), but electronic device limitations led to poor performance. Phased array radars were originally used for missile defence (see for example Safeguard Program). They are the heart of the ship-borne Aegis Combat System and the Patriot Missile System. The massive redundancy associated with having a large number of array elements increases reliability at the expense of gradual performance degradation that occurs as individual phase elements fail. To a lesser extent, phased array radars have been used in weather surveillance. As of 2017, NOAA plans to implement a national network of multi-function phased array radars throughout the United States within 10 years, for meteorological studies and flight monitoring.\nPhased array antennas can be built to conform to specific shapes, like missiles, infantry support vehicles, ships, and aircraft.\nAs the price of electronics has fallen, phased array radars have become more common. Almost all modern military radar systems are based on phased arrays, where the small additional cost is offset by the improved reliability of a system with no moving parts. Traditional moving-antenna designs are still widely used in roles where cost is a significant factor such as air traffic surveillance and similar systems.\nPhased array radars are valued for use in aircraft since they can track multiple targets. The first aircraft to use a phased array radar was the B-1B Lancer. The first fighter aircraft to use phased array radar was the Mikoyan MiG-31. The MiG-31M's SBI-16 Zaslon passive electronically scanned array radar was considered to be the world's most powerful fighter radar, until the AN/APG-77 active electronically scanned array was introduced on the Lockheed Martin F-22 Raptor.\nPhased-array interferometry or aperture synthesis techniques, using an array of separate dishes that are phased into a single effective aperture, are not typical for radar applications, although they are widely used in radio astronomy. Because of the thinned array curse, such multiple aperture arrays, when used in transmitters, result in narrow beams at the expense of reducing the total power transmitted to the target. In principle, such techniques could increase spatial resolution, but the lower power means that this is generally not effective.\nAperture synthesis by post-processing motion data from a single moving source, on the other hand, is widely used in space and airborne radar systems.\nFrequency bands.\nAntennas generally have to be sized similar to the wavelength of the operational frequency, normally within an order of magnitude. This provides a strong incentive to use shorter wavelengths as this will result in smaller antennas. Shorter wavelengths also result in higher resolution due to diffraction, meaning the shaped reflector seen on most radars can also be made smaller for any desired beamwidth.\nOpposing the move to smaller wavelengths are a number of practical issues. For one, the electronics needed to produce high power very short wavelengths were generally more complex and expensive than the electronics needed for longer wavelengths or did not exist at all. Another issue is that the radar equation's effective aperture figure means that for any given antenna (or reflector) size will be more efficient at longer wavelengths. Additionally, shorter wavelengths may interact with molecules or raindrops in the air, scattering the signal. Very long wavelengths also have additional diffraction effects that make them suitable for over the horizon radars. For this reason, a wide variety of wavelengths are used in different roles.\nThe traditional band names originated as code-names during World War II and are still in military and aviation use throughout the world. They have been adopted in the United States by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and internationally by the International Telecommunication Union. Most countries have additional regulations to control which parts of each band are available for civilian or military use.\nOther users of the radio spectrum, such as the broadcasting and electronic countermeasures industries, have replaced the traditional military designations with their own systems.\nModulators.\nModulators act to provide the waveform of the RF-pulse. There are two different radar modulator designs:\nCoolant.\nCoherent microwave amplifiers operating above 1,000 watts microwave output, like travelling wave tubes and klystrons, require liquid coolant. The electron beam must contain 5 to 10 times more power than the microwave output, which can produce enough heat to generate plasma. This plasma flows from the collector toward the cathode. The same magnetic focusing that guides the electron beam forces the plasma into the path of the electron beam but flowing in the opposite direction. This introduces FM modulation which degrades Doppler performance. To prevent this, liquid coolant with minimum pressure and flow rate is required, and deionized water is normally used in most high power surface radar systems that use Doppler processing.\nCoolanol (silicate ester) was used in several military radars in the 1970s. However, it is hygroscopic, leading to hydrolysis and formation of highly flammable alcohol. The loss of a U.S. Navy aircraft in 1978 was attributed to a silicate ester fire. Coolanol is also expensive and toxic. The U.S. Navy has instituted a program named Pollution Prevention (P2) to eliminate or reduce the volume and toxicity of waste, air emissions, and effluent discharges. Because of this, Coolanol is used less often today.\nRegulations.\n\"Radar\" (also: \"RADAR\") is defined by \"article 1.100\" of the International Telecommunication Union's (ITU) ITU Radio Regulations (RR) as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A radiodetermination system based on the comparison of reference signals with radio signals reflected, or retransmitted, from the position to be determined. Each \"radiodetermination system\" shall be classified by the \"radiocommunication service\" in which it operates permanently or temporarily. Typical radar utilizations are primary radar and secondary radar, these might operate in the radiolocation service or the radiolocation-satellite service.\nConfigurations.\nRadar come in a variety of configurations in the emitter, the receiver, the antenna, wavelength, scan strategies, etc.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25679", "revid": "3306290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25679", "title": "Royal Air Force", "text": "Air and space warfare force of the United Kingdom\n \nMilitary unit\nThe Royal Air Force (RAF) is the air and space force of the United Kingdom, British Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies. It was formed towards the end of the First World War on 1 April 1918, on the merger of the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) and the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS). Following the Allied victory over the Central Powers in 1918, the RAF emerged as the largest air force in the world at the time. Since its formation, the RAF has played a significant role in British military history. In particular, during the Second World War, the RAF defeated the German Luftwaffe's efforts to establish air superiority over England during the Battle of Britain, and played a key role in the Combined Bomber Offensive alongside the USAAF.\nThe RAF's mission is to support the objectives of the British Ministry of Defence (MOD), which are to \"provide the capabilities needed to ensure the security and defence of the United Kingdom and overseas territories, including against terrorism; to support the Government's foreign policy objectives particularly in promoting international peace and security\". The RAF describes its mission statement as \"... [to provide] an \"agile, adaptable and capable\" Air Force that, person for person, is second to none, and that makes a decisive air power contribution in support of the UK Defence Mission\". The mission statement is supported by the RAF's definition of air power, which guides its strategy. Air power is defined as \"the ability to project power from the air and space to influence the behaviour of people or the course of events\".\nToday, the Royal Air Force maintains an operational fleet of various types of aircraft, described by the RAF as being \"leading-edge\" in terms of technology. This largely consists of fixed-wing aircraft, including those in the following roles: fighter and strike, airborne early warning and control, intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance (ISTAR), signals intelligence (SIGINT), maritime patrol, air-to-air refueling (AAR) and strategic &amp; tactical transport. The majority of the RAF's rotary-wing aircraft form part of the tri-service Joint Aviation Command in support of ground forces. Most of the RAF's aircraft and personnel are based in the UK, with many others serving on global operations (principally over Iraq and Syria) or at long-established overseas bases (Ascension Island, Cyprus, Gibraltar, and the Falkland Islands). Although the RAF is the principal British air power arm, the Royal Navy's Fleet Air Arm and the British Army's Army Air Corps also operate armed aircraft.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Royal Air Force was formed towards the end of the First World War on 1 April 1918, becoming the second independent air force in the world after the Finnish Air Force (established 6 March 1918), by merging the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) and the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS). This was done as recommended in a report prepared by the South African statesman and general Jan Smuts, which contained significant contributions from Lieutenant General David Henderson, on 17 August 1917. From the Smuts Report, came the Air Force (Constitution) Act which was passed on 23 November 1917, receiving Royal Assent on 29 November, which made provision for the creation of an Air Force. On 7 March 1918, King George V issued a royal decree naming the new service the 'Royal Air Force'. At the time of its formation, the RAF was the largest air force in the world. Its headquarters was located in the former Hotel Cecil.\nAfter the war, the RAF was drastically cut and its inter-war years were relatively quiet. The RAF was put in charge of British military activity in Iraq, and carried out minor activities in other parts of the British Empire, including establishing bases to protect Singapore and Malaya. The RAF's naval aviation branch, the Fleet Air Arm, was founded in 1924 but handed over to Admiralty control on 24 May 1939. In 1925, the RAF carried out its first independent action, conducting a successful air campaign against rebelling Mahsud tribesmen during Pink's War.\nThe RAF adopted the doctrine of strategic bombing, which led to the construction of long-range bombers and became its main bombing strategy in the Second World War.\nSecond World War.\nThe Royal Air Force underwent rapid expansion prior to and during the Second World War. Under the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan of December 1939, the air forces of British Commonwealth countries trained and formed \"Article XV squadrons\" for service with RAF formations. Many individual personnel from these countries, and exiles from occupied Europe, also served with RAF squadrons. By the end of the war the Royal Canadian Air Force had contributed more than 30 squadrons to serve in RAF formations, similarly, approximately a quarter of Bomber Command's personnel were Canadian. Additionally, the Royal Australian Air Force represented around nine per cent of all RAF personnel who served in the European and Mediterranean theatres.\nDuring the Battle of Britain in 1940, the RAF defended the skies over Britain against the numerically superior German . In what is perhaps the most prolonged and complicated air campaign in history, the Battle of Britain contributed significantly to the delay and subsequent indefinite postponement of Operation Sea Lion, Hitler's plans for an invasion of the UK. In the House of Commons on 20 August, prompted by the ongoing efforts of the RAF, Prime Minister Winston Churchill made a speech to the nation, where he said \"Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few\".\nThe largest RAF effort during the war was the strategic bombing campaign against Germany by Bomber Command. While RAF bombing of Germany began almost immediately upon the outbreak of war at first it was ineffectual; it was only later, particularly under the leadership of Air Chief Marshal Harris, that these attacks became increasingly devastating, from early 1943 onward, as new technology and greater numbers of superior aircraft became available. The RAF adopted night-time area bombing on German cities such as Hamburg and Dresden. Night time area bombing constituted the great bulk of the RAF's bombing campaign, mainly due to Harris, but it also developed precision bombing techniques for specific operations, such as the infamous \"Dambusters\" raid by No. 617 Squadron, or the Amiens prison raid known as Operation Jericho.\nCold War era.\nFollowing victory in the Second World War, the RAF underwent significant re-organisation, as technological advances in air warfare saw the arrival of jet fighters and bombers. During the early stages of the Cold War, one of the first major operations undertaken by the RAF was the Berlin Airlift, codenamed Operation Plainfire. Between 26 June 1948 and the lifting of the Soviet blockade of the city on 12 May 1949, the RAF provided 17% of the total supplies delivered, using Avro Yorks, Douglas Dakotas flying to Gatow Airport and Short Sunderlands flying to Lake Havel. The RAF saw its first post-war engagements in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War: during the withdrawal of the former Mandatory Palestine in May 1948 where British Supermarine Spitfire FR.18s shot down four Royal Egyptian Air Force Spitfire LF.9s after the REAF mistakenly attacked RAF Ramat David airbase; and during encounters with the Israeli Air Force which saw the loss of a single de Havilland Mosquito PR.34 in November 1948 and four Spitfire FR.18s and a single Hawker Tempest F.6 in January 1949.\nBefore Britain developed its own nuclear weapons, the RAF was provided with American nuclear weapons under Project E. However, following the development of its own arsenal, the British Government elected on 16 February 1960 to share the country's nuclear deterrent between the RAF and submarines of the Royal Navy, first deciding to concentrate solely on the air force's V bomber fleet. These were initially armed with nuclear gravity bombs, later being equipped with the Blue Steel missile. Following the development of the Royal Navy's Polaris submarines, the strategic nuclear deterrent passed to the navy's submarines on 30 June 1969. With the introduction of Polaris, the RAF's strategic nuclear role was reduced to a tactical one, using WE.177 gravity bombs. This tactical role was continued by the V bombers into the 1980s and until 1998 by the Panavia Tornado GR1.\nFor much of the Cold War the primary role of the RAF was the defence of Western Europe against potential attack by the Soviet Union, with many squadrons based in West Germany. The main RAF bases in RAF(G) were RAF Br\u00fcggen, RAF Gutersloh, RAF Laarbruch and RAF Wildenrath \u2013 the only air defence base in RAF(G). With the decline of the British Empire, global operations were scaled back, and RAF Far East Air Force was disbanded on 31 October 1971. Despite this, the RAF fought in many battles in the Cold War period. In June 1948, the RAF commenced Operation Firedog against Malayan pro-independence fighters during the Malayan Emergency. Operations continued for the next 12 years until 1960 with aircraft flying out of RAF Tengah and RAF Butterworth. The RAF played a minor role in the Korean War, with flying boats taking part. From 1953 to 1956 the RAF Avro Lincoln squadrons carried out anti-Mau Mau operations in Kenya using its base at RAF Eastleigh. The Suez Crisis in 1956 saw a large RAF role, with aircraft operating from RAF Akrotiri and RAF Nicosia on Cyprus and RAF Luqa and RAF Hal Far on Malta as part of Operation Musketeer. The RAF suffered its most recent loss to an enemy aircraft during the Suez Crisis, when an English Electric Canberra PR7 was shot down over Syria.\nIn 1957, the RAF participated heavily during the Jebel Akhdar War in Oman, operating both de Havilland Venom and Avro Shackleton aircraft. The RAF made 1,635 raids, dropping 1,094 tons and firing 900 rockets at the interior of Oman between July and December 1958, targeting insurgents, mountain top villages and water channels in a war that remained under low profile. The Konfrontasi against Indonesia in the early 1960s did see use of RAF aircraft, but due to a combination of deft diplomacy and selective ignoring of certain events by both sides, it never developed into a full-scale war. The RAF played a large role in the Aden Emergency between 1963 and 1967. Hawker Hunter FGA.9s based at RAF Khormaksar, Aden, were regularly called in by the British Army as close air support to carry out strikes on rebel positions. The Radfan Campaign (Operation Nutcracker) in early 1964 was successful in suppressing the revolt in Radfa, however it did nothing to end the insurgency with the British withdrawing from Aden in November 1967.\nOne of the largest actions undertaken by the RAF during the Cold War was the air campaign during the 1982 Falklands War, in which the RAF operated alongside the Fleet Air Arm. During the war, RAF aircraft were deployed in the mid-Atlantic at RAF Ascension Island and a detachment from No. 1 Squadron was deployed with the Royal Navy, operating from the aircraft carrier HMS \"Hermes\". RAF pilots also flew missions using the Royal Navy's Sea Harriers in the air-to-air combat role, in particular Flight Lieutenant Dave Morgan the highest scoring pilot of the war. Following a British victory, the RAF remained in the South Atlantic to provide air defence to the Falkland Islands, with the McDonnell Douglas Phantom FGR2 based at RAF Mount Pleasant which was built in 1984.\nPost-Cold War.\nWith the end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union, the RAF's focus returned to expeditionary air power. Since 1990, the RAF has been involved in several large-scale operations, including the 1991 Gulf War, the 1999 Kosovo War, the 2001 War in Afghanistan, the 2003 invasion and war in Iraq, the 2011 intervention in Libya and from 2014 onwards has been involved in the war against the Islamic State.\nThe RAF began conducting Remotely-piloted Air System (RPAS) operations in 2004, with No. 1115 Flight carrying out missions in Afghanistan and Iraq with the General Atomics MQ-1 Predator. Initially embedded with the United States Air Force, the RAF formed its own RPAS squadron in 2007 when No. 39 Squadron was stood up as a General Atomics MQ-9A Reaper unit at Creech AFB, Nevada.\nThe RAF's 90th anniversary was commemorated on 1 April 2008 by a flypast of the RAF's Aerobatic Display Team the Red Arrows and four Eurofighter Typhoons along the River Thames, in a straight line from just south of London City Airport Tower Bridge, the London Eye, the RAF Memorial and (at 13.00) the Ministry of Defence building.\nFour major defence reviews have been conducted since the end of the Cold War: the 1990 Options for Change, the 1998 Strategic Defence Review, the 2003 Delivering Security in a Changing World and the 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR). All four defence reviews have resulted in steady reductions in manpower and numbers of aircraft, especially combat aircraft such as fast-jets. As part of the latest 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review, the BAE Systems Nimrod MRA4 maritime patrol aircraft was cancelled due to over spending and missing deadlines. Other reductions saw total manpower reduced by 5,000 personnel to a trained strength of 33,000 and the early retirement of the Joint Force Harrier aircraft, the BAE Harrier GR7/GR9.\nIn recent years, fighter aircraft on Quick Reaction Alert (QRA) have been increasingly required to scramble in response to Russian Air Force aircraft approaching British airspace. On 24 January 2014, in the Houses of Parliament, Conservative MP and Minister of State for the Armed Forces, Andrew Robathan, announced that the RAF's QRA force had been scrambled almost thirty times in the last three years: eleven times during 2010, ten times during 2011 and eight times during 2012. RAF Coningsby in Lincolnshire and RAF Lossiemouth in Moray both provide QRA aircraft, and scramble their Typhoons within minutes to meet or intercept aircraft which give cause for concern. Lossiemouth generally covers the northern sector of UK airspace, while Coningsby covers the southern sector. Typhoon pilot Flight Lieutenant Noel Rees describes how QRA duty works. \"At the start of the scaled QRA response, civilian air traffic controllers might see on their screens an aircraft behaving erratically, not responding to their radio calls, or note that it's transmitting a distress signal through its transponder. Rather than scramble Typhoons at the first hint of something abnormal, a controller has the option to put them on a higher level of alert, 'a call to cockpit'. In this scenario the pilot races to the hardened aircraft shelter and does everything short of starting his engines\".\nOn 4 October 2015, a final stand-down saw the end of more than 70 years of RAF Search and Rescue provision in the UK. The RAF and Royal Navy's Westland Sea King fleets, after over 30 years of service, were retired. A civilian contractor, Bristow Helicopters, took over responsibility for UK Search and Rescue, under a Private Finance Initiative with newly purchased Sikorsky S-92 and AgustaWestland AW189 aircraft. The new contract means that all UK SAR coverage is now provided by Bristow aircraft.\nIn 2018, the RAF's vision of a future constellation of imagery satellites was initiated through the launch of the Carbonite-2 technology demonstrator. The 100\u00a0kg Carbonite-2 uses commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components to deliver high-quality imagery and 3D video footage from space. The Royal Air Force celebrated its 100th anniversary on 1 April 2018. It marked the occasion on 10 July 2018 with a flypast over London consisting of 103 aircraft.\nBetween March 2020 and 2022, the RAF assisted with the response efforts to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom as part of Operation Rescript. This saw the service provide repatriation flights and aeromedical evacuations of COVID-19 patients, drivers and call-handlers to support ambulance services and medics to assist with the staffing of hospitals, testing units and vaccination centres. Under Operation Broadshare, the RAF has also been involved with COVID-19 relief operations overseas, repatriating stranded nationals and delivering medical supplies and vaccines to British Overseas Territories and military installations.\nThe UK's 20-year long operations in Afghanistan came to an end in August 2021, seeing the largest airlift since the Berlin Blockade take place. As part of Operation Pitting, the RAF helped evacuate over 15,000 people in two weeks. Between April and May 2023, the RAF helped evacuate over 2,300 people from Sudan due to the 2023 Sudan conflict as part of Operation Polarbear.\nIn April 2024, Typhoon FGR4s operating from RAF Akrotiri, Cyprus, engaged and destroyed Iranian drones over Iraqi and Syrian airspace during Iran's strikes against Israel.\nOn 26 and 27 March 2025, RAF Puma helicopters marked their retirement from service with a flypast of locations with a historical link to Puma including RAF Odiham, Andover, Middle Wallop Flying Station, MOD Boscombe Down, Thiepval Barracks, PJHQ, RAF Halton, RAF High Wycombe, RAF Benson, RAF Cosford, RAF Shawbury as well as other places across the UK.\nIn June 2025, pro-Palestinian activists broke into Brize Norton Royal Air Force base in Oxfordshire, vandalising and tampering with aircraft. Such actions constitute a national security risk. The ensuing arrests garnered media attention, and the group Palestine Action, which claimed responsibility for the break-in, was later proscribed as a terrorist organisation by the UK government. In addition, a decision was made to begin a 'security review' of military bases across the United Kingdom.\nStructure.\nSenior leadership.\nThe professional head and highest-ranking officer of the Royal Air Force is the Chief of the Air Staff. He reports to the Chief of the Defence Staff, who is the professional head of the British Armed Forces. The incumbent Chief of the Air Staff is Air Chief Marshal Harvey Smyth who was appointed in 2025.\nThe management of the RAF is the responsibility of the Air Force Board, a sub-committee of the Defence Council which is part of the Ministry of Defence and the body legally responsible for the defence of the United Kingdom and its overseas territories. The Chief of the Air Staff chairs the Air Force Board Standing Committee which decides on the policy and actions required for the RAF to meet the requirements of the Defence Council and His Majesty's Government.\nThe Chief of the Air Staff is supported by several other senior commanders:\nAir Command.\nAdministrative and operational command of the RAF is delegated by the Air Force Board to Headquarters Air Command, based at RAF High Wycombe in Buckinghamshire. Air Command was formed on 1 April 2007 by combining RAF Strike Command and RAF Personnel and Training Command, resulting in a single command covering the whole RAF, led by the chief of the air staff. Through its subordinate groups, Air Command oversees the whole spectrum of RAF aircraft and operations.\nUnited Kingdom Space Command (UKSC), established 1 April 2021 under the command of Air Vice-Marshal Paul Godfrey is a joint command, but sits \"under the Royal Air Force.\" Godfrey is of equal rank to the commanders of 1, 2, 11, and 22 Groups. The new command has \"responsibility for not just operations, but also generating, training and growing the force, and also owning the money and putting all the programmatic rigour into delivering new ..capabilities.\" UKSC headquarters is at RAF High Wycombe co-located with Air Command.\nGroups.\nGroups are the subdivisions of operational commands and are responsible for certain types of capabilities or for operations in limited geographical areas. There are five groups subordinate to Air Command, of which four are functional and one is geographically focused:\nNo. 1 Group (Air Combat).\nNo. 1 Group is responsible for combat aircraft (comprising the Lightning Force and Typhoon Force) and the RAF's intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance (ISTAR) capabilities. It oversees stations at RAF Coningsby and RAF Waddington in Lincolnshire, RAF Lossiemouth in Moray and RAF Marham in Norfolk. The group's Eurofighter Typhoon FGR4 aircraft protect UK and NATO airspace by providing a continuous Quick Reaction Alert capability.\nNo. 2 Group (Air Combat Support).\nNo. 2 Group controls the Air Mobility Force which provides strategic and tactical airlift, air-to-air refuelling and command support air transport (CSAT). The group is also responsible for the RAF Medical Services, RAF Support Force, consisting of the RAF's engineering, logistics, intelligence, signals, musical and mountain rescue assets, RAF's Combat and Readiness Force, comprising the RAF Regiment, and the Air Security Force, comprising RAF Police. It oversees stations at RAF Benson and RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire, RAF Henlow in Bedfordshire, RAF Honington in Suffolk, RAF Odiham in Hampshire and RAF Northolt in West London.\nNo. 11 Group (Multi-domain operations).\nNo. 11 Group is responsible for integrating operations across the air, cyber and space domains whilst responding to new and evolving threats. It includes the RAF's Battlespace Management Force which controls the UK Air Surveillance and Control System (ASACS). The group oversees stations at RAF Boulmer in Northumberland, RAF Fylingdales in North Yorkshire and RAF Spadeadam in Cumbria.\nNo. 22 Group (Training).\nNo. 22 Group is responsible for the supply of qualified and skilled personnel to the RAF and provides flying and non-flying training to all three British armed services. It is the end-user of the UK Military Flying Training System which is provided by civilian contractor Ascent Flight Training. The group oversees stations at RAF College Cranwell in Lincolnshire, RAF Cosford and RAF Shawbury in Shropshire, RAF Halton in Buckinghamshire, MOD St Athan in the Vale of Glamorgan, RAF St Mawgan in Cornwall and RAF Valley on Anglesey. The No. 22 Group also manages the Royal Air Force Air Cadets.\nStations.\nAn RAF station is ordinarily subordinate to a group and is commanded by a group captain. Each station typically hosts several flying and non-flying squadrons or units which are supported by administrative and support wings.\nUnited Kingdom.\nFront-line flying operations are focused at eight stations:\nFlying training takes places at RAF Barkston Heath, RAF College Cranwell, RAF Shawbury and RAF Valley, each forming part of the UK Military Flying Training System which is dedicated to training aircrew for all three UK armed services. Specialist ground crew training is focused at RAF Cosford, RAF St Mawgan and MOD St. Athan.\nOperations are supported by numerous other flying and non-flying stations, with activity focussed at RAF Honington which coordinates Force Protection and RAF Leeming &amp; RAF Wittering which have a support enabler role.\nA Control and Reporting Centre (CRC) at RAF Boulmer is tasked with compiling a Recognised Air Picture of UK air space and providing tactical control of the Quick Reaction Alert Force. In order to achieve this Boulmer is supported by a network of eight Remote Radar Heads (RRHs) spread the length of the UK.\nOverseas.\nThe UK operates permanent military airfields (known as Permanent Joint Operating Bases) in four British Overseas Territories. These bases contribute to the physical defence and maintenance of sovereignty of the British Overseas Territories and enable the UK to conduct expeditionary military operations. Although command and oversight of the bases is provided by Strategic Command, the airfield elements are known as RAF stations.\nFour RAF squadrons are based overseas. No. 17 Test and Evaluation Squadron is based at Edwards Air Force Base, California, in the United States and works in close cooperation with the U.S. Air Force in the development of the Lockheed Martin F-35B Lightning. No. 80 Squadron is part of the Australia, Canada and United Kingdom Reprogramming Laboratory (ACURL) at Eglin Air Force Base, Florida, and is tasked with compiling and testing the Mission Data File Sets (MDFS) for the F-35. No. 84 Squadron is located at RAF Akrotiri in a search and rescue role. No. 230 Squadron are based at Medicina Lines, Brunei.\nSquadrons.\nA flying squadron is an aircraft unit which carries out the primary tasks of the RAF. RAF squadrons are somewhat analogous to the regiments of the British Army in that they have histories and traditions going back to their formation, regardless of where they are based or which aircraft they are operating. They can be awarded standards and battle honours for meritorious service. Most flying squadrons are commanded by a wing commander and, for a fast-jet squadron, have a complement of around twelve aircraft.\nFlights.\nIndependent flights are so designated because they are explicitly smaller in size than a squadron. Many independent flights are, or have been, front-line flying units. For example, No. 1435 Flight carries out air defence duties for the Falkland Islands, with four Eurofighter Typhoon fighters based at RAF Mount Pleasant.\nSupport wings and units.\nSupport capabilities are provided by several specialist wings and other units.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExpeditionary Air Wings.\nCommand, control, and support for overseas operations is typically provided through Expeditionary Air Wings (EAWs). Each wing is brought together as and when required and comprises the deployable elements of its home station as well as other support elements from throughout the RAF.\nSeveral Expeditionary Air Wings are based overseas:\nTraining schools.\nFlying training.\nThe RAF Schools consist of the squadrons and support apparatus that train new aircrew to join front-line squadrons. The schools separate individual streams, but group together units with similar responsibility or that operate the same aircraft type. Some schools operate with only one squadron, and have an overall training throughput which is relatively small; some, like No. 3 Flying Training School, have responsibility for all Elementary Flying Training (EFT) in the RAF, and all RAF aircrew will pass through its squadrons when they start their flying careers. No. 2 Flying Training School and No. 6 Flying Training School do not have a front-line training responsibility \u2013 their job is to group the University Air Squadrons and the Volunteer Gliding Squadrons together. The commanding officer of No. 2 FTS holds the only full-time flying appointment for a Group Captain in the RAF, and is a reservist.\nNon-flying training.\nThe British military operate a number of joint training organisations, with Air Command leading the provision of technical training through the Defence College of Technical Training (DCTT). It provides training in aeronautical engineering, electro and mechanical engineering, and communication and information systems.\nSpecialist training and education.\nThe Royal Air Force operates several units and centres for the provision of non-generic training and education. These include the Royal Air Force Leadership Centre and the RAF Centre for Air Power Studies, both based at RAF Cranwell, and the Air Warfare Centre, based at RAF Waddington and RAF Cranwell. Non-commissioned officer training and developmental courses occur at RAF Halton and officer courses occur at the Joint Services Command and Staff College at Shrivenham.\nPersonnel.\nAt its height in 1944 during the Second World War, more than 1,100,000 personnel were serving in the RAF. The longest-lived founding member of the RAF was Henry Allingham, who died on 18 July 2009 aged 113.\nAs of 1 January 2015, the RAF numbered some 34,200 Regular and 1,940 Royal Auxiliary Air Force personnel, giving a combined component strength of 36,140 personnel. In addition to the active elements of the RAF, (Regular and Royal Auxiliary Air Force), all ex-Regular personnel remain liable to be recalled for duty in a time of need, this is known as the Regular Reserve. In 2007, there were 33,980 RAF Regular Reserves, of which 7,950 served under a fixed-term reserve contract. Publications since April 2013 no-longer report the entire strength of the Regular Reserve, instead they only give a figure for Regular Reserves who serve under a fixed-term reserve contract. They had a strength of 7,120 personnel in 2014.\nFigures provided by the International Institute for Strategic Studies from 2012 showed that RAF pilots achieve a relatively high number of flying hours per year when compared with other major NATO allies such as France and Germany. RAF pilots achieve 210 to 290 flying hours per year. French and German Air Force pilots achieved 180 and 150 flying hours across their fleets respectively.\nOfficers.\nOfficers hold a commission from the sovereign, which provides the legal authority for them to issue orders to subordinates. The commission of a regular officer is granted after successfully completing the 24-week-long Initial Officer Training course at the RAF College, Cranwell, Lincolnshire.\nTo emphasise the merger of both military and naval aviation when the RAF was formed, many of the titles of officers were deliberately chosen to be of a naval character, such as flight lieutenant, wing commander, group captain, and air commodore.\nIn 1952, officers served in one of fourteen branches: Catering; Chaplains; Dental; Education; Equipment; Fighter Control; General Duties (i.e. aircrew); Legal; Medical; Physical Fitness; Provost; RAF Regiment; Secretarial; and Technical. All except General Duties and the RAF Regiment were open to women.\nOther ranks.\nOther ranks attend the Recruit Training Squadron at RAF Halton for basic training. The titles and insignia of other ranks in the RAF were based on that of the Army, with some alterations in terminology. Over the years, this structure has seen significant changes: for example, there was once a separate system for those in technical trades, and the ranks of chief technician and junior technician continue to be held only by personnel in technical trades. RAF other ranks fall into four categories: warrant officers, senior non-commissioned officers, junior non-commissioned officers and airmen. All warrant officers in the RAF are equal in terms of rank, but the most senior non-commissioned appointment is known as the Warrant Officer of the Royal Air Force.\nFrom 1952, trades for RAF airmen and airwomen were grouped into 23 trade groups: Accounting and Secretarial; Air Traffic Control and Fire Services; Aircraft Engineering; Airfield Construction; Armament Engineering; Catering; Dental; Electrical and Instrument Engineering; General Duties (i.e. aircrew); General Engineering; General Service; Ground Signalling; Marine Craft; Mechanical Transport; Medical; Music; Photography; Police; Radar Operating; Radio Engineering; RAF Regiment; Safety and Surface; and Supply. All were open to women except Air Traffic Control and Fire Services, Airfield Construction, General Duties, Marine Craft and the RAF Regiment\nAircraft.\nAir combat.\nTyphoon.\nThe Eurofighter Typhoon FGR4 is the RAF's primary multi-role air defence and ground attack fighter aircraft, following the retirement of the Panavia Tornado F3 in late March 2011. With the completion of 'Project Centurion' upgrades, the Typhoon FGR4 took over ground attack duties from the Panavia Tornado GR4, which was retired on 1 April 2019. The Typhoon is tasked to defend UK airspace, while also frequently deploying in support of NATO air defence missions in the Baltic (Operation Azotize), Black Sea (Operation Biloxi), Iceland (Icelandic Air Policing) and Poland (Operation Chessman).\nThe RAF has seven front-line Typhoon squadrons, plus an Operational Conversion Unit (OCU), and Operational Evaluation Unit (OEU); No. 3 (Fighter) Squadron, No. XI (F) Squadron, No. 12 Squadron (joint RAF / Qatar Air Force), No. 29 Squadron (OCU), and No. 41 Test and Evaluation Squadron (OEU) based at RAF Coningsby; with No. 1 (F) Squadron, No. II (Army Cooperation) Squadron, No. 6 Squadron, and No. IX (Bomber) Squadron based at RAF Lossiemouth. Additionally, four Typhoons (\"Faith\", \"Hope\", \"Charity\", and \"Desperation\") are based at RAF Mount Pleasant on the Falkland Islands, forming No. 1435 Flight, where they provide air defence. It was originally suggested that an eighth front-line Typhoon squadron could be formed, however, the 2021 Defence Command Paper announced the retirement of 24 Tranche 1 Typhoons by 2025, and a commitment to seven front-line squadrons. On 31 March 2025, the majority of Tranche 1 Typhoons were withdrawn from use, with the last four remaining as part of No. 1435 Flight until 2027.\nThe Typhoon made its combat debut in support of Operation Ellamy in 2011, and has been supporting Operation Shader since December 2015. Typhoons have also been supporting Operation Poseidon Archer since January 2024. The Typhoon made its first air-to-air kill in December 2021, shooting down a small hostile drone near Al-Tanf base, Syria, with an ASRAAM.\nLightning.\nThe Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning is a single-seat, single-engine, all-weather stealth multirole combat aircraft. It is intended to perform both air superiority and strike missions while also providing electronic warfare and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities. The F-35B, with the ability to perform short take-offs and vertical-landings (STOVL), is jointly operated by the RAF and the Fleet Air Arm (FAA), who regularly operate from the Royal Navy's two \"Queen Elizabeth\"-class aircraft carriers. The F-35A is currently on order to allow the RAF to participate in NATO's nuclear mission. Originally a total of 138 F-35B Lightnings were planned, however the 2021 Defence Command Paper amended this to a commitment to increase the fleet beyond the current order of 48. In June 2025, the second phase procurement plan was announced, with the purchase of 12 F-35As and 17 F-35Bs, taking the fleet up to 75 jets ordered. By August 2025, 40 F-35Bs had been delivered to the RAF (though one crashed in November 2021). The F-35B has an out of service date (OSD) of 2069.\nThe first RAF squadron to operate the F-35B was No. 17 Test and Evaluation Squadron at Edwards AFB, California, accepting its first aircraft in 2014. No. 617 (The Dambusters) Squadron officially reformed on 18 April 2018 as the first operational RAF Lightning squadron. The first four aircraft arrived at RAF Marham from the United States in June 2018, with a further five arriving in August 2018. The Lightning was declared combat ready in January 2019. The second UK based F-35B squadron to be formed was No. 207 Squadron on 1 August 2019 as the OCU for both RAF and Royal Navy pilots. The second front line F-35B squadron to be formed was 809 Naval Air Squadron (FAA) on 8 December 2023, and is crewed by a mix of Royal Navy and RAF personnel like the other F-35B squadrons.\nAt the 2025 NATO Summit at The Hague, Prime Minister Keir Starmer announced that the RAF will acquire at least twelve nuclear capable F-35As. This marks the return of a nuclear role for the RAF for the first time since 1998, when the UK retired the WE.177 bombs from service. According to the MoD, the F-35As will be based at RAF Marham and will help the stand-up of a third front line F-35 Lightning squadron. The OCU, No. 207 Squadron, will conduct day-to-day operations with the F-35A in a training role, due to their increased flight time and decreased maintenance requirements. The aircraft are planned for delivery by 2030.\nIntelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance (ISTAR).\nShadow.\nEight Shadows, six Shadow R1+ and two Shadow R2 are operated by No. 14 Squadron from RAF Waddington, these aircraft are King Air 350CERs that have been specially converted for the ISTAR role. Four Shadow R1s were originally ordered in 2007 due to an Urgent Operational Requirement, and began the conversion process to the ISTAR role in 2009.\nProtector.\nThe General Atomics Protector RG1 was officially introduced into RAF service on 17 Jun 2025 with 31 Squadron, with operational flying beginning in late 2025, replacing the legacy MQ-9A Reapers of XIII Squadron. On 5 October 2015, it was announced that the Scavenger programme had been replaced by \"Protector\", a new requirement for at least 20 unmanned aerial vehicles. On 7 October 2015, it was revealed that Protector would be a certifiable derivative of the MQ-9B SkyGuardian with enhanced range and endurance. In 2016, it was indicated that at least sixteen aircraft would be purchased with a maximum of up to twenty-six. In July 2018, a General Atomics US civil-registered SkyGuardian was flown from North Dakota to RAF Fairford for the Royal International Air Tattoo where it was given RAF markings. In July 2020, the Ministry of Defence signed a contract for three Protectors with an option on an additional thirteen aircraft. The 2021 Defence Command Paper confirmed the order for 16 Protectors, despite the fact that the 2015 SDSR originally laid out plans for more than 20. The first Protector RG1 (\"PR009\") was delivered to RAF Waddington in September 2023. No. 31 Squadron was reformed as the first Protector squadron on 11 October 2023, having been earmarked for the role in 2018. As of June 2025, ten Protector UAVs were in service with the remaining 6 aircraft to be delivered by the end of the year.\nRC-135W Rivet Joint.\nThree Boeing RC-135W Rivet Joints replaced the Hawker Siddeley Nimrod R1 fleet in the signals intelligence role under the Airseeker Programme and are flown by No. 51 Squadron. The Nimrod fleet was retired in 2011, the RAF co-manned aircraft of the US Air Force until the three RC-135s entered service between 2014 and 2017. The aircraft were Boeing KC-135R Stratotanker tankers converted to RC-135W standard in the most complex combined Foreign Military Sales case and co-operative support arrangement that the UK had undertaken with the United States Air Force since the Second World War.\nThe Rivet Joint received its first operational deployment in August 2014, when it was deployed to the Middle East to fly missions over Iraq and Syria as part of Operation Shader. The RC-135W's OSD is 2035.\nWedgetail.\nThe RAF is expecting to take initial delivery in end of 2025 of three E-7 Wedgetail Airborne Warning and Control Systems (AWACS) aircraft that will be designated Wedgetail AEW1 and operated by 8 Squadron at RAF Lossiemouth, with expected in-service date of early 2026. Wedgetail provides crucial Airborne Early Warning and Control (AEW&amp;C) capabilities. It generates high-resolution radar data and shares it in real-time through advanced communication links.\nOther ISTAR Units.\nBased at RAF Waddington, No. 54 Squadron and No. 56 Squadron act as the OCU and OEU for the ISTAR fleet respectively.\nMaritime patrol.\nPoseidon MRA1.\nNine Boeing Poseidon MRA1 were ordered by the British government in November 2015 in its Strategic Defence and Security Review for surveillance, anti-submarine and anti-surface ship warfare, filling a capability gap in maritime patrol that had been left since the cancellation of the BAE Systems Nimrod MRA4 programme in the 2010 SDSR. On 13 July 2017, it was announced that No. 120 Squadron and No. 201 Squadron, both former Nimrod MR2 squadrons, would operate the Poseidon and be based at RAF Lossiemouth. No. 120 Squadron was stood up on 1 April 2018, with No. 201 Squadron reforming on 7 August 2021. No. 54 Squadron was the OCU for the Poseidon fleet between 2020 and 2023. No. 42 (Torpedo Bomber) Squadron has been the OCU for the Poseidon since September 2023.\nThe first production Poseidon MRA1 \"ZP801\" made its initial flight on 13 July 2019. \"ZP801\" arrived at Kinloss Barracks, the former home of the Nimrod, on 4 February 2020, filling a decade long gap in maritime capability. The Poseidon was declared combat ready in April 2020. The Poseidon carried out its first operational mission on 3 August 2020, when the Russian warship \"Vasily Bykov\" was tracked. A Poseidon MRA1 arrived at RAF Lossiemouth for the first time in October 2020. The ninth, and final Poseidon arrived at RAF Lossiemouth on 11 January 2022.\nAir mobility.\nC-17A Globemaster III.\nNo. 99 Squadron operate eight Boeing C-17A Globemaster III in the heavy strategic airlift role from RAF Brize Norton, Oxfordshire. Four C-17A were originally leased from Boeing in 2000, These four were subsequently purchased outright, followed by a fifth delivered on 7 April 2008 and a sixth delivered on 11 June 2008. The MOD said there was \"a stated departmental requirement for eight\" C-17s and a seventh was subsequently ordered, to be delivered in December 2010. In February 2012 the purchase of an eighth C-17 was confirmed; the aircraft arrived at RAF Brize Norton in May 2012.. As with all US Foreign Military Sales, the aircraft retains its US designation rather than getting a UK style designation.\nAtlas C.1.\nThe Airbus Atlas C1 (A400M) replaced the RAF's fleet of C-130 Hercules, initially replacing the C1/C3 (C-130K) which were withdrawn from use on 28 October 2013, having originally entered service in 1967. Based at RAF Brize Norton, the Atlas fleet is operated by No. 30 Squadron and No. LXX Squadron. The first Atlas C1 (\"ZM400\") was delivered to the RAF in November 2014. Originally, twenty-five A400Ms were ordered in the initial batch; the total initial purchase then dropped to twenty-two. The final aircraft in the initial order of 22 aircraft was delivered in May 2023. In February 2023, the Chief of the Air Staff indicated that up to six additional aircraft were planned for delivery by 2030. The C-130J Hercules was retired from RAF service on 30 June 2023.\nNo. XXIV Squadron acts as the Air Mobility OCU (AMOCU) for the Globemaster and Atlas, while No. 206 Squadron is the OEU.\nVoyager KC2/3.\nAir transport tasks are also carried out by the Airbus Voyager KC2/3, flown by No. 10 Squadron and No. 101 Squadron. The first Voyager (\"ZZ330\") arrived in the UK for testing at MOD Boscombe Down in April 2011, and entered service in April 2012. The Voyager received approval from the MOD on 16 May 2013 to begin air-to-air refuelling flights and made its first operational tanker flight on 20 May 2013 as part of a training sortie with Tornado GR4s. By 21 May 2013, the Voyager fleet had carried over 50,000 passengers and carried over 3,000 tons of cargo. A total of fourteen Voyagers form the fleet, with nine allocated to sole RAF use (three KC2s and six KC3s). As the Voyagers lack a refuelling boom, the RAF has requested a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the USAF allowing the UK access to tankers equipped with refuelling booms for its RC-135W Rivet Joint .\nEnvoy CC1.\nTwo Dassault Falcon 900XLs were procured in early 2022 to replace the RAF's fleet of four BAe 146s (two CC2s and two C3s) in the Command Support Air Transport role. Known as the Envoy IV CC1 in British service, the aircraft are based at RAF Northolt and are operated by a mixed civilian and No. 32 (The Royal) Squadron crew. This arrangement will remain until 2026 when the fleet will be placed on the military register.\nHelicopters.\nRAF helicopters support the British Army by moving troops and equipment to and around the battlefield. Helicopters are also used in a variety of other roles, including in support of RAF ground units and heavy-lift support for the Royal Marines. The support helicopters are organised into the tri-service Joint Aviation Command (JAC), along with helicopters from the British Army and Royal Navy. No. 22 Squadron, based at RAF Benson, is the OEU for JAC.\nChinook HC5/HC6/HC6A.\nThe large twin-rotor Boeing Chinook is the RAF's heavy-lift support helicopter. Originally ordered in 1978, with subsequent orders in 1995, 2011, and 2018 (yet to be finalised), the Chinook is operated by No. 7 Squadron, No. 18 (B) Squadron and No. 27 Squadron at RAF Odiham and No. 28 (AC) Squadron (Support Helicopter OCU) at RAF Benson. Since being first delivered in 1980, the Chinook has been involved in numerous operations: the Falklands War (1982); Operation Granby (1991); Operation Engadine (1999); Operation Barras (2000); Operation Herrick (2002\u20132014); Operation Telic (2003\u20132011); Operation Ruman (2017); and Operation Newcombe (2018\u20132022). The 54-strong fleet of Chinooks currently has an OSD in the 2040s.\nTraining aircraft.\nThe UK's military flying training has been privatised through a public-private partnership, known as the UK Military Flying Training System (UKMFTS). Training is provided by Ascent Flight Training, a consortium of Lockheed Martin and Babcock International. New aircraft were procured to reduce the training gap between the older generation Grob Tutor T1, Short Tucano T1 and Beechcraft King Air T1 aircraft, and the RAF's modern front-line aircraft, including advanced systems and glass cockpits. UKMFTS also relies far more on synthetic training to prepare aircrew for the front line, where advanced synthetic training is commonplace.\nInitial training.\nThe Grob Tutor T1 equips fifteen University Air Squadrons, which provide university students an opportunity to undertake an RAF training syllabus, which includes first solo, as well as air navigation, aerobatics and formation flying. These units are co-located with Air Experience Flights, which share the same aircraft and facilities and provide air experience flying to the Air Training Corps and Combined Cadet Force. The Tutor is also flown by No. 16 Squadron and No. 115 Squadron based at RAF Wittering.\nVolunteer Gliding Squadrons also provide air experience flying to cadets using the Grob Viking T1 conventional glider. Due to an airworthiness issue in April 2014, the Viking fleet and the Grob Vigilant T1 fleet were grounded for a two-year period, although Viking operations have subsequently resumed. The Vigilant was unexpectedly withdrawn from service in May 2018, a year earlier than planned. A contract tender was initiated in February 2018 to replace this capability from 2022 onwards.\nElementary training.\nThe Grob Prefect T1 was introduced to RAF service in 2016 as its elementary trainer. The 23-strong fleet is based at RAF Cranwell and RAF Barkston Heath in Lincolnshire where they are operated by No. 57 Squadron. On completion of elementary training, aircrew are then streamed to either fast jet, multi-engine, or rotary training.\nBasic fast jet training.\nBasic fast jet training is provided on the Beechcraft Texan T1, which replaced the Short Tucano T1 in November 2019. The Texan is a tandem-seat turboprop aircraft, featuring a digital glass cockpit. It is operated by No. 72 (F) Squadron based at RAF Valley in Anglesey which provides lead-in training for RAF and Royal Navy fighter pilots prior to advanced training on the BAE Hawk T2. The first two Texans were delivered in February 2018 and by December 2018 ten aircraft had arrived at RAF Valley. Four additional Texans were delivered on 3 November 2020.\nAdvanced fast jet training.\nThe BAE Hawk T2 is flown by No. IV Squadron and No. XXV (F) Squadron based at RAF Valley. The latter provides initial Advanced Fast Jet Training (AFJT), while pilots who graduate on to the former squadron learn tactical and weapons training. After advanced training aircrew go on to an Operational Conversion Unit (OCU) where they are trained to fly either the Typhoon FGR4 (No. 29 Squadron at RAF Coningsby) or F-35B Lightning (No. 207 Squadron at RAF Marham) in preparation for service with a front-line squadron. The OCUs use operational aircraft alongside simulators and ground training, although in the case of the Typhoon a two-seater training variant exists which is designated the Typhoon T3.\nOn 15 October 2020, it was announced a joint RAF-Qatari Air Force Hawk squadron (similar to No. 12 Squadron) would be formed in the future. On 1 April 2021, it was further elaborated that this squadron would be stood up in September 2021 at RAF Leeming, North Yorkshire. The Joint Hawk Training Squadron received its first two Hawk Mk.167s at RAF Leeming on 1 September 2021. On 24 November 2021, the Joint Hawk Training Squadron became 11 Squadron QEAF when it reformed at RAF Leeming.\nMulti-engine training.\nMulti-Engine aircrew, weapon systems officer (WSO) and weapon systems operator (WSOp) students are trained on the Embraer Phenom T1. It is operated by No. 45 Squadron based at RAF Cranwell. Multi-engine aircrew then go to their Operational Conversion Unit or front-line squadron.\nRotary Training.\nNo. 1 Flying Training School (No. 1 FTS) (formerly the Defence Helicopter Flying School) is based at RAF Shawbury in Shropshire and provides basic helicopter pilot training for all UK armed forces. It flies twenty-nine Airbus Juno HT1. No. 1 FTS comprises two main elements, 2 Maritime Air Wing (2 MAW) and No. 9 Regiment. 2 MAW includes No. 660 Squadron of the Army Air Corps (AAC) and 705 Naval Air Squadron and provide basic helicopter flying training. No. 9 Regiment comprises No. 60 Squadron of the RAF and No. 670 Squadron of the AAC in the advanced helicopter flying training. No. 202 Squadron is also part of No. 1 FTS and operates the Airbus Jupiter HT1 at RAF Valley.\nFuture aircraft.\nIn July 2014, the House of Commons Defence Select Committee released a report on the RAF future force structure that envisaged a mixture of unmanned and manned platforms, including further F-35, Protector RG1, a service life extension for the Typhoon (which would otherwise end its service in 2030) or a possible new manned aircraft. In July 2018, at the Farnborough Airshow, the Defence Secretary announced a \u00a32bn investment for BAE Systems, MBDA and Leonardo to develop a new British 6th Generation Fighter to replace Typhoon in 2035 under Project Tempest.\nOn 22 March 2019, the defence secretary announced the UK had signed a $1.98\u00a0billion deal to procure five Boeing E-7 Wedgetails to replace the ageing Boeing E-3D Sentry AEW1 fleet in the Airborne Early Warning and Control (AEW&amp;C) role. As of May 2020, the first E-7 is expected to enter RAF service in 2023 with the final aircraft arriving in late 2025 or early 2026. In December 2020, it was announced that the Wedgetail AEW1 will be based at RAF Lossiemouth. The 2021 Defence Command Paper cut the Wedgetail order down to three aircraft. The Sentry AEW1s were officially withdrawn on 28 September 2021. This left a prolonged capability gap since, by 2025, the in-service date for Wedgetail had slipped into 2026.\nIn March 2021, the Defence and Security Industrial Strategy paper was published which announced the aim to procure a New Medium Helicopter (NMH) in order to replace the Puma HC2, Griffin HAR2 (in RAF service) and the AAC's Bell 212 AH1 and Eurocopter Dauphin AH1. In May 2022, the MoD announced the beginning of the NMH competition, with the aim to acquire up to 44 helicopters. By November 2022, four companies qualified for the MoD's requirements: Airbus (H175M); Boeing (MH-139 Grey Wolf); Leonardo (AW149); and Sikorsky / Lockheed Martin (S-70 Black Hawk). The Minister of State for Defence Procurement opened bidding for the competition, between Airbus Helicopters UK, Leonardo Helicopters UK and Lockheed Martin UK, in February 2024.\nSymbols, flags, emblems and uniform.\nFollowing the tradition of the other British armed services, the RAF has adopted symbols to represent it, use as rallying devices for members and promote esprit de corps. British aircraft in the early stages of the First World War carried the Union Flag as an identifying feature; however, this was easily confused with Germany's Iron Cross motif. In October 1914, therefore, the French system of three concentric rings was adopted, with the colours reversed to a red disc surrounded by a white ring and an outer blue ring. The relative sizes of the rings have changed over the years and during the Second World War an outer yellow ring was added to the fuselage roundel. Aircraft serving in the Far East during the Second World War had the to prevent with Japanese aircraft. Since the 1970s, camouflaged aircraft carry low-visibility roundels, either red and blue on dark camouflage, or washed-out pink and light blue on light colours. Most non-camouflaged training and transport aircraft retain the traditional red-white-blue roundel.\nThe RAF's motto is and is usually translated from Latin as \"Through Adversity to the Stars\", but the RAF's official translation is \"Through Struggle to the Stars\". The choice of motto is attributed to a junior officer named J S Yule, in response to a request for suggestions from a commander of the Royal Flying Corps, Colonel Sykes.\nThe badge of the Royal Air Force was first used in August 1918. In heraldic terms, it is: \"In front of a circle inscribed with the motto and ensigned by the Imperial Crown an eagle volant and affront\u00e9 head lowered and to the sinister\". Although there have been debates among airmen over the years about whether the bird was originally meant to be an albatross or an eagle, the consensus is that it was always an eagle.\nCeremonial functions and display.\nRed Arrows.\nThe Red Arrows, officially known as the Royal Air Force Aerobatic Team, is the aerobatics display team of the Royal Air Force based at RAF Waddington. The team was formed in late 1964 as an all-RAF team, replacing a number of unofficial teams that had been sponsored by RAF commands. The Red Arrows badge shows the aircraft in their trademark \"Diamond Nine\" formation, with the motto , a French word meaning \"brilliance\" or \"excellence\".\nInitially, they were equipped with seven Folland Gnat trainers inherited from the RAF Yellowjacks display team. This aircraft was chosen because it was less expensive to operate than front-line fighters. In their first season, they flew at sixty-five shows across Europe. In 1966, the team was increased to nine members, enabling them to develop their \"Diamond Nine\" formation. In late 1979, they switched to the BAE Hawk trainer. The Red Arrows have performed over 4,700 displays in fifty-six countries worldwide.\nBattle of Britain Memorial Flight.\nThe Battle of Britain Memorial Flight (BBMF) is a Royal Air Force unit providing that operates historic aircraft from WW2 era for ceremonial and commemoration purposes. Formed in 1957, BBMF comprises Spitfire and Hurricane fighters to represent the main types that fought in the Battle of Britain, but also an Avro Lancaster to commemorate Bomber Command and a Dakota to commemorate airborne forces contribution. The aircraft are regularly seen at events commemorating the Second World War and upon British State occasions, notably Trooping the Colour, Royal Weddings, key Royal Birthdays and Jubilee ceremonies. \nKing's Colour Squadron, Royal Air Force Regiment.\nThe King's Colour Squadron is the unit of the Royal Air Force charged with the safe-keeping of the King's Colour for the Royal Air Force in the United Kingdom and the only dedicated Ceremonial drill unit of the RAF. Since its formation, it has been formed exclusively by Officers and Gunners of No. 63 Squadron RAF Regiment. KCS, as its known, is task with representing the UK and RAF at State and Ceremonial events (such as Remembrance Day at the Cenotaph, opening of Parliament and repatriation ceremonies). They also mount a guard a Buckingham Palace, Windsor Castle and the Tower of London, in place of the Army's Brigade of Guards each year.\nRoyal Air Force Music.\nHeadquarters Royal Air Force Music Services, located at RAF Northolt, supports professional musicians who perform at events around the globe in support of the RAF. The Central Band of the Royal Air Force was established in 1920. Other bands include the Band of the Royal Air Force College, the Band of the Royal Air Force Regiment and the Band of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force.\nTrooping the Colour.\nThe Royal Air Force, and its predecessor, the Royal Flying Corps, has provided the flypast for Trooping the Colour since 1913. The RFC performed its first flypast for King George V's Official Birthday over Laffin's Plain, Aldershot.\nFootnotes.\nRAF ranks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25682", "revid": "46071083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25682", "title": "Red Army", "text": "Soviet army and air force from 1918 to 1946\nMilitary unit\nThe Workers' and Peasants' Red Army, often referred by its shortened name as the Red Army, was the army and air force of the Russian Soviet Republic and, from 1922, the Soviet Union. The army was established in January 1918 by a decree of the Council of People's Commissars to oppose the military forces of the new nation's adversaries during the Russian Civil War, especially the various groups collectively known as the White Army. In February 1946, the Red Army (which embodied the main component of the Soviet Armed Forces alongside the Soviet Navy) was renamed the \"Soviet Army\". Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union it was split between the post-Soviet states, with its bulk becoming the Russian Ground Forces, commonly considered to be the successor of the Soviet Army.\nThe Red Army provided the largest ground force in the Allied victory in the European theatre of World War II, and its invasion of Manchuria assisted the unconditional surrender of Japan. During its operations on the Eastern Front, it accounted for 75\u201380% of the casualties that the \"Wehrmacht\" and \"Waffen-SS\" suffered during the war, and ultimately captured the German capital, Berlin.\nUp to 34 million soldiers served in the Red Army during World War II, 8 million of which were non-Slavic minorities. Officially, the Red Army lost 6,329,600 killed in action (KIA), 555,400 deaths by disease and 4,559,000 missing in action (MIA) (mostly captured). The majority of the losses, excluding POWs, were ethnic Russians (5,756,000), followed by ethnic Ukrainians (1,377,400). Of the 4.5 million missing, 939,700 rejoined the ranks in liberated Soviet territory, and a further 1,836,000 returned from German captivity. The official grand total of losses amounted to 8,668,400. This is the official total dead, but other estimates give the number of total dead up to almost 11\u00a0million. Officials at the Russian Central Defense Ministry Archive (CDMA) maintain that their database lists the names of roughly 14\u00a0million dead and missing service personnel.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrigins.\nIn September 1917, Vladimir Lenin wrote:\"There is only one way to prevent the restoration of the police, and that is to create a people's militia and to fuse it with the army (the standing army to be replaced by the arming of the entire people).\" At the time, the Imperial Russian Army had started to collapse. Approximately 23% (about 19\u00a0million) of the male population of the Russian Empire were mobilized; however, most of them were not equipped with any weapons and had support roles such as maintaining the lines of communication and the base areas. The Tsarist general Nikolay Dukhonin estimated that there had been 2\u00a0million deserters, 1.8\u00a0million dead, 5\u00a0million wounded and 2\u00a0million prisoners. He estimated the remaining troops as numbering 10\u00a0million.\nWhile the Imperial Russian Army was being taken apart, \"it became apparent that the rag-tag Red Guard units and elements of the imperial army who had gone over the side of the Bolsheviks were quite inadequate to the task of defending the new government against external foes.\" Therefore, the Council of People's Commissars decided to form the Red Army on 28 January 1918. They envisioned a body \"formed from the class-conscious and best elements of the working classes.\" All citizens of the Russian republic aged 18 or older were eligible. Its role being the defense \"of the Soviet authority, the creation of a basis for the transformation of the standing army into a force deriving its strength from a nation in arms, and, furthermore, the creation of a basis for the support of the coming Socialist Revolution in Europe.\" Enlistment was conditional upon \"guarantees being given by a military or civil committee functioning within the territory of the Soviet Power, or by party or trade union committees or, in extreme cases, by two persons belonging to one of the above organizations.\" In the event of an entire unit wanting to join the Red Army, a \"collective guarantee and the affirmative vote of all its members would be necessary.\" Because the Red Army was composed mainly of peasants, the families of those who served were guaranteed rations and assistance with farm work. Some peasants who remained at home yearned to join the Army; men, along with some women, flooded the recruitment centres. If they were turned away, they would collect scrap metal and prepare care-packages. In some cases, the money they earned would go towards tanks for the Army.\nThe Council of People's Commissars appointed itself the supreme head of the Red Army, delegating command and administration of the army to the Commissariat for Military Affairs and the Special All-Russian College within this commissariat. Nikolai Krylenko was the supreme commander-in-chief, with Aleksandr Myasnikyan as deputy. Nikolai Podvoisky became the commissar for war, Pavel Dybenko, commissar for the fleet. Proshyan, Samoisky, Steinberg were also specified as people's commissars as well as Vladimir Bonch-Bruyevich from the Bureau of Commissars. At a joint meeting of Bolsheviks and Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, held on 22 February 1918, Krylenko remarked:\"We have no army. The demoralized soldiers are fleeing, panic-stricken, as soon as they see a German helmet appear on the horizon, abandoning their artillery, convoys and all war material to the triumphantly advancing enemy. The Red Guard units are brushed aside like flies. We have no power to stay the enemy; only an immediate signing of the peace treaty will save us from destruction.\"\nHistory.\nRussian Civil War.\nThe Russian Civil War (1917\u20131923) can be divided into three periods:\nAt the start of the civil war, the Red Army consisted of 299 infantry regiments. The civil war intensified after Lenin dissolved the Russian Constituent Assembly (5\u20136 January 1918) and the Soviet government signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (3 March 1918), removing Russia from the First World War. Freed from international obligations, the Red Army confronted an internecine war against a variety of opposing anti-Bolshevik forces, including the Revolutionary Insurgent Army of Ukraine led by Nestor Makhno, the anti-White and anti-Red Green armies, efforts to restore the defeated Provisional Government, monarchists, but mainly the White Movement of several different anti-socialist military confederations. \"Red Army Day\", 23 February 1918, has a two-fold historical significance: it was the first day of conscription (in Petrograd and Moscow), and the first day of combat against the occupying Imperial German Army.\nThe Red Army controlled by the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic also against independence movements, invading and annexing newly independent states of the former Russian Empire. This included three military campaigns against the army of the Ukrainian People's Republic, in January\u2013February 1918, January\u2013February 1919, and May\u2013October 1920. Conquered nations were subsequently incorporated into the Soviet Union.\nIn June 1918, Leon Trotsky abolished workers' control over the Red Army, replacing the election of officers with traditional army hierarchies and criminalizing dissent with the death penalty. Simultaneously, Trotsky carried out a mass recruitment of officers from the old Imperial Russian Army, who were employed as military advisors (\"voenspetsy\"). The Bolsheviks occasionally enforced the loyalty of such recruits by holding their families as hostages. As a result of this initiative, in 1918, 75% of the officers were former tsarists. By mid-August 1920 the Red Army's former tsarist personnel included 48,000 officers, 10,300 administrators, and 214,000 non-commissioned officers. When the civil war ended in 1922, ex-tsarists constituted 83% of the Red Army's divisional and corps commanders.\nIn September 1918, the Bolshevik militias consolidated under the supreme command of the Revolutionary Military Council of the Republic (). The first chairman was Trotsky, and the first commander-in-chief was Jukums V\u0101cietis of the Latvian Riflemen; in July 1919 he was replaced by Sergey Kamenev. Soon afterwards Trotsky established the GRU (military intelligence) to provide political and military intelligence to Red Army commanders. Trotsky founded the Red Army with an initial Red Guard organization and a core soldiery of Red Guard militiamen and the Cheka secret police. Conscription began in June 1918, and opposition to it was violently suppressed. To control the multi-ethnic and multi-cultural Red Army soldiery, the Cheka operated special punitive brigades which suppressed anti-communists, deserters, and \"enemies of the state\".\nIn 1919, 612 \"hardcore\" deserters of the total 837,000 draft dodgers and deserters were executed following Trotsky's draconian measures. According to Figes, \"a majority of deserters (most registered as \"weak-willed\") were handed back to the military authorities, and formed into units for transfer to one of the rear armies or directly to the front\". Even those registered as \"malicious\" deserters were returned to the ranks when the demand for reinforcements became desperate\". Forges also noted that the Red Army instituted amnesty weeks to prohibit punitive measures against desertion which encouraged the voluntary return of 98,000\u2013132,000 deserters to the army.\nThe Red Army used special regiments for ethnic minorities, such as the Dungan Cavalry Regiment commanded by the Dungan Magaza Masanchi. It also co-operated with armed Bolshevik Party-oriented volunteer units, the Forces of Special Purpose from 1919 to 1925.\nThe slogan \"exhortation, organization, and reprisals\" expressed the discipline and motivation which helped ensure the Red Army's tactical and strategic success. On campaign, the attached Cheka special punitive brigades conducted summary field court-martial and executions of deserters and slackers. Under Commissar Yan Karlovich Berzin, the brigades took hostages from the villages of deserters to compel their surrender; one in ten of those returning was executed. The same tactic also suppressed peasant rebellions in areas controlled by the Red Army, the biggest of these being the Tambov Rebellion. The Soviets enforced the loyalty of the various political, ethnic, and national groups in the Red Army through political commissars attached at the brigade and regimental levels. The commissars also had the task of spying on commanders for political incorrectness. In August 1918, Trotsky authorized General Mikhail Tukhachevsky to place blocking units behind politically unreliable Red Army units, to shoot anyone who retreated without permission. In 1942, during the Great Patriotic War (1941\u20131945) Joseph Stalin reintroduced the blocking policy and penal battalions with Order 227.\nIn the spring of 1919, Anna Novikova was enrolled in the school of infantry commanders in Moscow. After completing military training, she became the first woman to command a combat unit of the Red Army. In 1920, she fought on an armored train.\nPolish\u2013Soviet War and prelude.\nThe Soviet westward offensive of 1918\u20131919 occurred at the same time as the general Soviet move into the areas abandoned by the Ober Ost garrisons that were being withdrawn to Germany in the aftermath of World War I. This merged into the 1919\u20131921 Polish\u2013Soviet War, in which the Red Army invaded Poland, reaching the central part of the country in 1920, but then suffered a resounding defeat in Warsaw, which put an end to the war. During the Polish Campaign the Red Army numbered some 6.5 million men, many of whom the Army had difficulty supporting, around 581,000 in the two operational fronts, western and southwestern. Around 2.5 million men and women were mobilized in the interior as part of reserve armies.\nReorganization.\nThe XI Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) (RCP (b)) adopted a resolution on the strengthening of the Red Army. It decided to establish strictly organized military, educational and economic conditions in the army. However, it was recognized that an army of 1,600,000 would be burdensome. By the end of 1922, after the Congress, the Party Central Committee decided to reduce the Red Army to 800,000. This reduction necessitated the reorganization of the Red Army's structure. The supreme military unit became corps of two or three divisions. Divisions consisted of three regiments. Brigades as independent units were abolished. The formation of departments' rifle corps began.\nDoctrinal development in the 1920s and 1930s.\nAfter four years of warfare, the Red Army's defeat of Pyotr Wrangel in the south in 1920 allowed the foundation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in December 1922. Historian John Erickson sees 1 February 1924, when Mikhail Frunze became head of the Red Army staff, as marking the ascent of the general staff, which came to dominate Soviet military planning and operations. By 1 October 1924 the Red Army's strength had diminished to 530,000. The list of Soviet divisions 1917\u20131945 details the formations of the Red Army in that time.\nIn the late 1920s and throughout the 1930s, Soviet military theoreticians \u2013 led by Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky \u2013 developed the deep operation doctrine, a direct consequence of their experiences in the Polish\u2013Soviet War and in the Russian Civil War. To achieve victory, deep operations envisage simultaneous corps- and army-size unit maneuvers of simultaneous parallel attacks throughout the depth of the enemy's ground forces, inducing catastrophic defensive failure. The deep-battle doctrine relies upon aviation and armor advances with the expectation that maneuver warfare offers quick, efficient, and decisive victory. Marshal Tukhachevsky said that aerial warfare must be \"employed against targets beyond the range of infantry, artillery, and other arms. For maximum tactical effect aircraft should be employed en masse, concentrated in time and space, against targets of the highest tactical importance.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"To the Red army, Stalin has dealt a fearful blow. As a result of the latest judicial frameup, it has fallen several cubits in stature. The interests of the Soviet defense have been sacrificed in the interests of the self-preservation of the ruling clique.\"\nTrotsky on the Red Army purges of 1937.\nRed Army deep operations found their first formal expression in the 1929 Field Regulations and became codified in the 1936 Provisional Field Regulations (PU-36). The Great Purge of 1937\u20131939 and the 1941 Red Army Purge removed many leading officers from the Red Army, including Tukhachevsky himself and many of his followers, and the doctrine was abandoned. Thus, at the Battle of Lake Khasan in 1938 and in the Battle of Khalkhin Gol in 1939 (major border conflicts with the Imperial Japanese Army), the doctrine was not used. Only in the Second World War did deep operations come into play.\nChinese\u2013Soviet conflicts.\nThe Red Army was involved in armed conflicts in the Republic of China during the Sino-Soviet conflict (1929), the Soviet invasion of Xinjiang (1934), when it was assisted by White Russian forces, and the Islamic rebellion in Xinjiang (1937) in Northwestern China. The Red Army achieved its objectives; it maintained effective control over the Manchurian Chinese Eastern Railway, and successfully installed a pro-Soviet regime in Xinjiang.\nSoviet\u2013Japanese border conflicts.\nThe Soviet\u2013Japanese border conflicts, also known as the \"Soviet\u2013Japanese Border War\" or the first \"Soviet\u2013Japanese War\", was a series of minor and major conflicts fought between the Soviet Union and the Empire of Japan from 1932 to 1939. Japan's expansion into Northeast China created a common border between Japanese controlled areas and the Soviet Far East and Mongolia. The Soviets and Japanese, including their respective client states of the Mongolian People's Republic and Manchukuo, disputed the boundaries and accused the other side of border violations. This resulted in a series of escalating border skirmishes and punitive expeditions, including the 1938 Battle of Lake Khasan, and culminated in the Red Army finally achieving a Soviet-Mongolian victory over Japan and Manchukuo at the Battles of Khalkhin Gol in September 1939. The Soviet Union and Japan agreed to a ceasefire. Later the two sides signed the Soviet\u2013Japanese Neutrality Pact on 13 April 1941, which resolved the dispute and returned the borders to \"status quo ante bellum\".\nWinter War with Finland.\nThe Winter War (, , ) was a war between the Soviet Union and Finland. It began with a Soviet offensive on 30 November 1939\u00a0\u2013 three months after the start of World War II and the Soviet invasion of Poland. The League of Nations deemed the attack illegal and expelled the Soviet Union on 14 December 1939.\nThe Soviet forces led by Semyon Timoshenko had three times as many soldiers as the Finns, thirty times as many aircraft, and a hundred times as many tanks. The Red Army, however, had been hindered by Soviet leader Joseph Stalin's Great Purge of 1937, reducing the army's morale and efficiency shortly before the outbreak of the fighting. With over 30,000 of its army officers executed or imprisoned, most of whom were from the highest ranks, the Red Army in 1939 had many inexperienced senior officers. Because of these factors, and high commitment and morale in the Finnish forces, Finland was able to resist the Soviet invasion for much longer than the Soviets expected. Finnish forces inflicted stunning losses on the Red Army for the first three months of the war while suffering very few losses themselves.\nHostilities ceased in March 1940 with the signing of the Moscow Peace Treaty. Finland ceded 9% of its pre-war territory and 30% of its economic assets to the Soviet Union. Soviet losses on the front were heavy, and the country's international reputation suffered. The Soviet forces did not accomplish their objective of the total conquest of Finland but did receive territory in Karelia, Petsamo, and Salla. The Finns retained their sovereignty and improved their international reputation, which bolstered their morale in the Continuation War (also known as the \"Second Soviet-Finnish War\") which was a conflict fought by Finland and Germany against the Soviet Union from 1941 to 1944.\nSecond World War (\"The Great Patriotic War\").\nIn accordance with the Soviet-Nazi Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact of 23 August 1939, the Red Army invaded Poland on 17 September 1939, after the Nazi invasion on 1 September 1939. On 30 November, the Red Army also attacked Finland, in the Winter War of 1939\u20131940. By autumn 1940, after conquering its portion of Poland, Nazi Germany shared an extensive border with the USSR, with whom it remained neutrally bound by their non-aggression pact and trade agreements. Another consequence of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact was the Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina, carried out by the Southern Front in June\u2013July 1940 and Soviet occupation of the Baltic states. These conquests also added to the border the Soviet Union shared with Nazi-controlled areas. For Adolf Hitler, the circumstance was no dilemma, because the \"Drang nach Osten\" (\"Drive towards the East\") policy secretly remained in force, culminating on 18 December 1940 with \"Directive No. 21, Operation Barbarossa\", approved on 3 February 1941, and scheduled for mid-May 1941.\nWhen Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, in Operation Barbarossa, the Red Army's ground forces had 303 divisions and 22 separate brigades (5.5 million soldiers) including 166 divisions and brigades (2.6 million) garrisoned in the western military districts. The Axis forces deployed on the Eastern Front consisted of 181 divisions and 18 brigades (3 million soldiers). Three Fronts, the Northwestern, Western, and Southwestern conducted the defense of the western borders of the USSR. In the first weeks of the Great Patriotic War (as it is known in Russia), the \"Wehrmacht\" defeated many Red Army units. The Red Army lost millions of men as prisoners and lost much of its pre-war mat\u00e9riel. Stalin increased mobilization, and by 1 August 1941, despite 46 divisions lost in combat, the Red Army's strength was 401 divisions.\nThe Soviet forces were apparently unprepared despite numerous warnings from a variety of sources. They suffered much damage in the field because of mediocre officers, partial mobilization, and an incomplete reorganization. The hasty pre-war forces expansion and the over-promotion of inexperienced officers (owing to the purging of experienced officers) favored the \"Wehrmacht\" in combat. The Axis's numeric superiority rendered the combatants' divisional strength approximately equal. A generation of Soviet commanders (notably Georgy Zhukov) learned from the defeats, and Soviet victories in the Battle of Moscow, at Stalingrad, Kursk and later in Operation Bagration proved decisive.\nIn 1941, the Soviet government raised the bloodied Red Army's \"esprit de corps\" with propaganda stressing the defense of Motherland and nation, employing historic exemplars of Russian courage and bravery against foreign aggressors. The anti-Nazi Great Patriotic War was conflated with the Patriotic War of 1812 against Napoleon, and historical Russian military heroes, such as Alexander Nevsky and Mikhail Kutuzov, appeared. Repression of the Russian Orthodox Church temporarily ceased, and priests revived the tradition of blessing arms before battle.\nTo encourage the initiative of Red Army commanders, the CPSU temporarily abolished political commissars, reintroduced formal military ranks and decorations, and introduced the Guards unit concept. Exceptionally heroic or high-performing units earned the Guards title (for example 1st Guards Special Rifle Corps, 6th Guards Tank Army), an elite designation denoting superior training, materiel, and pay. Punishment also was used; slackers, malingerers, those avoiding combat with self-inflicted wounds cowards, thieves, and deserters were disciplined with beatings, demotions, undesirable/dangerous duties, and summary execution by NKVD punitive detachments.\nAt the same time, the \"osobist\" (NKVD military counter-intelligence officers) became a key Red Army figure with the power to condemn to death and to spare the life of any soldier and (almost any) officer of the unit to which he was attached. In 1942, Stalin established the penal battalions composed of \"gulag\" inmates, Soviet PoWs, disgraced soldiers, and deserters, for hazardous front-line duty as \"tramplers\" clearing Nazi minefields, et cetera. Given the dangers, the maximum sentence was three months. Likewise, the Soviet treatment of Red Army personnel captured by the \"Wehrmacht\" was especially harsh. Per a 1941 Stalin directive, Red Army officers and soldiers were to \"fight to the last\" rather than surrender; Stalin stated: \"There are no Soviet prisoners of war, only traitors\". During and after World War II freed POWs went to special \"filtration camps\". Of these, by 1944, more than 90% were cleared, and about 8% were arrested or condemned to serve in penal battalions. In 1944, they were sent directly to reserve military formations to be cleared by the NKVD. Further, in 1945, about 100 filtration camps were set for repatriated POWs, and other displaced persons, which processed more than 4,000,000 people. By 1946, 80% civilians and 20% of POWs were freed, 5% of civilians, and 43% of POWs were re-drafted, 10% of civilians and 22% of POWs were sent to labor battalions, and 2% of civilians and 15% of the POWs (226,127 out of 1,539,475 total) were transferred to the Gulag.\nDuring the Great Patriotic War, the Red Army conscripted 29,574,900 men in addition to the 4,826,907 in service at the beginning of the war. Of this total of 34,401,807 it lost 6,329,600 killed in action (KIA), 555,400 deaths by disease and 4,559,000 missing in action (MIA) (most captured). Of the 4.5 million missing, 939,700 rejoined the ranks in the subsequently liberated Soviet territory, and a further 1,836,000 returned from German captivity. Thus the grand total of losses amounted to 8,668,400. This is the official total dead, but other estimates give the number of total dead up to almost 11 million men, including 7.7 million killed or missing in action and 2.6 million prisoners of war (POW) dead (out of 5.2 million total POWs), plus 400,000 paramilitary and Soviet partisan losses. Officials at the Russian Central Defense Ministry Archive (CDMA) maintain that their database lists the names of roughly 14 million dead and missing service personnel. The majority of the losses, excluding POWs, were ethnic Russians (5,756,000), followed by ethnic Ukrainians (1,377,400). As many as 8 million of the 34 million mobilized were non-Slavic minority soldiers, and around 45 divisions formed from national minorities served from 1941 to 1943.\nThe German losses on the Eastern Front consisted of an estimated 3,604,800 KIA/MIA within the 1937 borders plus 900,000 ethnic Germans and Austrians outside the 1937 border (included in these numbers are men listed as missing in action or unaccounted for after the war) and 3,576,300 men reported captured (total 8,081,100); the losses of the German satellites on the Eastern Front approximated 668,163 KIA/MIA and 799,982 captured (total 1,468,145). Of these 9,549,245, the Soviets released 3,572,600 from captivity after the war, thus the grand total of the Axis losses came to an estimated 5,976,645. Regarding POWs, both sides captured large numbers and had many die in captivity \u2013 one recent British figure says 3.6 of 6 million Soviet POWs died in German camps, while 300,000 of 3 million German POWs died in Soviet hands.\nShortcomings.\nIn 1941, the rapid progress of the initial German air and land attacks into the Soviet Union made Red Army logistical support difficult because many depots (and most of the USSR's industrial manufacturing base) lay in the country's invaded western areas, obliging their re-establishment east of the Ural Mountains. Lend-Lease trucks and jeeps from the United States began appearing in large numbers in 1942. Until then, the Red Army was often required to improvise or go without weapons, vehicles, and other equipment. The 1941 decision to physically move their manufacturing capacity east of the Ural Mountains kept the main Soviet support system out of German reach. In the later stages of the war, the Red Army fielded some excellent weaponry, especially artillery and tanks. The Red Army's heavy KV-1 and medium T-34 tanks outclassed most \"Wehrmacht\" armor, but in 1941 most Soviet tank units used older and inferior models.\nLend-Lease.\nThe Red Army was financially and materially assisted in its wartime effort by the United States. In total, the U.S. deliveries to the USSR through Lend-Lease amounted to $11 billion in materials ($180 billion in the 2020 money value): over 400,000 jeeps and trucks; 12,000 armored vehicles (including 7,000 tanks, about 1,386 of which were M3 Lees and 4,102 M4 Shermans); 14,015 aircraft (of which 4,719 were Bell P-39 Airacobras, 2,908 were Douglas A-20 Havocs and 2,400 were Bell P-63 Kingcobras) and 1.75\u00a0million tons of food.\nWartime rape.\nSoviet soldiers committed mass rapes in occupied territories, especially in Germany. The wartime rapes were followed by decades of silence. According to historian Antony Beevor, whose books were banned in 2015 from some Russian schools and colleges, NKVD (Soviet secret police) files have revealed that the leadership knew what was happening, but did little to stop it. It was often rear echelon units who committed the rapes. According to professor Oleg Rzheshevsky, \"4,148 Red Army officers and many privates were punished for committing atrocities\". The exact number of German women and girls raped by Soviet troops during the war and occupation is uncertain, but historians estimate their numbers are likely in the hundreds of thousands, and possibly as many as two million.\nSoviet\u2013Japanese War (1945).\nWhile the Soviets considered the surrender of Germany to be the end of the \"Great Patriotic War\", at the earlier Yalta Conference the Soviet Union agreed to enter the Pacific Theater portion of World War II within three months of the end of the war in Europe. This promise was reaffirmed at the Potsdam Conference held in July 1945.\nThe Red Army began the Soviet invasion of Manchuria on 9 August 1945 (three days after the first atomic bombing of Hiroshima and the same day the second atomic bomb was dropped on Nagasaki, while also being exact three months after the surrender of Germany). It was the largest campaign of the Soviet\u2013Japanese War, which resumed hostilities between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Empire of Japan after almost six years of peace following the 1932\u20131939 Soviet\u2013Japanese border conflicts. The Red Army, with support from Mongolian forces, overwhelmed the Japanese Kwantung Army and local Chinese forces supporting them. The Soviets advanced on the continent into the Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo, Mengjiang (the northeast section of present-day Inner Mongolia which was part of another puppet state) and via an amphibious operation the northern portion of Korea. Other Red Army operations included the Soviet invasion of South Sakhalin, which was the Japanese portion of Sakhalin Island (and Russia had lost to Japan in 1905 in the aftermath of the Russo-Japanese War), and the invasion of the Kuril Islands. Emperor Hirohito announced the surrender of Japan on 15 August. The commanding general of the Kwantung Army ordered a surrender the following day although some Japanese units continued to fight for several more days. A proposed Soviet invasion of Hokkaido, the second largest Japanese island, was originally planned to be part of the territory to be taken but it was cancelled.\nAdministration.\nMilitary administration after the October Revolution was taken over by the People's Commissariat of War and Marine affairs headed by a collective committee of Vladimir Antonov-Ovseyenko, Pavel Dybenko, and Nikolai Krylenko. At the same time, Nikolay Dukhonin was acting as the Supreme Commander-in-Chief after Alexander Kerensky fled from Russia. On 12 November 1917 the Soviet government appointed Krylenko as the Supreme Commander-in-Chief, and because of an \"accident\" during the forceful displacement of the commander-in-chief, Dukhonin was killed on 20 November 1917. Nikolai Podvoisky was appointed as the Narkom of War Affairs, leaving Dybenko in charge of the Narkom of Marine Affairs and Ovseyenko \u2013 the expeditionary forces to the Southern Russia on 28 November 1917. The Bolsheviks also sent out their own representatives to replace front commanders of the Russian Imperial Army.\nAfter the signing of Treaty of Brest-Litovsk on 3 March 1918, a major reshuffling took place in the Soviet military administration. On 13 March 1918, the Soviet government accepted the official resignation of Krylenko and the post of Supreme Commander-in-Chief was liquidated. On 14 March 1918, Leon Trotsky replaced Podvoisky as the Narkom of War Affairs. On 16 March 1918, Pavel Dybenko was relieved from the office of Narkom of Marine Affairs. On 8 May 1918, the All-Russian Chief Headquarters was created, headed by Nikolai Stogov and later Alexander Svechin.\nOn 2 September 1918, the Revolutionary Military Council (RMC) was established as the main military administration under Leon Trotsky, the Narkom of War Affairs. On 6 September 1918 alongside the chief headquarters, the Field Headquarters of RMC was created, initially headed by Nikolai Rattel. On the same day the office of the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces was created, and initially assigned to Jukums V\u0101cietis (and from July 1919 to Sergey Kamenev). The Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces existed until April 1924, the end of Russian Civil War.\nIn November 1923, after the establishment of the Soviet Union, the Council of People's Commissars on War and Navy Affairs was transformed into the People's Commissariat for Military and Naval Affairs.\nOrganization.\nAt the beginning of its existence, the Red Army functioned as a voluntary formation, without ranks or insignia. Democratic elections selected the officers. However, a decree on 29 May 1918 imposed obligatory military service for men of ages 18 to 40. To service the massive draft, the Bolsheviks formed regional military commissariats (\"voyennyy komissariat\", abbr. \"voyenkomat\"), which as of 2023 still exist in Russia in this function and under this name. Military commissariats, however, should not be confused with the institution of military political commissars.\nIn the mid-1920s, the territorial principle of manning the Red Army was introduced. In each region, able-bodied men were called up for a limited period of active duty in territorial units, which constituted about half the army's strength, each year, for five years. The first call-up period was for three months, with one month a year thereafter. A regular cadre provided a stable nucleus. By 1925, this system provided 46 of the 77 infantry divisions and one of the eleven cavalry divisions. The remainder consisted of regular officers and enlisted personnel serving two-year terms. The territorial system was finally abolished, with all remaining formations converted to the other cadre divisions, in 1937\u20131938.\nMechanization.\nThe Soviet military received ample funding and was innovative in its technology. An American journalist wrote in 1941:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Even in American terms the Soviet defence budget was large. In 1940 it was the equivalent of $11,000,000,000, and represented one-third of the national expenditure. Measure this against the fact that the infinitely richer United States will approximate the expenditure of that much yearly only in 1942 after two years of its greatest defence effort.\nMost of the money spent on the Red Army and Air Force went for machines of war. Twenty-three years ago when the Bolshevik Revolution took place there were few machines in Russia. Marx said Communism must come in a highly industrialized society. The Bolsheviks identified their dreams of socialist happiness with machines which would multiply production and reduce hours of labour until everyone would have everything he needed and would work only as much as he wished. Somehow this has not come about, but the Russians still worship machines, and this helped make the Red Army the most highly mechanized in the world, except perhaps the German Army now.\nLike Americans, the Russians admire size, bigness, large numbers. They took pride in building a vast army of tanks, some of them the largest in the world, armored cars, airplanes, motorized guns, and every variety of mechanical weapons.\nUnder Stalin's campaign for mechanization, the army formed its first mechanized unit in 1930. The 1st Mechanized Brigade consisted of a tank regiment, a motorized infantry regiment, as well as reconnaissance and artillery battalions. From this humble beginning, the Soviets would go on to create the first operational-level armored formations in history, the 11th and 45th Mechanized Corps, in 1932. These were tank-heavy formations with combat support forces included so they could survive while operating in enemy rear areas without support from a parent front.\nImpressed by the German campaign of 1940 against France, the Soviet People's Commissariat of Defence (Defence Ministry, Russian abbreviation NKO) ordered the creation of nine mechanized corps on 6 July 1940. Between February and March 1941, the NKO ordered another twenty to be created. All of these formations were larger than those theorized by Tukhachevsky. Even though the Red Army's 29 mechanized corps had an authorized strength of no less than 29,899 tanks by 1941, they proved to be a paper tiger. There were actually only 17,000 tanks available at the time, meaning several of the new mechanized corps were badly under strength. The pressure placed on factories and military planners to show production numbers also led to a situation where the majority of armored vehicles were obsolescent models, critically lacking in spare parts and support equipment, and nearly three-quarters were overdue for major maintenance. By 22 June 1941, there were only 1,475 of the modern T-34s and KV series tanks available to the Red Army, and these were too dispersed along the front to provide enough mass for even local success. To illustrate this, the 3rd Mechanized Corps in Lithuania was formed up of a total of 460 tanks; 109 of these were newer KV-1s and T-34s. This corps would prove to be one of the lucky few with a substantial number of newer tanks. However, the 4th Army was composed of 518 tanks, all of which were the obsolete T-26, as opposed to the authorized strength of 1,031 newer medium tanks. This problem was universal throughout the Red Army and would play a crucial role in the initial defeats of the Red Army in 1941 at the hands of the German armed forces.\nWartime.\nWar experience prompted changes to the way frontline forces were organized. Following six months of combat against the Germans, the Stavka abolished the rifle corps which was intermediate between the army and division level because, while useful in theory, in the state of the Red Army in 1941, they proved ineffective in practice. Following the decisive victory in the Battle of Moscow in January 1942, the high command began to reintroduce rifle corps into its more experienced formations. The total number of rifle corps started at 62 on 22 June 1941, dropped to six by 1 January 1942, but then increased to 34 by February 1943, and 161 by New Year's Day 1944. Actual strengths of front-line rifle divisions, authorized to contain 11,000 men in July 1941, were mostly no more than 50% of establishment strengths during 1941, and divisions were often worn down, because of continuous operations, to hundreds of men or even less.\nOn the outbreak of war, the Red Army deployed mechanized corps and tank divisions whose development has been described above. The initial German attack destroyed many and, in the course of 1941, virtually all of them, (barring two in the Transbaikal Military District). The remnants were disbanded. It was much easier to coordinate smaller forces, and separate tank brigades and battalions were substituted. It was late 1942 and early 1943 before larger tank formations of corps size were fielded to employ armor in mass again. By mid-1943, these corps were being grouped together into tank armies whose strength by the end of the war could be up to 700 tanks and 50,000 men.\nPersonnel.\nThe Bolshevik authorities assigned to every unit of the Red Army a political commissar, or \"politruk\", who had the authority to override unit commanders' decisions if they ran counter to the principles of the Communist Party. The Party leadership considered political control over the military absolutely necessary, as the army relied more and more on officers from the pre-revolutionary Imperial period and understandably feared a military coup. This system was abolished in 1925, as there were by that time enough trained Communist officers to render the counter-signing unnecessary.\nRanks and titles.\nThe early Red Army abandoned the institution of a professional officer corps as a \"heritage of tsarism\" in the course of the Revolution. In particular, the Bolsheviks condemned the use of the word \"officer\" and used the word \"commander\" instead. The Red Army abandoned epaulettes and ranks, using purely functional titles such as \"Division Commander\", \"Corps Commander\" and similar titles. Insignia for these functional titles existed, consisting of triangles, squares and rhombuses (so-called \"diamonds\").\nIn 1924 (2 October) \"personal\" or \"service\" categories were introduced, from K1 (section leader, assistant squad leader, senior rifleman, etc.) to K14 (field commander, army commander, military district commander, army commissar and equivalent). Service category insignia again consisted of triangles, squares and rhombuses, but also rectangles (1 \u2013 3, for categories from K7 to K9).\nOn 22 September 1935 the Red Army abandoned service categories and introduced personal ranks. These ranks, however, used a unique mix of functional titles and traditional ranks. For example, the ranks included \"Lieutenant\" and \"Comdiv\" (\u041a\u043e\u043c\u0434\u0438\u0432, Division Commander). Further complications ensued from the functional and categorical ranks for political officers (e.g., \"brigade commissar\", \"army commissar 2nd rank\"), for technical corps (e.g., \"engineer 3rd rank\", \"division engineer\"), and for administrative, medical and other non-combatant branches.\nThe Marshal of the Soviet Union (\u041c\u0430\u0440\u0448\u0430\u043b \u0421\u043e\u0432\u0435\u0442\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0433\u043e \u0421\u043e\u044e\u0437\u0430) rank was introduced on 22 September 1935. On 7 May 1940 further modifications to rationalise the system of ranks were made on the proposal by Marshal Voroshilov: the ranks of \"General\" and \"Admiral\" replaced the senior functional ranks of Combrig, Comdiv, Comcor, Comandarm in the Red Army and Flagman 1st rank etc. in the Red Navy; the other senior functional ranks (\"division commissar\", \"division engineer\", etc.) remained unaffected. The arm or service distinctions remained (e.g., general of the cavalry, marshal of armoured troops). For the most part the new system restored that used by the Imperial Russian Army at the conclusion of its participation in World War I.\nIn early 1943 a unification of the system saw the abolition of all the remaining functional ranks. The word \"officer\" became officially endorsed, together with the use of epaulettes, which superseded the previous rank insignia. The ranks and insignia of 1943 did not change much until the last days of the USSR; the contemporary Russian Army uses largely the same system.\nMilitary education.\nDuring the Civil War the commander cadres were trained at the Nicholas General Staff Academy of the Russian Empire, which became the Frunze Military Academy in the 1920s. Senior and supreme commanders were trained at the Higher Military Academic Courses, renamed the Advanced Courses for Supreme Command in 1925. The 1931 establishment of an Operations Faculty at the Frunze Military Academy supplemented these courses. The General staff Academy was reinstated on 2 April 1936, and became the principal military school for the senior and supreme commanders of the Red Army.\nPurges.\nAccording to the new data that emerged on the break of the 21st century, The Vesna Case (also known as \"Operation Vesna\") of 1930\u20131931 was massive Soviet repressions targeting former officers and generals of the Russian Imperial Army who had served in the Red Army and Soviet Navy, a major purge of the Red Army preceding the Great Purge. According to over 3,000 group cases in Moscow, Leningrad and Ukraine, over 10,000 persons were convicted. In particular, in May 1931, in Leningrad alone over 1,000 persons were executed according to the so-called \"Guards Case\" ().\nThe late 1930s saw purges of the Red Army leadership which occurred concurrently with Stalin's Great Purge of Soviet society. In 1936 and 1937, at the orders of Stalin, thousands of Red Army senior officers were dismissed from their commands. The purges had the objective of cleansing the Red Army of the \"politically unreliable elements,\" mainly among higher-ranking officers. This inevitably provided a convenient pretext for the settling of personal vendettas or to eliminate competition by officers seeking the same command. Many army, corps, and divisional commanders were sacked: most were imprisoned or sent to labor camps; others were executed. Among the victims was the Red Army's primary military theorist, Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, who was perceived by Stalin as a potential political rival. Officers who remained soon found all of their decisions being closely examined by political officers, even in mundane matters such as record-keeping and field training exercises. An atmosphere of fear and unwillingness to take the initiative soon pervaded the Red Army; suicide rates among junior officers rose to record levels. The purges significantly impaired the combat capabilities of the Red Army. Hoyt concludes \"the Soviet defense system was damaged to the point of incompetence\" and stresses \"the fear in which high officers lived.\" Clark says, \"Stalin not only cut the heart out of the army, he also gave it brain damage.\" Lewin identifies three serious results: the loss of experienced and well-trained senior officers; the distrust it caused among potential allies especially France; and the encouragement it gave Germany.\nRecently declassified data indicated that in 1937, at the height of the Purges, the Red Army had 114,300 officers, of whom 11,034 were dismissed. In 1938, the Red Army had 179,000 officers, 56% more than in 1937, of whom a further 6,742 were dismissed. In the highest echelons of the Red Army the Purges removed 3 of 5 marshals, 13 of 15 army generals, 8 of 9 admirals, 50 of 57 army corps generals, 154 out of 186 division generals, all 16 army commissars, and 25 of 28 army corps commissars.\nThe result was that the Red Army officer corps in 1941 had many inexperienced senior officers. While 60% of regimental commanders had two years or more of command experience in June 1941, and almost 80% of rifle division commanders, only 20% of corps commanders, and 5% or fewer army and military district commanders, had the same level of experience.\nThe significant growth of the Red Army during the high point of the purges may have worsened matters. In 1937, the Red Army numbered around 1.3\u00a0million, increasing to almost three times that number by June 1941. The rapid growth of the army necessitated in turn the rapid promotion of officers regardless of experience or training. Junior officers were appointed to fill the ranks of the senior leadership, many of whom lacked broad experience. This action in turn resulted in many openings at the lower level of the officer corps, which were filled by new graduates from the service academies. In 1937, the entire junior class of one academy was graduated a year early to fill vacancies in the Red Army. Hamstrung by inexperience and fear of reprisals, many of these new officers failed to impress the large numbers of incoming draftees to the ranks; complaints of insubordination rose to the top of offenses punished in 1941, and may have exacerbated instances of Red Army soldiers deserting their units during the initial phases of the German offensive of that year.\nBy 1940, Stalin began to relent, restoring approximately one-third of previously dismissed officers to duty. However, the effect of the purges would soon manifest itself in the Winter War of 1940, where Red Army forces generally performed poorly against the much smaller Finnish Army, and later during the German invasion of 1941, in which the Germans were able to rout the Soviet defenders partially due to inexperience amongst the Soviet officers.\nWeapons and equipment.\nThe Soviet Union expanded its indigenous arms industry as part of Stalin's industrialisation program in the 1920s and 1930s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25683", "revid": "47668471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25683", "title": "Rock", "text": " \nRock most often refers to:\nRock or Rocks may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "25685", "revid": "49394242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25685", "title": "Random variable", "text": "Variable representing a random phenomenon\nA random variable (also called random quantity, aleatory variable, or stochastic variable) is a mathematical formalization of a quantity or object which depends on random events. The term 'random variable' in its mathematical definition refers to neither randomness nor variability but instead is a mathematical function in which\nInformally, randomness typically represents some fundamental element of chance, such as in the roll of a die; it may also represent uncertainty, such as measurement error. However, the interpretation of probability is philosophically complicated, and even in specific cases is not always straightforward. The purely mathematical analysis of random variables is independent of such interpretational difficulties, and can be based upon a rigorous axiomatic setup.\nIn the formal mathematical language of measure theory, a random variable is defined as a measurable function from a probability measure space (called the \"sample space\") to a measurable space. This allows consideration of the pushforward measure, which is called the \"distribution\" of the random variable; the distribution is thus a probability measure on the set of all possible values of the random variable. It is possible for two random variables to have identical distributions but to differ in significant ways; for instance, they may be independent.\nIt is common to consider the special cases of discrete random variables and absolutely continuous random variables, corresponding to whether a random variable is valued in a countable subset or in an interval of real numbers. There are other important possibilities, especially in the theory of stochastic processes, wherein it is natural to consider random sequences or random functions. Sometimes a \"random variable\" is taken to be automatically valued in the real numbers, with more general random quantities instead being called \"random elements\".\nAccording to George Mackey, Pafnuty Chebyshev was the first person \"to think systematically in terms of random variables\".\nDefinition.\nA random variable formula_7 is a measurable function formula_8 from a sample space formula_9 as a set of possible outcomes to a measurable space formula_10. For the measurability of formula_7 to be meaningful, the sample space formula_12 needs to belong to a probability triple formula_13 (see the measure-theoretic definition). A random variable is often denoted by capital Roman letters such as formula_14.\nThe probability that formula_7 takes on a value in a measurable set formula_16 is written as\n formula_17.\nStandard case.\nIn many cases, formula_7 is real-valued, i.e. formula_19. In some contexts, the term random element (see extensions) is used to denote a random variable not of this form.\nWhen the image (or range) of formula_7 is finite or countably infinite, the random variable is called a discrete random variable and its distribution is a discrete probability distribution, i.e. can be described by a probability mass function that assigns a probability to each value in the image of formula_7. If the image is uncountably infinite (usually an interval) then formula_7 is called a continuous random variable. In the special case that it is absolutely continuous, its distribution can be described by a probability density function, which assigns probabilities to intervals; in particular, each individual point must necessarily have probability zero for an absolutely continuous random variable. Not all continuous random variables are absolutely continuous.\nAny random variable can be described by its cumulative distribution function, which describes the probability that the random variable will be less than or equal to a certain value.\nExtensions.\nThe term \"random variable\" in statistics is traditionally limited to the real-valued case (formula_23). In this case, the structure of the real numbers makes it possible to define quantities such as the expected value and variance of a random variable, its cumulative distribution function, and the moments of its distribution.\nHowever, the definition above is valid for any measurable space formula_24 of values. Thus one can consider random elements of other sets formula_24, such as random Boolean values, categorical values, complex numbers, vectors, matrices, sequences, trees, sets, shapes, manifolds, and functions. One may then specifically refer to a \"random variable of type formula_24\", or an \"formula_24-valued random variable\".\nThis more general concept of a random element is particularly useful in disciplines such as graph theory, machine learning, natural language processing, and other fields in discrete mathematics and computer science, where one is often interested in modeling the random variation of non-numerical data structures. In some cases, it is nonetheless convenient to represent each element of formula_24, using one or more real numbers. In this case, a random element may optionally be represented as a vector of real-valued random variables (all defined on the same underlying probability space formula_12, which allows the different random variables to covary). For example:\nDistribution functions.\nIf a random variable formula_42 defined on the probability space formula_13 is given, we can ask questions like \"How likely is it that the value of formula_7 is equal to 2?\". This is the same as the probability of the event formula_45 which is often written as formula_46 or formula_47 for short.\nRecording all these probabilities of outputs of a random variable formula_7 yields the probability distribution of formula_7. The probability distribution \"forgets\" about the particular probability space used to define formula_7 and only records the probabilities of various output values of formula_7. Such a probability distribution, if formula_7 is real-valued, can always be captured by its cumulative distribution function\nformula_53\nand sometimes also using a probability density function, formula_54. In measure-theoretic terms, we use the random variable formula_7 to \"push-forward\" the measure formula_56 on formula_12 to a measure formula_58 on formula_59. The measure formula_58 is called the \"(probability) distribution of formula_7\" or the \"law of formula_7\".\n The density formula_63, the Radon\u2013Nikodym derivative of formula_58 with respect to some reference measure formula_65 on formula_59 (often, this reference measure is the Lebesgue measure in the case of continuous random variables, or the counting measure in the case of discrete random variables).\nThe underlying probability space formula_12 is a technical device used to guarantee the existence of random variables, sometimes to construct them, and to define notions such as correlation and dependence or independence based on a joint distribution of two or more random variables on the same probability space. In practice, one often disposes of the space formula_12 altogether and just puts a measure on formula_59 that assigns measure 1 to the whole real line, i.e., one works with probability distributions instead of random variables. See the article on quantile functions for fuller development.\nExamples.\nDiscrete random variable.\nConsider an experiment where a person is chosen at random. An example of a random variable may be the person's height. Mathematically, the random variable is interpreted as a function which maps the person to their height. Associated with the random variable is a probability distribution that allows the computation of the probability that the height is in any subset of possible values, such as the probability that the height is between 180 and 190\u00a0cm, or the probability that the height is either less than 150 or more than 200\u00a0cm.\nAnother random variable may be the person's number of children; this is a discrete random variable with non-negative integer values. It allows the computation of probabilities for individual integer values \u2013 the probability mass function (PMF) \u2013 or for sets of values, including infinite sets. For example, the event of interest may be \"an even number of children\". For both finite and infinite event sets, their probabilities can be found by adding up the PMFs of the elements; that is, the probability of an even number of children is the infinite sum formula_70.\nIn examples such as these, the sample space is often suppressed, since it is mathematically hard to describe, and the possible values of the random variables are then treated as a sample space. But when two random variables are measured on the same sample space of outcomes, such as the height and number of children being computed on the same random persons, it is easier to track their relationship if it is acknowledged that both height and number of children come from the same random person, for example so that questions of whether such random variables are correlated or not can be posed.\nIf formula_71 are countable sets of real numbers, formula_72 and formula_73, then formula_74 is a discrete distribution function. Here formula_75 for formula_76, formula_77 for formula_78. Taking for instance an enumeration of all rational numbers as formula_79 , one gets a discrete function that is not necessarily a step function (piecewise constant).\nCoin toss.\nThe possible outcomes for one coin toss can be described by the sample space formula_80. We can introduce a real-valued random variable formula_81 that models a $1 payoff for a successful bet on heads as follows:\nformula_82\nIf the coin is a fair coin, \"Y\" has a probability mass function formula_83 given by:\nformula_84\nDice roll.\nA random variable can also be used to describe the process of rolling dice and the possible outcomes. The most obvious representation for the two-dice case is to take the set of pairs of numbers \"n\"1 and \"n\"2 from {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} (representing the numbers on the two dice) as the sample space. The total number rolled (the sum of the numbers in each pair) is then a random variable \"X\" given by the function that maps the pair to the sum:\nformula_85\nand (if the dice are fair) has a probability mass function \"f\"\"X\" given by:\nformula_86\nContinuous random variable.\nFormally, a continuous random variable is a random variable whose cumulative distribution function is continuous everywhere. There are no \"gaps\", which would correspond to numbers which have a finite probability of occurring. Instead, continuous random variables almost never take an exact prescribed value \"c\" (formally, formula_87) but there is a positive probability that its value will lie in particular intervals which can be arbitrarily small. Continuous random variables usually admit probability density functions (PDF), which characterize their CDF and probability measures; \nsuch distributions are also called absolutely continuous; but some continuous distributions are singular, or mixes of an absolutely continuous part and a singular part.\nAn example of a continuous random variable would be one based on a spinner that can choose a horizontal direction. Then the values taken by the random variable are directions. We could represent these directions by North, West, East, South, Southeast, etc. However, it is commonly more convenient to map the sample space to a random variable which takes values which are real numbers. This can be done, for example, by mapping a direction to a bearing in degrees clockwise from North. The random variable then takes values which are real numbers from the interval [0, 360), with all parts of the range being \"equally likely\". In this case, X = the angle spun. Any real number has probability zero of being selected, but a positive probability can be assigned to any \"range\" of values. For example, the probability of choosing a number in [0, 180] is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442. Instead of speaking of a probability mass function, we say that the probability \"density\" of X is 1/360. The probability of a subset of [0,\u00a0360) can be calculated by multiplying the measure of the set by 1/360. In general, the probability of a set for a given continuous random variable can be calculated by integrating the density over the given set.\nMore formally, given any interval formula_88, a random variable formula_89 is called a \"continuous uniform random variable\" (CURV) if the probability that it takes a value in a subinterval depends only on the length of the subinterval. This implies that the probability of formula_90 falling in any subinterval formula_91 is proportional to the length of the subinterval, that is, if \"a\" \u2264 \"c\" \u2264 \"d\" \u2264 \"b\", one has\nformula_92\nwhere the last equality results from the unitarity axiom of probability. The probability density function of a CURV formula_93 is given by the indicator function of its interval of support normalized by the interval's length: formula_94Of particular interest is the uniform distribution on the unit interval formula_95. Samples of any desired probability distribution formula_96 can be generated by calculating the quantile function of formula_96 on a randomly-generated number distributed uniformly on the unit interval. This exploits properties of cumulative distribution functions, which are a unifying framework for all random variables.\nMixed type.\nA mixed random variable is a random variable whose cumulative distribution function is neither discrete nor everywhere-continuous. It can be realized as a mixture of a discrete random variable and a continuous random variable; in which case the CDF will be the weighted average of the CDFs of the component variables.\nAn example of a random variable of mixed type would be based on an experiment where a coin is flipped and the spinner is spun only if the result of the coin toss is heads. If the result is tails, X = \u22121; otherwise X = the value of the spinner as in the preceding example. There is a probability of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 that this random variable will have the value \u22121. Other ranges of values would have half the probabilities of the last example.\nMost generally, every probability distribution on the real line is a mixture of discrete part, singular part, and an absolutely continuous part; see . The discrete part is concentrated on a countable set, but this set may be dense (like the set of all rational numbers).\nMeasure-theoretic definition.\nThe most formal, axiomatic definition of a random variable involves measure theory. Continuous random variables are defined in terms of sets of numbers, along with functions that map such sets to probabilities. Because of various difficulties (e.g. the Banach\u2013Tarski paradox) that arise if such sets are insufficiently constrained, it is necessary to introduce what is termed a sigma-algebra to constrain the possible sets over which probabilities can be defined. Normally, a particular such sigma-algebra is used, the Borel \u03c3-algebra, which allows for probabilities to be defined over any sets that can be derived either directly from continuous intervals of numbers or by a finite or countably infinite number of unions and/or intersections of such intervals.\nThe measure-theoretic definition is as follows.\nLet formula_98 be a probability space and formula_99 a measurable space. Then an formula_99-valued random variable is a measurable function formula_101, which means that, for every subset formula_102, its preimage is formula_103-measurable; formula_104, where formula_105. This definition enables us to measure any subset formula_106 in the target space by looking at its preimage, which by assumption is measurable.\nIn more intuitive terms, a member of formula_12 is a possible outcome, a member of formula_103 is a measurable subset of possible outcomes, the function formula_56 gives the probability of each such measurable subset, formula_24 represents the set of values that the random variable can take (such as the set of real numbers), and a member of formula_111 is a \"well-behaved\" (measurable) subset of formula_24 (those for which the probability may be determined). The random variable is then a function from any outcome to a quantity, such that the outcomes leading to any useful subset of quantities for the random variable have a well-defined probability.\nWhen formula_24 is a topological space, then the most common choice for the \u03c3-algebra formula_111 is the Borel \u03c3-algebra formula_115, which is the \u03c3-algebra generated by the collection of all open sets in formula_24. In such case the formula_99-valued random variable is called an formula_24-valued random variable. Moreover, when the space formula_24 is the real line formula_59, then such a real-valued random variable is called simply a random variable. Note that we are not giving formula_121 the usual Lebesgue formula_122-algebra, which is the completion of the Borel formula_122-algebra. This choice allows for more measurable functions formula_124 and makes it easier to check that a function formula_124 is measurable, as we only need to check that preimages of open sets are measurable.\nReal-valued random variables.\nIn this case the observation space is the set of real numbers. Recall, formula_98 is the probability space. For a real observation space, the function formula_127 is a real-valued random variable if\nformula_128\nThis definition is a special case of the above because the set formula_129 generates the Borel \u03c3-algebra on the set of real numbers, and it suffices to check measurability on any generating set. Here we can prove measurability on this generating set by using the fact that formula_130.\nMoments.\nThe probability distribution of a random variable is often characterised by a small number of parameters, which also have a practical interpretation. For example, it is often enough to know what its \"average value\" is. This is captured by the mathematical concept of expected value of a random variable, denoted formula_131, and also called the first moment. In general, formula_132 is not equal to formula_133. Once the \"average value\" is known, one could then ask how far from this average value the values of formula_7 typically are, a question that is answered by the variance and standard deviation of a random variable. formula_131 can be viewed intuitively as an average obtained from an infinite population, the members of which are particular evaluations of formula_7.\nMathematically, this is known as the (generalised) problem of moments: for a given class of random variables formula_7, find a collection formula_138 of functions such that the expectation values formula_139 fully characterise the distribution of the random variable formula_7.\nMoments can only be defined for real-valued functions of random variables (or complex-valued, etc.). If the random variable is itself real-valued, then moments of the variable itself can be taken, which are equivalent to moments of the identity function formula_141 of the random variable. However, even for non-real-valued random variables, moments can be taken of real-valued functions of those variables. For example, for a categorical random variable \"X\" that can take on the nominal values \"red\", \"blue\" or \"green\", the real-valued function formula_142 can be constructed; this uses the Iverson bracket, and has the value 1 if formula_7 has the value \"green\", 0 otherwise. Then, the expected value and other moments of this function can be determined.\nFunctions of random variables.\nA new random variable \"Y\" can be defined by applying a real Borel measurable function formula_144 to the outcomes of a real-valued random variable formula_7. That is, formula_146. The cumulative distribution function of formula_81 is then\nformula_148\nIf function formula_149 is invertible (i.e., formula_150 exists, where formula_151 is formula_149's inverse function) and is either increasing or decreasing, then the previous relation can be extended to obtain\nformula_153\nWith the same hypotheses of invertibility of formula_149, assuming also differentiability, the relation between the probability density functions can be found by differentiating both sides of the above expression with respect to formula_155, in order to obtain\nformula_156\nIf there is no invertibility of formula_149 but each formula_155 admits at most a countable number of roots (i.e., a finite, or countably infinite, number of formula_159 such that formula_160) then the previous relation between the probability density functions can be generalized with\nformula_161\nwhere formula_162, according to the inverse function theorem. The formulas for densities do not demand formula_149 to be increasing.\nIn the measure-theoretic, axiomatic approach to probability, if a random variable formula_7 on formula_12 and a Borel measurable function formula_144, then formula_167 is also a random variable on formula_12, since the composition of measurable functions is also measurable. (However, this is not necessarily true if formula_149 is Lebesgue measurable.) The same procedure that allowed one to go from a probability space formula_170 to formula_171 can be used to obtain the distribution of formula_81.\nExample 1.\nLet formula_7 be a real-valued, continuous random variable and let formula_174.\nformula_175\nIf formula_176, then formula_177, so\nformula_178\nIf formula_179, then\nformula_180\nso\nformula_181\nExample 2.\nSuppose formula_7 is a random variable with a cumulative distribution\nformula_183\nwhere formula_184 is a fixed parameter. Consider the random variable formula_185 Then,\nformula_186\nThe last expression can be calculated in terms of the cumulative distribution of formula_187 so\nformula_188\nwhich is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of an exponential distribution.\nExample 3.\nSuppose formula_7 is a random variable with a standard normal distribution, whose density is\nformula_190\nConsider the random variable formula_191 We can find the density using the above formula for a change of variables:\nformula_192\nIn this case the change is not monotonic, because every value of formula_81 has two corresponding values of formula_7 (one positive and negative). However, because of symmetry, both halves will transform identically, i.e.,\nformula_195\nThe inverse transformation is\nformula_196\nand its derivative is\nformula_197\nThen,\nformula_198\nThis is a chi-squared distribution with one degree of freedom.\nExample 4.\nSuppose formula_7 is a random variable with a normal distribution, whose density is\nformula_200\nConsider the random variable formula_191 We can find the density using the above formula for a change of variables:\nformula_192\nIn this case the change is not monotonic, because every value of formula_81 has two corresponding values of formula_7 (one positive and negative). Differently from the previous example, in this case however, there is no symmetry and we have to compute the two distinct terms:\nformula_205\nThe inverse transformation is\nformula_206\nand its derivative is\nformula_207\nThen,\nformula_208\nThis is a noncentral chi-squared distribution with one degree of freedom.\nEquivalence of random variables.\nThere are several different senses in which random variables can be considered to be equivalent. Two random variables can be equal, equal almost surely, or equal in distribution.\nIn increasing order of strength, the precise definition of these notions of equivalence is given below.\nEquality in distribution.\nIf the sample space is a subset of the real line, random variables \"X\" and \"Y\" are \"equal in distribution\" (denoted formula_209) if they have the same distribution functions:\nformula_210\nTo be equal in distribution, random variables need not be defined on the same probability space. Two random variables having equal moment generating functions have the same distribution. This provides, for example, a useful method of checking equality of certain functions of independent, identically distributed (IID) random variables. However, the moment generating function exists only for distributions that have a defined Laplace transform.\nAlmost sure equality.\nTwo random variables \"X\" and \"Y\" are \"equal almost surely\" (denoted formula_211) if, and only if, the probability that they are different is zero:\nformula_212\nFor all practical purposes in probability theory, this notion of equivalence is as strong as actual equality. It is associated to the following distance:\nformula_213\nwhere \"ess sup\" represents the essential supremum in the sense of measure theory.\nEquality.\nFinally, the two random variables \"X\" and \"Y\" are \"equal\" if they are equal as functions on their measurable space:\nformula_214\nThis notion is typically the least useful in probability theory because in practice and in theory, the underlying measure space of the experiment is rarely explicitly characterized or even characterizable.\nPractical difference between notions of equivalence.\nSince we rarely explicitly construct the probability space underlying a random variable, the difference between these notions of equivalence is somewhat subtle. Essentially, two random variables considered \"in isolation\" are \"practically equivalent\" if they are equal in distribution -- but once we relate them to \"other\" random variables defined on the same probability space, then they only remain \"practically equivalent\" if they are equal almost surely.\nFor example, consider the real random variables \"A\", \"B\", \"C\", and \"D\" all defined on the same probability space. Suppose that \"A\" and \"B\" are equal almost surely (formula_215), but \"A\" and \"C\" are only equal in distribution (formula_216). Then formula_217, but in general formula_218 (not even in distribution). Similarly, we have that the expectation values formula_219, but in general formula_220. Therefore, two random variables that are equal in distribution (but not equal almost surely) can have different covariances with a third random variable.\nConvergence.\nA significant theme in mathematical statistics consists of obtaining convergence results for certain sequences of random variables; for instance the law of large numbers and the central limit theorem.\nThere are various senses in which a sequence formula_221 of random variables can converge to a random variable formula_7. These are explained in the article on convergence of random variables.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nInline citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLiterature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
