{"id": "28627", "revid": "50666884", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28627", "title": "Sputtering", "text": "Emission of surface atoms through energetic particle bombardment\nIn physics, sputtering is a phenomenon in which microscopic particles of a solid material are ejected from its surface, after the material is itself bombarded by energetic particles of a plasma or gas. It occurs naturally in outer space, and can be an unwelcome source of wear in precision components. However, the fact that it can be made to act on extremely fine layers of material is utilised in science and industry\u2014there, it is used to perform precise etching, carry out analytical techniques, and deposit thin film layers in the manufacture of optical coatings, semiconductor devices and nanotechnology products. It is a physical vapor deposition technique.\nPhysics.\nWhen energetic ions collide with atoms of a target material, an exchange of momentum takes place between them.\nThese ions, known as \"incident ions\", set off collision cascades in the target. Such cascades can take many paths; some recoil back toward the surface of the target. If a collision cascade reaches the surface of the target, and its remaining energy is greater than the target's surface binding energy, an atom will be ejected. This process is known as \"sputtering\". If the target is thin (on an atomic scale), the collision cascade can reach through to its back side; the atoms ejected in this fashion are said to escape the surface binding energy \"in transmission\".\nThe average number of atoms ejected from the target per incident ion is called the \"sputter yield\". The sputter yield depends on several things: the angle at which ions collide with the surface of the material, how much energy they strike it with, their masses, the masses of the target atoms, and the target's surface binding energy. If the target possesses a crystal structure, the orientation of its axes with respect to the surface is an important factor.\nThe ions that cause sputtering come from a variety of sources\u2014they can come from plasma, specially constructed ion sources, particle accelerators, outer space (e.g. solar wind), or radioactive materials (e.g. alpha radiation).\nA model for describing sputtering in the cascade regime for amorphous flat targets is Thompson's analytical model. An algorithm that simulates sputtering based on a quantum mechanical treatment including electrons stripping at high energy is implemented in the program TRIM.\nAnother mechanism of physical sputtering is called \"heat spike sputtering\". This can occur when the solid is dense enough, and the incoming ion heavy enough, that collisions occur very close to each other. In this case, the binary collision approximation is no longer valid, and the collisional process should be understood as a many-body process. The dense collisions induce a heat spike (also called thermal spike), which essentially melts a small portion of the crystal. If that portion is close enough to its surface, large numbers of atoms may be ejected, due to liquid flowing to the surface and/or microexplosions. Heat spike sputtering is most important for heavy ions (e.g. Xe or Au or cluster ions) with energies in the keV\u2013MeV range bombarding dense but soft metals with a low melting point (Ag, Au, Pb, etc.). The heat spike sputtering often increases nonlinearly with energy, and can for small cluster ions lead to dramatic sputtering yields per cluster of the order of 10,000. For animations of such a process see \"Re: Displacement Cascade 1\" in the external links section.\nPhysical sputtering has a well-defined minimum energy threshold, equal to or larger than the ion energy at which the maximum energy transfer from the ion to a target atom equals the binding energy of a surface atom. That is to say, it can only happen when an ion is capable of transferring more energy into the target than is required for an atom to break free from its surface.\nThis threshold is typically somewhere in the range of ten to a hundred eV.\n\"Preferential sputtering\" can occur at the start when a multicomponent solid target is bombarded and there is no solid state diffusion. If the energy transfer is more efficient to one of the target components, or it is less strongly bound to the solid, it will sputter more efficiently than the other. If in an AB alloy the component A is sputtered preferentially, the surface of the solid will, during prolonged bombardment, become enriched in the B component, thereby increasing the probability that B is sputtered such that the composition of the sputtered material will ultimately return to AB.\nElectronic sputtering.\nThe term \"electronic sputtering\" can mean either sputtering induced by energetic electrons (for example in a transmission electron microscope), or sputtering due to very high-energy or highly charged heavy ions that lose energy to the solid, mostly by electronic stopping power, where the electronic excitations cause sputtering. Electronic sputtering produces high sputtering yields from insulators, as the electronic excitations that cause sputtering are not immediately quenched, as they would be in a conductor. One example of this is Jupiter's ice-covered moon Europa, where a MeV sulfur ion from Jupiter's magnetosphere can eject up to 10,000 H2O molecules.\nPotential sputtering.\nIn the case of multiple charged projectile ions a particular form of electronic sputtering can take place that has been termed \"potential sputtering\". In these cases the potential energy stored in multiply charged ions (i.e., the energy necessary to produce an ion of this charge state from its neutral atom) is liberated when the ions recombine during impact on a solid surface (formation of hollow atoms). This sputtering process is characterized by a strong dependence of the observed sputtering yields on the charge state of the impinging ion and can already take place at ion impact energies well below the physical sputtering threshold. Potential sputtering has only been observed for certain target species and requires a minimum potential energy.\nEtching and chemical sputtering.\nRemoving atoms by sputtering with an inert gas is called \"ion milling\" or \"ion etching\".\nSputtering can also play a role in reactive-ion etching (RIE), a plasma process carried out with chemically active ions and radicals, for which the sputtering yield may be enhanced significantly compared to pure physical sputtering. Reactive ions are frequently used in secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) equipment to enhance the sputter rates. The mechanisms causing the sputtering enhancement are not always well understood, although the case of fluorine etching of Si has been modeled well theoretically.\nSputtering observed to occur below the threshold energy of physical sputtering is also often called chemical sputtering. The mechanisms behind such sputtering are not always well understood, and may be hard to distinguish from chemical etching. At elevated temperatures, chemical sputtering of carbon can be understood to be due to the incoming ions weakening bonds in the sample, which then desorb by thermal activation. The hydrogen-induced sputtering of carbon-based materials observed at low temperatures has been explained by H ions entering between C-C bonds and thus breaking them, a mechanism dubbed \"swift chemical sputtering\".\nApplications and phenomena.\nSputtering only happens when the kinetic energy of the incoming particles is much higher than conventional thermal energies (\u226b 1 eV). When done with direct current (DC sputtering), voltages of 3-5 kV are used. When done with alternating current (RF sputtering), frequencies are around the 14\u00a0MHz range.\nSputter cleaning.\nSurfaces of solids can be cleaned from contaminants by using physical sputtering in a vacuum. Sputter cleaning is often used in surface science, vacuum deposition and ion plating. In 1955 Farnsworth, Schlier, George, and Burger reported using sputter cleaning in an ultra-high-vacuum system to prepare ultra-clean surfaces for low-energy electron-diffraction (LEED) studies. Sputter cleaning became an integral part of the ion plating process. When the surfaces to be cleaned are large, a similar technique, plasma cleaning, can be used. Sputter cleaning has some potential problems such as overheating, gas incorporation in the surface region, bombardment (radiation) damage in the surface region, and the roughening of the surface, particularly if \"over done.\" It is important to have a \"clean\" plasma in order to not continually recontaminate the surface during sputter cleaning. Redeposition of sputtered material on the substrate can also give problems, especially at high sputtering pressures. Sputtering of the surface of a compound or alloy material can result in the surface composition being changed. Often the species with the least mass or the highest vapor pressure is the one preferentially sputtered from the surface.\nFilm deposition.\nSputter deposition is a method of depositing thin films by sputtering that involves eroding material from a \"target\" source onto a \"substrate\", e.g. a silicon wafer, solar cell, optical component, or many other possibilities. Resputtering, in contrast, involves re-emission of the deposited material, e.g. SiO2 during the deposition also by ion bombardment.\nSputtered atoms are ejected into the gas phase but are not in their thermodynamic equilibrium state, and tend to deposit on all surfaces in the vacuum chamber. A substrate (such as a wafer) placed in the chamber will be coated with a thin film. Sputtering deposition usually uses an argon plasma because argon, a noble gas, will not react with the target material.\nSputter damage.\nSputter damage is usually defined during transparent electrode deposition on optoelectronic devices, which is usually originated from the substrate's bombardment by highly energetic species. The main species involved in the process and the representative energies can be listed as (values taken from):\nAs seen in the list above, negative ions (e.g., O\u2212 and In\u2212 for ITO sputtering) formed at the target surface and accelerated toward the substrate acquire the largest energy, which is determined by the potential between target and plasma potentials. Although the flux of the energetic particles is an important parameter, high-energy negative O\u2212 ions are additionally the most abundant species in plasma in case of reactive deposition of oxides. However, energies of other ions/atoms (e.g., Ar+, Ar0, or In0) in the discharge may already be sufficient to dissociate surface bonds or etch soft layers in certain device technologies. In addition, the momentum transfer of high-energy particles from the plasma (Ar, oxygen ions) or sputtered from the target might impinge or even increase the substrate temperature sufficiently to trigger physical (e.g., etching) or thermal degradation of sensitive substrate layers (e.g. thin film metal halide perovskites).\nThis can affect the functional properties of underlying charge transport and passivation layers and photoactive absorbers or emitters, eroding device performance. For instance, due to sputter damage, there may be inevitable interfacial consequences such as pinning of the Fermi level, caused by damage-related interface gap states, resulting in the formation of Schottky-barrier impeding carrier transport. Sputter damage can also impair the doping efficiency of materials and the lifetime of excess charge carriers in photoactive materials; in some cases, depending on its extent, such damage can even lead to a reduced shunt resistance.\nEtching.\nIn the semiconductor industry sputtering is used to etch the target. Sputter etching is chosen in cases where a high degree of etching anisotropy is needed and selectivity is not a concern. One major drawback of this technique is wafer damage and high voltage use.\nFor analysis.\nAnother application of sputtering is to etch away the target material. One such example occurs in secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), where the target sample is sputtered at a constant rate. As the target is sputtered, the concentration and identity of sputtered atoms are measured using mass spectrometry. In this way the composition of the target material can be determined and even extremely low concentrations (20\u00a0\u03bcg/kg) of impurities detected. Furthermore, because the sputtering continually etches deeper into the sample, concentration profiles as a function of depth can be measured.\nIn space.\nSputtering is one of the forms of space weathering, a process that changes the physical and chemical properties of airless bodies, such as asteroids and the Moon. On icy moons, especially Europa, sputtering of photolyzed water from the surface leads to net loss of hydrogen and accumulation of oxygen-rich materials that may be important for life. Sputtering is also one of the possible ways that Mars has lost most of its atmosphere and that Mercury continually replenishes its tenuous surface-bounded exosphere.\nOptics.\nDue to its adaptability with a wide range of materials, Sputtering is used to create various types of coatings that enhance the performance of optical components. Anti-reflective coatings are applied to lenses and optical instruments to minimize light reflection and increase light transmission, which improves clarity and reduces glare. Sputtering is also used to deposit reflective coatings on mirrors, ensuring high reflectivity and durability for applications such as telescopes, cameras, and laser systems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28628", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28628", "title": "Supranationalism", "text": ""}
{"id": "28629", "revid": "13054498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28629", "title": "Sociologist", "text": ""}
{"id": "28630", "revid": "46834214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28630", "title": "Satchel Paige", "text": "American baseball player and coach (1906\u20131982)\nLeroy Robert \"Satchel\" Paige (July 7, 1906 \u2013 June 8, 1982) was an American professional baseball pitcher who played in Negro league baseball and Major League Baseball (MLB). His career spanned five decades and culminated with his induction into the National Baseball Hall of Fame.\nA right-handed pitcher, Paige first played for the semi-professional Mobile Tigers from 1924 to 1926. He began his professional baseball career in 1926 with the Chattanooga Black Lookouts of the Negro Southern League and became one of the most famous and successful players from the Negro leagues. On town tours across the United States, Paige would sometimes have his infielders sit down behind him and then routinely strike out the side.\nAt age 42 in 1948, Paige made his MLB debut for the Cleveland Indians; to this day, this makes him the oldest debutant in National League or American League history. Additionally, Paige was 59 years old when he played his last major league game, which is also a record that stands to this day. Paige was the first black pitcher to play in the American League and was the seventh black player to play in Major League Baseball. Also in 1948, Paige became the first player who had played in the Negro leagues to pitch in the World Series; the Indians won the Series that year. He played with the St. Louis Browns from 1951 to 1953, representing the team in the All-Star Game in 1952 and 1953. He played his last professional game on June 21, 1966, for the Peninsula Grays of the Carolina League, two weeks shy of 60. In 1971, Paige became the first electee of the Negro League Committee to be inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame.\nDate of birth.\nWhile Satchel Paige was playing baseball, many ages and birthdates were reported, ranging from 1900 to 1908. Paige himself was the source of many of these dates. His actual birthdate, July 7, 1906, was determined in 1948 when Cleveland Indians owner Bill Veeck traveled to Mobile, Alabama, and accompanied Paige's family to the County Health Department to obtain his birth certificate. Paige's birth certificate is displayed in his autobiography.\nIn 1959, Paige's mother told a reporter that he was 55 rather than 53, saying she knew this because she wrote it down in her Bible. Paige wrote in his autobiography, \"Seems like Mom's Bible would know, but she ain't ever shown me the Bible. Anyway, she was in her nineties when she told the reporter that, and sometimes she tended to forget things.\"\nEarly life.\nPaige was born Leroy Robert Page to John Page, a gardener, and Lula Page (n\u00e9e Coleman), a domestic worker, in a section of Mobile, Alabama, known as Down the Bay. Lula and her children changed the spelling of their name from Page to Paige in the mid 1920s, just before the start of Satchel's baseball career. Lula said, \"Page looked too much like a page in a book,\" whereas Paige explained, \"My folks started out by spelling their name 'Page' and later stuck in the 'i' to make themselves sound more high-tone.\" The introduction of the new spelling coincided with the death of Paige's father, and may have suggested a desire for a new start.\nAccording to Paige, his nickname originated from childhood work toting bags at the train station. He said he was not making enough money at a dime a bag, so he used a pole and rope to build a contraption that allowed him to cart up to four bags at once. Another kid supposedly yelled, \"You look like a walking satchel tree.\" A different story was told by boyhood friend and neighbor Wilber Hines, who said he gave Paige the nickname after he was caught trying to steal a bag. At the age of 10, Paige was playing \"top ball\", which was what got him into baseball. \"Top ball\" was a kids' game that used sticks and bottle caps instead of baseballs and bats to play a variation of the diamond sport. Satchel's mother, Lula, would even comment on how Paige would rather \"play baseball than eat. It was always baseball, baseball.\"\nOn July 24, 1918, just seventeen days after his 12th birthday, Paige was sentenced to six years\u2014or until his 18th birthday, whichever came first\u2014at the Alabama Reform School for Juvenile Negro Law-Breakers in Mount Meigs, Alabama, owing to his truancy in school along with his tendency to steal.\nThe person who taught Paige to pitch while in reform school was the Reverend Moses Davis. It was Davis, who was also a trustee of the school, who devoted the long hours coaching the boys in baseball, and it was he who struck the deal with the sporting-goods store in Montgomery to secure the team's first uniforms. Davis was African American, as was the entire teaching staff at Mount Meigs, including the school's founder, Cornelia Bowen, a graduate of Tuskegee Institute. Paige was released from the institution in December 1923, seven months short of his 18th birthday. He summed up his years of incarceration: \"I traded five years of freedom to learn how to pitch. At least I started my real learning on the Mount. They were not wasted years at all. It made a real man out of me.\"\nAfter his release, Paige played for several Mobile semi-pro teams. He joined the semi-pro Mobile Tigers, for which his brother Wilson was already pitching. He also pitched for a semi-pro team named the \"Down the Bay Boys\", and he recalled an incident in the ninth inning of a 1\u20130 ballgame when his teammates made three consecutive errors, loading the bases for the other team with two outs. Angry, Paige said he stomped around the mound, kicking up dirt. The fans started booing him, so he decided that \"somebody was going to have to be showed up for that.\" He called in his outfielders and had them sit down in the infield. With the fans and his own teammates howling, Paige struck out the final batter, winning the game.\nNegro leagues.\nChattanooga and Birmingham: 1926\u20131929.\nA former friend from Mobile, Alex Herman, was the player/manager for the Chattanooga White Sox of the minor Negro Southern League. In 1926 he discovered Paige and offered to pay him $250 per month, of which Paige would collect $50 with the rest going to his mother. He also agreed to pay Lula Paige a $200 advance, and she agreed to the contract.\nThe local newspapers\u2014the \"Chattanooga News\" and \"Chattanooga Times\"\u2014recognized from the beginning that Paige was special. In April 1926, shortly after his arrival, he recorded nine strikeouts over six innings against the Atlanta Black Crackers. Partway through the 1927 season, Paige's contract was sold to the Birmingham Black Barons of the major Negro National League (NNL). According to Paige's first memoir, his contract was for $450 per month, but in his second he said it was for $275.\nPitching for the Black Barons, Paige threw hard but was wild and awkward. In his first big game in late June 1927, against the St. Louis Stars, Paige incited a brawl when his fastball hit the hand of St. Louis catcher Mitchell Murray. Murray then charged the mound and Paige raced for the dugout, but Murray flung his bat and struck Paige above the hip. The police were summoned, and the headline of the \"Birmingham Reporter\" proclaimed a \"Near Riot.\" Paige improved and matured as a pitcher with help from two teammates, Sam Streeter and Harry Salmon, and his manager, Bill Gatewood. He finished the 1927 season 7\u20131 with 69 strikeouts and 26 walks in 89&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 innings.\nOver the next two seasons, Paige went 12\u20135 and 10\u20139 while recording 176 strikeouts in 1929. (Several sources credit his 1929 strikeout total as the all-time single-season record for the Negro leagues, though there is variation among the sources about the exact number of strikeouts.) On April 29 of that season he recorded 17 strikeouts in a game against the Cuban Stars, which exceeded what was then the major league record of 16 held by Noodles Hahn and Rube Waddell. Six days later he struck out 18 Nashville Elite Giants, a number that was tied in the white majors by Bob Feller in 1938. Due to his increased earning potential, Barons owner R. T. Jackson would \"rent\" Paige out to other ball clubs for a game or two to draw a decent crowd, with both Jackson and Paige taking a cut.\nCuba, Baltimore, and Cleveland: 1929\u20131931.\nAbel Linares offered Paige $100 per game to play winter ball for the Santa Clara team in the Cuban League. Gambling on baseball games in Cuba was such a huge pastime that players were not allowed to drink alcohol, so they could stay ready to play. Paige\u2014homesick for carousing, hating the food, despising the constant inspections and being thoroughly baffled by the language\u2014went 6\u20135 in Cuba. He left Cuba abruptly before the end of the season, with several stories told about the circumstances. Paige told one version in which the mayor of a small hamlet asked him, in Spanish, if he had intentionally lost a particular game. Paige, not understanding a word the man said, nodded and smiled, thinking the man was fawning over him, and then had to flee from the furious mayor. Another version, also told by Paige, says that when he called on an attractive local girl at her home, she and her family interpreted his attentions as an official engagement and sent the police to enforce it, leading Paige to flee the island with police in pursuit. A third version, told by the general manager of the Santa Clara Leopards, says that he left Cuba in haste after legal charges were brought against him regarding an amorous incident with \"a young lady from the provincial mulatto bourgeoisie.\"\nWhen Paige returned to the United States, he and Jackson revived their practice of renting him out to various teams. In the spring of 1930, Jackson leased him to the Baltimore Black Sox, who had won the 1929 American Negro League championship led by their bowlegged third baseman Jud \"Boojum\" Wilson. Paige, as a Southerner, found that he was an outsider on the Black Sox, and his teammates considered him a hick. Moreover, he was the team's number two pitcher behind Laymon Yokely, and Paige did not like being overshadowed.\nIn midsummer Paige returned to Birmingham, where he pitched well the rest of the summer, going 7\u20134. In September he was leased to the Chicago American Giants of the NNL for a home-and-home series with the Houston Black Buffaloes of the Texas\u2013Oklahoma League. Paige won one and lost one in the series and then returned to Birmingham.\nBy the spring of 1931, the Depression was taking its toll on the Negro leagues, and the Black Barons had temporarily disbanded. Few teams could afford Paige, but Tom Wilson, who was moving the Nashville Elite Giants to Cleveland as the Cleveland Cubs, thought he could. Playing in the same city as a white major league team, Paige recalled, \"I'd look over at the Cleveland Indians' stadium, called League Park... All season long it burned me, playing there in the shadow of that stadium. \"It didn't hurt my pitching, but it sure didn't do me any good.\"\nPittsburgh, California, and North Dakota: 1931\u20131936.\nIn June 1931, the Crawford Colored Giants, an independent club owned by Pittsburgh underworld figure Gus Greenlee, made Paige an offer of $250 a month. On August 6, Paige made his Crawford debut against their hometown rivals, the Homestead Grays. Entering the game in the fourth inning, Paige held the Grays scoreless and had six strikeouts and no walks in five innings of relief work to get the win.\nIn September, Paige joined a Negro all-star team organized by Tom Wilson, called the Philadelphia Giants, to play in the California Winter League. This was the first of nine winters that he played in a league that provided ongoing competition between elite black and white baseball players, including major and minor league players. On October 24 Paige won his first California game 8\u20131, allowing five hits and striking out 11, including Babe Herman four times. He finished the winter with a 6\u20130 record and 70 strikeouts in 58 innings.\nIn 1932, Greenlee signed Josh Gibson, Oscar Charleston and Ted \"Double Duty\" Radcliffe away from Cumberland Posey's Homestead Grays to assemble one of the finest baseball clubs in history. Paige took the mound when the Crawfords opened the season on April 30 in their newly built stadium, Greenlee Field, the first completely black-owned stadium in the country. Paige lost the opener to the New York Black Yankees in a pitching duel with Jesse \"Mountain\" Hubbard, but he got even with them by beating them twice that season, including Paige's first Negro league no-hitter in July. Paige went 10\u20134, allowing 3.19 runs per game and striking out 92 in 132&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 innings.\nIn the midst of the Depression, Cum Posey's new East\u2013West League had collapsed by mid-season, and Greenlee was able to obtain many of the best players in black baseball. By the end of the season, Greenlee had signed to contracts Cool Papa Bell, John Henry Russell, Leroy Matlock, Jake Stephens, \"Boojum\" Wilson, Jimmie Crutchfield, Ted Page, Judy Johnson, and Rap Dixon. With the Crawfords playing five future Hall of Famers, many Negro league historians regard the 1930s Crawfords as the greatest team in Negro league history.\nThe next season, Greenlee organized a new Negro National League, which survived for 16 years. Despite Greenlee's efforts to control his biggest star, Paige followed his own schedule and was often late to games that he was scheduled to pitch. In August, he jumped the Crawfords, accepting an offer from Neil Churchill's North Dakota semi-pro team, the Bismarcks (sometimes known as the \"Bismarck Churchills\" today), of $400 and a late model car for just one month's work. It was Paige's first experience playing with an integrated team in the United States. He helped Bismarck beat their local rivals in Jamestown, who were also featuring a Negro league ace pitcher, Barney Brown. Paige was unapologetic when he returned to Pittsburgh in September to help the Crawfords win the second-half championship. Paige was snubbed by other Negro league players and fans when he was not selected for the first ever East\u2013West All-Star Game.\nThe 1934 season was perhaps the best of Paige's career, as he went 14\u20132 in league games while allowing 2.16 runs per game, recording 144 strikeouts, and giving up only 26 walks. On July 4, Paige threw his second no-hitter, this time against the Homestead Grays. He struck out 17, and only a first-inning walk to future Hall of Famer Buck Leonard and an error in the fourth inning prevented it from being a perfect game. Leonard, unnerved by the rising swoop of the ball, repeatedly asked the umpire to check the ball for scuffing. When the umpire removed one ball from play, Paige hollered, \"You may as well thrown 'em all out 'cause they're all gonna jump like that.\"\n\"The Denver Post\" conducted an annual baseball tournament (sometimes known as the \"Little World Series\") that attracted semi-pro and independent professional teams from across the country. In 1934 it was open, for the first time, to black players. Greenlee leased Paige to the Colored House of David, a prominent barnstorming team of white men who represented a religious commune and wore beards. Their manager was Hall of Fame pitcher Grover Cleveland Alexander. Paige pitched shutouts in his first two starts, striking out 14 and 18. The final, championship game was his third start in five days and he faced the Kansas City Monarchs\u2014at the time an independent, barnstorming team\u2014who were participating in the tournament with a lineup augmented by Negro league stars Turkey Stearnes and Sam Bankhead. Paige faced Chet Brewer before a crowd of 11,120. Paige won the pitchers' duel 2\u20131, striking out 12 Monarchs for a tournament total of 44 strikeouts in 28 innings. The 1934 tournament was Paige's first major exposure in front of the white press.\nPaige received his first East\u2013West All Star Game selection in 1934. Playing for the East, Paige came in during the sixth inning with a man on second and the score tied 0\u20130, and proceeded to strike out Alec Radcliffe and retire Turkey Stearnes and Mule Suttles on soft fly balls. The East scored one run in the top of the eighth and Paige held the West scoreless the rest of the way, giving him his first All-Star Game victory. 27 years after winning the second-ever East-West All-Star Game, Paige was also the winning pitcher of the 1961 East-West Game, the next to last in the series.\nDespite an outstanding season, Paige had a strong competitor for best Negro league pitcher of 1934, the 21-year-old Slim Jones of the Philadelphia Stars, who went 22\u20133 in league games. In September, a four-team charity benefit doubleheader was played at Yankee Stadium, with the second game featuring a faceoff between Paige and Jones. Paige recalled driving all night from Pittsburgh and parking near the stadium, then falling asleep in the car. A batboy found and woke him, and he got into uniform just in time for his scheduled start. In a game that was sometimes described as the greatest game in Negro league history, Paige and Jones battled to a 1\u20131 tie that was called because of darkness. A rematch was scheduled, and this time Paige and the Crawfords beat Jones and the Stars 3\u20131.\nThat fall, Paige faced off against major league star Dizzy Dean, who that season had won 30 regular season games plus two more in the World Series, in several exhibition games. In Cleveland, Paige struck out 13 while beating Dean 4\u20131, although for that game Dean was playing with a minor league team. Later, while playing in the California Winter League, Paige faced Dean in front of 18,000 fans in Los Angeles, with Dean's team including major league stars like Wally Berger. The two teams battled for 13 innings, with Paige's team finally winning 1\u20130. Bill Veeck, future owner of the Cleveland Indians, St. Louis Browns, and Chicago White Sox, was watching the game and many years later described it as \"the greatest pitchers' battle I have ever seen.\" Paige and Dean would continue to barnstorm against each other until 1945. Later, when Dean was a sports columnist for the \"Chicago Tribune\", he called Paige \"the pitcher with the greatest stuff I ever saw.\"\nIn the spring of 1935, Greenlee refused Paige's request to raise his $250 per month salary, so Paige decided to return to Bismarck for the same $400 per month and late model used car that he got before. Churchill added other Negro league players to the team\u2014pitchers Barney Morris, and Hilton Smith, catcher Quincy Trouppe, and pitcher/catcher Double Duty Radcliffe. Paige dominated the competition, with a 29\u20132 record, 321 strikeouts, and only 16 walks. In Wichita, Ray \"Hap\" Dumont was establishing a new national baseball tournament, the National Baseball Congress. Dumont invited 32 semi-pro teams, paying $1,000 for Paige and his Bismarck teammates to attend. The tournament was held at Lawrence\u2013Dumont Stadium in Wichita, Kansas and offered a $7,000 purse. Churchill added yet another Negro league star to his team\u2014Chet Brewer, the Kansas City Monarchs' ace pitcher. Bismarck swept the tournament in seven straight games. Paige won the four games he started, pitched in relief in a fifth game, and struck out 60 batters\u2014a record that still held 74 years later.\nIn September, Paige could not return to the NNL because he was banned from the league for the 1935 season for jumping to the Bismarck team. J. L. Wilkinson, owner of the independent Kansas City Monarchs, signed Paige on a game-by-game basis through the end of the season.\nThat winter, a northern California promoter, Johnny Burton, hired Paige to front a team called the \"Satchel Paige All-Stars\", in a game to be held on February 7, 1936, in Oakland against a white all-star squad. The opposing team included a number of major league players out of the Bay Area, including Ernie Lombardi, Augie Galan, Cookie Lavagetto, and Gus Suhr, as well as Pacific Coast League star Joe DiMaggio, who was making his last stop as a minor leaguer before joining the New York Yankees. Other than Negro league catcher, Ebel Brooks, Paige's team was composed of local semi-pro players. Despite the imbalance in talent, Paige kept the game to a 1\u20131 tie through nine innings, striking out 12 and giving up one run on three hits. In the bottom of the tenth inning, he struck out two more, then gave up a single to Dick Bartell, bringing up DiMaggio. Bartell stole second on the first pitch, then went to third on a wild pitch. DiMaggio then hit a hard hopper to the mound that Paige deflected; DiMaggio beat the second baseman's throw to drive in the winning run. A Yankee scout watching the game wired the club that day a report that read, \"DiMaggio everything we'd hoped he'd be: Hit Satch one for four.\"\nIn 1936, Paige returned to Pittsburgh where Greenlee acquiesced to Paige's salary demands and gave him a $600-per-month contract, by far the highest in the Negro leagues. In games for which complete box scores are available, Paige went 5\u20130, allowed 3.21 runs per game, and struck out 47 in 47&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 innings. At the end of the season, Tom Wilson arranged with the other NNL owners to assemble an all-star team that would enter the lucrative \"Denver Post\" tournament. The team included Paige, Josh Gibson, Cool Papa Bell, Leroy Matlock, Buck Leonard, Felton Snow, Bill Wright and Sammy Hughes. They swept the tournament in seven games to win the $5,000 prize, with Paige winning three of them. In the title game against an overmatched semi-pro team from Borger, Texas, Paige pitched a 7\u20130 shutout, striking out 18. The Negro league all-stars then barnstormed, playing a series against a team of major leaguers led by Rogers Hornsby. One match-up featured Paige facing the 17-year-old Bob Feller, who had just finished a half-season with the Cleveland Indians. Each pitched three innings and gave up one hit, with Feller striking out eight and Paige seven. Later in the game, the Negro league team pulled out a win.\nDominican Republic: 1937.\nIn the spring of 1937 the Crawfords were training in New Orleans, and Paige was approached by Dr. Jos\u00e9 Enrique Aybar, dean of the University of Santo Domingo, deputy of the Dominican Republic's national congress and director of the Dragones, a baseball team operated by Rafael Trujillo, dictator of the Dominican Republic. Aybar hired Paige to act as an agent for Trujillo in recruiting other Negro league players to play for \"Los Dragones.\" Aybar gave Paige $30,000 to hire as many players as he could. Paige recruited five of his Crawfords teammates\u2014Cool Papa Bell, Leroy Matlock, Sam Bankhead, Harry Williams and Herman Andrews\u2014as well as Josh Gibson, who had recently been traded to the Homestead Grays. Other Dominican teams were also recruiting Negro league players. Greenlee and his fellow owners banned Paige and the other jumpers from the organized Negro leagues, but failed to dissuade the players.\nIn the Dominican Republic, the American players were shadowed by armed guards. Although the purpose of the guards was to protect the players, the players were fearful that Trujillo would unleash them in anger if his team lost the championship. The season ended with an eight-game series between the two top teams, Paige's Dragones of \"Ciudad Trujillo\" (as Trujillo had renamed the capital city of Santo Domingo) and the \u00c1guilas Cibae\u00f1as of Santiago. The Dragones won the first four, with Paige contributing two of them. The \u00c1guilas came back to win the next two and still had a chance to win the championship if they won the final two games. In Paige's memoirs, he recalled finishing the game with two shutout innings to hold onto a 6\u20135 win while soldiers looked on \"like a firing squad.\" In reality, however, Paige did not enter the game until there was one out in the ninth inning, with his team leading 8\u20133. He proceeded to give up three runs on three hits before he got the third out on a great throw by Bankhead. Paige had an excellent season overall, however, leading the league with an 8\u20132 record.\nPaige and the other players returning from the Dominican Republic faced a Negro league ban for jumping their teams. In response, they formed a barnstorming team called \"Trujillo's All-Stars\", which was later known as the \"Satchel Paige All-Stars.\" Wilkinson evaded the ban by having promoter Ray Dean schedule games between the All-Stars and the House of David. In August, the All-Stars won the \"Denver Post\" tournament. In late September, Paige faced a team of Negro league all-stars at the Polo Grounds. Despite striking out eight and allowing only two runs, he lost when the opposing pitcher, Johnny \"Schoolboy\" Taylor, tossed a no-hitter. A week later a rematch was held at Yankee Stadium, and this time Paige beat Taylor handily.\nMexico: 1938.\nIn 1938, Greenlee, who still held Paige's NNL contract, again made an unsuccessful attempt to sign Paige. Greenlee then sold his contract to the Newark Eagles for $5,000, but they could not sign him either. Paige instead went to play in the Mexican League.\nJorge Pasquel, a Mexican baseball executive and businessman, and his four brothers wanted the Mexican League to compete with the major leagues. Their plan to do that was to hire the best Negro league players who were ignored by the big leagues, then raid big league teams and field integrated clubs in the name of international baseball. With this goal, they hired Paige for $2,000 per month to play for the moribund Club Agrario of Mexico City, to create a rivalry for Club Azules of Veracruz, a powerhouse bunch led by Mart\u00edn Dihigo. Back in the states, Greenlee, out $5,000, declared Paige \"banned forever from baseball.\"\nPitching in Venezuela, Paige felt pain in his right shoulder. After he arrived in Mexico, the pain developed into the first major injury of his career. He tried to pitch through the pain, and managed to beat Dihigo in their first match-up in early September, allowing one run in eight innings. Two weeks later they faced off again, and this time Paige could barely lift his arm. He managed to go six-plus innings in a game that Paige's team ultimately lost 10\u20133. One sportswriter wrote that Paige looked like a \"squeezed lemon.\"\nPaige returned to his hotel room. He recalled that the next morning, \"My stomach got sick with the pain that shot up my right arm. Sweat popped out all over me. The pain wouldn't quit. I tried lifting my arm. I couldn't. I just sat there, sweating, hurting enough to want to cry, getting sicker in the stomach and getting scared\u2014real scared. My arm. I couldn't lift it.\" He was examined by physicians in Mexico and in the United States; one expert told him that he would never pitch again.\nKansas City Travelers: 1939.\nWith his arm injured, Paige suddenly found himself unemployable. He looked for work as a manager or coach, but was unsuccessful. One ballclub owner was willing to give him a chance to play ball again\u2014J.L. Wilkinson of the Monarchs. Wilkinson offered him the modest opportunity to play, not for the Negro American League Monarchs, but for a second-string barnstorming team called the Travelers, which was now renamed the Satchel Paige All-Stars. Paige would pitch when he could and play first base when he could not.\nManaged by Newt Joseph, the team also included Byron \"Mex\" Johnson, but otherwise it mostly functioned as a minor-league team staffed by marginal, aging, or young players. Playing throughout Kansas, Missouri, the Dakotas, Illinois, and even Utah, large crowds turned out to see Paige throw an inning or two, relying on junkballs. Paige recalled, \"Everybody'd heard I was a fastballer and here I was throwing Alley Oops and bloopers and underhand and sidearm and any way I could to get the ball up to the plate and get it over, maybe even for a strike. But even that made my arm ache like a tooth was busting every time I threw. And the balls I was throwing never would fool anybody in the Negro leagues, not without a fast ball to go with them.\"\nSometime that summer Paige's fast ball returned. Paige's catcher, Frazier \"Slow\" Robinson, recalled that one afternoon Paige told him, \"You better be ready because I'm ready today.\" Paige then surprised him when, with Robinson expecting a lob, Paige \"threw that baseball so hard that he knocked the mitt off my hand.\" Modern sports medicine specialists suggest that Paige suffered from a partially torn rotator cuff in his shoulder caused by repetitive stress. Paige's recovery was assisted by the Monarch's long-time trainer, Frank \"Jewbaby\" Floyd, who was sent by Wilkinson to work with Paige. Floyd worked with massage, hot and cold water, ointments, and chiropractic. He had Paige rest his arm by pitching fewer innings and playing other positions.\nBy late fall his team was playing well against major Negro league teams. On September 22, 1939, in the second game of a double-header against the powerful American Giants, Paige won a 1\u20130 game, striking out 10 men in the seven innings before the game was called on account of darkness. Buck O'Neil, who had batted against Paige in 1935 and 1936 and faced him again in a game against the parent Monarchs, recalled a dropoff in speed but an improvement in deception. \"He could still throw hard. Not as hard as he had thrown, but you're talkin' about somebody thrown' ninety-eight, a hundred miles an hour. But now he's throwin' maybe ninety\u2014which is still more than the average guy ... He was the best and, actually, he was so deceptive! You'd look at that big ol' slow arm movin' and\u2014\"chooo\"\u2014that ball's just right by you. And then he'd come up and throw you a change of pace and, oh, man.\"\nPuerto Rico: 1939\u201340.\nIn just one season, Paige left his mark on Puerto Rican baseball. He arrived in Puerto Rico in late October, four weeks after the start of the 1939\u201340 winter season, and joined the \"Brujos de Guayama\" (the Guayama Witch Doctors). The town of Guayama is widely known for its Santer\u00eda, Palo, and other spiritualist religious practices. In a legendary game in Guayama, Paige walked off the mound because he saw a ghost standing next to him.\nA team that featured shortstop Perucho Cepeda and outfielder Tetelo Vargas, the Guayama Witch Doctors were the 1938\u201339 champions. In September 1939, they had won the semi-pro baseball \"World Series\" in Puerto Rico against the Duncan Cementeers. On November 5, Paige pitched a shutout against rival Santurce, which featured player-manager Josh Gibson, by a lopsided score of 23\u20130.\nIn a December game against Mayag\u00fcez, Paige set a league record by striking out 17. He ended the season with a 19\u20133 record, a 1.93 ERA, and 208 strikeouts in 205 innings. The 19 wins and 208 strikeouts set league single-season records that have never been broken. Paige helped his team win the league championship playoff series, winning two games against the San Juan Senadores.\nPuerto Rican pitcher Ram\u00f3n Bayron recalled, \"It took special eyes to see his pitches.\" Luis Olmo, who later played with the Brooklyn Dodgers, described Paige that winter as \"the best I've ever seen.\"\nKansas City Monarchs: 1940\u20131947.\nPaige returned to the Travelers for the 1940 season. Abe and Effa Manley, owners of the Newark Eagles, still claimed that they still held the rights to Paige's Negro league contract, and retaliated against Wilkinson by signing players from Wilkinson's Negro American League. In late June, the NNL and NAL leaders met to discuss the situation and reached an agreement that allowed Paige to advance to the Kansas City Monarchs and let the Manleys keep the players they had recruited in violation of the inter-league rules. Late in the 1940 season, Paige was promoted to the Monarchs. On September 12, Paige made his debut with the Monarchs against the American Giants and pitched a five-inning darkness-shortened complete game. The Monarchs won 9\u20133 and Paige struck out ten.\nBecause of Paige's strong gate appeal, there was considerable demand by outside teams to lease Paige's services to pitch for a single game. With infrequent league games, Wilkinson booked Paige to pitch for small-town teams or other Negro league teams at rates ranging from a third of the total receipts to a fixed fee $250 to $2,000 per game, plus expenses. Wilkinson purchased a Douglas DC-3 airplane just to ferry Paige around to these outside appearances. Because of the larger gate when Paige pitched, the Monarchs' owners could also insist on a larger share of the receipts from their road games. Wilkinson and Paige each kept a share of the fees. By the early 1940s, Paige's estimated annual earnings were $40,000, which was four times the pay of the average player on the major league New York Yankees and nearly matched the pay of their top star, Joe DiMaggio.\nHoping for some publicity for Paige, who had received relatively little coverage while pitching in the hinterlands with the Travelers, Wilkinson arranged for Paige to pitch on opening day of 1941 for the New York Black Yankees. Appearing in front of a crowd of 20,000 fans at Yankee Stadium, Paige pitched a complete game, 5\u20133 victory, striking out eight. As intended, the contest brought considerable coverage from both the black and white media, including a pictorial by \"Life\" magazine.\nPaige took over the role of ace pitcher for the Monarchs, while Hilton Smith, their former ace, dropped to number two pitcher and sometimes was relegated to relieving Paige. Because of Paige's ability to draw a crowd, he would often be scheduled to start a game and pitch for three innings, with Smith or another teammate assigned to pitch the last six. In addition to Smith, Paige's teammates included first baseman Buck O'Neil, shortstop and manager Newt Allen, and center fielder Willard Brown. In 1941, the Monarchs won their third consecutive Negro American League championship. Though no standings were published, according to historian John Holway, they had a 24\u20136 team record for a winning percentage of .800, placing them five games ahead of the second-place New Orleans/St. Louis Stars.\nOn August 1, 1941, Paige made his first appearance in the East\u2013West All Star Game in five years, collecting 305,311 votes, 40,000 more than the next highest player, Buck Leonard. Paige entered the game at the start of the eighth inning with the East leading 8\u20131 and pitched the last two innings. The only hit he gave up was a slow roller to the NNL's new starting catcher, the Baltimore Elite Giants' Roy Campanella.\nWith America's entrance into World War II, Dizzy Dean came out of retirement, forming an all-star team consisting of recently drafted white major league and minor league players. On May 24, Dean faced Paige and the Monarchs in an exhibition game at Wrigley Field, the first time a black team ever played at Wrigley. The Monarchs defeated Dean's All-Stars 3\u20131 in front of a crowd of 29,775. On May 31, Paige teamed up with the Homestead Grays to face Dean's All-Stars again before 22,000 fans at Griffith Stadium. The Grays won 8\u20131, with Paige striking out seven (including Washington Senators star Cecil Travis) in five innings of work.\nIn the 1942 East-West All-Star Game, Paige entered in the top of the seventh with the score tied 2\u20132. Pitching the last three innings, he allowed three runs on five hits and was charged with the loss in the 5\u20132 game.\n1942 Negro World Series.\nThe Monarchs won the Negro American League pennant again in 1942. For the first time since 1927, the champions of the two leagues, Kansas City and Washington/Homestead, met in the Negro World Series. Paige started game one in Washington and pitched five shutout innings. The Monarchs scored their first run in the top of the sixth. In the bottom of the frame, Jack Matchett relieved Paige and finished the game, with Kansas City adding seven more runs to win 8\u20130.\nGame two was played two days later in Pittsburgh, and a highlight was Paige's dramatic showdown with Josh Gibson. In the bottom of the sixth, Paige relieved starter Hilton Smith with the Monarchs ahead 2\u20130. In the seventh inning, he gave up three singles and faced Gibson with the bases loaded and two outs. Gibson fouled off the first two pitches, then whiffed on the third. When Paige told the story in his autobiography, he mythologized the story. According to Paige, the strikeout came in the ninth inning with a one-run lead, and he walked the three batters ahead of Gibson in order to face him. The mythical version was retold by Buck Leonard and Buck O'Neil in their memoirs. In the actual game, the Monarchs added three runs in the top of the eighth to take a 5\u20130 lead, then Paige gave up four in the bottom of the frame to make it 5\u20134. The Monarchs added another three in the top of the ninth and won 8\u20134.\nAfter two days rest, Paige started game three, which was played in Yankee Stadium. Paige gave up two runs in the first and was pulled after two innings. Matchett pitched the remainder of the game, which the Monarchs won, 9\u20133, giving them a 3\u20130 lead in the series. The next series game was played a week later in Kansas City. When the injury-plagued Grays brought in star players from other teams, including pitcher Leon Day, second baseman Lenny Pearson, and outfielder Ed Stone of the Newark Eagles and shortstop Bus Clarkson of the Philadelphia Stars, the Monarchs played under protest. Day and Paige both pitched complete games, with Paige giving up four runs on eight hits and Day giving up one run on five hits for a Grays victory. The Monarchs' protest was upheld and the game was disallowed. Game four took place in Shibe Park in Philadelphia, and Paige was scheduled to start, but he did not show up until the fourth inning. According to his autobiography, Paige was delayed in Lancaster, Pennsylvania by an arrest for speeding. The Grays had taken a 5\u20134 lead, and Paige immediately entered the game. In the remainder of the game, he did not allow a hit or a run and struck out six, while the Monarchs' hitters scored two runs in the seventh to take the lead and three more in the eighth to win, 9\u20135, and sweep the series. Paige had pitched in all four official games in the Series (as well as one unofficial one), going 16 innings, striking out 18, and giving up eight hits and six runs.\n1943\u20131946.\nPaige was the West's starting pitcher in the 1943 East-West All-Star Game, played before a record 51,723 fans in Comiskey Park. He pitched three scoreless innings without giving up a hit, struck out four, walked one, and was credited as the winning pitcher in the West's 2\u20131 victory. As a batter, he hit a double to lead off the bottom of the third, then was lifted for a pitch runner to \"thunderous applause.\"\nWorld War II caused a large number of baseball players to be inducted into military service. Among Paige's Kansas City teammates, Connie Johnson, Buck O'Neil, and Ted Strong entered military service that year, and Willard Brown followed them the following season. Paige's Selective Service records show that during the war his draft status evolved from 1-A (available to be drafted) to 2-A (\"deferred in support of national health, safety, or interest\") to the final 4-A (too old for service, even though when he registered he gave a birth date of 1908, two years younger than his actual birth date). Paige continued to play, and the available statistics show a slip in performance in 1943, with a 6\u20138 record and a 4.59 run average (his highest average since 1929) reported for the Monarchs. The Monarchs' string of four straight pennants ended, as the Negro American League title was captured by the Birmingham Black Barons in 1943 and 1944 and by the Cleveland Buckeyes in 1945. In 1944, Paige won six games while striking out 85 batters with a 0.72 ERA.\nBefore the 1944 East-West All-Star Game\u2014black baseball's most lucrative event\u2014Paige grabbed headlines when he demanded that the owners contribute the receipts to the war relief fund, threatening a player strike if they did not accede. The owners were able to turn the other players and fans against Paige, however, when they revealed that Paige had received $800 for participating in the 1943 game (in contrast to the $50 paid to the other players) and had demanded an extra cut for the 1944 game as well. Paige was removed from the roster and the strike was averted when the owners agreed to raise the player payments (the East's team accepted $200 each, while the West's players agreed to $100).\nIn 1946, many of the Monarchs' players, including Willard Brown, Connie Johnson, Buck O'Neil, Ford Smith, and Ted Strong, returned from military service, and the team led the NAL in both the first and second halves, capturing the league pennant. O'Neil led the league in batting average, Brown in home runs, Johnson in wins, and Paige in total run average.\n1946 Negro World Series.\nThe Monarchs faced the Newark Eagles in the 1946 Negro World Series. The first game was played at the Polo Grounds and Hilton Smith started for the Monarchs. The Monarchs held a 1\u20130 lead in the bottom of the sixth, when Smith walked Larry Doby to lead off the inning, and Paige was called in to relieve. Paige struck out Monte Irvin and Lenny Pearson, but Doby stole second and Paige gave up a single to Johnny Davis, which tied the game. In the top of the seventh, the Monarchs got the lead back when Paige hit a single, advanced to second on an error, and scored on a hit by Herb Souell. Paige shut down the Eagles for the rest of the game, striking out eight and allowing four hits over four innings, and was credited with the win.\nTwo days later, Paige came into the second game in a similar situation as the first, but the result was quite different. Ford Smith started the game for the Monarchs, and he had a 4\u20131 lead entering the bottom of the seventh. After allowing two runs and with Irvin on first, Paige was brought in to protect the 4\u20133 lead. This time, however, Paige gave up four hits before the end of the inning, and four runs crossed the plate. Paige finished the game, but was charged with the loss in the 7\u20134 game.\nThe next two games were played in Kansas City, and the Monarchs won game three, getting a complete game from Jim LaMarque. Ted Alexander started game four, but gave way to Paige in the top of the sixth with the Monarchs trailing 4\u20131. Paige gave up three runs on three hits in the sixth, including a home run to Irvin. He went on to finish the game, giving up one more run in the seventh, and the Monarchs lost 8\u20131.\nKansas City won the fifth game and Newark won the sixth. For the deciding game seven, Paige was missing. Buck O'Neil believed Paige was meeting with Bob Feller about their upcoming barnstorming tour. With Ford Smith pitching, the Monarchs lost 3\u20132, and the Eagles claimed the championship.\nBarnstorming with Feller: 1946\u20131947.\nIn late 1946, Bob Feller organized the first barnstorming tour to use airplanes to travel from site to site. His tour has been described as \"the most ambitious baseball undertaking since John McGraw and Charles Comiskey dreamed up their round-the-world junket in 1913.\" For his team, Feller recruited all-stars from both major leagues. As his main opponent, he asked Paige to head a team of Negro league all-stars.\nFeller's team included 1946 American League batting champion, Mickey Vernon, at first base, Johnny Beradino at second, Phil Rizzuto at shortstop, and Ken Keltner at third. The outfielders were Jeff Heath, Charlie Keller, and Sam Chapman; after the World Series was over, National League batting champion Stan Musial would also join the tour. Catching was shared by Jim Hegan and Frankie Hayes. In addition to Feller, the pitching staff included Bob Lemon, Dutch Leonard, Johnny Sain, Spud Chandler, and Fred Hutchinson.\nWith help from J.L. Wilkinson and Tom Baird, Paige assembled a team that included first baseman Buck O'Neil, second baseman Hank Thompson, shortstops Chico Renfroe and Artie Wilson, third basemen Howard Easterling and Herb Souell, outfielders Gene Benson and Johnny Davis, catcher Quincy Trouppe, and pitchers Barney Brown, Gentry Jessup, Rufus Lewis, Hilton Smith, and Neck Stanley.\nFeller scheduled 35 games in 31 cities in 17 states, all to be played in 27 days. The tour would require 13,000 miles of travel. Several same-day multi-city doubleheaders were to be played. Feller leased two DC-3 airplanes, with \"Bob Feller All-Stars\" painted on one fuselage and \"Satchel Paige All-Stars\" on the other. While Feller's team would face several other opponents, the majority of the games were against Paige's team. Feller and Paige would start each game whenever possible and usually pitch one to five innings.\nThe first game was played at Forbes Field in Pittsburgh on September 30, two days after the end of the major league season and one day after the final game of the Negro World Series. Paige and Feller each pitched three innings and left the game with the score tied 1\u20131. Feller struck out three and gave up two hits, while Paige struck out four and gave up only one hit. Paige's team broke the tie in the seventh inning when Hank Thompson walked and stole second and Souell drove him home with a single up the middle.\nOver the next six days, Feller's team won games in Youngstown, Cleveland, Chicago, Cincinnati, New York, and Newark, before Paige's team won a second game in New York. Paige pitched five shutout innings in Yankee Stadium before a crowd of 27,462. After the game they flew to Baltimore, where that same evening Paige's team beat Feller's. The next day, Paige's team won again in Columbus. From there, Feller's team won games in Dayton, Ohio, Richmond, Indiana, Council Bluffs, Iowa, and Wichita, Kansas. They then played two games in Kansas City, with Paige's team winning the first game on a three-run walk-off home run by Johnny Davis, and Feller's team winning the second. After that series, Feller's team continued on to Denver and California, while most of Paige's team left the tour. Paige, however, continued on to California where he joined a lesser team, Chet Brewer's Kansas City Royals, which was scheduled to play Feller's All-Stars.\nPaige faced Feller in Los Angeles and in San Diego and lost both games. Another scheduled match-up was cancelled when Paige filed a lawsuit against Feller, claiming that Feller had not paid some of the money he was owed. Overall, Feller had pitched 54 innings against Paige's team and given up 15 runs, an average of 2.50 per nine innings. Paige had pitched 42 innings and allowed 18 runs, or 3.86 per nine innings.\nAfter the 1947 season, Feller organized another all-star team for a barnstorming tour. This time, Paige was not invited to tour with him, with Feller opting to play more games in the South against white opponents. Paige did face Feller twice, however, while playing with Chet Brewer's Kansas City Royals in Los Angeles. In the first game, on October 15, both pitchers went four innings. Feller gave up four hits and one walk and struck out two, while Paige gave up just two hits and one walk and struck out seven. Nevertheless, Paige took the loss when he gave up a run in the fourth when Keltner singled and later scored on a sacrifice fly by Heath. On October 19, they again faced each other in front of a crowd of 12,000-plus. Both pitchers went five innings. Paige allowed three hits and no walks, and struck out eight, including Ralph Kiner twice. He left the game with a 1\u20130 lead, but Feller's team came back in the late innings to win 2\u20131.\nAmerican and National League.\nCleveland Indians.\nOn July 7, 1948, Cleveland Indians owner Bill Veeck brought Paige in to try out with Indians player-coach Lou Boudreau. On that same day, his 42nd birthday, Paige signed his first major league contract, for $40,000 for the three months remaining in the season, becoming the first black pitcher in the American League and the seventh black big leaguer overall. On July 9, 1948, Paige became the oldest man ever to debut in the National League or American League, at the age of 42 years and two days. When asked about his age, he would reply \"If someone asked you how old you were and you didn't know your age, how old would you think you were?\" With the St. Louis Browns beating the Indians 4\u20131 in the bottom of the fourth inning, Boudreau pulled his starting pitcher, Bob Lemon, and sent Paige in. Paige, not knowing the signs and not wanting to confuse his catcher, pitched cautiously. Chuck Stevens lined a ball to left field for a single. Jerry Priddy bunted Stevens over to second. Up next was Whitey Platt, and Paige decided to take command. He threw an overhand pitch for a strike and one sidearm for another strike. Paige then threw his \"Hesitation Pitch\" (see \"pitching style\" section below), which surprised Platt so much that he threw his bat 40 feet up the third base line. Browns manager Zack Taylor bolted from the dugout to talk to umpire Bill McGowan about the pitch, claiming it was a balk, but McGowan let it stand as a strike. Paige then got Al Zarilla to fly out to end the inning. The next inning, he gave up a leadoff single, but with his catcher having simplified his signals, Paige got the next batter to hit into a double play, followed by a pop fly. Larry Doby pinch-hit for Paige the following inning.\nPaige got his first big league victory on July 15, 1948, the night after he pitched in an exhibition game against the Brooklyn Dodgers in front of 65,000 people in Cleveland's Municipal Stadium. It came at Philadelphia's Shibe Park. The Indians were up 5\u20133 and the bases were loaded in the sixth inning of the second game of a double header. He got Eddie Joost to fly out to end the inning, but gave up two runs the next inning when Ferris Fain doubled and Hank Majeski hit a home run. Paige buckled down and gave up only one more hit the rest of the game, getting five of the next six outs on fly balls.\nLongtime Chicago Cubs broadcaster Jack Brickhouse once said with amusement that Paige \"threw a lot of pitches that were not quite 'legal' and not quite 'illegal.'\" American League President Will Harridge eventually ruled the hesitation pitch illegal and stated that if Paige threw it again, it would be called a balk. Paige said, \"I guess Mr. Harridge did not want me to show up those boys who were young enough to be my sons.\"\nOn August 3, 1948, with the Indians one game behind the Athletics, Boudreau started Paige against the Washington Senators in Cleveland. The 72,562 people that saw the game set a new attendance record for a major league night game. Although a nervous Paige walked two of the first three batters and gave up a triple to Bud Stewart to fall behind 2\u20130, by the time he left in the seventh, the Indians were up 4\u20132 and held on to give him his second victory. His next start was at Comiskey Park in Chicago. 51,013 people paid to see the game, but many thousands more stormed the turnstiles and crashed into the park, overwhelming the few dozen ticket-takers. Paige went the distance, shutting out the White Sox, 5\u20130, debunking the assumption that nine innings of pitching was now beyond his capabilities.\nThe Indians were in a heated pennant race on August 20, 1948. Coming into the game against the White Sox, Bob Lemon, Gene Bearden and Sam Zoldak had thrown shutouts to run up a 30-inning scoreless streak, 11 shy of the big league record. 201,829 people had come to see his last three starts. For this game in Cleveland, 78,382 people came to see Paige, a full 6,000 more people than the previous night game attendance record. Paige went the distance, giving up two singles and one double for his second consecutive three hit shutout. At that point in the season, Paige was 5\u20131 with an astoundingly low 1.33 ERA. He made one appearance in the 1948 World Series. He pitched for two-thirds of an inning in Game Five while the Indians were trailing the Boston Braves. Paige gave up a sacrifice fly to Warren Spahn, got called for a balk, and got Tommy Holmes to ground out to shortstop Lou Boudreau. The Indians won the series in six games.\nPaige ended the 1948 season with a 6\u20131 record with a 2.48 ERA, 2 shutouts, 43 strikeouts, 22 walks and 61 base hits allowed in 72&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 innings. There was some discussion of Paige possibly winning the Rookie of the Year Award. While technically a \"rookie\" to the majors, the 20-plus-year veteran Paige regarded such an idea with disdain and considered rejecting the award if it were to be given. The issue proved moot, as both versions of the award (by Major League Baseball and by \"Sporting News\") were given to other players. The year 1949 was not nearly as good for Paige as 1948. He ended the season with a 4\u20137 record and was 1\u20133 in his starts with a 3.04 ERA. After the season, with Veeck selling the team to pay for his divorce, the Indians gave Paige his unconditional release.\nSt. Louis Browns.\nPenniless, Paige returned to his barnstorming days after being released from the Indians. When Veeck bought an 80% interest in the St. Louis Browns he soon signed Paige. In his first game back in the major leagues, on July 18, 1951, against the Washington Senators, Paige pitched six innings of shutout baseball until the seventh when he gave up three runs. He ended the season with a 3\u20134 record and a 4.79 ERA.\nIn 1952, Rogers Hornsby took over as manager of the Browns, and despite past accusations of racism, Hornsby was less hesitant to use Paige than Boudreau was four years before. Paige was so effective that when Hornsby was fired by Veeck, his successor Marty Marion seemed not to want to risk going more than three games without using Paige in some form. By July 4, with Paige having worked in 25 games, Casey Stengel named him to the American League All-Star team, making him the first black pitcher on an AL All-Star team. The All-Star game was cut short after five innings due to rain and Paige never got in. Stengel resolved to name him to the team the following year. Paige finished the year 12\u201310 with a 3.07 ERA for a team that lost ninety games.\nStengel kept his word and named Paige to the 1953 All-Star team despite Paige not having a very good year. Paige ended the year with a disappointing 3\u20139 record. Paige was released after the season when Veeck sold the Browns.\nHiatus from the Major Leagues.\nPaige once again returned to his barnstorming days. Then, on August 14, 1955, Paige signed a contract with the Greensboro Patriots of the Carolina League.\nVeeck once again came to Paige's rescue when, after taking control of the Phillies' Triple-A farm team, the Miami Marlins of the International League, he signed Paige to a contract for $15,000 and a percentage of the gate. Paige finished the season 11\u20134 with an ERA of 1.86 with 79 strikeouts and only 28 walks. This time, when Veeck left the team, Paige was allowed to stay on, for two more years.\nIn 1957, the Marlins finished in sixth place, but Paige had a 10\u20138 record with 76 strikeouts versus 11 walks and 2.42 ERA. The following year, Paige finished 10\u201310, saying that he would not return to Miami in 1959. In 1959, Paige returned to his barnstorm roots and signed a pitching contract with the Havana Cuban Stars who were owned by Dempsey Hovland. Paige was in and out of baseball, pitching sporadically, over the next decade.\nAt the age of 55, in 1961, Paige signed on with the Triple-A Portland Beavers of the Pacific Coast League, pitching 25 innings, striking out 19 and giving up eight earned runs. He failed to record a single decision in his stint with the Beavers.\nKansas City Athletics.\nIn 1965, Kansas City Athletics owner Charles O. Finley signed Paige, 59 at the time, for one game. On September 25, against the Boston Red Sox, Finley invited several Negro league veterans, including Cool Papa Bell, to be introduced before the game. Paige was in the bullpen, sitting on a rocking chair, being served coffee by a \"nurse\" between innings. He started the game by getting Jim Gosger out on a pop foul. The next man, Dalton Jones, reached first and went to second on an infield error, but was thrown out trying to reach third on a pitch in the dirt. Carl Yastrzemski doubled and Tony Conigliaro hit a fly ball to end the inning. The next six batters went down in order, including a strikeout of Bill Monbouquette. In the fourth inning, Paige took the mound, to be removed according to plan by Haywood Sullivan. He walked off to a standing ovation from the small crowd of 9,289. The lights dimmed and, led by the PA announcer, the fans lit matches and cigarette lighters while singing \"The Old Gray Mare\".\nThe end.\nIn 1966, Paige continued to tour the country pitching exhibition games. On June 19, 1966, Paige took the mound for the Carolina League's Peninsula Grays against the Greensboro Yankees in a three-inning exhibition stint, not allowing a hit. Grays General Manager Marshall Fox decided to let the nearly-sixty-year-old legend pitch in a real game, which Satchel did two days later, drawing a much larger-than-usual crowd of 3,118 to War Memorial Stadium. Again facing Greensboro, Paige started the game and pitched two innings, allowing two runs on five hits, before giving way to scheduled starter (and future big-leaguer) Steve Mingori. Notably, the Grays opted to use their back-up catcher Bruce Lowell that night, and not their regular man behind the plate, future Hall of Famer Johnny Bench.\nPitching style.\nThe spectacle of watching Paige pitch was made all the more entertaining by the expansive pitching repertoire he developed over the years. In his early years, Paige was known as a pure fastball pitcher. He experimented with releasing pitches from a variety of arm angles in that time, something he would build upon later as he added more pitches to the mix. In 1933, while he was playing integrated baseball in Bismarck, North Dakota, \"The Bismarck Tribune\" reported that Paige used \"a tricky delayed delivery with great effectiveness,\" something that would later become known as Paige's famous \"hesitation pitch\".\nThe idea came to me in a game, when the guy at bat was all tighted up waiting for my fast ball. I knew he'd swing as soon as I just barely moved. So when I stretched, I paused just a little longer with my arms above my head. Then I threw my left foot forward but I didn't come around with my arm right away. I put that foot of mine down, stopping for a second, before the ball left my hand. When my foot hit the ground that boy started swinging, so by the time I came around with the whip he was way off stride and couldn't get anywhere near the ball. I had me a strikeout.\nIn 1934, before a barnstorming match-up, Dizzy Dean was heard on the radio saying that \"Satchel Paige has no clue how to throw a curve.\" In actuality, Paige had been practicing and perfecting his curveball in secret for many years. When Dean came up to bat, Satchel Paige struck him out with nothing but curveballs\u2014officially adding the pitch to his repertoire. Paige could throw a variety of curveballs at different speeds and arm angles.\nIn late 1939, after Paige had recovered from the severe arm injury that jeopardized his career, he re-designed his pitching repertoire to take better care of his arm. He still had an exceptional fastball but he did away with his fast curve, deciding to only throw slow curves from that point forward. He learned to throw a knuckleball from Cool Papa Bell, a pitch which he reportedly perfected in regards to its movement, but could not always fully control. He also added a \"slow sinker\" and used his hesitation pitch more frequently. Along with these additions to his repertoire, Paige made greater use of his sidearm and submarine releases, which both made him a more deceptive pitcher and lessened the strain on his pitching arm.\nAs Paige got older, he had to rely more and more on his offspeed pitches. By the time he finally got to play in the major leagues, he threw a seemingly endless variety of pitches, all of which moved. He was especially known for his tailing fastball, slow curve, hesitation pitch, a fantastic change-up, and a highly effective eephus pitch. He had unique trick pitches with unique names. Besides calling his fast ball \"Long Tom,\" he possessed trick pitches with names such as the \"Whipsy-Dipsy-Do,\" the \"Midnight Creeper,\" and \"the Wobbly Ball.\" He reportedly could deceive batters by throwing fastballs with a curveball wrist action, and vice versa. Pitching this way allowed Paige to be a highly effective pitcher, even into his fifties.\nPost-playing career.\nAfter the 1957 season, Paige went to the Mexican state of Durango to appear in a United Artists movie, \"The Wonderful Country\", starring Robert Mitchum and Julie London. Paige played Sgt. Tobe Sutton, a hard-bitten cavalry sergeant of the Buffalo Soldiers.\nLate in 1960, Paige began collaborating with writer David Lipman on his autobiography, which was published by Doubleday in April 1962, and ran to three printings.\nIn 1968, Paige assumed the position of deputy sheriff in Jackson County, Missouri, with the understanding that he need not bother to actually come to work in the sheriff's office. The purpose of the charade was to set up Paige with political credentials. Soon after, he ran for a Missouri state assembly seat with the support of the local Democratic club against incumbent Representative Leon Jordan. Jordan defeated Paige by the margin of 1,870 votes to 382 (83\u201317%).\nIn 1968, Paige reached out to all twenty MLB teams at the time to try and join one of them on the active roster in order to reach the 158 days required to qualify for the five-year minimum for the pension. On August 12, Atlanta Braves owner William Bartholomay agreed to sign him as an adviser. On February 26, 1969, the league and the players' association altered the pension requirements, with one of the requirements stating that any player that had played at least four years could qualify for the pension, including players that had played during 1959. At any rate, Paige worked the year as an assistant trainer.\nBowie Kuhn replaced William Eckert as the Commissioner of Baseball in 1969. In the wake of Ted Williams' 1966 Hall of Fame induction speech urging the induction of Negro leaguers, and on the recommendation of the Baseball Writers' Association of America, Kuhn empowered a ten-man committee to sift through hundreds of names and nominate the first group of four Negro league players to go to the Hall of Fame. Because Paige pitched in Peninsula in 1966, he would not have been eligible for enshrinement until 1971, as players have to be out of professional baseball for at least five years before they can be elected. All of the men on the committee agreed that Paige had to be the first Negro league player to get elected. On February 9, 1971, Kuhn announced that Paige would be the first member of the Negro wing of the Hall of Fame. Because many in the press saw the suggestion of a \"Negro wing\" as separate but equal and denounced Major League Baseball for the idea, by the time that Paige's induction came around on August 9, Kuhn convinced the owners and the private trust of the Hall of Fame that there should be no separate wing after all. It was decided that all who had been chosen and all who would be chosen would get their plaques in the \"regular\" section of the Hall of Fame.\nPaige took a job with the Tulsa Oilers minor league team in 1973 as their pitching coach. During the mid-to-late 1970s he finally slowed down his traveling, making only occasional personal appearances at mostly minor league stadiums and banquets.\nIn 1980, Paige was named vice-president of the Triple-A Springfield Cardinals, although it was mostly an honorary position.\nPaige was inducted into the Baseball Reliquary's Shrine of the Eternals in 2001.\nPersonal life.\nOn October 26, 1934, Paige married his longtime girlfriend Janet Howard. They separated a few years later and she served Paige with divorce papers while he was walking onto the field during a game at Wrigley Field. At his court date, on August 4, 1943, Paige's divorce was finalized with him paying a one time payment of $1,500 plus Howard's $300 attorney's fees.\nPaige married Lucy Maria Figueroa during his time playing in Puerto Rico in 1940, but because he was not divorced from his first wife, the marriage to Figueroa was not legal.\nIn 1946 or 1947, Paige married LaHoma Jean Brown. Paige and LaHoma had seven children together; LaHoma also had a daughter from an earlier marriage.\nDeath.\nPaige died of a heart attack after a power failure at his home in Kansas City on June 8, 1982. He is buried on Paige Island in the Forest Hill Calvary Cemetery in Kansas City.\nLegacy.\nIn 2010, sportswriter Joe Posnanski, writing for \"Sports Illustrated\", named Paige as the hardest thrower in the history of baseball. He based this, in part, on the fact that: \"Joe DiMaggio would say that Paige was the best he ever faced. Bob Feller would say that Paige was the best he ever saw. Hack Wilson would say that the ball looked like a marble when it crossed the plate. Dizzy Dean would say that Paige's fastball made his own look like a changeup.\" Posnanski further noted that for most of his career, Satchel Paige threw nothing but fastballs. Nothing. Oh, he named them different names\u2014Bat Dodger, Midnight Rider, Midnight Creeper, Jump Ball, Trouble Ball\u2014but essentially they were all fastballs. And he was still unhittable for the better part of 15 years. One pitch. It's a lot like Mariano Rivera, except he wasn't doing it for one inning at a time. He was pitching complete games day after day. That had to be some kind of incredible fastball. ... [he was] perhaps the most precise pitcher in baseball history\u2014he threw ludicrously hard. And he also threw hundreds and hundreds of innings.\nHall of Famer Charlie Gehringer, who faced Paige at the peak of his career, said \"I never hit against anybody better.\"\nThe episode \"The Ballad of Satchel Paige\" from the Chicago-based \"Destination Freedom\" radio anthology series was broadcast by station WMAQ on May 15, 1948.\nOn May 31, 1981, the ABC made-for-television movie \"\" aired, starring Louis Gossett Jr. as Paige, Beverly Todd as Lahoma, and former baseball pro Bubba Phillips as Coach Hardy. Paige was paid $10,000 for his story and technical advice. The film was based on the 1962 book, \"Maybe I'll Pitch Forever\". In August, with great difficulty because of health problems, he attended a reunion of Negro league players held in Ashland, Kentucky, that paid special tribute to him and Cool Papa Bell. Attending the reunion were Willie Mays, Buck Leonard, Monte Irvin, Judy Johnson, Chet Brewer, Gene Benson, Bob Feller and Happy Chandler.\nIn 1996, Paige was portrayed by Delroy Lindo in the HBO made-for-television film \"Soul of the Game\".\nIn 1999, he ranked Number 19 on \"The Sporting News\"' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, and was nominated as a finalist for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team.\nOn July 28, 2006, a statue of Satchel Paige was unveiled in Cooper Park, Cooperstown, New York, commemorating the contributions of the Negro leagues to baseball.\nStatistics.\nNorth Dakota.\nSource\nNote: Compiled by Tye from newspaper clippings; some clipping did not include complete stats.\nDominican League.\nSource:\nMexican League.\nSource:\nNote: Paige suffered a serious arm injury while playing in Mexico.\nCuban (Winter) League.\nSource:\nCalifornia Winter League.\nSource:\nPuerto Rican (Winter) League.\nSources:\nThe above venues aggregate a total of 232 victories and 89 losses, for a winning percentage of .723.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28631", "revid": "50595800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28631", "title": "Sam Raimi", "text": "American filmmaker (born 1959)\nSamuel Marshall Raimi ( ; born October 23, 1959) is an American filmmaker. He is best known for directing the first three films in the \"Evil Dead\" franchise (1981\u2013present) and the \"Spider-Man\" trilogy (2002\u20132007). He also directed the superhero movie \"Darkman\" (1990), the revisionist western \"The Quick and the Dead\" (1995), the neo-noir crime thriller \"A Simple Plan\" (1998), the supernatural thriller \"The Gift\" (2000), the supernatural horror \"Drag Me to Hell\" (2009), the Disney fantasy \"Oz the Great and Powerful\" (2013), and the Marvel Studios film \"Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness\" (2022).\nHis films are known for their highly dynamic visual style, inspired by comic books and slapstick comedy. He founded the production companies Renaissance Pictures in 1979 and Ghost House Pictures in 2002. Raimi has also produced several successful television series, including ', its spin-off ', and \"Ash vs Evil Dead\" starring longtime friend and collaborator Bruce Campbell reprising his role in the \"Evil Dead\" franchise.\nEarly life.\nRaimi was born in Royal Oak, Michigan, to a Conservative Jewish family. He is a son of merchants Celia Barbara (n\u00e9e Abrams) (1929-2016) and Leonard Ronald Raimi (1926-2021). His ancestors were Jewish immigrants from Russia and Hungary. His younger brother Ted is an actor, and his older brother Ivan is a screenwriter and physician. His older sister, Andrea Raimi Rubin, is a court reporter. Another older brother, Sander, died at 15 in an accidental drowning in Israel; Raimi has said that the trauma knitted the remaining family closer together and \"colored everything he's done for the rest of his life.\" Raimi also mentioned that Sander first introduced him to \"Spider-Man\", igniting his love for comics.\nRaimi graduated from Groves High School and later went on to attend Michigan State University and later Universit\u00e0 Bocconi in Milan, Italy, where he studied English but left after three semesters to film \"The Evil Dead\".\nCareer.\nFilm.\nRaimi became fascinated with making films when his father brought a movie camera home one day. He began to make Super 8 movies with his friend Bruce Campbell, whom he met in 1975. In college, he collaborated with his brother's roommate Robert Tapert and Campbell to shoot \"Within the Woods\" (1978), a 32-minute horror film which raised $375,000, as well as his debut feature film \"It's Murder!\". During that time, he also shot the seven-minute short film \"Clockwork\" (1978), starring Scott Spiegel (who had appeared in \"Within the Woods\") and Cheryl Guttridge. Through family, friends, and a network of investors, Raimi was able to finance production of the highly successful horror film \"The Evil Dead\" (1981), which became a cult hit and effectively launched Raimi's career.\nHe began work on his third film \"Crimewave\" (1985), which he co-wrote with the then-unknown Coen brothers, shortly after. Intended as a live-action comic book, the film was unsuccessful, partly due to unwanted studio intervention. Raimi then returned to the horror genre with the seminal \"Evil Dead II\" (which added slapstick humor to the over-the-top horror, showcasing his love of the Three Stooges). With his brother Ivan Raimi (and crediting himself as Celia Abrams), Sam Raimi also wrote \"Easy Wheels\" (1989), which parodied the Outlaw biker film genre. A long-time comic book buff, he then attempted to adapt \"The Shadow\" into a movie but was unable to secure the rights, so he created his own superhero, \"Darkman\" (1990). The film was his first major studio picture, and was commercially successful, spawning two sequels. Through it he was still able to secure funding for \"Evil Dead III\", which was retitled \"Army of Darkness\" and largely steered away from horror towards fantasy and comedy elements. \"Army of Darkness\", the final movie in the \"Evil Dead\" trilogy, commercially underperformed, yet on video became a cult classic.\nIn the 1990s, Raimi moved into other genres, directing such films as the western \"The Quick and the Dead\" (starring Sharon Stone and Gene Hackman), the critically acclaimed crime thriller \"A Simple Plan\" (1998) (starring Bill Paxton and Billy Bob Thornton), and the romantic drama \"For Love of the Game\" (1999) (starring Kevin Costner).\nRaimi has frequently collaborated with Joel and Ethan Coen, beginning when Joel was one of the editors of \"Evil Dead\". The Coens co-wrote \"Crimewave\" and \"The Hudsucker Proxy\" with Raimi in the mid-1980s (though \"Hudsucker\" was not produced for almost a decade). Raimi made cameo appearances in \"Miller's Crossing\", \"The Hudsucker Proxy\", and with Joel Coen in \"Spies Like Us\". The Coen brothers gave Raimi advice on shooting in snow for \"A Simple Plan\", based on their experiences with \"Fargo\".\nRaimi has worked in front of the camera in \"The Stand\" as a dimwitted hitman, John Carpenter's \"Body Bags\" as a murdered gas station attendant, and \"Indian Summer\" in what is perhaps his biggest role as a bumbling assistant to Alan Arkin. The film was written by his childhood friend, writer-director Mike Binder, and shot at the camp that they both attended when they were younger. \nRaimi achieved great critical and commercial success with the blockbuster \"Spider-Man\" (2002), which was adapted from the comic book series of the same name. The movie grossed over US$800 million worldwide, spawning two sequels: \"Spider-Man 2\" and \"Spider-Man 3\", both directed by Raimi and each grossing approximately $800 million. After the completion of the third \"Spider-Man\" film, he planned on producing two more sequels (although Sony Pictures planned three sequels) but could not find a satisfactory script. In 2022, reflecting on \"Spider-Man 3\", Raimi told \"Rolling Stone\": \"It was a very painful experience for me. I wanted to make a Spider-Man movie to redeem myself for that. [The aborted] \"Spider-Man 4\" \u2014 that was really what that was about. I wanted to go out on a high note. I didn't want to just make another one that pretty much worked. I had a really high standard in my mind. And I didn't think I could get that script to the level that I was hoping for by that start date.\" He, along with Marc Webb, were both brought on as creative consultants for Marvel Studios' \"\", directed by Jon Watts.\nRaimi produced the entire English-language \"The Grudge\" franchise, based on the original Japanese films. On December 11, 2006, the website SuperHero Hype reported that director Sam Raimi and Michael Uslan would co-produce a new film version of \"The Shadow\" for Columbia Pictures. On October 16, 2007, Raimi stated that: \"I don't have any news on \"The Shadow\" at this time, except that the company that I have with Josh Donen, my producing partner, we've got the rights to \"The Shadow\". I love the character very much and we're trying to work on a story that'll do justice to the character.\" According to \"Entertainment Weekly\", Raimi had expressed an interest in directing a film version of \"The Hobbit\", the prequel to the \"Lord of the Rings\" trilogy. In 2008, it was reported Guillermo del Toro would direct with Peter Jackson as the executive producer, though Jackson ultimately directed \"The Hobbit\" film series. In 2008, it was reported Raimi might direct \"By Any Means Necessary\", the next film based on the \"Jack Ryan\" CIA character created by Tom Clancy for Paramount Pictures. Disney also approached him to direct \"W.I.T.C.H.: The Movie\", based on the popular comic.\nRaimi directed the horror film \"Drag Me to Hell\", released in 2009 to critical acclaim. Blizzard Entertainment announced on July 22, 2009, that Raimi would be directing a film adaptation of the \"Warcraft\" video game series, but at the 2012 San Diego Comic-Con, it was revealed that he would not be the director.\nIn 2009, it was reported Raimi would produce the British supernatural thriller \"Refuge\", which would be directed by Corin Hardy and published by Mandate Pictures, and the remake of the Danish thriller \"The Substitute\", which would be directed by Scott Derrickson, under his new label Spooky Pictures. In 2010, it was reported he would produce the British thriller flick \"Burst 3D\" with his company Ghost House Pictures, directed by Neil Marshall.\nRaimi directed \"Oz the Great and Powerful\", which was released on March 8, 2013, by Walt Disney Pictures and grossed $493 million worldwide. He said he would not be directing the planned sequel.\nRaimi, along with Bruce Campbell and Rob Tapert, produced the remake of Raimi's \"Evil Dead\". First-time feature filmmaker Fede \u00c1lvarez wrote and directed, and Diablo Cody was also brought in to revise/rewrite the script. Raimi confirmed plans to write \"Evil Dead 4\" with his brother; it was later specified that this film would be \"Army of Darkness 2\". \u00c1lvarez revealed that Raimi would direct the sequel to \"Army of Darkness\". However, in a 2014 interview, Bruce Campbell announced that \"Army of Darkness 2\" is not happening, saying \"It's all internet b.s. There's no reality whatsoever. These random comments slip out of either my mouth, or Sam Raimi's mouth, next thing you know, we're making a sequel.\"\nOn February 26, 2016, it was confirmed that Raimi was attached to direct the upcoming film \"World War 3\" for Warner Bros. The film would be based on a possible future inspired by the book \"The Next 100 Years\" by George Friedman.\nOn February 16, 2017, it was reported that Raimi would be directing a thriller about the Bermuda Triangle for Skydance Media, with the script being written by Doug Miro and Carlo Bernard.\nBy January 29, 2018, Raimi was set to direct the first in the movie adaptations of Patrick Rothfuss's Kingkiller Chronicle series, \"The Name of the Wind\", with Rothfuss and Lin-Manuel Miranda serving as executive producers.\nOn February 5, 2020, it was announced that Raimi was in talks with Marvel Studios to direct \"Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness\", and Raimi confirmed his involvement in April 2020. This marked Raimi's return to the superhero film genre after more than 15 years following \"Spider-Man 3\" in 2007 and his first feature film directorial effort since 2013's \"Oz the Great and Powerful.\"\nTelevision.\nIn addition to film, Raimi has worked in television, producing such series as ' and its spin-off ', both featuring his younger brother Ted Raimi and long-time friend Bruce Campbell, \"American Gothic\", \"Cleopatra 2525\", \"M.A.N.T.I.S.\", ', \"Young Hercules\", and \"Jack of All Trades\". In 2008, Raimi executive-produced a syndicated TV series called \"Legend of the Seeker\", based on Terry Goodkind's best-selling \"The Sword of Truth\" fantasy series. He also executive produced the Starz original television series ', ', ' and \"\". He directed the pilot episode of \"Ash vs Evil Dead\" for Starz.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1993, Raimi married Gillian Greene, the daughter of Canadian actor Lorne Greene. They have five children; their three eldest, daughter Emma Rose and sons Lorne and Henry, appeared as extras in \"Drag Me to Hell\" and during the final battle in \"Spider-Man 3\". Greene filed for divorce on May 8, 2024, citing irreconcilable differences.\nPolitical donations.\nIn 1995, Raimi donated $450 to the campaign of then-Republican Senator Arlen Specter. In 2002, he donated $1,000 to Democratic Senator Barbara Boxer. During the 2004 election cycle, Raimi donated $900 to Republican President George W. Bush.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28632", "revid": "49893966", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28632", "title": "Seventh-day Adventist Church", "text": "Protestant Christian denomination\nThe Seventh-day Adventist Church (SDA) is an Adventist Protestant Christian denomination which is distinguished by its observance of Saturday, the seventh day of the week in the Christian (Gregorian) and the Hebrew calendar, as the Sabbath; its emphasis on the imminent Second Coming (advent) of Jesus Christ; and its annihilationist soteriology. The denomination grew out of the Millerite movement in the United States during the mid-19th century, and it was formally established in 1863. Among its co-founders was Ellen G. White, whose extensive writings are still held in high regard by the church.\nMuch of the theology of the Seventh-day Adventist Church corresponds to common evangelical Christian teachings, such as the Trinity and the infallibility of Scripture. Distinctive eschatological teachings include the unconscious state of the dead and the doctrine of an investigative judgment. The church emphasizes diet and health, including adhering to Jewish dietary law, advocating vegetarianism, and its holistic view of human nature\u2014i.e., that the body, soul, and spirit form one inseparable entity. The church holds the belief that \"God created the universe, and in a recent six-day creation made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested on the seventh day.\" Marriage is defined as a lifelong union between a man and a woman. The second coming of Christ and resurrection of the dead are among official beliefs.\nThe world church is governed by a General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists, with smaller regions administered by divisions, unions, local conferences, and local missions. The Seventh-day Adventist Church is as of 2016[ [update]] \"one of the fastest-growing and most widespread churches worldwide\", with a worldwide baptized membership of over 22 million people. , it was the twelfth-largest Protestant religious body in the world and the sixth-largest highly international religious body. It is ethnically and culturally diverse and maintains a missionary presence in over 215 countries and territories. The church operates over 7,500 schools including over 100 post-secondary institutions, numerous hospitals, and publishing houses worldwide, a humanitarian aid organization known as the Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA) and tax-exempt businesses such as Sanitarium, the proceeds of which contribute to the church's charitable and religious activities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe Seventh-day Adventist Church is the largest of several Adventist groups which arose from the Millerite movement of the 1840s in upstate New York, a phase of the Second Great Awakening. William Miller predicted on the basis of Daniel 8:14\u201316 and the \"day-year principle\" that Jesus Christ would return to Earth between the spring of 1843 and the spring of 1844. In the summer of 1844, Millerites came to believe that Jesus would return on October 22, 1844, understood to be the biblical Day of Atonement for that year. Miller's failed prediction became known as the \"Great Disappointment\".\nHiram Edson and other Millerites came to believe that Miller's calculations were correct, but that his interpretation of Daniel 8:14 was flawed as he assumed Christ would come to cleanse the world. These Adventists came to the conviction that Daniel 8:14 foretold Christ's entrance into the most holy place of the heavenly sanctuary rather than his Second Coming. Over the next few decades this understanding of a sanctuary in heaven developed into the doctrine of the investigative judgment, an eschatological process that commenced in 1844, in which every person would be judged to verify their eligibility for salvation and God's justice will be confirmed before the universe. This group of Adventists continued to believe that Christ's second coming would continue to be imminent, however they resisted setting further dates for the event, citing Revelation 10:6, \"that there should be time no longer.\"\nDevelopment of Sabbatarianism.\nAs the early Adventist movement consolidated its beliefs, the question of the biblical day of rest and worship was raised. The foremost proponent of Sabbath-keeping among early Adventists was Joseph Bates. Bates was introduced to the Sabbath doctrine through a tract written by Millerite preacher Thomas M. Preble, who in turn had been influenced by Rachel Oakes Preston, a young Seventh Day Baptist. This message was gradually accepted and formed the topic of the first edition of the church publication \"The Present Truth\", which appeared in July 1849.\nOrganization and recognition.\nFor about 20 years, the Adventist movement consisted of a small, loosely knit group of people who came from many churches and whose primary means of connection and interaction was through James White's periodical \"The Advent Review and Sabbath Herald\". They embraced the doctrines of the Sabbath, the heavenly sanctuary interpretation of Daniel 8:14, conditional immortality, and the expectation of Christ's premillennial return. Among its most prominent figures were Joseph Bates, James White, and Ellen G. White. Ellen White came to occupy a particularly central role; her many visions and spiritual leadership convinced her fellow Adventists that she possessed the gift of prophecy.\nOn May 21, 1863, the Seventh-day Adventist Church was officially founded in Battle Creek, Michigan. The denominational headquarters were later moved from Battle Creek to Takoma Park, Maryland, where they remained until 1989. The General Conference headquarters then moved to its current location in Silver Spring, Maryland.\nIn the 1870s, the denomination turned to evangelism through missionary work and revivals, tripling its membership to 16,000 by 1880 and establishing a presence beyond North America during the late 19th century. The denomination's rapid growth continued, with 75,000 members in 1901. By that time, the denomination operated two colleges, a medical school, a dozen academies, 27 hospitals, and 13 publishing houses. By 1945, the church estimated that it had 210,000 members in the US and Canada, along with 360,000 members who lived in other parts of the world; the church's budget was $29 million and the number of students who were enrolled in the church's schools was 140,000.\nBeliefs.\nThe church first published its beliefs and doctrines in Battle Creek, Michigan in 1872, as a brief statement which was titled \"A Synopsis of Our Faith\". The church experienced challenges as it formed its core beliefs and doctrines, especially as a number of the early Adventist leaders came from churches that held to some form of Arianism (Ellen G. White was not one of them). This, along with some of the movement's other theological views, led conservative evangelical Protestants to regard it as a cult. According to Adventist scholars, the teachings and writings of White ultimately proved influential in shifting the church from largely semi-Arian roots towards Trinitarianism. Adventists, for the most part, credit her with bringing the Seventh-day Adventist church into a more comprehensive awareness of the Godhead during the 1890s. The Adventist Church adopted Trinitarian theology early in the 20th century and began to dialogue with other Protestant groups toward the middle of the century, eventually gaining wide recognition as a Protestant church. \"Christianity Today\" recognized the Seventh-day Adventist church as \"the fifth-largest Christian communion worldwide\" in its January 22, 2015 issue.\nAlthough her husband claimed that her visions did not support the Trinitarian creed, her writings reveal a growing awareness on the \"mystery of the Godhead\". After continued Bible study, and after a decades-long debate, the denomination eventually concluded that Scripture explicitly teaches the belief in the existence of a triune God, and it affirmed that biblical view in the non-credal 28 Fundamental Beliefs.\nHowever, mainstream scholars are still not convinced that Ellen White was a Nicene Trinitarian. In her writing, she mentions a ceremony in heaven where Jesus was recognized in front of the heavenly host, to be equal with the Father, of which Satan disapproved (as explained in her book \"Spirit of Prophecy Vol. 1\").\nThe official teachings of the Seventh-day Adventist denomination are expressed in its 28 Fundamental Beliefs. This statement of beliefs was originally adopted by the General Conference in 1980, with an additional belief (number 11) being added in 2005. Almost all of the 28 Fundamental Beliefs are the same as other evangelical Protestant denominations. The Adventist beliefs that evangelicals consider heterodoxy is worshiping God on Saturday, the gift of prophecy by Ellen G. White and the sanctuary doctrine.\nThe church believes God created Earth in six days and rested on the seventh day, Saturday. The Seventh-day Adventist Church believes in baptizing new members by immersion. It believes the Bible to be the most important book. They believe when humans die, that they remain asleep until they are brought back to life. Eternal life is given to people who accept Jesus as their Savior. The church believes that one receives salvation through only Jesus. It believes that the investigative judgment will take place in heaven before Jesus returns to earth. The church believes in the Apocalypse of John which will bring on the Second Coming of Jesus.\nCulture and practices.\nSabbath activities.\nPart of Friday might be spent in preparation for the Sabbath; for example, preparing meals and tidying homes. Adventists may gather for Friday evening worship to welcome in the Sabbath, a practice often known as vespers.\nWorship service.\nThe major weekly worship service occurs on Saturday, typically commencing with Sabbath School which is a structured time of small-group bible study at church. Adventists make use of an officially produced \"Sabbath School Lesson\", which deals with a particular biblical text or doctrine every quarter.\nAfter a brief break, the community joins together again for a church service that follows a typical evangelical format, with a sermon as a central feature. Corporate singing, Scripture readings, prayers and an offering, including tithing (money collection), are other standard features. The instruments and forms of worship music vary greatly throughout the worldwide church.\nHoly Communion.\nAdventist churches usually practice open communion four times a year. It commences with a foot washing ceremony, known as the \"Ordinance of Humility\", based on the Gospel account of John 13. The Ordinance of Humility is meant to emulate Christ's washing of his disciples' feet at the Last Supper and to remind participants of the need to humbly serve one another. Participants segregate by gender to separate rooms to conduct this ritual, although some congregations allow married couples to perform the ordinance on each other and families are often encouraged to participate together. After its completion, participants return to the main sanctuary for consumption of the Lord's Supper, which consists of unleavened bread and unfermented grape juice.\nHealth and diet.\nSince the Seventh-day Adventist Church began in the 1860s, it has advocated its members to eat a vegetarian diet, particularly the consumption of kosher foods described in , meaning abstinence from pork, rabbit, shellfish, and other animals proscribed as \"unclean\". The church discourages its members from consuming alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and illegal drugs. In addition, some Adventists avoid processed foods and caffeine.\nThe pioneers of the Adventist Church had much to do with the common acceptance of breakfast cereals and meat alternatives into the Western diet. John Harvey Kellogg started the meat alternative movement by creating Protose at Battle Creek Sanitarium, which was later sold through mail order by Battle Creek Food Company. The Battle Creek Food Company manufactured mostly meat alternatives for the guests at Battle Creek Sanitarium. Will Keith Kellogg and John Harvey Kellogg invented corn flakes at Battle Creek Sanitarium, by putting stale wheat berry between rollers and baking it. It was later served to the sanitarium guests. The Kellogg brothers also invented bran flakes and Rice Krispies. Later in 1906, Will Keith Kellogg founded the Battle Creek Toasted Corn Flake Company in Battle Creek, Michigan. Special Foods founded in Worthington, Ohio, in 1939, manufactured nut meat substitutes. After World War II, it changed its name to Worthington Foods. Worthington Foods introduced two canned meat alternatives in 1949: Soyloin Steaks, and Meatless Wieners. In 1960, it bought the rights to manufacture and market Battle Creek Foods Company products after John Harvey Kellogg died. In 1975, it released its frozen, soy-based meatless foods nationwide. In both Australia and New Zealand, Sanitarium Health and Wellbeing Company owned by the church manufactures brands such as So Good, Up &amp; Go, and Weet-Bix.\nThe Adventist Health Studies indicate that the average Adventist in California lives four to ten years longer than the average Californian. The research concludes that Adventists live longer because they do not smoke or drink alcohol; have a day of rest every week; and maintain a healthy, low-fat, vegetarian diet that is rich in nuts and beans. The cohesiveness of Adventists' social networks also has been put forward as an explanation for their extended lifespan. Dan Buettner named Loma Linda, California a \"Blue Zone\" of longevity, and attributes that to the large concentration of Seventh-day Adventists and their health practices. The 96,000 adults who participated in the Adventist Health Studies-2 from 2001 to 2007 were 30 to 112 years old, and lived in Canada and the United States. The study revealed that 8% were vegans, 28% were ovo/lacto-vegetarians, 10% were pesco-vegetarians, 6% semi-vegetarian, and 48% non-vegetarian. 98.9% of the participants were non-smokers and 93.4% abstained from drinking alcohol. Those who were vegetarian had a much lower risk of obesity, hypertension, and hyperglycemia. Adventists who were vegetarian had a lower risk of breast cancer, colorectal cancer, coronary heart disease, lung cancer, and prostate cancer, compared to non-vegetarians. Those who were vegan had a lower body mass index, compared to vegetarians and meat eaters.\nAdventists' clean lifestyles were recognized by the U.S. military in 1954 when 2,200 Adventists volunteered to serve as human test subjects in Operation Whitecoat: a biodefense medical research program whose stated purpose was to defend troops and civilians against biological weapons.\nMarriage.\nThe Adventist definition of marriage is a lawfully binding lifelong commitment between a man and a woman. The Church Manual professes the belief that marriage originated as an institution from the biblical story of Adam and Eve and that their union should be used as the pattern for all other marriages.\nAdventists hold that marriage is a divine institution established by God during the events of the Book of Genesis prior to the expulsion of Adam and Eve from Eden. They believe that God celebrated the union of Adam and Eve and that the concept of marriage was one of the first gifts of God to man, and that it is \"one of the two institutions that, after the fall, Adam brought with him beyond the gates of Paradise.\"\nThe Old and New Testament texts are interpreted by some Adventists to teach that wives should submit to their husbands in marriage.\nAdventists hold that heterosexual marriages are the only biblically ordained grounds for sexual intimacy. Adventists do not perform same-sex marriages, and individuals who are openly homosexual cannot be ordained, but may hold church office and membership if they are not actively pursuing same-sex relationships. Current church policy states that openly homosexual (and \"practicing\") persons are to be welcomed into the church services and treated with the love and kindness afforded any human being.\nEthics and sexuality.\nThe Seventh-day Adventist Church opposes abortion, believing it can have long-term negative effects on both the individuals involved and society as a whole. In an official statement on the \"Biblical View of Unborn Life\", the church declared that an unborn child is considered by God to be a living individual. However, there are circumstances where the mother's life is at risk and Seventh-day Adventist hospitals will perform emergency abortions.\nAdventists encourage sexual abstinence for both men and women before marriage. The church disapproves of extra-marital cohabitation. Adventists oppose homosexual activities and relationships, citing the belief that scripture makes no accommodation for homosexuality.\nThe Adventist church has released official statements in relation to other ethical issues such as euthanasia (against active euthanasia but permissive of passive withdrawal of medical support to allow death to occur), birth control (in favor of it for married couples if used correctly, but against abortion as birth control and premarital sex in any case) and human cloning (against it if the technology could result in defective births or abortions).\nDress and entertainment.\nAdventists have traditionally held socially conservative attitudes regarding dress and entertainment. These attitudes are reflected in one of the church's fundamental beliefs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccordingly, Adventists are opposed to practices such as body piercing and tattoos and refrain from the wearing of jewelry, including such items as earrings and bracelets. Some also oppose the displaying of wedding bands, although banning wedding bands is not the position of the General Conference. In 1986, the North American Division permitted the wearing of wedding rings. Before that, it was a source of friction, since Adventists overseas have worn wedding rings for many decades.\nConservative Adventists avoid certain recreational activities which are considered to be a negative spiritual influence, including dancing, rock music and secular theatre. However, major studies conducted from 1989 onwards found that a majority of North American church youth reject some of these standards.\nOn June 29, 2000, the General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists adopted a resolution on gambling. The church encourages its members not to gamble and it will not accept funding from it.\nYouth ministry.\nMissionary work with children and youth begins with the Adventurer club. The Adventurer curriculum is for children aged between 4\u20139 and it is divided into 6 classes which are little lamb, early bird, sunbeam, builder and helping hand. Each class builds on the previous class. The curriculum is structured in way that will interest, challenge, and provide successful experiences for children. The curriculum is divided into 5 sections which are, Basic, My God, Myself, My Friends and My World which help children to meet the objectives of the curriculum. The objectives of the Adventurer Curriculum are: to develop a Christ-like character; to experience the joy and satisfaction of doing things well; to express their love for Jesus in a natural way; to learn good sportsmanship and strengthen their ability to get along with others; to discover their God-given abilities and to learn how to use them to benefit self and serve others; to discover God's world; to improve their understanding of what makes families strong; to develop parental support for the training of children. The club engages in witnessing, community work so as to share the love of Jesus.\nPathfinders is a club for 5th to 10th grade (up to 12th in the Florida Conference) boys and girls. It is similar to and based partly on the Scouting movement. Pathfinders exposes young people to such activities as camping, community service, personal mentorship, and skills-based education, and trains them for leadership in the church. Yearly \"Camporees\" are held in individual Conferences, where Pathfinders from the region gather and participate in events similar to Boy Scouts' Jamborees.\nAfter a person enters 9th grade, they are eligible to join Teen Leadership Training within Pathfinders. In the 11th grade, typically after being a member of a club, they can become a Pathfinder or Adventurer staff member and begin the \"Master Guide\" program (similar to Scout Master) which develops leaders for both Adventurers and Pathfinders.\nOrganization.\nStructure and polity.\nThe Seventh-day Adventist church is governed by a form of representation which resembles the presbyterian system of church organization. Four levels of organization exist within the world church.\nThe denomination is organized in a representative form of church government, which means authority arises from the membership of local churches. Each organization is governed by a general \"session\" which occurs at certain intervals. This is usually when administrative decisions are made. In addition to administering their own congregations, churches send representatives to vote on matters and leaders in a shared local unit of administration. They vote also on who will represent them in a large area, with further representation selected at each successively larger administrative region. Finally, the General Conference elects the executive committee and officers who hold its authority between the decisions of the quinquennial General Conference Session. The president of the General Conference is also elected at the General Conference Session every five years.\nTithes collected from church members are not used directly by the local churches, but are passed upwards to the local conferences which then distribute the finances toward various ministry needs. Employees are compensated \"on the basis of the church remuneration policy and practice in effect in the location or country in which they reside\".\nThe Church Manual gives provisions for each level of government to create educational, healthcare, publishing, and other institutions that are seen within the call of the Great Commission.\nChurch officers and clergy.\nThe ordained clergy of the Adventist church are known as ministers or pastors. Ministers are neither elected nor employed by the local churches, but instead are appointed by the local Conferences, which assign them responsibility over a single church or group of churches. Ordination is a formal recognition bestowed upon pastors and elders after usually a number of years of service. In most parts of the world, women may not be given the title \"ordained\", although some are employed in ministry, and may be \"commissioned\" or \"ordained-commissioned\". However, beginning in 2012, some unions adopted policies of allowing member conferences to ordain without regard to gender.\nA number of lay offices exist within the local church, including the ordained positions of elder and deacon. Elders and deacons are appointed by the vote of a local church business meeting or elected committees. Elders serve a mainly administrative and pastoral role, but must also be capable of providing religious leadership (particularly in the absence of an ordained minister). The role of deacons is to assist in the smooth functioning of a local church and to maintain church property.\nOrdination of women.\nIn 1990, at their General Conference Session leaders of the Seventh-day Adventist Church prevented the ordination of women. They voted 1,173 against and 377 in favor. Those who supported ordaining women were from Europe and North America, while those from Africa, Asia and South America were strongly against. Five years later, it turned down a request by the North American Division that its local conferences be allowed to ordain women.\nOn July 29, 2012, the Columbia Union Conference, which has its headquarters in Maryland voted 80 percent in favor of ordaining women. On August 19, 2012, the Pacific Union Conference, which has its headquarters in California voted 79 percent to 21 percent in favor of ordaining women. The world leaders of the church were disappointed with the actions of the two conferences and considered their actions not in harmony with the world church. In 2012, there were 320 women pastors in the church, while in North America there are 120 women pastors and 4,100 male pastors. In 2013, the Southeastern California Conference voted for the first time a woman as president.\nIn July 8, 2015, leaders who represented the Seventh-day Adventist Church voted at their General Conference Session in San Antonio, Texas, against the ordination of women becoming pastors. They voted 1,381 against and 977 in favor. Western Adventists who are against the ban say it is keeping them from functioning in this culture, while those who support the ban get their reason for opposing from the Bible. Adventists in North America, Europe and a few other areas have been ordaining women as pastors. Women are banned from leading local conferences, they also can not create or close churches. Ted N. C. Wilson, who was re-elected for a second five-year term as president, voted no, while former president Jan Paulsen voted yes.\nMembership.\nThe Seventh-day Adventist Church is one of the world's fastest-growing organizations, primarily from membership increases in developing nations. Today much of the church membership reside outside of the United States, with large numbers in Africa, Asia and Latin America. Every 30.33 seconds a new member is baptized into one of the 13 divisions of the Seventh-day Adventist Church.\nIn 2006, over 25 million people worshiped weekly in Seventh-day Adventist churches around the world. In 2011, it was reported that the Seventh-day Adventist Church was the fastest-growing church in the United States. Released data showed the membership growing by 2.5% in North America, a rapid clip for that part of the world, where many Christian denominations are declining. On the church\u2019s 150th anniversary in April 2013, there were over 17,000,000 members. In 2013, it was reported that the church lost one in three members over a fifty year period. For every 100 people the church gains, it loses 43 members. The reason why people leave the church is because of marital issues and unemployment. In 2015, the church was the most racially diverse denomination in the United States. The ratio was 37 percent white, 32 percent black, 15 percent Hispanic, 8 percent Asian and 8 percent another or mixed. In 2017, the church had members in almost every country and territory in the world, except for Brunei, Comoros, Djibouti, Falkland Islands, Iran, Jersey, Maldives, Monaco, Somalia and Tokelau. In 2019, the Seventh-day Adventist Church had 21,000,000 baptized members around the world.\nIn 2020, church officials reported the lowest membership increase in 16 years, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Seventh-day Adventist Church added only 803,000 members, the last time annual membership growth dropped below 1 million was in 2004. In 2021, the Seventh-day Adventist Church had 1.2 million members worshiping in Canada and the United States.\nIn July 2025, church membership was 23,000,000 when Erton K\u00f6hler was elected the new president of the General Conference.\nAdventist mission.\nStarted in the late 19th century, Adventist mission work today reaches people in over 200 countries and territories. Adventist mission workers seek to preach the gospel, promote health through hospitals and clinics, run development projects to improve living standards, and provide relief in times of calamity.\nMissionary outreach of the Seventh-day Adventist Church is aimed not only at non-Christians but also at Christians from other denominations. Adventists believe that Christ has called his followers in the Great Commission to reach the whole world. Adventists are cautious, however, to ensure that evangelism does not impede or intrude on the basic rights of the individual. Religious liberty is a stance that the Adventist Church supports and promotes.\nEducation.\nGlobally, the Adventist Church operates 7,598 schools, colleges and universities, with a total enrollment of more than 1,545,000 and a total teaching staff of approximately 80,000. It operates the second largest school system in the world; only larger is the Roman Catholic Church school system.\nMedical.\nTheir largest medical school and hospitals in North America are Loma Linda University, Loma Linda University Medical Center and AdventHealth Orlando. Throughout the world, the Seventh-day Adventist Church runs a wide network of hospitals, clinics, lifestyle centers, and sanitariums. These play a role in the church's health message and worldwide missions outreach.\nAdventHealth is the largest not-for-profit Protestant health care provider in the United States. it operates 56 hospitals in nine states.\nHumanitarian aid and the environment.\nFor over 50 years, the church has been active in humanitarian aid through the work of the Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA). ADRA works as a non-sectarian relief agency in 125 countries and areas of the world. ADRA has been granted General Consultative Status by the United Nations Economic and Social Council. Worldwide, ADRA employs over 4,000 people to help provide relief in crises as well as development in situations of poverty.\nThe church embraces an official commitment to the protection and care of the environment as well as taking action to avoid the dangers of climate change: \"Seventh-day Adventism advocates a simple, wholesome lifestyle, where people do not step on the treadmill of unbridled over-consumption, accumulation of goods, and production of waste. A reformation of lifestyle is called for, based on respect for nature, restraint in the use of the world's resources, reevaluation of one's needs, and reaffirmation of the dignity of created life.\"\nMedia.\nAdventists have long been proponents of media-based ministries. Traditional Adventist evangelistic efforts consisted of street missions and the distribution of tracts such as \"The Present Truth\", which was published by James White as early as 1849. Until J. N. Andrews was sent to Switzerland in 1874, Adventist global efforts consisted entirely of the posting of tracts such as White's to various locations.\nIn the last century, these efforts have also made use of media such as radio and television. The first of these was H. M. S. Richards' radio show \"Voice of Prophecy\", which was initially broadcast in Los Angeles in 1929. Since then, Adventists have been on the forefront of media evangelism; \"It Is Written\", founded by George Vandeman, was the first religious program to air on color television in March 1965 and the first major Christian ministry to utilize satellite uplink technology. Amazing Facts was founded in 1965 by Joe Crews in Baltimore as a radio ministry. Amazing Facts broadcasts \"Bible Answers Live\" each Sunday where listeners phone or email Bible questions which are answered live. Today the \"Hope Channel\", the official television network of the church which launched in October 2003, operates 8+ international channels broadcasting 24 hours a day on cable, satellite, and the Web.\n In 1971, Adventist World Radio was founded and rented in Portugal its first shortwave radio station. It later constructed its own shortwave radio station on Guam. Adventist World Radio covers earth in over 100 languages with shortwave radio, podcasts and 1,700+ AM/FM radio stations. \nSDA evangelists such as Doug Batchelor, Mark Finley and Dwight Nelson have undertaken a number of international satellite-broadcast live evangelistic events, addressing audiences in up to 40 languages simultaneously.\nIn 2016, the Church released the film \"Tell the World\".\nPublishing.\nThe Adventist Church owns and operates 58 publishing companies around the world, in about 136 languages. The major number are in the Trans-European Division (TED), and Inter-European Division (EUD). In 2014, Review and Herald Publishing Association merged with Pacific Press Publishing Association. The Review and Herald board voted 153-to-66 in favor of the merger and the board of Pacific Press voted 42-to-1 in favor of the merger. Review and Herald Publishing Association had been in Hagerstown, Maryland, since 1983. From 2013 to 2014, Review and Herald Publishing Association lost almost US$2 million. Formerly its revenue in 1985 was $45.8 million and dropped to $21.8 million in 2013. Pacific Press had also lost much revenue. Pacific Press Publishing Association was in Mountain View, California from 1904 to 1983. It moved to Nampa, Idaho, to reduce the cost of living for new employees.\nEcumenical activity.\nThe Adventist Church generally opposes the ecumenical movement, although it supports some of the other goals of ecumenism. The General Conference has released an official statement concerning the Adventist position with respect to the ecumenical movement, which contains the following paragraph:\n Should Adventists cooperate ecumenically? Adventists should cooperate insofar as the authentic gospel is proclaimed and crying human needs are being met. The Seventh-day Adventist Church wants no entangling memberships and refuses any compromising relationships that might tend to water down her distinct witness. However, Adventists wish to be \"conscientious cooperators\". The ecumenical movement as an agency of cooperation has acceptable aspects; as an agency for the organic unity of churches, it is much more suspect.\nWhile not being a member of the World Council of Churches, the Adventist Church has participated in its assemblies in an observer capacity.\nCriticism.\nThe Adventist Church has received criticism along several lines, including what some claim are heterodox doctrines, Ellen G. White and her status within the church, and alleged exclusivist issues.\nDoctrines.\nSeveral teachings that have come under scrutiny are the annihilationist view of hell, the investigative judgment (and a related view of the atonement), and the Sabbath. Critics such as evangelical Anthony Hoekema (who felt that Adventists were more in agreement with Arminianism) argued that some Adventist doctrines were heterodox. In addition, Hoekema also claimed that Adventist doctrine suffers from legalism.\nWhile critics such as Hoekema have classified Adventism as a sectarian group on the basis of its atypical doctrines, it has been accepted as more mainstream by Protestant evangelicals since its meetings and discussions with evangelicals in the 1950s. Billy Graham invited Adventists to be part of his crusades after \"Eternity\", a conservative Christian magazine edited by Donald Barnhouse, asserted in 1956 that Adventists are Christians. He also later stated, \"They are sound on the great New Testament doctrines including grace and redemption through the vicarious offering of Jesus Christ 'once for all'\". Walter Martin, who is considered by many to be the father of the counter-cult apologetics movement within evangelicalism, authored \"The Truth About Seventh-day Adventists\" (1960) which marked a turning point in the way Adventism was viewed: \"It is perfectly possible to be a Seventh-day Adventist and be a true follower of Jesus Christ despite heterodox concepts\".\nLater on, Martin planned to write a new book on Seventh-day Adventism, with the assistance of Kenneth R. Samples. Samples subsequently authored \"From Controversy to Crisis: An Updated Assessment of Seventh-day Adventism\", which upholds Martin's view \"for that segment of Adventism which holds to the position stated in QOD, and further expressed in the Evangelical Adventist movement of the last few decades.\" However, Samples also claimed that \"Traditional Adventism\" appeared \"to be moving further away from a number of positions taken in QOD\", and at least at Glacier View seemed to have \"gained the support of many administrators and leaders\".\nEllen G. White and her status.\nEllen G. White's status as a modern-day prophet has also been criticized. In the \"Questions on Doctrine\" era, evangelicals expressed concern about Adventism's understanding of the relationship of White's writings to the inspired canon of Scripture. The Adventist fundamental beliefs maintain that \"the Bible is the standard by which all teaching and experience must be tested\".\nA common criticism of Ellen White, widely popularized by Walter T. Rea, Ronald Numbers, and others, is the claim of plagiarism from other authors. An independent lawyer specializing in plagiarism, Vincent L. Ramik, was engaged to undertake a study of Ellen G. White's writings during the early 1980s and concluded that they were \"conclusively unplagiaristic [\"sic\"]\". When the plagiarism charge ignited a significant debate during the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Adventist General Conference commissioned a major study by Dr. Fred Veltman. The ensuing project became known as the \"Life of Christ' Research Project\". Veltman examined 15 randomly selected chapters of The Desire of Ages for evidence of literary dependence and concluded, \"On an average we may say that 31.4 percent of the DA text is dependent to some extent on literary sources.\" The results are available at the General Conference Archives. Dr. Roger W. Coon, David J. Conklin, Dr. Denis Fortin, King and Morgan, and Morgan, among others, undertook the refutation of the accusations of plagiarism. At the conclusion of his report, Ramik states:\nIt is impossible to imagine that the intention of Ellen G. White, as reflected in her writings and the unquestionably prodigious efforts involved therein, was anything other than a sincerely motivated and unselfish effort to place the understandings of Biblical truths in a coherent form for all to see and comprehend. Most certainly, the nature and content of her writings had but one hope and intent, namely, the furthering of mankind's understanding of the word of God. Considering all factors necessary in reaching a just conclusion on this issue, it is submitted that the writings of Ellen G. White were conclusively unplagiaristic.\nExclusivism.\nCritics have alleged that certain Adventist beliefs and practices are exclusivist in nature, and they point to the Adventist claim to be the \"remnant church\", and the traditional Protestant association of Roman Catholicism with \"Babylon\". These attitudes are said to legitimize the proselytising of Christians from other denominations. In response to such criticisms, Adventist theologians have stated that the doctrine of the remnant does not preclude the existence of genuine Christians in other denominations but is concerned with institutions.\nOffshoots and schisms.\nThroughout the denomination's history, several groups have left the church and formed their own movements.\nFollowing World War I, a group known as the Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement was formed as a result of the actions of L. R. Conradi and certain European church leaders during the war, who decided that it was acceptable for Adventists to take part in said war. Those who opposed this stand and refused to participate in the war were declared \"disfellowshipped\" by their local Church leaders at the time. When the Church leaders from the General Conference came and admonished the local European leaders after the war to try to heal the damage, and bring the members together, it met with resistance from those who had suffered under those leaders. Their attempts at reconciliation failed after the war, and the group became organized as a separate church at a conference held on July 14\u201320, 1925. The movement was officially incorporated in 1949.\nIn 2005, in another attempt to examine and resolve what its German leaders had done, the mainstream church apologized for its failures during World War II, stating that they \"'deeply regret' any participation in or support of Nazi activities during the war by the German and Austrian leadership of the church.\"\nIn the Soviet Union, the same issues produced the group known as the True and Free Seventh-day Adventists. This also formed as the result of a schism within the Seventh-day Adventist Church in Europe during World War I over the position its European church leaders took on having its members join the military or keep the Sabbath. The group remains active today (2010) in the former republics of the Soviet Union.\nWell-known but distant offshoots are the Davidian Seventh-day Adventist organization and the Branch Davidians, themselves a schism within the larger Davidian movement. The Davidians formed in 1929, following Victor Houteff, after he published his book \"The Shepherd's Rod\", which was rejected as heretical. A succession dispute after Houteff died in 1955 led to the formation of two groups, the original Davidians and the Branches. Later, another ex-Adventist, David Koresh, led the Branch Davidians until he died in the 1993 siege at the group's headquarters near Waco, Texas.\nCultural influence.\n\"Hacksaw Ridge\" depicts the life of Adventist conscientious objector and Medal of Honor recipient Desmond Doss. \"The Road to Wellville\" is based on a novel about Seventh-day Adventist physician John Harvey Kellogg, director of the Battle Creek Sanitarium. \"A Cry in the Dark\", a film about the death of Azaria Chamberlain, features the prejudice her parents faced due to misconceptions about their religion. Many other forms of media include mentions of Seventh-day Adventism.\nMany country postal services around the world have created postage stamps honoring the Seventh-day Adventist Church, or an individual member. In 2020, Iraqi Post released a set of eight commemorative stamps to honor the Christian churches in the country. The set included a photograph of the Baghdad Seventh-day Adventist Church.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28633", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28633", "title": "Seventh-day Adventist", "text": ""}
{"id": "28637", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28637", "title": "Scroll Lock", "text": "Computer key\nScroll Lock or ScrLk (sometimes notated \u2913 or \u2195) is a lock key (typically with an associated status light) on most IBM-compatible computer keyboards. Depending on the operating system, it may be used for different purposes, and applications may assign functions to the key or change their behavior depending on its toggling state. The key is not frequently used, and therefore some reduced or specialized keyboards lack altogether.\nPressing performs the same function as pressing . This behavior is a remnant of the original IBM PC keyboards, which did not have a dedicated key. Instead, they assigned the Pause function to and the Break function to .\nFunction.\nWindow scrolling.\nThe key is meant to lock all scrolling techniques and is a vestige of the original IBM PC keyboard. In its original design, was intended to modify the behavior of the arrow keys. When the mode is on, the arrow keys scroll the contents of a text window instead of moving the cursor. In this usage, is a toggling lock key like Num Lock or Caps Lock, which have a state that persists after the key is released.\nToday, this particular use of is rare. Modern programs honoring this behavior include Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Project, Image-Line FL Studio, IBM Lotus Notes, Fort\u00e9 Agent, Renoise, Cakewalk by BandLab, and LibreOffice Calc.\nSome text editors (such as Notepad++, Microsoft Visual Studio) exhibit similar behavior when the arrow keys are used with pressed.\nMost GUI environments neglect , which means scrolling must be accomplished with a mouse, using means such as scrollbars or scroll wheels, or an \"autoscroll\" feature activated by the middle mouse button (which may be part of the scroll wheel). In some instances, + in conjunction with the arrow keys can enable scrolling.\nSome web browsers including Google Chrome, Firefox, and Internet Explorer support a caret browsing mode which can be toggled by . While the window scrolling behavior with caret navigation disabled (the default) is similar to that suggested for Scroll Lock, enabling caret navigation will enable a cursor scrolling behavior as if Scroll Lock were disabled.\nConsole scrolling.\nPressing the key in the Linux console while the text is scrolling through the screen freezes the console output (but not input) during which no further text is sent to the screen, while the program continues running as usual \u2014 or becomes blocked at the write syscall when too much data is prevented from reaching the terminal, causing the tty's output queue to become full if the tty file descriptor is not using non-blocking I/O. When is pressed again, the screen is unfrozen and all text generated during the freeze is displayed at once and the program continues to run normally. This allows the user to pause the display and read long log messages that scroll through the screen too quickly to read, such as when the system is booting up (provided the keyboard driver has already been loaded). Unless configured otherwise or in raw mode, (DC3 in ASCII) and (DC1 in ASCII) can be used instead of Scroll Lock in Unix-like systems to freeze and unfreeze the tty output respectively.\nThis behavior emulates the Hold Screen key or similar flow control mechanisms on computer terminal hardware.\nOn the FreeBSD system console, the key not only pauses output, but additionally enables scrolling: after pressing , one can use and to scroll up or down. Pressing again disables this mode and moves back to the bottom of the output. The Linux console implemented this behaviour by using and , not requiring to be active; this behavior has been removed due to a vulnerability (CVE-2020-14390). The NetBSD console can be scrolled either with / or by pressing then / .\nBoot diagnostics.\nIn Multiuser DOS, System Manager, and REAL/32, activating during boot will always enter a special diagnostic mode, where the operating system and loaded device drivers will display detailed status and debugging information about themselves and their interaction with the operating system, sometimes up to several screenfulls per loaded driver. Automatic scrolling is suspended for as long as remains activated.\nDR-DOS 7.02 and higher provides a CONFIG.SYS directive named codice_1 to change the Scroll Lock status on the fly. Activating during boot will enter a DIAG mode as well, wherein some special drivers may display more verbose messages, but in contrast to the situation under the Multiuser DOS family normal DOS drivers do not typically display additional information. The operating system, however, will temporarily suspend any automatic timeouts (codice_2) in CONFIG.SYS trace (codice_3) and / single-stepping modes for as long as is active.\nDebugging.\nIn the Microsoft Windows NT family starting with Windows 2000, a debugging feature can be enabled, that allows the user to manually crash the system, generating a memory dump for analysis of the current state of the operating system. This can be accomplished by setting the REG_DWORD registry key codice_4 to codice_5. Once set, the user can hold the key and tap the key twice to trigger a Blue Screen of Death.\nIn Microsoft Visual Basic 5.0 and 6.0, pauses the running program in the integrated development environment, as does its alias .\nCopy and paste.\nIn conjunction with the alternative DOS keyboard and console drivers FreeKEYB and K3PLUS, also serves as part of a copy &amp; paste facility between applications. Compared to the standard keyboard driver KEYB these drivers offer several extensions including an extended keystroke buffer with key stacking facility, macro recorder, and a second cursor called CopyCursor, which can be invoked on demand (by default on pressing or the middle mouse button) and freely move on the screen using the cursor keys or the mouse, even outside the area reachable by the standard cursor in the running application. Once invoked, pressing (or the left mouse button) the characters under the CopyCursor can be stuffed, one after another, into the keyboard buffer, from where they will be read by the running application as emulated key (or Alt Numpad) input, thereby typically showing up at the location of the standard cursor. The CopyCursor will move to the next screen position after each (or backwards with each ). Normal keyboard input is possible while the CopyCursor is enabled, and the user can switch between the two cursors by toggling the hotkey again. Pressing or exits the CopyCursor, so that, on its next invocation, it will show up at the position of the standard cursor again rather than at its previous location. If the screen contents are scrolled, the position of the CopyCursor will move accordingly until reaching the display limits. With activated, keypresses will still reach the normal keystroke buffer, while CopyCursor input will be stacked up internally for later use in a second queue, dynamically maintained within the extended keystroke buffer. Thereby, it is possible to \"collect\" selected screen output from different programs and spool out the data much later while within yet another application by toggling off again. It is also possible to use this as input into the macro recorder for later use as scrap macro. Since this is an integral part of these keyboard drivers, it is fully transparent to running software and therefore works with virtually any DOS program, including at the command prompt, temporary shelled programs, and task switchers.\nOther uses.\nIBM PC documentation called an \"inactive key\". When \"PC Magazine\" asked an executive of keyboard manufacturer Key Tronic about the key's purpose in a 1983 interview, he replied \"I don't know, but we put it on ours, too.\"\nThe indicator light is sometimes used for other purposes such as a keyboard layout indicator in some Linux distributions or other applications, because doing so is less likely to cause problems than manipulating other keys/lights.\nKeyboard, video, mouse switches (KVM) often use the Scroll Lock key on the keyboard connected to the KVM switch for selecting between computers. On KVM switches with On-screen display (OSD), a \"double click\" of the Scroll Lock key often brings up the OSD, allowing the user to select the desired computer from a list or access the configuration menu of the KVM. Some models, especially those without an OSD, switch to the input corresponding to the number key pressed after Scroll Lock, or in the case of some two-port switches, the up and down arrow keys. Simple models with only two or four inputs may immediately switch to the next input following a double press of the Scroll Lock key.\nScroll Lock on keyboards without a Scroll Lock key.\nLaptops and keyboards without a physical key may have a second function on another key that acts as if a key is activated. \nSome common methods are:\nAnother way to press is to use an on-screen keyboard. In Windows 8 and later versions, it can be found in the \"Windows Ease of Access\" program group. This will provide access to an emulation of a standard 101/102-key keyboard.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28638", "revid": "46568299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28638", "title": "List of synthetic polymers", "text": "List of human-made polymers\nSome familiar household synthetic polymers include: Nylons in textiles and fabrics, Teflon in non-stick pans, Bakelite for electrical switches, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) in pipes, etc. The common PET bottles are made of a synthetic polymer, polyethylene terephthalate. The plastic kits and covers are mostly made of synthetic polymers like polythene, and tires are manufactured from polybutadienes. However, due to the environmental issues created by these synthetic polymers which are mostly non-biodegradable and often synthesized from petroleum, alternatives like bioplastics are also being considered. They are however expensive when compared to the synthetic polymers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIUPAC definition\n Artificial polymer: Man-made polymer that is not a biopolymer.\nNote 1: Artificial polymer should also be used in the case of chemically&lt;br&gt;modified biopolymers.\nNote 2: Biochemists are now capable of synthesizing copies of biopolymers&lt;br&gt;that should be named Synthetic biopolymer to make a distinction&lt;br&gt;with true biopolymers.\nNote 3: Genetic engineering is now capable of generating non-natural analogues&lt;br&gt;of biopolymers that should be referred to as artificial biopolymers, e.g.,&lt;br&gt;artificial protein, artificial polynucleotide, etc. \nOrganic polymers.\nThe eight most common types of synthetic organic polymers, which are commonly found in households are:\nBrand names.\nThese polymers are often better known through their brand names, for instance:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28639", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28639", "title": "Stop codon", "text": "Codon that marks the end of a protein-coding sequence\nIn molecular biology, a stop codon (or termination codon) is a codon (nucleotide triplet within messenger RNA) that signals the termination of the translation process of the current protein. Most codons in messenger RNA correspond to the addition of an amino acid to a growing polypeptide chain, which may ultimately become a protein; stop codons signal the termination of this process by binding release factors, which cause the ribosomal subunits to disassociate, releasing the amino acid chain.\nWhile start codons need nearby sequences or initiation factors to start translation, a stop codon alone is sufficient to initiate termination.\nProperties.\nStandard codons.\nIn the standard genetic code, there are three different termination codons:\nAlternative stop codons.\nThere are variations on the standard genetic code, and alternative stop codons have been found in the mitochondrial genomes of vertebrates, \"Scenedesmus obliquus\", and \"Thraustochytrium\".\nReassigned stop codons.\nThe nuclear genetic code is flexible as illustrated by variant genetic codes that reassign standard stop codons to amino acids.\nTranslation.\nIn 1986, convincing evidence was provided that selenocysteine (Sec) was incorporated co-translationally. Moreover, the codon partially directing its incorporation in the polypeptide chain was identified as UGA also known as the opal termination codon. Different mechanisms for overriding the termination function of this codon have been identified in prokaryotes and in eukaryotes. A particular difference between these kingdoms is that cis elements seem restricted to the neighborhood of the UAG codon in prokaryotes while in eukaryotes this restriction is not present. Instead such locations seem disfavored albeit not prohibited.\nIn 2003, a landmark paper described the identification of all known selenoproteins in humans: 25 in total. Similar analyses have been run for other organisms.\nThe UAG codon can translate into pyrrolysine (Pyl) in a similar manner.\nGenomic distribution.\nDistribution of stop codons within the genome of an organism is non-random and can correlate with GC-content. For example, the \"E. coli\" K-12 genome contains 2705 TAA (63%), 1257 TGA (29%), and 326 TAG (8%) stop codons (GC content 50.8%). Also the substrates for the stop codons release factor 1 or release factor 2 are strongly correlated to the abundance of stop codons. Large scale study of bacteria with a broad range of GC-contents shows that while the frequency of occurrence of TAA is negatively correlated to the GC-content and the frequency of occurrence of TGA is positively correlated to the GC-content, the frequency of occurrence of the TAG stop codon, which is often the minimally used stop codon in a genome, is not influenced by the GC-content.\nRecognition.\nRecognition of stop codons in bacteria have been associated with the so-called 'tripeptide anticodon', a highly conserved amino acid motif in RF1 (PxT) and RF2 (SPF). Even though this is supported by structural studies, it was shown that the tripeptide anticodon hypothesis is an oversimplification.\nNomenclature.\nStop codons were historically given many different names, as they each corresponded to a distinct class of mutants that all behaved in a similar manner. These mutants were first isolated within bacteriophages (T4 and lambda), viruses that infect the bacteria \"Escherichia coli\". Mutations in viral genes weakened their infectious ability, sometimes creating viruses that were able to infect and grow within only certain varieties of \"E. coli\".\n\"amber\" mutations (UAG).\nThey were the first set of nonsense mutations to be discovered, isolated by Richard H. Epstein and Charles Steinberg and named after their friend and graduate Caltech student Harris Bernstein, whose last name means \"amber\" in German (\"cf.\" Bernstein).\nViruses with amber mutations are characterized by their ability to infect only certain strains of bacteria, known as amber suppressors. These bacteria carry their own mutation that allows a recovery of function in the mutant viruses. For example, a mutation in the tRNA that recognizes the amber stop codon allows translation to \"read through\" the codon and produce a full-length protein, thereby recovering the normal form of the protein and \"suppressing\" the amber mutation.\nThus, amber mutants are an entire class of virus mutants that can grow in bacteria that contain amber suppressor mutations. Similar suppressors are known for ochre and opal stop codons as well.\ntRNA molecules carrying unnatural aminoacids have been designed to recognize the amber stop codon in bacterial RNA. This technology allows for incorporation of orthogonal aminoacids (such as p-azidophenylalanine) at specific locations of the target protein.\n\"ochre\" mutations (UAA).\nIt was the second stop codon mutation to be discovered. Reminiscent of the usual yellow-orange-brown color associated with amber, this second stop codon was given the name of \"ochre\", an orange-reddish-brown mineral pigment.\nOchre mutant viruses had a property similar to amber mutants in that they recovered infectious ability within certain suppressor strains of bacteria. The set of ochre suppressors was distinct from amber suppressors, so ochre mutants were inferred to correspond to a different nucleotide triplet. Through a series of mutation experiments comparing these mutants with each other and other known amino acid codons, Sydney Brenner concluded that the amber and ochre mutations corresponded to the nucleotide triplets \"UAG\" and \"UAA\".\n\"opal\" or \"umber\" mutations (UGA).\nThe third and last stop codon in the standard genetic code was discovered soon after, and corresponds to the nucleotide triplet \"UGA\".\nTo continue matching with the theme of colored minerals, the third nonsense codon came to be known as \"opal\", which is a type of silica showing a variety of colors. Nonsense mutations that created this premature stop codon were later called opal mutations or umber mutations.\nMutations and disease.\nNonsense.\nNonsense mutations are changes in DNA sequence that introduce a premature stop codon, causing any resulting protein to be abnormally shortened. This often causes a loss of function in the protein, as critical parts of the amino acid chain are no longer assembled. Because of this terminology, stop codons have also been referred to as nonsense codons.\nNonstop.\nA nonstop mutation, also called a stop-loss variant, is a point mutation that occurs within a stop codon. Nonstop mutations cause the continued translation of an mRNA strand into what should be an untranslated region. Most polypeptides resulting from a gene with a nonstop mutation lose their function due to their extreme length and the impact on normal folding. Nonstop mutations differ from nonsense mutations in that they do not create a stop codon but, instead, delete one. Nonstop mutations also differ from missense mutations, which are point mutations where a single nucleotide is changed to cause replacement by a different amino acid. Nonstop mutations have been linked with many inherited diseases including endocrine disorders, eye disease, and neurodevelopmental disorders.\nHidden stops.\nHidden stops are non-stop codons that would be read as stop codons if they were frameshifted +1 or \u22121. These prematurely terminate translation if the corresponding frame-shift (such as due to a ribosomal RNA slip) occurs before the hidden stop. It is hypothesised that this decreases resource wastage on nonfunctional proteins and the production of potential cytotoxins. Researchers at Louisiana State University propose the \"ambush hypothesis\", that hidden stops are selected for. Codons that can form hidden stops are used in genomes more frequently compared to synonymous codons that would otherwise code for the same amino acid. Unstable rRNA in an organism correlates with a higher frequency of hidden stops.\nHowever, this hypothesis could not be validated with a larger data set.\nStop-codons and hidden stops together are collectively referred as stop-signals. Researchers at University of Memphis found that the ratios of the stop-signals on the three reading frames of a genome (referred to as translation stop-signals ratio or TSSR) of genetically related bacteria, despite their great differences in gene contents, are much alike. This nearly identical genomic-TSSR value of genetically related bacteria may suggest that bacterial genome expansion is limited by their unique stop-signals bias of that bacterial species.\nTranslational readthrough.\nStop codon suppression or translational readthrough occurs when in translation a stop codon is interpreted as a sense codon, that is, when a (standard) amino acid is 'encoded' by the stop codon. Mutated tRNAs can be the cause of readthrough, but also certain nucleotide motifs close to the stop codon. Translational readthrough is very common in viruses and bacteria, and has also been found as a gene regulatory principle in humans, yeasts, bacteria and drosophila. This kind of endogenous translational readthrough constitutes a variation of the genetic code, because a stop codon codes for an amino acid. In the case of human malate dehydrogenase, the stop codon is read through with a frequency of about 4%. The amino acid inserted at the stop codon depends on the identity of the stop codon itself: Gln, Tyr, and Lys have been found for the UAA and UAG codons, while Cys, Trp, and Arg for the UGA codon have been identified by mass spectrometry. Extent of readthrough in mammals have widely variable extents, and can broadly diversify the proteome and affect cancer progression.\nUse as a watermark.\nIn 2010, when Craig Venter unveiled the first fully functioning, reproducing cell controlled by synthetic DNA he described how his team used frequent stop codons to create watermarks in RNA and DNA to help confirm the results were indeed synthetic (and not contaminated or otherwise), using it to encode authors' names and website addresses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28641", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28641", "title": "SJK", "text": "SJK may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28642", "revid": "43277479", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28642", "title": "Symbionese Liberation Army", "text": "American militant organization (1973\u20131975)\nThe United Federated Forces of the Symbionese Liberation Army (commonly referred to simply as the SLA) was a small, American militant far-left organization active between 1973 and 1975; it claimed to be a vanguard movement. They were widely regarded by American law enforcement to be the first terrorist organization to rise from the American left. Six members died in a May 1974 shootout with police in Los Angeles. The three surviving fugitives recruited new members, but nearly all of them were apprehended in 1975 and prosecuted.\nThe pursuit and prosecution of SLA members lasted until 2003, when former member Sara Jane Olson, another fugitive, was convicted in a plea bargain and sentenced for second-degree murder related to a 1975 bank robbery by the SLA in Carmichael, California.\nDuring its existence from 1973 to 1975, the group murdered at least two people, committed armed bank robberies, attempted bombings and other violent crimes, including the kidnapping in 1974 of newspaper heiress Patty Hearst. Its spokesman was escaped convict Donald DeFreeze, but Patricia Soltysik and Nancy Ling Perry were believed to share group leadership. \nIn November 1973, the previously unknown SLA assassinated Marcus Foster, the black Superintendent of Oakland Public Schools, and wounded his deputy superintendent Robert Blackburn. This murder alienated the SLA from the local radical community.\nFrom the beginning, the small group was made up overwhelmingly of white members. After Thero Wheeler left in October 1973, disagreeing with plans for violence, DeFreeze was the SLA's only black member. Joe Remiro was Chicano, described as white in a February 1974 article in \"The New York Times\". He had been active for a period in the Latino activist group Venceremos before it disbanded in 1973.\nIdeology and symbols.\nIn their manifesto \"Symbionese Liberation Army Declaration of Revolutionary War &amp; the Symbionese Program\", co-founders Donald DeFreeze and Patricia \"Mizmoon\" Soltysik wrote: \nThe name 'symbionese' is taken from the word \"symbiosis\" and we define its meaning as a body of dissimilar bodies and organisms living in deep and loving harmony and partnership in the best interest of all within the body. \nThey intended the political symbiosis to encompass the unity of all left-wing struggles: feminist, anti-racist, anti-capitalist, and others. They wanted all races, genders, and ages to fight together in a left-wing united front, and to live together peacefully.\nThe group adopted a seven-headed SLA hydra-like cobra symbol, using it as a logo. The SLA featured this image on their publications.\nHistory.\nFormation: DeFreeze escapes prison.\nThe SLA formed after the escape from prison by Donald DeFreeze, who took the name \"General Field Marshal Cinque\". He had been serving five years to life for robbing a prostitute. DeFreeze took the name Cinque from the leader of the slave rebellion that took over the slave ship \"Amistad\" in 1839. \nDeFreeze escaped from Soledad State Prison on March 5, 1973, by walking away while on work duty in a boiler room located outside the perimeter fence.\nSome sources have suggested that DeFreeze was an informant from 1967 to 1969 for the Public Disorder Intelligence Unit of the Los Angeles Police Department.\nVenceremos associates and future SLA members Willie Wolfe and Russell Little, concerned with the potential for exposure through surveillance at the high-profile Peking House, arranged for DeFreeze to move in with their associate Patricia Soltysik in the relative anonymity of Concord, California. DeFreeze and Soltysik became lovers and began to outline the plans for founding the \"Symbionese Nation\".\n1973.\nMurder of Marcus Foster.\nOn November 6, 1973, in Oakland, California, two members of the SLA killed school superintendent Marcus Foster and badly wounded his deputy, Robert Blackburn, as the two men left an Oakland school board meeting. The hollow-point bullets used to kill Foster had been packed with cyanide.\nAlthough Foster had been the first black school superintendent of any major public school system, the SLA condemned him in their flyers for his supposed plan to introduce identification cards into Oakland schools, calling him \"fascist.\" Foster had already gained the support of the school board to change the proposal. \nSome SLA members had mistakenly believed that killing Foster would gain support for them in the Black community and help them recruit new members; instead they alienated most black people and other leftists. Harry Reynolds, a deputy superintendent in the system, said those who published the flyers had \"irresponsible flapping at the mouth.\" In addition, he said \"somebody didn't like this guy [Foster] bringing all these people together. They may have been jealous of the type of progress he was making.\"\nRobert Blackburn, who served for a time as acting superintendent, later discussed how wrong the SLA was: \nThese were not political radicals, Blackburn said of the SLA. They were uniquely mediocre and stunningly off-base. The people in the SLA had no grounding in history. They swung from the world of being thumb-in-the-mouth cheerleaders to self-described revolutionaries with nothing but rhetoric to support them.\nOn January 10, 1974, Russell Little and Joseph Remiro, also SLA founding members, were arrested during an armed encounter with police. After police found extensive SLA materials at a house the group was renting, the two were charged with Foster's murder. Both men were convicted of murder in 1975 and sentenced to life imprisonment. Seven years later, on June 5, 1981, Little's conviction was overturned by the California Court of Appeal. He was later acquitted in a retrial in Monterey County.\nRussell Little said later that in fact Soltysik had shot Foster, and Nancy Ling Perry had shot Blackburn, aided by DeFreeze.\n1974.\nKidnapping of Patty Hearst.\nAfter Remiro and Little were arrested, the remaining SLA members considered kidnapping an important figure in order to negotiate the release of their jailed comrades. The US Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) found documents at one abandoned safe house revealing an action was planned for the \"full moon of January 7\". The FBI did not take any precautions, and the SLA did not act until a month later.\nOn February 4, 1974, publishing heiress Patty Hearst, a sophomore at the University of California, Berkeley, was abducted from her Berkeley residence at Apartment 4, 2603 Benvenue Avenue. This was less than three months after a November 1973 \"San Francisco Chronicle\" story announcing her betrothal to Steven Weed, which published their address. The SLA choice of Hearst was for maximum news coverage of their action.\nThe SLA next demanded a ransom from the Hearsts in the form of a food distribution program. The value of food to be distributed fluctuated: on February 23 the demand was for $4 million; it peaked at $400 million. The Hearsts created an organization, People in Need, which distributed free food, though the operation was halted when violence erupted at one of the four distribution points. The crowds were much greater than expected, and people were injured as panicked workers threw boxes of food off moving trucks into the crowd. The SLA then demanded that a community coalition called the Western Addition Project Area Committee be given charge of food distribution. The committee organized the distribution of 100,000 bags of groceries at 16 locations across four counties between February 26 and the end of March.\nConditions of early captivity of Patty Hearst.\nTerence Hallinan, the first attorney who represented Hearst, was planning to argue involuntary intoxication, a side effect of which is amnesia.\nHearst's attorney F. Lee Bailey used the Stockholm syndrome argument as part of her defense at trial. He claimed that she had been confined in a closet barely large enough for her to lie down in; that her contact with the outside world was regulated by her captors; and that she was regularly threatened with execution. Hearst's lawyer said that she had been raped by both DeFreeze and Wolfe. Both men were among those who died in 1974 in a firefight with police. The SLA publicly claimed to be holding Hearst according to the conditions of the Geneva Conventions.\nThe SLA subjected Hearst to indoctrination in SLA ideology. In Hearst's taped recordings, used to announce demands and conditions, on day thirteen of her capture, Hearst can be heard extemporaneously expressing SLA ideology.\nHibernia Bank robbery.\nThe SLA's next action was the armed robbery of the Hibernia Bank branch at 1450 Noriega Street in San Francisco, on April 15, 1974. The group needed money and chose this site, because they wanted to make a public statement and knew it had cameras, but they shot and wounded two people in the course of the robbery.\nAt 10:00\u00a0a.m., three armed SLA members rushed into the bank, including Hearst holding a rifle. Security camera footage of Hearst was carried internationally. In her memoir, \"Every Secret Thing\", she denied having participated willingly in the robbery and said she was threatened by other members. The group took more than $10,000 in the robbery. \nHearst later pleaded guilty and was sentenced to seven years in prison on charges related to this. After she served two years in prison, President Jimmy Carter commuted the remainder of her sentence. President Bill Clinton gave her an official pardon.\nMove to Los Angeles.\nThe SLA believed it had to recruit new members and recognized that it had alienated the radical community in the Bay Area by assassinating Marcus Foster. Cinque suggested moving the organization to his former neighborhood in South Central Los Angeles, where he had friends whom they might recruit. The SLA had difficulty getting established there. They relied on commandeering housing and supplies, generating resentment among the people who protected their secrecy and security. \nAt this stage, SLA member Russell Little, who was being held in jail pending a trial, said that he believed the SLA had entirely lost sight of its goals. He believed they got sidetracked into a confrontation with the Los Angeles Police Department rather than educating the public in a political dialogue.\nOn May 16, 1974, William and Emily Harris entered Mel's Sporting Goods Store in the Los Angeles suburb of Inglewood, California, to shop for supplies. While Emily made the purchases, Bill decided to shoplift a bandolier. When a security guard confronted him, Bill Harris brandished a revolver. The guard knocked the gun out of his hand and handcuffed William's left wrist. Hearst, on armed lookout from the group's van across the street, began shooting at the store's overhead sign. Everyone in the store but the Harrises took cover, and the couple fled the store, jumping into the van and escaping with Hearst.\nThe SLA abandoned the van, but because of the shoplifting and shooting, police examined the vehicle. They found a parking ticket that had the address of the group's new location (their so-called safe house.) The rest of the SLA fled that house after seeing news coverage of the shooting at the sports shop. The SLA took over a house occupied by Christine Johnson and Minnie Lewisin, at 1466 East 54th Street. Among those in the house at the time was a 17-year-old neighbor named Brenda Daniels, who was sleeping on the couch.\nDaniels recalls the events that night:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I went down to Minnie's every Thursday evening to play some cards and drink a little. I fell asleep early and when I woke up around two a.m. I saw four white women and three dudes\u2014two blacks and one white. I saw guns spread out all over the floor, an' I asked them why they had guns, more than I'd ever seen in my life. They didn't answer, and, instead, the black dude asked me my name and then introduced me to everyone.\n[When asked if Patty Hearst was there]\nMan, how can I tell? All white women look the same to me.\nPolice shootout.\nThe next day, an anonymous phone call to the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) said that several heavily armed people were staying at the caller's daughter's house. That afternoon, more than 400 LAPD officers, under the command of Captain Mervin King, along with FBI agents, Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department (LASD), California Highway Patrol (CHP), and Los Angeles Fire Department (LAFD), surrounded the neighborhood. The leader of a SWAT team used a bullhorn to announce, \"Occupants of 1466 East 54th Street, this is the Los Angeles Police Department speaking. Come out with your hands up!\"\nA young child walked out, along with an older man. The man said that no one else was in the house, but the child intervened, saying there were several people and they had guns and ammunition. After several more attempts to get people to leave the house, a member of the SWAT team fired tear gas projectiles into the structure. SLA members responded with bursts of automatic gunfire, and a violent gun battle began. The police were firing semi-automatic AR-15 and AR-180 rifles. The SLA members were armed with M1 carbines that had been converted to fully automatic fire. Police also reported that the SLA had made homemade grenades from 35\u00a0mm film canisters, and had thrown them at responding officers.\nDuring the shootout, police continued to fire dozens of tear gas grenades into the house, attempting to force out the SLA members. About two hours into the shootout, the house caught fire, probably due to an exploding tear gas canister. As the house began to burn, two women left from the rear and one came out to the front (she had come in drunk the previous night, passed out, and woken up in the middle of the siege); all were taken into custody, but were found not to be SLA members.\nAutomatic weapons fire continued from the house. At this point, Nancy Ling Perry and Camilla Hall came out of the house. Police later said they fatally shot Hall in the head as she aimed a weapon toward them; Perry was shooting at them, and they shot her twice. After Hall fell to the ground, Atwood pulled her body back into the house. Perry's body remained outside the house.\nThe rest died inside, from smoke inhalation, burns and gunshot wounds. The coroner's report concluded that Donald DeFreeze committed suicide by shooting himself in the side of the head. Atwood, Willie Wolfe, and Patricia Soltysik died of smoke inhalation and burns. After the shooting stopped and the fire was extinguished, police recovered 19 firearms\u2014including rifles, pistols, and shotguns. It was one of the largest police shootouts in U.S. history with a reported total of over 9,000 rounds being fired (4,000 by the SLA and 5,000 by police). There were no casualties among law enforcement, firefighters, or civilians outside the house.\nThe SLA leadership was decimated: Donald DeFreeze (General Cinque), Patricia Soltysik (Mizmoon or Zoya) and Nancy Ling Perry had all died. The other dead were also founding members: Angela Atwood (\"General Gelina\"), Camilla Hall (\"Gabi\"), and Willie Wolfe (\"Kahjoh\", misspelled by the media at the time as \"Cujo\").&lt;ref name=\"cujo/kahjoh\"&gt;\"The Voices of Guns\", p. 286.&lt;/ref&gt; Perry's body was outside, but the others were all found in a crawl space under the house, which had burned down around them.\nArea TV stations all covered the shootout and conflagration. They took advantage of new broadcasting technology, such as smaller portable cameras that made their mobile units more nimble. Holed up in a hotel in Anaheim, the Harrises and Hearst watched the siege and destruction live on TV from their room.\n1975.\nReturn to the Bay Area.\nEmily and William Harris, a married couple who were founding members, remained at large as fugitives with Hearst. Claiming to lead the SLA, they later picked up a few more members and committed more crimes, including the 1975 armed robbery of a bank in Carmichael, California, in which a customer was killed. \nMost of the small group were apprehended in 1975 and brought to trial; most accepted plea deals and served several years in prison.\nInitially the Harrises and Hearst stayed in the Bay area. By early the next year, Bill and Emily Harris were leaders. They had taken refuge with Hearst for a period on the East Coast, where they were aided by former radical Wendy Yoshimura from San Francisco. \nAfter the four returned to the Bay area, the SLA members recruited activists and siblings Steve and Kathleen Soliah, Kathleen's boyfriend James Kilgore, and Michael Bortin. Except for Yoshimura, who was Japanese American and born at the internment camp where her parents were held during World War II, all the new members were white.\nCrocker Bank robbery.\nOn April 21, 1975, the SLA members conducted an armed robbery of the Crocker National Bank branch in Carmichael, California, in the Sacramento area. During the robbery, Emily Harris discharged her shotgun and accidentally shot and killed customer Myrna Lee Opsahl, a 42-year-old mother of four children. Five SLA members were ultimately charged in this murder and robbery. \nAfter being apprehended following years as fugitives, four of them pleaded guilty to reduced charges in early 2002.\nHearst capture, trial and conviction.\nAfter a long and highly publicized search, Hearst was captured on September 18, 1975, along with the Harrises, Steven Soliah, and Yoshimura; they had been found in San Francisco safe houses. In Hearst's arrest affidavit, she claimed that SLA members had used LSD to drug her and had forced her to take part in the bank raid. \nShe was convicted of the Hibernia Bank robbery and sentenced to seven years in prison. After she had been in prison for 21 months, US President Jimmy Carter commuted the sentence to time served. She was pardoned by President Bill Clinton. The Harrises were convicted for their part in the Hearst kidnapping and spent eight years in prison. Police allegedly consulted psychics in searching for Hearst.\nAftermath.\nOn February 26, 1976, a Los Angeles county grand jury indicted Kathleen Ann Soliah on explosives and conspiracy charges. She was accused of planting pipe bombs under two LAPD squad cars in August 1975, intending to kill police officers in retaliation for the six SLA members who died in the May 17, 1974 shootout in Los Angeles. The devices did not detonate.\nSoliah went on the run, eventually moving to Minnesota. She lived as a fugitive for 21 years, changing her name and creating a new upper-middle-class life under the alias Sara Jane Olson. She married a doctor and they had three daughters.\nThe FBI arrested Soliah/Olson in 1999 after a tip was received by the television show \"America's Most Wanted\", which had twice aired her profile. She was prosecuted in Los Angeles by its deputy district attorneys. Before going to trial in 2001, she pleaded guilty to possession of explosives with the intent to murder and was sentenced to two consecutive terms of ten years to life. In negotiation of the plea bargain, she had been told that she would serve no more than eight years. She attempted to change her plea, telling the judge that she had pleaded guilty only because she believed she could not receive a fair trial for bombing charges after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. She said that she was innocent of the making, possessing, or placing of the pipe bombs. The judge refused her request.\nThe Opsahl murder/Crocker bank robbery cold case had been pursued due to new evidence developed through the efforts of the Los Angeles deputy district attorneys who had prosecuted Olson. On January 16, 2002, first-degree murder charges for the killing of Myrna Opsahl were filed against Sara Jane Olson, Emily Harris, William Harris, Michael Bortin, and James Kilgore in Sacramento. All were living \"above ground\" and were quickly arrested except for Kilgore. He had been living in South Africa and remained at large for nearly another year.\nOn November 7, 2002, Olson, the Harrises, and Bortin pleaded guilty to reduced second-degree murder charges. The Harrises had divorced, and Emily had taken back her surname of Montague. She admitted to holding the murder weapon at the bank but said that the shotgun had gone off accidentally. Hearst had earlier said that Montague had dismissed the murder at the time saying, \"She was a bourgeois pig anyway. Her husband is a doctor.\" In court, Montague denied having said this. She added, \"I do not want [the Opsahl family] to believe that we ever considered her life insignificant.\"\nSentences were handed down on February 14, 2003, in Sacramento for the four defendants in the Opsahl murder case. Montague was sentenced to eight years for second degree murder. Her former husband, William Harris, was sentenced to seven years, and Bortin to six years. Olson was sentenced to six years, adding two consecutively to the 14-year sentence she had already received. All sentences were the maximum allowed under their plea bargains.\nOn November 8, 2002, James Kilgore was arrested in South Africa after having been a fugitive since 1975. He was extradited to the United States to face federal explosives and passport fraud charges. Prosecutors alleged that a pipe bomb had been found in Kilgore's apartment in 1975 and that he had obtained a passport under a false name. He pleaded guilty to the charges in 2003.\nSara Jane Olson was expecting to receive a sentence of 5 years and 4 months, but \"in stiffening Olson's sentence ..., the prison board turned to a seldom-used section of state law, allowing it to recalculate sentences for old crimes in light of new, tougher sentencing guidelines.\" Olson was sentenced to 14 years\u00a0\u2014 later reduced to 13 years\u00a0\u2014 plus six years for her role in the Opsahl killing. \nAs a state's witness, Hearst had been given immunity, but the plea bargains meant that no trial was held and she never testified on this case.\nOn April 26, 2004, Kilgore was sentenced to 54 months in prison for the explosives and passport fraud charges. He was the last remaining SLA member to face federal prosecution.\nAfter serving six years of her prison sentence, Sarah Jane Olson was released on parole. She reunited with her family in California on March 17, 2008. But after a discovery that her release was premature because of a clerical error, she was arrested at Los Angeles International Airport and notified that her right to travel out of state had been rescinded. She was returned to prison for a year.\nOn March 17, 2009, Sarah Olson was released after serving seven years of her 14-year sentence. She was to check in with her parole officer in Los Angeles where it would be determined if she would be allowed to serve her parole in Saint Paul, Minnesota, with her husband and three daughters. Several officials, including the Governor of Minnesota, urged that she serve her parole in California, but she was finally allowed to return to Minnesota and serve it there.\nOn May 10, 2009, James Kilgore was released from prison in California.\nAs of 2017, all but one of the surviving SLA members have been released from prison. Founding member Joe Remiro remains incarcerated, serving a life sentence for the murder of Marcus Foster. Little said that Soltysik, Perry, and DeFreeze were the ones who shot Foster and Blackburn. They died in the 1974 shootout in Los Angeles. Remiro was up for parole in 2019.\nKnown members.\nFounding members.\nThese three were responsible for the assassination of Marcus Foster and wounding of his deputy.\nCultural impact.\nThe SLA distributed photographs, news releases and radio-quality taped interviews in which they explained their activities to the press. The Bay Area Research Collective was formed as an above-ground support group for the SLA, and distributed a mimeographed newsletter, \"The Dragon\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28643", "revid": "16327787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28643", "title": "Secondary sex characteristic", "text": "Features that occur in an organism at sexual maturity\nA secondary sex characteristic is a physical characteristic of an organism that is related to or derived from its sex, but not directly part of its reproductive system. In humans, these characteristics typically start to appear during puberty\u2014and include enlarged breasts and widened hips of females, facial hair and Adam's apples on males, and pubic hair on both. In non-human animals, they can start to appear at sexual maturity\u2014and include, for example, the manes of male lions, the bright facial and rump coloration of male mandrills, and horns in many goats and antelopes.\nSecondary sex characteristics are particularly evident in the sexually dimorphic phenotypic traits that distinguish the sexes of a species. In evolution, secondary sex characteristics are the product of sexual selection for traits that show fitness, giving an organism an advantage over its rivals in courtship and in aggressive interactions.\nMany characteristics are believed to have been established by a positive feedback loop known as the Fisherian runaway produced by the secondary characteristic in one sex and the desire for that characteristic in the other sex. Male birds and fish of many species have brighter coloration or other external ornaments. Differences in size between sexes are also considered secondary sexual characteristics.\nSecondary sex characteristics vs. primary sex characteristics.\nThe reproductive organs in male or female mammals that are usually identifiable at birth are described as the primary sex characteristics or sex organs. In the male, these are the penis, testes, and scrotum. In the female, these are the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, vagina and vulva. The primary sex organs are different from the secondary sex organs because at maturity they produce gametes, which are haploid male or female germ cells which can unite with another of the opposite sex during sexual reproduction to form a zygote.\nThe secondary sex characteristics differ in that they will not be identifiable at birth, they will develop as the subject becomes sexually mature. In mammals, these characteristics may include increased mammary tissue in females and greater muscle mass in males. Secondary sexual characteristics have an evolutionary purpose: increase the chance of breeding.\nEvolutionary roots.\nIn \"The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex\", Charles Darwin hypothesized that sexual selection, or competition within a species for mates, can explain observed differences between sexes in many species.\nRonald Fisher, the English biologist, developed a number of ideas concerning secondary characteristics in his 1930 book \"The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection\", including the concept of Fisherian runaway which postulates that the desire for a characteristic in females combined with that characteristic in males can create a positive feedback loop or runaway where the feature becomes hugely amplified. The 1975 handicap principle extends this idea, stating that a peacock's tail, for instance, displays fitness by being a useless impediment that is very hard to fake. Another of Fisher's ideas is the sexy son hypothesis, whereby females will desire to have sons that possess the characteristic that they find sexually attractive in order to maximize the number of grandchildren they produce. An alternative hypothesis is that some of the genes that enable males to develop impressive ornaments or fighting ability may be correlated with fitness markers such as disease resistance or a more efficient metabolism. This idea is known as the good genes hypothesis.\nIn non-human animals.\nExamples of secondary sex characteristics in non-human animals include manes of male lions and long feathers of male peafowl, the tusks of male narwhals, enlarged proboscises in male elephant seals and proboscis monkeys, the bright facial and rump coloration of male mandrills, horns in many goats and antelopes, and the swollen upper lip and elongated premaxillary and maxillary teeth of male spikethumb frogs. Male fish develop \"nuptial tubercles\", mainly on their snouts, in the breeding season. These are an honest signal of health, and may assist females in sexual selection for species that use lek mating, such as the roach \"Rutilus rutilus\".\nBiologists today distinguish between \"male-to-male combat\" and \"mate choice\", usually female choice of male mates. Sexual characteristics due to combat are such things as antlers, horns, and greater size. Characteristics due to mate choice, often referred to as \"ornaments\", include brighter plumage, coloration, and other features that have no immediate purpose for survival or combat.\nMale jumping spiders have visual patches of UV reflectance, which are ornamentations used to attract females.\nIn humans.\nSexual differentiation begins during gestation, when the gonads are formed. The general structure and shape of the body and face, as well as sex hormone levels, are similar in preadolescent boys and girls. As puberty begins and sex hormone levels rise, differences appear, though some changes are similar in males and females. Male levels of testosterone directly induce the growth of the genitals, and indirectly (via dihydrotestosterone (DHT)) the prostate. Estradiol and other hormones cause breasts to develop in females. However, fetal or neonatal androgens may modulate later breast development by reducing the capacity of breast tissue to respond to later estrogen.\nUnderarm hair and pubic hair are usually considered secondary sex characteristics, but they may also be considered non-secondary sex characteristics because they are features of both sexes following puberty.\nFemales.\nIn females, breasts are a manifestation of higher levels of estrogen; estrogen also widens the pelvis and increases the amount of body fat in hips, thighs, buttocks, and breasts. Estrogen also induces growth of the uterus, proliferation of the endometrium, and menstruation. Female secondary sex characteristics include:\nMales.\nThe increased secretion of testosterone from the testes during puberty causes the male secondary sexual characteristics to be manifested. Testosterone directly increases size and mass of muscles, vocal cords, and bones, deepening of the voice, and changing the shape of the face and skeleton. Converted into DHT in the skin, it accelerates growth of androgen-responsive facial and body hair but may slow and eventually stop the growth of head hair. Taller stature is largely a result of later puberty and slower epiphyseal fusion. Overall, male secondary sex characteristics include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28644", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28644", "title": "Software optimization", "text": ""}
{"id": "28645", "revid": "42778291", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28645", "title": "Smuggling", "text": "Illegal movement of goods or people\nSmuggling is the illegal transportation of objects, substances, information or people, such as out of a house or buildings, into a prison, or across an international border, in violation of applicable laws or other regulations. More broadly, social scientists define smuggling as the purposeful movement across a border in contravention to the relevant legal frameworks.\nThere are various motivations to smuggle. These include the participation in illegal trade, such as in the drug trade/drug cartel, illegal weapons trade, human trafficking, wildlife smuggling or wildlife trade, counterfeiting, game of chance, prostitution, kidnapping, heists, copyright infringement (piracy), chop shops, illegal immigration or illegal emigration, tax evasion, import restrictions, export restrictions, providing contraband to prison inmates, or the theft of the items being smuggled.\nSmuggling is a common theme in literature, from Bizet's opera \"Carmen\" to the James Bond spy books (and later films) \"Diamonds Are Forever\" and \"Goldfinger\".\nEtymology.\nThe verb \"smuggle\", from Low German \"smuggeln\" or Dutch \"smokkelen\" (=\"to transport (goods) illegally\"), apparently a frequentative formation of a word meaning \"to sneak\", most likely entered the English language during the 1600s\u20131700s.\nHistory.\nSmuggling has a long and controversial history, probably dating back to the first time at which duties were imposed in any form, or any attempt was made to prohibit a form of traffic. Smuggling is often associated with efforts by authorities to prevent the importation of certain contraband items or non-taxed goods; however, there has also been smuggling based on illegally exporting goods. In England smuggling first became a recognised problem in the 13th century, following the creation of a national customs collection system by Edward I in 1275. Medieval smuggling tended to focus on the export of highly taxed export goods \u2014 notably wool and hides. Merchants also, however, sometimes smuggled other goods to circumvent prohibitions or embargoes on particular trades. Grain, for instance, was usually prohibited from export, unless prices were low, because of fears that grain exports would raise the price of food in England and thus cause food shortages and civil unrest. Following the loss of Gascony to the French in 1453, imports of wine were also sometimes embargoed during wars to try to deprive the French of the revenues that could be earned from their main export.\nMost studies of historical smuggling have been based on official sources \u2014 such as court records, or the letters of Revenue Officers. A senior academic of the University of Bristol states that they only detail the activities of those dumb enough to get caught. This has led him and others, such as Prof. H. V. Bowen of the University of Swansea to use commercial records to reconstruct smuggling businesses. Jones' study focuses on smuggling in Bristol in the mid-16th century, arguing that the illicit export of goods like grain and leather represented a significant part of the city's business, with many members of the civic elite engaging in it, whether by disguised/hidden transport or mis-description of goods. Grain smuggling by members of the civic elite, often working closely with corrupt customs officers, has also been shown to have been prevalent in East Anglia during the later 16th century.\nIn England wool was smuggled to the continent in the 17th century, under the pressure of high excise taxes. In 1724 Daniel Defoe wrote of Lymington, Hampshire, on the south coast of England\nI do not find they have any foreign commerce, except it be what we call smuggling and roguing; which I may say, is the reigning commerce of all this part of the English coast, from the mouth of the Thames to the Land's End in Cornwall.\nThe high rates of duty levied on tea and also wine and spirits, and other luxury goods coming in from mainland Europe at this time made the clandestine import of such goods and the evasion of the duty a highly profitable venture for impoverished fishermen and seafarers. In certain parts of the country such as the Romney Marsh, East Kent, Cornwall and East Cleveland, the smuggling industry was for many communities more economically significant than legal activities such as farming and fishing. The principal reason for the high duty was the need for the government to finance a number of extremely expensive wars with France and the United States.\nBefore the era of drug smuggling and human trafficking, smuggling had acquired a kind of nostalgic romanticism, in the vein of Robert Louis Stevenson's \"Kidnapped\":\nFew places on the British coast did not claim to be the haunts of wreckers or mooncussers. The thievery was boasted about and romanticized until it seemed a kind of heroism. It did not have any taint of criminality and the whole of the south coast had pockets vying with one another over whose smugglers were the darkest or most daring. \"The Smugglers Inn\" was one of the commonest names for a bar on the coast.\nIn North America, smuggling in colonial times was a reaction to the heavy taxes and regulations imposed by mercantilist trade policies. After American independence in 1783, smuggling developed at the edges of the United States at places like Passamaquoddy Bay, St. Mary's in Georgia, Lake Champlain, and Louisiana. During Thomas Jefferson's embargo of 1807-1809, these same places became the primary places where goods were smuggled out of the nation in defiance of the law. Like Britain, a gradual liberalization of trade laws as part of the free trade movement meant less smuggling. in 1907 President Theodore Roosevelt tried to cut down on smuggling by establishing the Roosevelt Reservation along the United States-Mexico Border. Smuggling revived in the 1920s during Prohibition, and drug smuggling became a major problem after 1970. In the 1990s, when economic sanctions were imposed on Serbia, a large percent of the population lived off smuggling petrol and consumer goods from neighboring countries. The state unofficially allowed this to continue or otherwise the entire economy would have collapsed.\nIn modern times, as many first-world countries have struggled to contain a rising influx of immigrants, the smuggling of people across national borders has become a lucrative extra-legal activity, as well as the extremely dark side, people-trafficking, especially of women who may be enslaved typically as prostitutes.\nTypes of smuggling.\nGoods.\nMuch smuggling occurs when enterprising merchants attempt to supply demand for a good or service that is illegal or heavily taxed. As a result, illegal drug trafficking, and the smuggling of weapons (illegal arms trade), as well as the historical staples of smuggling, alcohol (rum-running) and tobacco, are widespread. As the smuggler faces significant risk of civil and criminal penalties if caught with contraband, smugglers are able to impose a significant price premium on smuggled goods. The profits involved in smuggling goods appear to be extensive. The iron law of prohibition posits that greater enforcement results in more potent alcohol and drugs being smuggled.\nProfits also derive from avoiding taxes or levies on imported goods. For example, a smuggler might purchase a large quantity of cigarettes in a place with low taxes and smuggle them into a place with higher taxes, where they can be sold at a far higher margin than would otherwise be possible. It has been reported that smuggling one truckload of cigarettes within the United States can lead to a profit of US$2 million.\nPeople smuggling.\nWith regard to people smuggling, a distinction can be made between people smuggling as a service to those wanting to illegally migrate and the involuntary trafficking of people. An estimated 90% of people who illegally crossed the border between Mexico and the United States are believed to have paid a smuggler to lead them across.\nPeople smuggling can be used to rescue a person from oppressive circumstances. For example, when the Southern United States allowed slavery, many slaves moved north via the Underground Railroad. Similarly, during the Holocaust, Jewish people were smuggled out of Germany by people such as Algoth Niska.\nIn October 2023, Spanish police arrested 11 individuals involved in smuggling migrants hidden in trucks at Algeciras sea border, connected to a network providing forged documents. In the same month, they dismantled another criminal organization focused on supplying fake documents to migrants in Spain, primarily in the agricultural sector.\nHuman trafficking.\nTrafficking of human beings \u2014 sometimes called human trafficking or, in the case of sexual services, sex trafficking \u2014 is not the same as people smuggling. A smuggler will facilitate illegal entry into a country for a fee, and on arrival at their destination, the smuggled person is free; the trafficking victim is coerced in some way. Victims do not agree to be trafficked; they are tricked, lured by false promises, or forced into it. Traffickers use coercive tactics including deception, fraud, intimidation, isolation, physical threats and use of force, debt bondage or even force-feeding drugs to control their victims.\nWhile the majority of victims are women, and sometimes children, other victims include men, women and children forced or conned into manual or cheap labor. Due to the illegal nature of trafficking, the exact extent is unknown. A U.S. government report published in 2003 estimates that 800,000-900,000 people worldwide are trafficked across borders each year. This figure does not include those who are trafficked internally.\nChild trafficking.\nAccording to a study by Alternatives to Combat Child Labour Through Education and Sustainable Services in the Middle East and North Africa Region (ACCESS-MENA) 30% of school children living in border villages of Yemen had been smuggled into Saudi Arabia. Child trafficking is commonly referenced as \"transporting\". Smuggled children were in danger of being sexually abused or even killed. Poverty is one of the reasons behind child trafficking and some children are smuggled with their parents' consent via a transporter. As many as 50% of those smuggled are children. In the Philippines, between 60,000 and 100,000 children are trafficked to work in the sex industry.\nHuman trafficking and migration.\nEach year, hundreds of thousands of migrants are moved illegally by highly organized international smuggling and trafficking groups, often in dangerous or inhumane conditions. This phenomenon has been growing in recent years as people of low income countries are aspiring to enter developed countries in search of jobs. Migrant smuggling and human trafficking are two separate offences and differ in a few central respects. While \"smuggling\" refers to facilitating the illegal entry of a person into a State, \"trafficking\" includes an element of exploitation.\nThe trafficker retains control over the migrant\u2014through force, fraud or coercion\u2014typically in the sex industry, through forced labour or through other practices similar to slavery. Trafficking violates the idea of basic human rights. The overwhelming majority of those trafficked are women and children. These victims are commodities in a multibillion-dollar global industry. Criminal organizations are choosing to traffic human beings because, unlike other commodities, people can be used repeatedly and because trafficking requires little in terms of capital investment.\nSmuggling is also reaping huge financial dividends to criminal groups who charge migrants massive fees for their services. Intelligence reports have noted that drug-traffickers and other criminal organizations are switching to human cargo to obtain greater profit with less risk.\nIt is acknowledged that the smuggling of people is a growing global phenomenon. It is a transnational crime. Currently, economic instability appears to be the main reason for illegal migration movement throughout the world. Nevertheless, many of the willing migrants undertake the hazardous travel to their destination country with criminal syndicates specialized in people smuggling. These syndicates arrange everything for the migrants, but at a high price.\nVery often the traveling conditions are inhumane: the migrants are overcrowded in trucks or boats and fatal accidents occur frequently. After their arrival in the destination country, their illegal status puts them at the mercy of their smugglers, which often force the migrants to work for years in the illegal labor market to pay off the debts incurred as a result of their transportation.\nWildlife.\nWildlife smuggling results from the demand for exotic species and the lucrative nature of the trade. The CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora) regulates the movement of endangered wildlife across political borders.\nEconomics of smuggling.\nResearch on smuggling as economic phenomenon is scant. Jagdish Bhagwati and Bent Hansen first forwarded a theory of smuggling in which they saw smuggling essentially as an import-substituting economic activity. Their main consideration, however, was the welfare implications of smuggling. Against common belief that the private sector is more efficient than the public sector, they showed that smuggling might not enhance social welfare though it may divert resources from governments to the private sector.\nIn contrast, Faizul Latif Chowdhury, in 1999, suggested a production-substituting model of smuggling in which price disparity due to cost of supply is critically important as an incentive for smuggling. This price disparity is caused by domestic consumption-taxes and import duties. Drawing attention to the case of cigarettes, Chowdhury suggested that, in Bangladesh, smuggling of cigarettes reduced the level of domestic production. Domestic production of cigarettes is subject to value added tax (VAT) and other consumption tax. Reduction of domestic taxes enables the local producer to supply at a lower cost and bring down the price disparity that encourages smuggling.\nHowever, Chowdhury suggested that there is a limit beyond which reducing domestic taxes on production cannot confer a competitive advantage versus smuggled cigarettes. Therefore, government needs to upscale its anti-smuggling drive so that seizures (taking possession of person or property by legal process) can add to the cost of smuggling and thus render smuggling uncompetitive. Notably, Chowdhury modeled the relationship of the smuggler to the local producer as one of antagonistic duopoly.\nOn the other hand, research by Tat Chee Tsui in 2016 suggests that even if increasing cigarette duty may encourage smuggling, total cigarette-consumption still declines because the price of illicit goods, as substitutes of taxed cigarettes, also increases because of higher tax rate.\nOne economic view sees smuggling as monopoly-busting - as a challenge to state-sponsored restrictions or taxes on trade.\nMethods.\nIn smuggling, concealment can involve concealing the smuggled goods on a person's clothing, luggage or inside a body cavity. Some smugglers hide the whole transportation vehicle or ship used to bring the items into an area. Avoiding border checks, such as by small ships, private airplanes, through overland smuggling routes, smuggling tunnels and even small submersibles. This also applies for illegally passing a border oneself, for illegal immigration or illegal emigration. In many parts of the world, particularly the Gulf of Mexico, the smuggling vessel of choice is the go-fast boat.\nSubmitting to border checks with the goods or people hidden in a vehicle or between (other) merchandise, or the goods hidden in luggage, in or under clothes, inside the body (see body cavity search, balloon swallower and mule), etc. Many smugglers fly on regularly scheduled airlines. A large number of suspected smugglers are caught each year by customs worldwide. Goods and people are also smuggled across seas hidden in containers, and overland hidden in cars, trucks, and trains. A related topic is illegally passing a border oneself as a stowaway. The high level of duty levied on alcohol and tobacco in Britain has led to large-scale smuggling from France to the UK through the Channel Tunnel.\nThe combination of acknowledged corruption at the border and high import tariffs led smugglers in the 1970s and '80s to fly electronic equipment such as stereos and televisions in cargo planes from one country to clandestine landing strips in another, thereby circumventing encounters at the frontier between countries.\nFor illegally passing a border oneself, another method is with a false passport (completely fake, or illegally changed, or the passport of a lookalike).\nAt Border checkpoints, especially for shipping cargo, Border agents must inspect cargo for smuggled and illegal goods. However, because of what is called Gridlock a maximum of 5% inspections per cargo holds worldwide. Since it can take a proper and complete inspection four to six hours, major global trade routes such as Singapore offer great opportunity for smugglers and traders alike. As the leading Cape Town Customs Official argues, if a shipping port stops and inspects every ship it would cause a total shipping grid lock, which is trade gridlock, which is also economic gridlock. By under-declaring and misrepresenting, even the most surprising goods is common practice when smuggling. What popular culture does not communicate, is that illegal drugs and arms are not the bane of customs officers and the ultimate threat to their economy. In reality, the most commonly smuggled items are everyday items one believes to be common and thus causes higher losses in tax revenue. An anonymous shipping agent said that smuggling becomes second nature to businessmen, taking finished products and misrepresenting them to offer the cheapest possible rate. What the majority of people do not realize, is that the media and popular culture focus on criminal organizations as primary smugglers, but in reality legitimate businesses are the biggest offenders. By incorporating their label on merchandise or products, it leaves bias towards their goods as the popular media portrays them as reliable. Smuggling, however, is produced through the very culture of the shipping industry and is affected by institutionalized tariffs and taxes around the world.\nThe existence of the Multi-Consignment Contraband (MCC) smuggling method (smuggling two or more different types of contraband such as drugs and illegal immigrants or drugs and guns at the same time) was verified following the completion of a study that found 16 documented cases of smugglers transporting more than one type of contraband in the same shipment. MCC shipments were frequently associated with Phase II and Phase III smuggling organizations.\nUse of animals.\nIn addition to human couriers, smugglers have been known to transport illicit goods with the use of trained animals. One advantage to smugglers using animals is that unlike human couriers, who might turn state's evidence if caught, an animal courier, if caught with any contraband on them, would be unable to provide any verbal information to the authorities.\nDogs.\nOne way that smugglers have used animals to transport contraband at times is through the use of dogs. Often smugglers have been known to strap drugs onto the backs of canine and then use such dogs as pack animals to transport the contraband across further distances or across borders.\nCats.\nAnother way smugglers have used to transport contraband on multiple occasions is cats. Usually the cats are used to sneak drugs into prisons, where prison gangs can then sell the drugs to other inmates. Often a smuggler from the outside will attach small amounts of drugs to a cat and then the cat will either be lured inside the prison by inmates with cat treats or the cat might be trained to enter the prison. In addition to drugs, cats have also been used to smuggle other kinds of contraband into prison such as cellphones, tools, batteries and phone chargers. The reason why cats can make good drug couriers is due to the fact that felines are naturally stealthy animals and because the prison guards are often less likely to suspect that contraband might be on a cat.\nBirds.\nAdditionally smugglers have also used homing pigeons to transport contraband by air at times. Carrier pigeons have been used to smuggle drugs into prisons and across borders. Additionally homing pigeons have also been used to transport cellphones and SIM cards into prisons. The reason why pigeons have been useful for smugglers, is that they can fly for long distances and because the birds are usually unlikely to arouse much suspicion from authorities, due to the fact that pigeons are such widespread and commonly witnessed birds, in both rural and urban areas.\nLivestock.\nSmugglers have also been known to transport contraband with the use of livestock. One such example is the use of horses, donkeys, mules and ponies. The traffickers often strap the illicit goods to the packhorses pack saddle, so that the animal can carry more loads of contraband further and across more rugged terrain then a human courier. In addition to Packhorses, Smugglers have also been known to transport contraband with the use of horse-drawn vehicles. Additionally there are also livestock that smugglers have used as living body couriers, in such instances the animals are either made to swallow the drugs or the drugs are surgically implanted inside the animals before they are herded to another destination, at a later date when the animals are slaughtered for their meat, the drugs are then removed and given to associates. One such example is the use of cattle. Cattle have been used as 'body couriers' to transport contraband in multiple ways, often by inserting the drugs into the cattle, to be removed at a later time after slaughter. Another animal that traffickers have used as body couriers are goats, which they remove drugs from after slaughter. Additionally another animal that has been used by smugglers to transport contraband are sheep. Oftentimes, the traffickers either attach the drugs to the sheep's wool or they insert the drugs inside the sheep to be removed at a later date after slaughter. What type of livestock or pack animals do organized criminals use to carry contraband, often depends on availability and region. For example, in parts of South America, traffickers have used llamas as pack animals to transport drugs across rugged terrain or across borders. In certain parts of Asia, elephants have been used as pack animals to carry large amounts of drugs across wilderness areas or across borders. In Middle Eastern countries, smugglers have also been known to use camels as pack animals to transport drugs across further distances or across borders.\nLegal definition.\nIn popular perception smuggling is synonymous with illegal trade. Even social scientists have misconstrued smuggling as illegal trade. While the two have indeed identical objectives, namely the evasion of taxes and the importation of contraband items, their demand and cost functions are altogether different requiring different analytical framework. As a result, illegal trade through customs stations is differently considered, and smuggling is defined as international trade through 'unauthorized route'. A seaport, airport or land port which has not been authorized by the government for importation and exportation is an 'unauthorized route'. The legal definition of these occurs in the Customs Act of the country. Notably, some definitions define any 'undeclared' trafficking of currency and precious metal as smuggling. Smuggling is a cognizable offense in which both the smuggled goods and the goods are punishable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28647", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28647", "title": "String algorithm", "text": ""}
{"id": "28648", "revid": "12521734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28648", "title": "String-searching algorithm", "text": "Searching for patterns in text\nA string-searching algorithm, sometimes called string-matching algorithm, is an algorithm that searches a body of text for portions that match by pattern.\nA basic example of string searching is when the pattern and the searched text are arrays of elements of an alphabet (finite set) \u03a3. \u03a3 may be a human language alphabet, for example, the letters \"A\" through \"Z\" and other applications may use a \"binary alphabet\" (\u03a3 = {0,1}) or a \"DNA alphabet\" (\u03a3 = {A,C,G,T}) in bioinformatics.\nIn practice, the method of feasible string-search algorithm may be affected by the string encoding. In particular, if a variable-width encoding is in use, then it may be slower to find the \"N\"th character, perhaps requiring time proportional to \"N\". This may significantly slow some search algorithms. One of many possible solutions is to search for the sequence of code units instead, but doing so may produce false matches unless the encoding is specifically designed to avoid it.\nOverview.\nThe most basic case of string searching involves one (often very long) string, sometimes called the \"haystack\", and one (often very short) string, sometimes called the \"needle\". The goal is to find one or more occurrences of the needle within the haystack. For example, one might search for \"to\" within:\n Some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and digested.\nOne might request the first occurrence of \"to\", which is the fourth word; or all occurrences, of which there are 3; or the last, which is the fifth word from the end.\nVery commonly, however, various constraints are added. For example, one might want to match the \"needle\" only where it consists of one (or more) complete words\u2014perhaps defined as \"not\" having other letters immediately adjacent on either side. In that case a search for \"hew\" or \"low\" should fail for the example sentence above, even though those literal strings do occur.\nAnother common example involves \"normalization\". For many purposes, a search for a phrase such as \"to be\" should succeed even in places where there is something else intervening between the \"to\" and the \"be\":\nMany symbol systems include characters that are synonymous (at least for some purposes):\nFinally, for strings that represent natural language, aspects of the language itself become involved. For example, one might wish to find all occurrences of a \"word\" despite it having alternate spellings, prefixes or suffixes, etc.\nAnother more complex type of search is regular expression searching, where the user constructs a pattern of characters or other symbols, and any match to the pattern should fulfill the search. For example, to catch both the American English word \"color\" and the British equivalent \"colour\", instead of searching for two different literal strings, one might use a regular expression such as:\n colou?r\nwhere the \"?\" conventionally makes the preceding character (\"u\") optional.\nThis article mainly discusses algorithms for the simpler kinds of string searching.\nA similar problem introduced in the field of bioinformatics and genomics is the maximal exact matching (MEM). Given two strings, MEMs are common substrings that cannot be extended left or right without causing a mismatch.\nExamples of search algorithms.\nNaive string search.\nA simple and inefficient way to see where one string occurs inside another is to check at each index, one by one. First, we see if there is a copy of the needle starting at the first character of the haystack; if not, we look to see if there's a copy of the needle starting at the second character of the haystack, and so forth. In the normal case, we only have to look at one or two characters for each wrong position to see that it is a wrong position, so in the average case, this takes O(\"n\" + \"m\") steps, where \"n\" is the length of the haystack and \"m\" is the length of the needle; but in the worst case, searching for a string like \"aaaab\" in a string like \"aaaaaaaaab\", it takes O(\"nm\")\nFinite-state-automaton-based search.\nIn this approach, backtracking is avoided by constructing a deterministic finite automaton (DFA) that recognizes a stored search string. These are expensive to construct\u2014they are usually created using the powerset construction\u2014but are very quick to use. For example, the DFA shown to the right recognizes the word \"MOMMY\". This approach is frequently generalized in practice to search for arbitrary regular expressions.\nStubs.\nKnuth\u2013Morris\u2013Pratt computes a DFA that recognizes inputs with the string to search for as a suffix, Boyer\u2013Moore starts searching from the end of the needle, so it can usually jump ahead a whole needle-length at each step. Baeza\u2013Yates keeps track of whether the previous \"j\" characters were a prefix of the search string, and is therefore adaptable to fuzzy string searching. The bitap algorithm is an application of Baeza\u2013Yates' approach.\nIndex methods.\nFaster search algorithms preprocess the text. After building a substring index, for example a suffix tree or suffix array, the occurrences of a pattern can be found quickly. As an example, a suffix tree can be built in formula_1 time, and all formula_2 occurrences of a pattern can be found in formula_3 time under the assumption that the alphabet has a constant size and all inner nodes in the suffix tree know what leaves are underneath them. The latter can be accomplished by running a DFS algorithm from the root of the suffix tree.\nOther variants.\nSome search methods, for instance trigram search, are intended to find a \"closeness\" score between the search string and the text rather than a \"match/non-match\". These are sometimes called \"fuzzy\" searches.\nClassification of search algorithms.\nClassification by a number of patterns.\nThe various algorithms can be classified by the number of patterns each uses.\nSingle-pattern algorithms.\nIn the following compilation, \"m\" is the length of the pattern, \"n\" the length of the searchable text, and \"k\" = |\u03a3| is the size of the alphabet.\n1.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Asymptotic times are expressed using O, \u03a9, and \u0398 notation.\n2.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Used to implement the \"memmem\" and \"strstr\" search functions in the glibc and musl C standard libraries.\n3.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Can be extended to handle approximate string matching and (potentially-infinite) sets of patterns represented as regular languages.\nThe Boyer\u2013Moore string-search algorithm has been the standard benchmark for the practical string-search literature.\nAlgorithms using a finite set of patterns.\nIn the following compilation, \"M\" is the length of the longest pattern, \"m\" their total length, \"n\" the length of the searchable text, \"o\" the number of occurrences.\nAlgorithms using an infinite number of patterns.\nNaturally, the patterns can not be enumerated finitely in this case. They are represented usually by a regular grammar or regular expression.\nClassification by the use of preprocessing programs.\nOther classification approaches are possible. One of the most common uses preprocessing as main criteria.\nClassification by matching strategies.\nAnother one classifies the algorithms by their matching strategy:\nReal-time string matching.\nIn real-time string matching, one requires the matcher to output a response after reading each character of the text, that indicates \nwhether this is the last character of a match. The response has to be given within constant time. \nThe requirement regarding preprocessing vary: O(\"m\") preprocessing may be allowed after the pattern is read (but before the reading of\nthe text), or a stricter requirement may be posed according to which the matcher has to also pause for at most a constant time after reading any character of the pattern (including the last). \nFor the more lenient version, if one does not mind that the preprocessing time and memory requirement dependend on the size of the alphabet, a real-time solution is provided by\nautomaton matching.\nZvi Galil developed a method to turn certain algorithms into real-time algorithms, and applied it to produce a variant of the KMP\nmatcher that runs in real time under the strict requirement.\nString searching with don't cares.\nIn this version of the string searching problem, there is a special symbol, \u00f8 (read: don't care), which can match any other symbol (including another \u00f8). \nDon't care symbols can appear either in the pattern or in the text. In 2002, an algorithm for this problem that runs in formula_4 time has been\ngiven by Richard Cole and Ramesh Hariharan, improving on a solution from 1973 by Fischer and Paterson\nthat has complexity formula_5, where \"k\" is the size of the alphabet. Another algorithm, claimed simpler, has been proposed by Clifford and Clifford."}
{"id": "28649", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28649", "title": "Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome", "text": "Skin disease\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nStevens\u2013Johnson syndrome (SJS) is a type of severe skin reaction. Together with toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) and Stevens\u2013Johnson/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN) overlap, they are considered febrile mucocutaneous drug reactions and probably part of the same spectrum of disease, with SJS being less severe. Erythema multiforme (EM) is generally considered a separate condition. Early symptoms of SJS include fever and flu-like symptoms. A few days later, the skin begins to blister and peel, forming painful raw areas. Mucous membranes, such as the mouth, are also typically involved. Complications include dehydration, sepsis, pneumonia and multiple organ failure.\nThe most common cause is certain medications such as lamotrigine, carbamazepine, allopurinol, sulfonamide antibiotics and nevirapine. Other causes can include infections such as \"Mycoplasma pneumoniae\" and cytomegalovirus, or the cause may remain unknown. Risk factors include HIV/AIDS and systemic lupus erythematosus.\nThe diagnosis of Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome is based on involvement of less than 10% of the skin. It is known as TEN when more than 30% of the skin is involved and considered an intermediate form when 10\u201330% is involved. SJS/TEN reactions are believed to follow a type IV hypersensitivity mechanism. It is also included with drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS syndrome), acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) and toxic epidermal necrolysis in a group of conditions known as severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs).\nTreatment typically takes place in hospital such as in a burn unit or intensive care unit. Efforts may include stopping the cause, pain medication, antihistamines, antibiotics, intravenous immunoglobulins or corticosteroids. Together with TEN, SJS affects 1 to 2 people per million per year. Typical onset is under the age of 30. Skin usually regrows over two to three weeks; however, complete recovery can take months. Overall, the risk of death with SJS is 5 to 10%.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nSJS usually begins with fever, sore throat, and fatigue, which is commonly misdiagnosed and therefore treated with antibiotics. SJS, SJS/TEN, and TEN are often heralded by fever, sore throat, cough, and burning eyes for 1 to 3 days. Patients with these disorders frequently experience burning pain of their skin at the start of disease. Ulcers and other lesions begin to appear in the mucous membranes, almost always in the mouth and lips, but also in the genital and anal regions. Those in the mouth are usually extremely painful and reduce the patient's ability to eat or drink. Conjunctivitis occurs in about 30% of children who develop SJS. A rash of round lesions about an inch across arises on the face, trunk, arms and legs, and soles of the feet, but usually not the scalp.\nCauses.\nSJS is thought to arise from a disorder of the immune system. The immune reaction can be triggered by drugs or infections. Genetic factors are associated with a predisposition to SJS. The cause of SJS is unknown in one-quarter to one-half of cases. SJS, SJS/TEN, and TEN are considered a single disease with common causes and mechanisms.\nIndividuals expressing certain human leukocyte antigen (i.e. HLA) serotypes (i.e. genetic alleles), genetical-based T cell receptors, or variations in their efficiency to absorb, distribute to tissues, metabolize, or excrete (this combination is termed ADME) a drug are predisposed to develop SJS.\nMedications.\nAlthough SJS can be caused by viral infections and malignancies, the main cause is medications. A leading cause appears to be the use of antibiotics, particularly sulfa drugs. Between 100 and 200 different drugs may be associated with SJS. No reliable test exists to establish a link between a particular drug and SJS for an individual case. Determining what drug is the cause is based on the time interval between first use of the drug and the beginning of the skin reaction. Drugs discontinued more than 1 month prior to onset of mucocutaneous physical findings are highly unlikely to cause SJS and TEN. SJS and TEN most often begin between 4 and 28 days after culprit drug administration.\u00a0A published algorithm (ALDEN) to assess drug causality gives structured assistance in identifying the responsible medication.\nSJS may be caused by the medications rivaroxaban, vancomycin, allopurinol, valproate, levofloxacin, diclofenac, etravirine, isotretinoin, fluconazole, valdecoxib, sitagliptin, oseltamivir, penicillins, barbiturates, sulfonamides, phenytoin, azithromycin, oxcarbazepine, zonisamide, modafinil, lamotrigine, nevirapine, pyrimethamine, ibuprofen, ethosuximide, carbamazepine, bupropion, telaprevir, and nystatin. Genetic susceptibility plays a significant role in drug-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Individuals who carry HLA-B15:02 or HLA-A31:01 are at substantially increased risk of carbamazepine-induced Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome.\nMedications that have traditionally been known to lead to SJS, erythema multiforme, and toxic epidermal necrolysis include sulfonamide antibiotics, penicillin antibiotics, cefixime (antibiotic), barbiturates (sedatives), lamotrigine, phenytoin (e.g., Dilantin) (anticonvulsants) and trimethoprim. Combining lamotrigine with sodium valproate increases the risk of SJS.\nNonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are a rare cause of SJS in adults; the risk is higher for older patients, women, and those initiating treatment. Typically, the symptoms of drug-induced SJS arise within a week of starting the medication. Similar to NSAIDs, paracetamol (acetaminophen) has also caused rare cases of SJS. People with systemic lupus erythematosus or HIV infections are more susceptible to drug-induced SJS.\nInfections.\nThe second most common cause of SJS and TEN is infection, particularly in children. This includes upper respiratory infections, otitis media, pharyngitis, and Epstein\u2013Barr virus, \"Mycoplasma pneumoniae\" and cytomegalovirus infections. The routine use of medicines such as antibiotics, antipyretics and analgesics to manage infections can make it difficult to identify if cases were caused by the infection or medicines taken.\nViral diseases reported to cause SJS include: herpes simplex virus (possibly; is debated), AIDS, coxsackievirus, influenza, hepatitis, and mumps.\nIn pediatric cases, Epstein\u2013Barr virus and enteroviruses have been associated with SJS.\nRecent upper respiratory tract infections have been reported by more than half of patients with SJS.\nBacterial infections linked to SJS include group A beta-hemolytic streptococci, diphtheria, brucellosis, lymphogranuloma venereum, mycobacteria, \"Mycoplasma pneumoniae\", rickettsial infections, tularemia, and typhoid.\nFungal infections with coccidioidomycosis, dermatophytosis and histoplasmosis are also considered possible causes. Malaria and trichomoniasis, protozoal infections, have also been reported as causes.\nPathophysiology.\nSJS is a type IV hypersensitivity reaction in which a drug or its metabolite stimulates cytotoxic T cells (i.e. CD8+ T cells) and T helper cells (i.e. CD4+ T cells) to initiate autoimmune reactions that attack self tissues. In particular, it is a type IV, subtype IVc, delayed hypersensitivity reaction dependent in part on the tissue-injuring actions of natural killer cells. This contrasts with the other types of SCARs disorders, i.e., the DRESS syndrome which is a Type IV, Subtype IVb, hypersensitivity drug reaction dependent in part on the tissue-injuring actions of eosinophils and acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis which is a Type IV, subtype IVd, hypersensitivity reaction dependent in part on the tissue-injuring actions of neutrophils.\nLike other SCARs-inducing drugs, SJS-inducing drugs or their metabolites stimulate CD8+ T cells or CD4+ T cells to initiate autoimmune responses. Studies indicate that the mechanism by which a drug or its metabolites accomplishes this involves subverting the antigen presentation pathways of the innate immune system. The drug or metabolite covalently binds with a host protein to form a non-self, drug-related epitope. An antigen presenting cell (APC) takes up these alter proteins; digests them into small peptides; places the peptides in a groove on the human leukocyte antigen (i.e. HLA) component of their major histocompatibility complex (i.e. MHC); and presents the MHC-associated peptides to T-cell receptors on CD8+ T cells or CD4+ T cells. Those peptides expressing a drug-related, non-self epitope on one of their various HLA protein forms (HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, HLA-DM, HLA-DO, HLA-DP, HLA-DQ, or HLA-DR) can bind to a T-cell receptor and thereby stimulate the receptor-bearing parent T cell to initiate attacks on self tissues. Alternatively, a drug or its metabolite may stimulate these T cells by inserting into the groove on a HLA protein to serve as a non-self epitope or bind outside of this groove to alter a HLA protein so that it forms a non-self epitope. In all these cases, however, a non-self epitope must bind to a specific HLA serotype (i.e. variation) in order to stimulate T cells. Since the human population expresses some 13,000 different HLA serotypes while an individual expresses only a fraction of them and since a SJS-inducing drug or metabolite interacts with only one or a few HLA serotypes, a drug's ability to induce SCARs is limited to those individuals who express HLA serotypes targeted by the drug or its metabolite. Accordingly, only rare individuals are predisposed to develop a SCARs in response to a particular drug on the bases of their expression of HLA serotypes: Studies have identified several HLA serotypes associated with development of SJS, SJS/TEN, or TEN in response to certain drugs. In general, these associations are restricted to the cited populations.\nIn some East Asian populations studied (Han Chinese and Thai), carbamazepine- and phenytoin-induced SJS is strongly associated with HLA-B*1502 (HLA-B75), an HLA-B serotype of the broader serotype HLA-B15. A study in Europe suggested the gene marker is only relevant for East Asians. This has clinical relevance as it is agreed upon that prior to starting a medication such as allopurinol in a patient of Chinese descent, HLA-B*58:01 testing should be considered.\nBased on the Asian findings, similar studies in Europe showed 61% of allopurinol-induced SJS/TEN patients carried the HLA-B58 (phenotype frequency of the B*5801 allele in Europeans is typically 3%). One study concluded: \"Even when HLA-B alleles behave as strong risk factors, as for allopurinol, they are neither sufficient nor necessary to explain the disease.\"\nOther HLA associations with the development of SJS, SJS/TEN, or TEN and the intake of specific drugs as determined in certain populations are given in HLA associations with SCARs.\nT-cell receptors.\nIn addition to acting through HLA proteins to bind with a T-cell receptor, a drug or its metabolite may bypass HLA proteins to bind directly to a T-cell receptor and thereby stimulate CD8+ T or CD4+ T cells to initiate autoimmune responses. In either case, this binding appears to develop only on certain T cell receptors. Since the genes for these receptors are highly edited, i.e. altered to encode proteins with different amino acid sequences, and since the human population may express more than 100 trillion different (i.e. different amino acid sequences) T-cell receptors while an individual express only a fraction of these, a drug's or its metabolite's ability to induce the DRESS syndrome by interacting with a T cell receptor is limited to those individuals whose T cells express a T cell receptor(s) that can interact with the drug or its metabolite. Thus, only rare individuals are predisposed to develop SJS in response to a particular drug on the bases of their expression of specific T-cell receptor types. While the evidence supporting this T-cell receptor selectivity is limited, one study identified the preferential presence of the TCR-V-b and complementarity-determining region 3 in T-cell receptors found on the T cells in the blisters of patients with allopurinol-induced DRESS syndrome. This finding is compatible with the notion that specific types of T cell receptors are involved in the development of specific drug-induced SCARs.\nADME.\nVariations in ADME, i.e. an individual's efficiency in absorbing, tissue-distributing, metabolizing, or excreting a drug, have been found to occur in various severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARS) as well as other types of adverse drug reactions. These variations influence the levels and duration of a drug or its metabolite in tissues and thereby impact the drug's or metabolite's ability to evoke these reactions. For example, CYP2C9 is an important drug-metabolizing cytochrome P450; it metabolizes and thereby inactivates phenytoin. Taiwanese, Japanese, and Malaysian individuals expressing the CYP2C9*3 variant of CYP2C9, which has reduced metabolic activity compared to the wild type (i.e. CYP2c9*1) cytochrome, have increased blood levels of phenytoin and a high incidence of SJS (as well as SJS/TEN and TEN) when taking the drug. In addition to abnormalities in drug-metabolizing enzymes, dysfunctions of the kidney, liver, or GI tract which increase a SCARs-inducing drug or metabolite levels are suggested to promote SCARs responses. These ADME abnormalities, it is also suggested, may interact with particular HLA proteins and T cell receptors to promote a SCARs disorder.\nDiagnosis.\nThe diagnosis is based on involvement of less than 10% of the skin. It is known as TEN when more than 30% of the skin is involved and an intermediate form with 10 to 30% involvement. A positive Nikolsky's sign is helpful in the diagnosis of SJS and TEN. A skin biopsy is helpful, but not required, to establish a diagnosis of SJS and TEN.\nPathology.\nSJS, like TEN and erythema multiforme, is characterized by confluent epidermal necrosis with minimal associated inflammation. The acuity is apparent from the (normal) basket weave-like pattern of the stratum corneum.\nClassification.\nStevens\u2013Johnson syndrome (SJS) is a milder form of toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). These conditions were first recognized in 1922. A classification first published in 1993, that has been adopted as a consensus definition, identifies Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and SJS/TEN overlap. All three are part of a spectrum of severe cutaneous reactions (SCAR) which affect skin and mucous membranes. The distinction between SJS, SJS/TEN overlap, and TEN is based on the type of lesions and the amount of the body surface area with blisters and erosions. It is agreed that the most reliable method to classify EM, SJS, and TEN is based on lesion morphology and extent of epidermal detachment. Blisters and erosions cover between 3% and 10% of the body in SJS, 11\u201330% in SJS/TEN overlap, and over 30% in TEN. The skin pattern most commonly associated with SJS is widespread, often joined or touching (confluent), papuric spots (macules) or flat small blisters or large blisters which may also join. These occur primarily on the torso.\nSJS, TEN, and SJS/TEN overlap can be mistaken for erythema multiforme. Erythema multiforme, which is also within the SCAR spectrum, differs in clinical pattern and etiology.\nPrevention.\nScreening individuals for certain predisposing gene variants before initiating treatment with particular SJS-, TEN/SJS-, or TEN-inducing drugs is recommended or under study. These recommendations are typically limited to specific populations that show a significant chance of having the indicated gene variant since screening of populations with extremely low incidences of expressing the variant is considered cost-ineffective. Individuals expressing the HLA allele associated with sensitivity to an indicated drug should not be treated with the drug. These recommendations include the following. Before treatment with carbamazepine, the Taiwan and USA Food and Drug Administrations recommend screening for HLA-B*15:02 in certain Asian groups. This has been implemented in Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, and many medical centers in Thailand and Mainland China. Before treatment with allopurinol, the American College of Rheumatology guidelines for managing gout recommend HLA-B*58:01 screening. This is provided in many medical centers in Taiwan, Hong Kong, Thailand, and Mainland China. Before treatment with abacavir, the USA Food and Drug Administration recommends screening for HLA-B*57:01 in Caucasian populations. This screening is widely implemented. It has also been suggested that all individuals found to express this HLA serotype avoid treatment with abacovir. Current trials are underway in Taiwan to define the cost-effectiveness of avoiding phenytoin in SJS, SJS/TEN, and TEN for individuals expressing the CYP2C9*3 allele of CYP2C9.\nTreatment.\nSJS constitutes a dermatological emergency. Patients with documented \"Mycoplasma\" infections can be treated with oral macrolide or oral doxycycline.\nInitially, treatment is similar to that for patients with thermal burns, and continued care can only be supportive (e.g., intravenous fluids and nasogastric or parenteral feeding) and symptomatic (e.g., analgesic mouth rinse for mouth ulcer). Dermatologists and surgeons tend to disagree about whether the skin should be debrided.\nBeyond this kind of supportive care, no treatment for SJS is accepted. Treatment with corticosteroids is controversial. Early retrospective studies suggested corticosteroids increased hospital stays and complication rates. No randomized trials of corticosteroids have been conducted for SJS, and it can be managed successfully without them.\nOther agents have been used, including cyclophosphamide and ciclosporin, but none have exhibited much therapeutic success. Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment has shown some promise in reducing the length of the reaction and improving symptoms. Other common supportive measures include the use of topical pain anesthetics and antiseptics, maintaining a warm environment, and intravenous analgesics.\nAn ophthalmologist should be consulted immediately, as SJS frequently causes the formation of scar tissue inside the eyelids, leading to corneal vascularization, impaired vision, and a host of other ocular problems. Those with chronic ocular surface disease caused by SJS may find some improvement with PROSE treatment (prosthetic replacement of the ocular surface ecosystem treatment).\nPrognosis.\nSJS (with less than 10% of body surface area involved) has a mortality rate of around 5%. The mortality for toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is 30\u201340%. The risk for death can be estimated using the SCORTEN scale, which takes a number of prognostic indicators into account. It is helpful to calculate a SCORTEN within the first 3 days of hospitalization. Other outcomes include organ damage/failure, ocular morbidity, and blindness. Restrictive lung disease may develop in patients with SJS and TEN after initial acute pulmonary involvement. Patients with SJS or TEN caused by a drug have a better prognosis the earlier the causative drug is withdrawn.\nEpidemiology.\nSJS is a rare condition, with a reported incidence of around 2.6 to 6.1 cases per million people per year. In the United States, about 300 new diagnoses are made each year. The condition is more common in adults than in children.\nHistory.\nSJS is named for Albert Mason Stevens and Frank Chambliss Johnson, American pediatricians who jointly published a description of the disorder in the \"American Journal of Diseases of Children\" in 1922.\nResearch.\nIn 2015, the NIH and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) organized a workshop entitled \"Research Directions in Genetically-Mediated Stevens\u2013Johnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28650", "revid": "4897226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28650", "title": "Stoichiometry", "text": "Calculation of relative masses of reactants and products in chemical reactions\nStoichiometry () is the relationships between the quantities of reactants and products before, during, and following chemical reactions.\nStoichiometry is based on the law of conservation of mass; the total mass of reactants must equal the total mass of products, so the relationship between reactants and products must form a ratio of positive integers. This means that if the amounts of the separate reactants are known, then the amount of the product can be calculated. Conversely, if one reactant has a known quantity and the quantity of the products can be empirically determined, then the amount of the other reactants can also be calculated.\nThis is illustrated in the image here, where the unbalanced equation is:\n However, the current equation is imbalanced. The reactants have 4 hydrogen and 2 oxygen atoms, while the product has 2 hydrogen and 3 oxygen. To balance the hydrogen, a coefficient of 2 is added to the product H2O, and to fix the imbalance of oxygen, it is also added to O2. Thus, we get:\nHere, one molecule of methane reacts with two molecules of oxygen gas to yield one molecule of carbon dioxide and two molecules of liquid water. This particular chemical equation is an example of complete combustion. The numbers in front of each quantity are a set of stoichiometric coefficients which directly reflect the molar ratios between the products and reactants. Stoichiometry measures these quantitative relationships, and is used to determine the amount of products and reactants that are produced or needed in a given reaction. \nDescribing the quantitative relationships among substances as they participate in chemical reactions is known as \"reaction stoichiometry\". In the example above, reaction stoichiometry measures the relationship between the quantities of methane and oxygen that react to form carbon dioxide and water: for every mole of methane combusted, two moles of oxygen are consumed, one mole of carbon dioxide is produced, and two moles of water are produced. \nBecause of the well known relationship of moles to atomic weights, the ratios that are arrived at by stoichiometry can be used to determine quantities by weight in a reaction described by a balanced equation. This is called \"composition stoichiometry\".\n\"Gas stoichiometry\" deals with reactions solely involving gases, where the gases are at a known temperature, pressure, and volume and can be assumed to be ideal gases. For gases, the volume ratio is ideally the same by the ideal gas law, but the mass ratio of a single reaction has to be calculated from the molecular masses of the reactants and products. In practice, because of the existence of isotopes, molar masses are used instead in calculating the mass ratio.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"stoichiometry\" was first used by Jeremias Benjamin Richter in 1792 when the first volume of Richter's was published. The term is derived from the Ancient Greek words (), meaning 'element', and (), meaning 'measure'. Ludwig Darmstaedter and Ralph E. Oesper have written a useful account on this.\nDefinitions.\nA stoichiometric amount or stoichiometric ratio of a reagent is the optimum amount or ratio where, assuming that the reaction proceeds to completion:\nStoichiometry rests upon the very laws that help to understand it better, i.e., law of conservation of mass, the law of definite proportions (i.e., the law of constant composition), the law of multiple proportions and the law of reciprocal proportions. In general chemical reactions combine in definite ratios of chemicals. Since chemical reactions can neither create nor destroy matter, nor transmute one element into another, the amount of each element must be the same throughout the overall reaction. For example, the number of atoms of a given element X on the reactant side must equal the number of atoms of that element on the product side, whether or not all of those atoms are involved in a reaction.\nChemical reactions, as macroscopic unit operations, consist of many elementary reactions, where a single molecule reacts with another molecule. As the reacting molecules (or formula units or ion pairs) consist of a definite set of atoms in an integer ratio, the ratio between reactants in a complete reaction is also in an integer ratio. A reaction may consume more than one molecule, and the stoichiometric number counts this number, defined as positive for products (added) and negative for reactants (removed). The unsigned coefficients are generally referred to as the stoichiometric coefficients.\nEach element has an atomic mass (usually given as an average in the form of the standard atomic weight), and considering molecules as collections of atoms, every compound has a molecular mass (if molecular) or formula mass (if non-molecular), which when expressed in daltons is numerically equal to the molar mass in g/mol. By definition, the atomic mass of carbon-12 is exactly 12\u00a0Da, making its molar mass 12\u00a0g/mol. The number of chemical entities per mole in a substance is given by the Avogadro constant, exactly since the 2019 revision of the SI. Thus, to calculate the stoichiometry by mass, the number of molecules required for each reactant is expressed in moles and multiplied by the molar mass of each to give the mass of each reactant per mole of reaction. The mass ratios can be calculated by dividing each by the total in the whole reaction.\nElements in their natural state are mixtures of isotopes of differing mass; thus, atomic masses and thus molar masses are not exactly integers. For instance, instead of an exact 14:3 proportion, 17.031\u00a0g of ammonia consists of 14.007\u00a0g of nitrogen and 3\u00a0\u00d7\u00a01.008\u00a0g of hydrogen, because natural nitrogen includes a small amount of nitrogen-15, and natural hydrogen includes hydrogen-2 (deuterium).\nA stoichiometric reactant is a reactant that is consumed in a reaction, as opposed to a catalytic reactant, which is not consumed in the overall reaction because it reacts in one step and is regenerated in another step.\nConverting grams to moles.\nStoichiometry is not only used to balance chemical equations but also used in \"conversions\" between quantities of a substance by dimensional analysis, e.g., converting from grams to moles using molar mass as the \"conversion factor\", or from grams to milliliters using density. For example, to express 2.00\u00a0g of NaCl (sodium chloride) as an amount (in moles), one would do the following:\n formula_1\nIn the above example, when written out in fraction form, the units of grams form a multiplicative identity, which is equivalent to one (g/g\u00a0=\u00a01), with the resulting amount in moles (the unit that was needed), as shown in the following equation,\n formula_2\nMolar proportion.\nStoichiometry is often used to balance chemical equations (reaction stoichiometry). For example, the two diatomic gases, hydrogen and oxygen, can combine to form a liquid, water, in an exothermic reaction, as described by the following equation:\nReaction stoichiometry describes the 2:1:2 ratio of hydrogen, oxygen, and water molecules in the above equation.\nThe molar ratio allows for conversion between moles of one substance and moles of another. For example, in the reaction\nthe amount of water that will be produced by the combustion of 0.27 moles of CH3OH is obtained using the molar ratio between CH3OH and H2O of 2 to 4.\n formula_3\nThe term stoichiometry is also often used for the molar proportions of elements in stoichiometric compounds (composition stoichiometry). For example, the stoichiometry of hydrogen and oxygen in H2O is 2:1. In stoichiometric compounds, the molar proportions are whole numbers.\nDetermining amount of product.\nStoichiometry can also be used to find the quantity of a product yielded by a reaction. If a piece of solid copper (Cu) were added to an aqueous solution of silver nitrate (), the silver (Ag) would be replaced in a single displacement reaction forming aqueous copper(II) nitrate () and solid silver. How much silver is produced if 16.00 grams of Cu is added to the solution of excess silver nitrate?\nThe following steps would be used:\nThe complete balanced equation would be:\nFor the mass to mole step, the mass of copper (16.00\u00a0g) would be converted to moles of copper by dividing the mass of copper by its molar mass: 63.55\u00a0g/mol.\n formula_4\nNow that the amount of Cu in moles (0.2518) is found, we can set up the mole ratio. This is found by looking at the coefficients in the balanced equation: Cu and Ag are in a 1:2 ratio.\n formula_5\nNow that the moles of Ag produced is known to be 0.5036\u00a0mol, we convert this amount to grams of Ag produced to come to the final answer:\n formula_6\nThis set of calculations can be further condensed into a single step:\n formula_7\nFurther examples.\nFor propane () reacting with oxygen gas (), the balanced chemical equation is:\nThe mass of water formed if 120\u00a0g of propane () is burned in excess oxygen is then\n formula_8\nStoichiometric ratio.\nStoichiometry is also used to find the right amount of one reactant to \"completely\" react with the other reactant in a chemical reaction \u2013 that is, the stoichiometric amounts that would result in no leftover reactants when the reaction takes place. An example is shown below using the thermite reaction,\nThis equation shows that 1\u00a0mole of iron(III) oxide and 2\u00a0moles of aluminium will produce 1\u00a0mole of aluminium oxide and 2\u00a0moles of iron. So, to completely react with 85.0\u00a0g of iron(III) oxide (0.532\u00a0mol), 28.7\u00a0g (1.06\u00a0mol) of aluminium are needed.\n formula_9\nLimiting reagent and percent yield.\nThe limiting reagent is the reagent that limits the amount of product that can be formed and is completely consumed when the reaction is complete. An excess reactant is a reactant that is left over once the reaction has stopped due to the limiting reactant being exhausted.\nConsider the equation of roasting lead(II) sulfide (PbS) in oxygen () to produce lead(II) oxide (PbO) and sulfur dioxide ():\nTo determine the theoretical yield of lead(II) oxide if 200.0\u00a0g of lead(II) sulfide and 200.0\u00a0g of oxygen are heated in an open container:\n formula_10\n formula_11\nBecause a lesser amount of PbO is produced for the 200.0\u00a0g of PbS, it is clear that PbS is the limiting reagent.\nIn reality, the actual yield is not the same as the stoichiometrically-calculated theoretical yield. Percent yield, then, is expressed in the following equation:\n formula_12\nIf 170.0\u00a0g of lead(II) oxide is obtained, then the percent yield would be calculated as follows:\n formula_13\nExample.\nConsider the following reaction, in which iron(III) chloride reacts with hydrogen sulfide to produce iron(III) sulfide and hydrogen chloride:\nThe stoichiometric masses for this reaction are:\n 324.41\u00a0g , 102.25\u00a0g , 207.89\u00a0g , 218.77\u00a0g HCl\nSuppose 90.0\u00a0g of reacts with 52.0\u00a0g of . To find the limiting reagent and the mass of HCl produced by the reaction, we change the above amounts by a factor of 90/324.41 and obtain the following amounts:\n 90.00\u00a0g , 28.37\u00a0g , 57.67\u00a0g , 60.69\u00a0g HCl\nThe limiting reactant (or reagent) is , since all 90.00 g of it is used up while only 28.37 g are consumed. Thus, 52.0 \u2212 28.4 = 23.6\u00a0g left in excess. The mass of HCl produced is 60.7\u00a0g.\nBy looking at the stoichiometry of the reaction, one might have guessed being the limiting reactant; three times more is used compared to (324\u00a0g vs 102\u00a0g).\nDifferent stoichiometries in competing reactions.\nOften, more than one reaction is possible given the same starting materials. The reactions may differ in their stoichiometry. For example, the methylation of benzene (), through a Friedel\u2013Crafts reaction using as a catalyst, may produce singly methylated (), doubly methylated (), or still more highly methylated () products, as shown in the following example,\n \nIn this example, which reaction takes place is controlled in part by the relative concentrations of the reactants.\nStoichiometric coefficient and stoichiometric number.\nIn lay terms, the \"stoichiometric coefficient\" of any given component is the number of molecules and/or formula units that participate in the reaction as written. A related concept is the \"stoichiometric number\" (using IUPAC nomenclature), wherein the stoichiometric coefficient is multiplied by +1 for all products and by \u22121 for all reactants.\nFor example, in the reaction , the stoichiometric number of is \u22121, the stoichiometric number of is \u22122, for CO2 it would be +1 and for it is +2.\nIn more technically precise terms, the stoichiometric number in a chemical reaction system of the \"i\"-th component is defined as\n formula_14\nor\n formula_15\nwhere formula_16 is the number of molecules of \"i\", and formula_17 is the progress variable or extent of reaction.\nThe stoichiometric number\u00a0formula_18 represents the degree to which a chemical species participates in a reaction. The convention is to assign negative numbers to \"reactants\" (which are consumed) and positive ones to \"products\", consistent with the convention that increasing the extent of reaction will correspond to shifting the composition from reactants towards products. However, any reaction may be viewed as going in the reverse direction, and in that point of view, would change in the negative direction in order to lower the system's Gibbs free energy. Whether a reaction actually \"will\" go in the arbitrarily selected forward direction or not depends on the amounts of the substances present at any given time, which determines the kinetics and thermodynamics, i.e., whether equilibrium lies to the \"right\" or the \"left\" of the initial state,\nIn reaction mechanisms, stoichiometric coefficients for each step are always integers, since elementary reactions always involve whole molecules. If one uses a composite representation of an overall reaction, some may be rational fractions. There are often chemical species present that do not participate in a reaction; their stoichiometric coefficients are therefore zero. Any chemical species that is regenerated, such as a catalyst, also has a stoichiometric coefficient of zero.\nThe simplest possible case is an isomerization\n A \u2192 B\nin which \"\u03bd\"B\u00a0=\u00a01 since one molecule of B is produced each time the reaction occurs, while \"\u03bd\"A\u00a0=\u00a0\u22121 since one molecule of A is necessarily consumed. In any chemical reaction, not only is the total mass conserved but also the numbers of atoms of each kind are conserved, and this imposes corresponding constraints on possible values for the stoichiometric coefficients.\nThere are usually multiple reactions proceeding simultaneously in any natural reaction system, including those in biology. Since any chemical component can participate in several reactions simultaneously, the stoichiometric number of the \"i\"-th component in the \"k\"-th reaction is defined as\n formula_19\nso that the total (differential) change in the amount of the \"i\"-th component is\n formula_20\nExtents of reaction provide the clearest and most explicit way of representing compositional change, although they are not yet widely used.\nWith complex reaction systems, it is often useful to consider both the representation of a reaction system in terms of the amounts of the chemicals present {\u00a0\"Ni\"\u00a0} (state variables), and the representation in terms of the actual compositional degrees of freedom, as expressed by the extents of reaction {\u00a0\"\u03bek\"\u00a0}. The transformation from a vector expressing the extents to a vector expressing the amounts uses a rectangular matrix whose elements are the stoichiometric numbers [\u00a0\"\u03bdi\u2009k\"\u00a0].\nThe maximum and minimum for any \"\u03bek\" occur whenever the first of the reactants is depleted for the forward reaction; or the first of the \"products\" is depleted if the reaction as viewed as being pushed in the reverse direction. This is a purely kinematic restriction on the reaction simplex, a hyperplane in composition space, or \"N\"\u2011space, whose dimensionality equals the number of \"linearly-independent\" chemical reactions. This is necessarily less than the number of chemical components, since each reaction manifests a relation between at least two chemicals. The accessible region of the hyperplane depends on the amounts of each chemical species actually present, a contingent fact. Different such amounts can even generate different hyperplanes, all sharing the same algebraic stoichiometry.\nIn accord with the principles of chemical kinetics and thermodynamic equilibrium, every chemical reaction is \"reversible\", at least to some degree, so that each equilibrium point must be an interior point of the simplex. As a consequence, extrema for the \"\u03be\"s will not occur unless an experimental system is prepared with zero initial amounts of some products.\nThe number of \"physically\"-independent reactions can be even greater than the number of chemical components, and depends on the various reaction mechanisms. For example, there may be two (or more) reaction \"paths\" for the isomerism above. The reaction may occur by itself, but faster and with different intermediates, in the presence of a catalyst.\nThe (dimensionless) \"units\" may be taken to be molecules or moles. Moles are most commonly used, but it is more suggestive to picture incremental chemical reactions in terms of molecules. The \"N\"s and \"\u03be\"s are reduced to molar units by dividing by the Avogadro constant. While dimensional mass units may be used, the comments about integers are then no longer applicable.\nStoichiometry matrix.\nIn complex reactions, stoichiometries are often represented in a more compact form called the stoichiometry matrix. The stoichiometry matrix is denoted by the symbol N.\nIf a reaction network has \"n\" reactions and \"m\" participating molecular species, then the stoichiometry matrix will have correspondingly \"m\" rows and \"n\" columns.\nFor example, consider the system of reactions shown below:\n \n \nThis system comprises four reactions and five different molecular species. The stoichiometry matrix for this system can be written as:\n formula_21\nwhere the rows correspond to respectively. The process of converting a reaction scheme into a stoichiometry matrix can be a lossy transformation: for example, the stoichiometries in the second reaction simplify when included in the matrix. This means that it is not always possible to recover the original reaction scheme from a stoichiometry matrix.\nOften the stoichiometry matrix is combined with the rate vector, v, and the species vector, x to form a compact equation, the biochemical systems equation, describing the rates of change of the molecular species:\n formula_22\nGas stoichiometry.\n\"Gas stoichiometry\" is the quantitative relationship (ratio) between reactants and products in a chemical reaction with reactions that produce gases. Gas stoichiometry applies when the gases produced are assumed to be ideal, and the temperature, pressure, and volume of the gases are all known. The ideal gas law is used for these calculations. Often, but not always, the standard temperature and pressure (STP) are taken as 0\u00a0\u00b0C and 1 bar and used as the conditions for gas stoichiometric calculations.\nGas stoichiometry calculations solve for the unknown volume or mass of a gaseous product or reactant. For example, if we wanted to calculate the volume of gaseous produced from the combustion of 100\u00a0g of , by the reaction:\nwe would carry out the following calculations:\n formula_23\nThere is a 1:1 molar ratio of to in the above balanced combustion reaction, so 5.871\u00a0mol of will be formed. We will employ the ideal gas law to solve for the volume at 0\u00a0\u00b0C (273.15\u00a0K) and 1 atmosphere using the gas law constant of \"R\"\u00a0=\u00a00.08206 L\u00b7atm\u00b7K\u22121\u00b7mol\u22121:\n formula_24\nGas stoichiometry often involves having to know the molar mass of a gas, given the density of that gas. The ideal gas law can be re-arranged to obtain a relation between the density and the molar mass of an ideal gas:\n formula_25 \u00a0\u00a0 and \u00a0\u00a0 formula_26\nand thus:\n formula_27\nwhere:\nStoichiometric air-to-fuel ratios of common fuels.\nIn the combustion reaction, oxygen reacts with the fuel, and the point where exactly all oxygen is consumed and all fuel burned is defined as the stoichiometric point. With more oxygen (overstoichiometric combustion), some of it stays unreacted. Likewise, if the combustion is incomplete due to lack of sufficient oxygen, fuel remains unreacted. (Unreacted fuel may also remain due to physical rather than chemical factors, such as slow combustion or insufficient mixing of fuel and oxygen \u2013 this is not due to stoichiometry.) Different hydrocarbon fuels have different contents of carbon, hydrogen and other elements, thus their stoichiometry varies.\nOxygen makes up only 20.95% of the volume of air, and only 23.20% of its mass. The air-fuel ratios listed below are much higher than the equivalent oxygen-fuel ratios, due to the high proportion of inert gasses in the air.\nGasoline engines can run at stoichiometric air-to-fuel ratio, because gasoline is quite volatile and is mixed (sprayed or carburetted) with the air prior to ignition. Diesel engines, in contrast, run lean, with more air available than simple stoichiometry would require. Diesel fuel is less volatile and is effectively burned as it is injected.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28651", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28651", "title": "Outline of statistics", "text": "Overview of and topical guide to statistics\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to statistics:\nStatistics is a field of inquiry that studies the collection, analysis, interpretation, and presentation of data. It is applicable to a wide variety of academic disciplines, from the physical and social sciences to the humanities; it is also used and misused for making informed decisions in all areas of business and government.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNature of statistics.\nStatistics can be described as all of the following:"}
{"id": "28652", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28652", "title": "Outline of sociology", "text": "Overview of and topical guide to sociology\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to the discipline of sociology:\nSociology is the systematic study of society, human social behavior, and patterns of social relationships, social interaction, and culture. The term sociology was coined in the late 18th century to describe the scientific study of society. It uses a range of methods \u2014 from qualitative interviews to quantitative data analysis \u2014 to examine how social structures, institutions, and processes shape individual and group life. Sociology encompasses various subfields such as criminology, medical sociology, education, and increasingly, digital sociology, which studies the impact of digital technologies on society. Digital sociology examines the impact of digital technologies on social behavior and institutions, encompassing professional, analytical, critical, and public dimensions. The internet has reshaped social networks and power relations, illustrating the growing importance of digital sociology. Sociologists seek to understand how identities, inequalities, norms, and institutions evolve across time and context.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNature of sociology.\nDefinition.\nSociology can be described as all of the following:\nEssence of sociology.\nOverall.\nSociology\nKey themes across sociological research.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSociological publications.\nSociology journals &lt;br&gt;\nMagazines\nSociology books\nSociological associations.\nSociological associations\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28653", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28653", "title": "Outline of sculpture", "text": "Artworks that are three-dimensional objects, and creation thereof\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to sculpture:\nA sculpture \u2013 human-made three-dimensional art object.\nSculpture or sculpting \u2013 activity of creating sculptures. A person who creates sculptures is called a \"sculptor\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhat type of thing is sculpture?\nSculpture can be described as all of the following:\nHistory of sculpture.\nHistory of sculpture\nGeneral sculpture concepts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMaterials used in sculpture.\nTraditional Materials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nModern Materials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable works of sculpture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSelected sculptors.\nAntiquity to the 19th century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n19th to 20th century (Modern).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nContemporary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArts similar to sculpture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "28656", "revid": "49920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28656", "title": "Second law", "text": "Second law may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28658", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28658", "title": "Sickle cell anaemia", "text": ""}
{"id": "28659", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28659", "title": "Singularity", "text": "Singularity or singular point may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28661", "revid": "507227", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28661", "title": "Defamation", "text": "Communication causing harm to reputation\nDefamation is a communication that injures a third party's reputation and causes a legally redressable injury. The precise legal definition of defamation varies from country to country. It is not necessarily restricted to making assertions that are false, and can extend to concepts that are more abstract than reputation such as dignity and honour. \nIn the English-speaking world, the law of defamation traditionally distinguishes between libel (written, printed, posted online, published in mass media) and slander (oral speech). It is treated as a civil wrong (tort, delict), as a criminal offence, or both.\nDefamation and related laws can encompass a variety of acts (from general defamation and insult\u00a0\u2013 as applicable to every citizen\u00a0\u2013\u200d to specialized provisions covering specific entities and social structures):\nHistory.\nDefamation law has a long history stretching back to classical antiquity. While defamation has been recognized as an actionable wrong in various forms across historical legal systems and in various moral and religious philosophies, defamation law in contemporary legal systems can primarily be traced back to Roman and early English law.\nRoman law was aimed at giving sufficient scope for the discussion of a man's character, while it protected him from needless insult and pain. The remedy for verbal defamation was long confined to a civil action for a monetary penalty, which was estimated according to the significance of the case, and which, although punitive in its character, doubtless included practically the element of compensation. But a new remedy was introduced with the extension of the criminal law, under which many kinds of defamation were punished with great severity. At the same time increased importance attached to the publication of defamatory books and writings, the \"libri\" or \"libelli famosi\", from which is derived the modern use of the word \"libel\"; and under the later emperors the latter term came to be specially applied to anonymous accusations or \"pasquils\", the dissemination of which was regarded as particularly dangerous, and visited with very severe punishment, whether the matters contained in them were true or false.\nThe Praetorian Edict, codified circa AD 130, declared that an action could be brought up for shouting at someone contrary to good morals: \"\"qui, adversus bonos mores convicium cui fecisse cuiusve opera factum esse dicitur, quo adversus bonos mores convicium fieret, in eum iudicium dabo.\" In this case, the offence was constituted by the unnecessary act of shouting. According to Ulpian, not all shouting was actionable. Drawing on the argument of Labeo, he asserted that the offence consisted in shouting contrary to the morals of the city (\"adversus bonos mores huius civitatis\") something apt to bring in disrepute or contempt (\"quae... ad infamiam vel invidiam alicuius spectaret\"\") the person exposed thereto. Any act apt to bring another person into disrepute gave rise to an \"actio injurarum\". In such a case the truth of the statements was no justification for the public and insulting manner in which they had been made, but, even in public matters, the accused had the opportunity to justify his actions by openly stating what he considered necessary for public safety to be denounced by the libel and proving his assertions to be true. The second head included defamatory statements made in private, and in this case the offence lay in the content of the imputation, not in the manner of its publication. The truth was therefore a sufficient defense, for no man had a right to demand legal protection for a false reputation.\nIn Anglo-Saxon England, whose legal tradition is the predecessor of contemporary common law jurisdictions, slander was punished by cutting out the tongue. Historically, while defamation of a commoner in England was known as libel or slander, the defamation of a member of the English aristocracy was called \"scandalum magnatum,\" literally \"the scandal of magnates\".\nHuman rights.\nFollowing the Second World War and with the rise of contemporary international human rights law, the right to a legal remedy for defamation was included in Article 17 of the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;# No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation.\nThis implies a right to legal protection against defamation; however, this right co-exists with the right to freedom of opinion and expression under Article 19 of the ICCPR as well as Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Article 19 of the ICCPR expressly provides that the right to freedom of opinion and expression may be limited so far as it is necessary \"for respect of the rights or reputations of others\". Consequently, international human rights law provides that while individuals should have the right to a legal remedy for defamation, this right must be balanced with the equally protected right to freedom of opinion and expression. In general, ensuring that domestic defamation law adequately balances individuals' right to protect their reputation with freedom of expression and of the press entails:\nIn most of Europe, article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights permits restrictions on freedom of speech when necessary to protect the reputation or rights of others. Additionally, restrictions of freedom of expression and other rights guaranteed by international human rights laws (including the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)) and by the constitutions of a variety of countries are subject to some variation of the three-part test recognized by the United Nations Human Rights Committee which requires that limitations be: 1) \"provided by law that is clear and accessible to everyone\", 2) \"proven to be necessary and legitimate to protect the rights or reputations of others\", and 3) \"proportionate and the least restrictive to achieve the purported aim\". This test is analogous to the Oakes Test applied domestically by the Supreme Court of Canada in assessing whether limitations on constitutional rights are \"demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society\" under Section 1 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the \"necessary in a democratic society\" test applied by the European Court of Human Rights in assessing limitations on rights under the ECHR, Section 36 of the post-Apartheid Constitution of South Africa, and Section 24 of the 2010 Constitution of Kenya. Nevertheless, the worldwide use of criminal and civil defamation, to censor, intimidate or silence critics, has been increasing in recent years.\nGeneral comment No. 34.\nIn 2011, the United Nations Human Rights Committee published their General comment No. 34 (CCPR/C/GC/34)\u00a0\u2013 regarding Article 19 of the ICCPR.\nParagraph 47 states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefamation laws must be crafted with care to ensure that they comply with paragraph 3 [of Article 19 of the ICCPR], and that they do not serve, in practice, to stifle freedom of expression. All such laws, in particular penal defamation laws, should include such defences as the defence of truth and they should not be applied with regard to those forms of expression that are not, of their nature, subject to verification. At least with regard to comments about public figures, consideration should be given to avoiding penalizing or otherwise rendering unlawful untrue statements that have been published in error but without malice. In any event, a public interest in the subject matter of the criticism should be recognized as a defence. Care should be taken by States parties to avoid excessively punitive measures and penalties. Where relevant, States parties should place reasonable limits on the requirement for a defendant to reimburse the expenses of the successful party. States parties should consider the decriminalization of defamation and, in any case, the application of the criminal law should only be countenanced in the most serious of cases and imprisonment is never an appropriate penalty. It is impermissible for a State party to indict a person for criminal defamation but then not to proceed to trial expeditiously\u00a0\u2013 such a practice has a chilling effect that may unduly restrict the exercise of freedom of expression of the person concerned and others.\nDefamation as a tort.\nWhile each legal tradition approaches defamation differently, it is typically regarded as a tort for which the offended party can take civil action. The range of remedies available to successful plaintiffs in defamation cases varies between jurisdictions and range from damages to court orders requiring the defendant to retract the offending statement or to publish a correction or an apology.\nCommon law.\nBackground.\nModern defamation in common law jurisdictions are historically derived from English defamation law. English law allows actions for libel to be brought in the High Court for any published statements alleged to defame a named or identifiable individual or individuals (under English law companies are legal persons, and allowed to bring suit for defamation) in a manner that causes them loss in their trade or profession, or causes a reasonable person to think worse of them.\nOverview.\nIn contemporary common law jurisdictions, to constitute defamation, a claim must generally be false and must have been made to someone other than the person defamed. Some common law jurisdictions distinguish between spoken defamation, called \"slander\", and defamation in other media such as printed words or images, called \"libel\". The fundamental distinction between libel and slander lies solely in the \"form\" in which the defamatory matter is published. If the offending material is published in some fleeting form, such as spoken words or sounds, sign language, gestures or the like, then it is slander. In contrast, libel encompasses defamation by written or printed words, pictures, or in any form other than spoken words or gestures. The law of libel originated in the 17th century in England. With the growth of publication came the growth of libel and development of the tort of libel. The highest award in an American defamation case, at US$222.7\u00a0million was rendered in 1997 against Dow Jones in favour of MMAR Group Inc; however, the verdict was dismissed in 1999 amid allegations that MMAR failed to disclose audiotapes made by its employees.\nIn common law jurisdictions, civil lawsuits alleging defamation have frequently been used by both private businesses and governments to suppress and censor criticism. A notable example of such lawsuits being used to suppress political criticism of a government is the use of defamation claims by politicians in Singapore's ruling People's Action Party to harass and suppress opposition leaders such as J. B. Jeyaretnam. Over the first few decades of the twenty first century, the phenomenon of strategic lawsuits against public participation has gained prominence in many common law jurisdictions outside Singapore as activists, journalists, critics of corporations, political leaders, and public figures are increasingly targeted with vexatious defamation litigation. As a result, tort reform measures have been enacted in various jurisdictions; the \"California Code of Civil Procedure\" and Ontario's \"Protection of Public Participation Act\" do so by enabling defendants to make a special motion to strike or dismiss during which discovery is suspended and which, if successful, would terminate the lawsuit and allow the party to recover its legal costs from the plaintiff.\nDefences.\nThere are a variety of defences to defamation claims in common law jurisdictions. The two most fundamental defences arise from the doctrine in common law jurisdictions that only a false statement of fact (as opposed to opinion) can be defamatory. This doctrine gives rise to two separate but related defences: opinion and truth. Statements of opinion cannot be regarded as defamatory as they are inherently non-falsifiable. Where a statement has been shown to be one of fact rather than opinion, the most common defence in common law jurisdictions is that of truth. Proving the truth of an allegedly defamatory statement is always a valid defence. Where a statement is partially true, certain jurisdictions in the Commonwealth have provided by statute that the defence \"shall not fail by reason only that the truth of every charge is not proved if the words not proved to be true do not materially injure the claimant's reputation having regard to the truth of the remaining charges\". Similarly, the American doctrine of substantial truth provides that a statement is not defamatory if it has \"slight inaccuracies of expression\" but is otherwise true. Since a statement can only be defamatory if it harms another person's reputation, another defence tied to the ability of a statement to be defamatory is to demonstrate that, regardless of whether the statement is true or is a statement of fact, it does not actually harm someone's reputation.\nIt is also necessary in these cases to show that there is a well-founded public interest in the specific information being widely known, and this may be the case even for public figures. Public interest is generally not \"what the public is interested in\", but rather \"what is in the interest of the public\".\nOther defences recognized in one or more common law jurisdictions include:\nInsurance.\nMedia liability or defamation insurance is often purchased by publishers and journalists to cover potential damage awards from libel lawsuits. Roughly 3/4 of all money spent on claims by liability insurers goes to lawyers and only 1/4 goes to settlements or judgments, according to one estimate from Michelle Worrall Tilton of Media Risk Consultants. Some advise buying worldwide coverage that offers defense against cases regardless of where in the world they are filed, since a compainant can look for a more favourable jurisdiction to file their claim. Investigative journalism usually requires higher insurance premiums, with some plans not covering investigative work altogether.\nDefamation per se.\nMany common law jurisdictions recognize that some categories of statements are considered to be defamatory \"per se\", such that people making a defamation claim for these statements do not need to prove that the statement was defamatory. In an action for defamation \"per se\" the law recognizes that certain false statements are so damaging that they create a presumption of injury to the plaintiff's reputation, allowing a defamation case to proceed to verdict with no actual proof of damages. Although laws vary by state, and not all jurisdictions recognize defamation \"per se\", there are four general categories of false statement that typically support a \"per se\" action:\nIf the plaintiff proves that such a statement was made and was false, to recover damages the plaintiff need only prove that someone had made the statement to any third party. No proof of special damages is required. However, to recover full compensation a plaintiff should be prepared to prove actual damages.\nAs with any defamation case, truth remains an absolute defence to defamation \"per se\". This means that even if the statement would be considered defamatory \"per se\" if false, if the defendant establishes that it is in fact true, an action for defamation \"per se\" cannot survive. The conception of what type of allegation may support an action for defamation per se can evolve with public policy. For example, in May 2012 an appeals court in New York, citing changes in public policy with regard to homosexuality, ruled that describing someone as gay is not defamation.\nVariations within common law jurisdictions.\nWhile defamation torts are broadly similar across common law jurisdictions; differences have arisen as a result of diverging case law, statutes and other legislative action, and constitutional concerns specific to individual jurisdictions.\nSome jurisdictions have a separate tort or delict of injury, intentional infliction of emotional distress, involving the making of a statement, even if truthful, intended to harm the claimant out of malice; some have a separate tort or delict of \"invasion of privacy\" in which the making of a true statement may give rise to liability: but neither of these comes under the general heading of \"defamation\". The tort of harassment created by Singapore's \"Protection from Harassment Act 2014\" is an example of a tort of this type being created by statute. There is also, in almost all jurisdictions, a tort or delict of \"misrepresentation\", involving the making of a statement that is untrue even though not defamatory. Thus a surveyor who states a house is free from risk of flooding has not defamed anyone, but may still be liable to someone who purchases the house relying on this statement. Other increasingly common claims similar to defamation in U.S. law are claims that a famous trademark has been diluted through tarnishment, see generally trademark dilution, \"intentional interference with contract\", and \"negligent misrepresentation\". In America, for example, the unique tort of false light protects plaintiffs against statements which are not technically false but are misleading. Libel and slander both require publication.\nAlthough laws vary by state; in America, a defamation action typically requires that a plaintiff claiming defamation prove that the defendant:\nAdditionally, American courts apply special rules in the case of statements made in the press concerning public figures, which can be used as a defence. While plaintiff alleging defamation in an American court must usually prove that the statement caused harm, and was made without adequate research into the truthfulness of the statement; where the plaintiff is a celebrity or public official, they must additionally prove that the statement was made with actual malice (i.e. the intent to do harm or with reckless disregard for the truth). A series of court rulings led by \"New York Times Co. v. Sullivan\", 376 U.S. 254 (1964) established that for a public official (or other legitimate public figure) to win a libel case in an American court, the statement must have been published knowing it to be false or with reckless disregard to its truth (i.e. actual malice). The Associated Press estimates that 95% of libel cases involving news stories do not arise from high-profile news stories, but \"run of the mill\" local stories like news coverage of local criminal investigations or trials, or business profiles. An early example of libel is the case of John Peter Zenger in 1735. Zenger was hired to publish the \"New York Weekly Journal\". When he printed another man's article criticizing William Cosby, the royal governor of Colonial New York, Zenger was accused of seditious libel. The verdict was returned as \"not guilty\" on the charge of seditious libel, because it was proven that all the statements Zenger had published about Cosby had been true, so there was not an issue of defamation. Another example of libel is the case of \"New York Times Co. v. Sullivan\" (1964). The Supreme Court of the United States overruled a state court in Alabama that had found \"The New York Times\" guilty of libel for printing an advertisement that criticized Alabama officials for mistreating student civil rights activists. Even though some of what \"The Times\" printed was false, the court ruled in its favour, saying that libel of a public official requires proof of actual malice, which was defined as a \"knowing or reckless disregard for the truth\".\nMany jurisdictions within the Commonwealth (e.g. Singapore, Ontario, and the United Kingdom) have enacted legislation to:\nLibel law in England and Wales was overhauled even further by the \"Defamation Act 2013\".\nDefamation in Indian tort law largely resembles that of England and Wales. Indian courts have endorsed the defences of absolute and qualified privilege, fair comment, and justification. While statutory law in the United Kingdom provides that, if the defendant is only successful in proving the truth of some of the several charges against him, the defence of justification might still be available if the charges not proved do not materially injure the reputation, there is no corresponding provision in India, though it is likely that Indian courts would treat this principle as persuasive precedent. Recently, incidents of defamation in relation to public figures have attracted public attention.\nThe origins of U.S. defamation law pre-date the American Revolution. Though the First Amendment of the American Constitution was designed to protect freedom of the press, it was primarily envisioned to prevent censorship by the state rather than defamation suits; thus, for most of American history, the Supreme Court did not interpret the First Amendment as applying to libel cases involving media defendants. This left libel laws, based upon the traditional common law of defamation inherited from the English legal system, mixed across the states. The 1964 case \"New York Times Co. v. Sullivan\" dramatically altered the nature of libel law in the country by elevating the fault element for public officials to actual malice\u00a0\u2013 that is, public figures could win a libel suit only if they could demonstrate the publisher's \"knowledge that the information was false\" or that the information was published \"with reckless disregard of whether it was false or not\". Later the Supreme Court held that statements that are so ridiculous to be clearly not true are protected from libel claims, as are statements of opinion relating to matters of public concern that do not contain a provably false factual connotation. Subsequent state and federal cases have addressed defamation law and the Internet.\nAmerican defamation law is much less plaintiff-friendly than its counterparts in European and the Commonwealth countries. A comprehensive discussion of what is and is not libel or slander under American law is difficult, as the definition differs between different states and is further affected by federal law. Some states codify what constitutes slander and libel together, merging the concepts into a single defamation law.\nNew Zealand received English law with the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi in February 1840. The current Act is the \"Defamation Act 1992\" which came into force on 1 February 1993 and repealed the \"Defamation Act 1954\". New Zealand law allows for the following remedies in an action for defamation: compensatory damages; an injunction to stop further publication; a correction or a retraction; and in certain cases, punitive damages. Section 28 of the Act allows for punitive damages only when a there is a flagrant disregard of the rights of the person defamed. As the law assumes that an individual suffers loss if a statement is defamatory, there is no need to prove that specific damage or loss has occurred. However, Section 6 of the Act allows for a defamation action brought by a corporate body to proceed only when the body corporate alleges and proves that the publication of the defamation has caused or is likely to cause pecuniary loss to that body corporate.\nAs is the case for most Commonwealth jurisdictions, Canada follows English law on defamation issues (except in Quebec where the private law is derived from French civil law). In common law provinces and territories, defamation covers any communication that tends to lower the esteem of the subject in the minds of ordinary members of the public. Probably true statements are not excluded, nor are political opinions. Intent is always presumed, and it is not necessary to prove that the defendant intended to defame. In \"Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto\" (1995), the Supreme Court of Canada rejected the \"actual malice\" test adopted in the US case \"New York Times Co. v. Sullivan\". Once a claim has been made, the defendant may avail themselves of a defence of justification (the truth), fair comment, responsible communication, or privilege. Publishers of defamatory comments may also use the defence of innocent dissemination where they had no knowledge of the nature of the statement, it was not brought to their attention, and they were not negligent.\nCorporate defamation.\nCommon law jurisdictions vary as to whether they permit corporate plaintiffs in defamation actions. Under contemporary Australian law, private corporations are denied the right to sue for defamation, with an exception for small businesses (corporations with less than 10 employees and no subsidiaries); this rule was introduced by the state of New South Wales in 2003, and then adopted nationwide in 2006. By contrast, Canadian law grants private corporations substantially the same right to sue for defamation as individuals possess. Since 2013, English law charts a middle course, allowing private corporations to sue for defamation, but requiring them to prove that the defamation caused both serious harm and serious financial loss, which individual plaintiffs are not required to demonstrate.\nRoman Dutch and Scots law.\nDefamation in jurisdictions applying Roman Dutch law (i.e. most of Southern Africa, Indonesia, Suriname, and the Dutch Caribbean) gives rise to a claim by way of \"actio iniuriarum\". For liability under the \"actio iniuriarum\", the general elements of delict must be present, but specific rules have been developed for each element. Causation, for example, is seldom in issue, and is assumed to be present. The elements of liability under the \"actio iniuriarum\" are as follows: \nUnder the \"actio iniuriarum\", harm consists in the infringement of a personality right, either \"corpus\", \"dignitas\", or \"fama\". \"Dignitas\" is a generic term meaning 'worthiness, dignity, self-respect', and comprises related concerns like mental tranquillity and privacy. Because it is such a wide concept, its infringement must be serious. Not every insult is humiliating; one must prove \"https://\". This includes insult (\"https://\" in the narrow sense), adultery, loss of consortium, alienation of affection, breach of promise (but only in a humiliating or degrading manner), et cetera. \"Fama\" is a generic term referring to reputation and \"actio iniuriarum\" pertaining to it encompasses defamation more broadly Beyond simply covering actions that fall within the broader concept of defamation, \"actio iniuriarum\" relating to infringements of a person's \"corpus\" provides civil remedies for assaults, acts of a sexual or indecent nature, and 'wrongful arrest and detention'.\nIn Scots law, which is closely related to Roman Dutch law, the remedy for defamation is similarly the \"actio iniuriarium\" and the most common defence is \"veritas\" (i.e. proving the truth of otherwise defamatory statement). Defamation falls within the realm of non-patrimonial (i.e. dignitary) interests. The Scots law pertaining to the protection of non-patrimonial interests is said to be 'a thing of shreds and patches'. This notwithstanding, there is 'little historical basis in Scots law for the kind of structural difficulties that have restricted English law' in the development of mechanisms to protect so-called 'rights of personality'. The \"actio iniuriarum\" heritage of Scots law gives the courts scope to recognize, and afford reparation in, cases in which no patrimonial (or 'quasi-patrimonial') 'loss' has occurred, but a recognized dignitary interest has nonetheless been invaded through the wrongful conduct of the defender. For such reparation to be offered, however, the non-patrimonial interest must be deliberately affronted: negligent interference with a non-patrimonial interest will not be sufficient to generate liability. An \"actio iniuriarum\" requires that the conduct of the defender be 'contumelious'\u2014that is, it must show such hubristic disregard of the pursuer's recognized personality interest that an intention to affront (\"animus iniuriandi\") might be imputed.\nDefamation as a crime.\nIn addition to tort law, many jurisdictions treat defamation as a criminal offence and provide for penalties as such. Article 19, a British free expression advocacy group, has published global maps charting the existence of criminal defamation law across the globe, as well as showing countries that have special protections for political leaders or functionaries of the state.\nThere can be regional statutes that may differ from the national norm. For example, in the United States, criminal defamation is generally limited to the living. However, there are 7 states (Idaho, Kansas, Louisiana, Nevada, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Utah) that have criminal statutes regarding defamation of the dead.\nThe Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) has also published a detailed database on criminal and civil defamation provisions in 55 countries, including all European countries, all member countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, America, and Canada.\nQuestions of group libel have been appearing in common law for hundreds of years. One of the earliest known cases of a defendant being tried for defamation of a group was the case of \"R v Orme and Nutt\" (1700). In this case, the jury found that the defendant was guilty of libelling several subjects, though they did not specifically identify who these subjects were. A report of the case told that the jury believed that \"where a writing ... inveighs against mankind in general, or against a particular order of men, as for instance, men of the gown, this is no libel, but it must descend to particulars and individuals to make it libel.\" This jury believed that only individuals who believed they were specifically defamed had a claim to a libel case. Since the jury was unable to identify the exact people who were being defamed, there was no cause to identify the statements were a libel.\nAnother early English group libel which has been frequently cited is \"King v. Osborne\" (1732). In this case, the defendant was on trial \"for printing a libel reflecting upon the Portuguese Jews\". The printing in question claimed that Jews who had arrived in London from Portugal burned a Jewish woman to death when she had a child with a Christian man, and that this act was common. Following Osborne's anti-Semitic publication, several Jews were attacked. Initially, the judge seemed to believe the court could do nothing since no individual was singled out by Osborne's writings. However, the court concluded that \"since the publication implied the act was one Jews frequently did, the whole community of Jews was defamed.\" Though various reports of this case give differing accounts of the crime, this report clearly shows a ruling based on group libel. Since laws restricting libel were accepted at this time because of its tendency to lead to a breach of peace, group libel laws were justified because they showed potential for an equal or perhaps greater risk of violence. For this reason, group libel cases are criminal even though most libel cases are civil torts.\nIn a variety of Common Law jurisdictions, criminal laws prohibiting protests at funerals, sedition, false statements in connection with elections, and the use of profanity in public, are also often used in contexts similar to criminal libel actions. The boundaries of a court's power to hold individuals in \"contempt of court\" for what amounts to alleged defamatory statements about judges or the court process by attorneys or other people involved in court cases is also not well established in many common law countries.\nCriticism.\nWhile defamation torts are less controversial as they ostensibly involve plaintiffs seeking to protect their right to dignity and their reputation, criminal defamation is more controversial as it involves the state expressly seeking to restrict freedom of expression. Human rights organizations, and other organizations such as the Council of Europe and Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, have campaigned against strict defamation laws that criminalize defamation. The freedom of expression advocacy group Article 19 opposes criminal defamation, arguing that civil defamation laws providing defences for statements on matters of public interest are better compliant with international human rights law. The European Court of Human Rights has placed restrictions on criminal libel laws because of the freedom of expression provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights. One notable case was \"Lingens v. Austria\" (1986).\nLaws by jurisdiction.\nSummary table.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nAlbania.\nAccording to the Criminal Code of Albania, defamation is a crime. Slandering in the knowledge of falsity is subject to fines of from ALL (c. $350) to one million ALL (c. $). If the slandering occurs in public or damages multiple people, the fine is 40,000 ALL to three million ALL (c. $). In addition, defamation of authorities, public officials or foreign representatives (Articles 227, 239 to 241) are separate crimes with maximum penalties varying from one to three years of imprisonment.\nArgentina.\nIn Argentina, the crimes of calumny and injury are foreseen in the chapter \"Crimes Against Honor\" (Articles 109 to 117-bis) of the Penal Code. Calumny is defined as \"the false imputation to a determined person of a concrete crime that leads to a lawsuit\" (Article 109). However, expressions referring to subjects of public interest or that are not assertive do not constitute calumny. Penalty is a fine from 3,000 to 30,000 pesos. He who intentionally dishonour or discredit a determined person is punished with a penalty from 1,500 to 20,000 pesos (Article 110).\nHe who publishes or reproduces, by any means, calumnies and injuries made by others, will be punished as responsible himself for the calumnies and injuries whenever its content is not correctly attributed to the corresponding source. Exceptions are expressions referring to subjects of public interest or that are not assertive (see Article 113). When calumny or injury are committed through the press, a possible extra penalty is the publication of the judicial decision at the expenses of the guilty (Article 114). He who passes to someone else information about a person that is included in a personal database and that one knows to be false, is punished with six months to three years in prison. When there is harm to somebody, penalties are aggravated by an extra half (Article 117 bis, \u00a7\u00a7 2nd and 3rd).\nAustralia.\nDefamation law in Australia developed primarily out of the English law of defamation and its cases, though now there are differences introduced by statute and by the implied constitutional limitation on governmental powers to limit speech of a political nature established in \"Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation\" (1997).\nIn 2006, uniform defamation laws came into effect across Australia. In addition to fixing the problematic inconsistencies in law between individual States and Territories, the laws made a number of changes to the common law position, including:\nThe 2006 reforms also established across all Australian states the availability of truth as an unqualified defence; previously a number of states only allowed a defence of truth with the condition that a public interest or benefit existed. The defendant however still needs to prove that the defamatory imputations are substantially true.\nThe law as it currently stands in Australia was summarized in the 2015 case of Duffy v Google by Justice Blue in the Supreme Court of South Australia:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The tort can be divided up into the following ingredients:\nDefences available to defamation defendants include absolute privilege, qualified privilege, justification (truth), honest opinion, publication of public documents, fair report of proceedings of public concern and triviality.\nOnline.\nOn 10 December 2002, the High Court of Australia delivered judgment in the Internet defamation case of \"Dow Jones v Gutnick\". The judgment established that internet-published foreign publications that defamed an Australian in their Australian reputation could be held accountable under Australian defamation law. The case gained worldwide attention and is often said, inaccurately, to be the first of its kind. A similar case that predates \"Dow Jones v Gutnick\" is \"Berezovsky v Michaels\" in England.\nAustralia's first Twitter defamation case to go to trial is believed to be \"Mickle v Farley\". The defendant, former Orange High School student Andrew Farley was ordered to pay $105,000 to a teacher for writing defamatory remarks about her on the social media platform.\nA more recent case in defamation law was \"Hockey v Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited\" [2015], heard in the Federal Court of Australia. This judgment was significant as it demonstrated that tweets, consisting of even as little as three words, can be defamatory, as was held in this case.\nAustria.\nIn Austria, the crime of defamation is foreseen by Article 111 of the Criminal Code. Related criminal offences include \"slander and assault\" (Article 115), that happens \"if a person insults, mocks, mistreats or threatens will ill-treatment another one in public\", and yet \"malicious falsehood\" (Article 297), defined as a false accusation that exposes someone to the risk of prosecution.\nAzerbaijan.\nIn Azerbaijan, the crime of defamation (Article 147) may result in a fine up to \"500 times the amount of minimum salaries\", public work for up to 240 hours, correctional work for up to one year, or imprisonment of up to six months. Penalties are aggravated to up to three years of prison if the victim is falsely accused of having committed a crime \"of grave or very grave nature\" (Article 147.2). The crime of insult (Article 148) can lead to a fine of up to 1,000 times the minimum wage, or to the same penalties of defamation for public work, correctional work or imprisonment.\nAccording to the OSCE report on defamation laws, \"Azerbaijan intends to remove articles on defamation and insult from criminal legislation and preserve them in the Civil Code\".\nBelgium.\nIn Belgium, crimes against honour are foreseen in Chapter V of the Belgian Penal Code, Articles 443 to 453-bis. Someone is guilty of calumny \"when law admits proof of the alleged fact\" and of defamation \"when law does not admit this evidence\" (Article 443). The penalty is eight days to one year of imprisonment, plus a fine (Article 444). In addition, the crime of \"calumnious denunciation\" (Article 445) is punished with 15 days to six months in prison, plus a fine. In any of the crimes covered by Chapter V of the Penal Code, the minimum penalty may be doubled (Article 453-bis) \"when one of the motivations of the crime is hatred, contempt or hostility of a person due to his or her intended race, colour of the skin, ancestry, national origin or ethnicity, nationality, gender, sexual orientation, marital status, place of birth, age, patrimony, philosophical or religious belief, present or future health condition, disability, native language, political belief, physical or genetical characteristic, or social origin\".\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, defamation is a crime, which is prosecuted either as \"defamation\" (three months to a year in prison, plus fine; Article 139 of the Penal Code), \"calumny\" (six months to two years in prison, plus fine; Article 138 of the PC) or \"injury\" (one to six months in prison, or fine; Article 140), with aggravating penalties when the crime is practiced in public (Article 141, item III) or against a state employee because of his regular duties. Incitation to hatred and violence is also foreseen in the Penal Code (incitation to a crime, Article 286). Moreover, in situations like bullying or moral constraint, defamation acts are also covered by the crimes of \"illegal constraint\" (Article 146 of the Penal Code) and \"arbitrary exercise of discretion\" (Article 345 of PC), defined as breaking the law as a vigilante.\nBulgaria.\nIn Bulgaria, defamation is formally a criminal offence, but the penalty of imprisonment was abolished in 1999. Articles 146 (insult), 147 (criminal defamation) and 148 (public insult) of the Criminal Code prescribe a penalty of fine.\nCanada.\nCivil.\nQuebec.\nIn Quebec, defamation was originally grounded in the law inherited from France and is presently established by Chapter III, Title 2 of Book One of the \"Civil Code of Quebec\", which provides that \"every person has a right to the respect of his reputation and privacy\".\nTo establish civil liability for defamation, the plaintiff must establish, on a balance of probabilities, the existence of an injury (fault), a wrongful act (damage), and of a causal connection (link of causality) between the two. A person who has made defamatory remarks will not necessarily be civilly liable for them. The plaintiff must further demonstrate that the person who made the remarks committed a wrongful act. Defamation in Quebec is governed by a reasonableness standard, as opposed to strict liability; a defendant who made a false statement would not be held liable if it was reasonable to believe the statement was true.\nCriminal.\nThe \"Criminal Code of Canada\" specifies the following as criminal offences:\nThe criminal portion of the law has been rarely applied, but it has been observed that, when treated as an indictable offence, it often appears to arise from statements made against an agent of the Crown, such as a police officer, a corrections officer, or a Crown attorney. In the most recent case, in 2012, an Ottawa restaurant owner was convicted of ongoing online harassment of a customer who had complained about the quality of food and service in her restaurant.\nAccording to the OSCE official report on defamation laws issued in 2005, 57 persons in Canada were accused of defamation, libel and insult, among which 23 were convicted \u2013 9 to prison sentences, 19 to probation and one to a fine. The average period in prison was 270 days, and the maximum sentence was four years of imprisonment.\nOnline.\nThe rise of the internet as a medium for publication and the expression of ideas, including the emergence of social media platforms transcending national boundaries, has proven challenging to reconcile with traditional notions of defamation law. Questions of jurisdiction and conflicting limitation periods in trans-border online defamation cases, liability for hyperlinks to defamatory content, filing lawsuits against anonymous parties, and the liability of internet service providers and intermediaries make online defamation a uniquely complicated area of law.\nIn 2011, the Supreme Court of Canada held that a person who posts hyperlinks on a website which lead to another site with defamatory content is not publishing that defamatory material for the purposes of libel and defamation law.\nChile.\nIn Chile, the crimes of calumny and slanderous allegation () are covered by Articles 412 to 431 of the Penal Code. Calumny is defined as \"the false imputation of a determined crime and that can lead to a public prosecution\" (Article 412). If the calumny is written and with publicity, penalty is \"lower imprisonment\" in its medium degree plus a fine of 11 to 20 \"vital wages\" when it refers to a crime, or \"lower imprisonment\" in its minimum degree plus a fine of six to ten \"vital wages\" when it refers to a misdemeanor (Article 413). If it is not written or with publicity, penalty is \"lower imprisonment\" in its minimum degree plus a fine of six to fifteen \"vital wages\" when it is about a crime, or plus a fine of six to ten \"vital wages\" when it is about a misdemeanor (Article 414).\nAccording to Article 25 of the Penal Code, \"lower imprisonment\" is defined as a prison term between 61 days and five years. According to Article 30, the penalty of \"lower imprisonment\" in its medium or minimum degrees carries with it also the suspension of the exercise of a public position during the prison term.\nArticle 416 defines as \"all expression said or action performed that dishonors, discredits or causes contempt\". Article 417 defines broadly (grave slander), including the imputation of a crime or misdemeanor that cannot lead to public prosecution, and the imputation of a vice or lack of morality, which are capable of harming considerably the reputation, credit or interests of the offended person. \"Grave slander\" in written form or with publicity are punished with \"lower imprisonment\" in its minimum to medium degrees plus a fine of eleven to twenty \"vital wages\". Calumny or slander of a deceased person (Article 424) can be prosecuted by the spouse, children, grandchildren, parents, grandparents, siblings and heirs of the offended person. Finally, according to Article 425, in the case of calumnies and slander published in foreign newspapers, are considered liable all those who from Chilean territory sent articles or gave orders for publication abroad, or contributed to the introduction of such newspapers in Chile with the intention of propagating the calumny and slander.\nChina.\nCivil.\nBased on text from : Civil Code of the People's Republic of China, \"Book Four\" (\"Personality Rights\").\n\"Chapter I\" (\"General rules\"):\n\"Chapter V\" (\"Rights to Reputation and Rights to Honor\"):\nCriminal.\nArticle 246 of the Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China () makes serious defamation punishable by fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention upon complaint, unless it is against the government.\nCroatia.\nIn Croatia, the crime of insult prescribes a penalty of up to three months in prison, or a fine of \"up to 100 daily incomes\" (Criminal Code, Article 199). If the crime is committed in public, penalties are aggravated to up to six months of imprisonment, or a fine of \"up to 150 daily incomes\" (Article 199\u20132). Moreover, the crime of defamation occurs when someone affirms or disseminates false facts about other person that can damage his reputation. The maximum penalty is one year in prison, or a fine of up to 150 daily incomes (Article 200\u20131). If the crime is committed in public, the prison term can reach one year (Article 200\u20132). On the other hand, according to Article 203, there is an exemption for the application of the aforementioned articles (insult and defamation) when the specific context is that of a scientific work, literary work, work of art, public information conducted by a politician or a government official, journalistic work, or the defence of a right or the protection of justifiable interests, in all cases \"provided that\" the conduct was not aimed at damaging someone's reputation.\nCzech Republic.\nAccording to the Czech Criminal Code, Article 184, defamation is a crime. Penalties may reach a maximum prison term of one year (Article 184\u20131) or, if the crime is committed through the press, film, radio, TV, publicly accessible computer network, or by \"similarly effective\" methods, the offender may stay in prison for up to two years or be prohibited of exercising a specific activity.\nHowever, only the most severe cases will be subject to criminal prosecution. The less severe cases can be solved by an action for apology, damages or injunctions.\nDenmark.\nIn Denmark, libel is a crime, as defined by Article 267 of the Danish Criminal Code, with a penalty of up to six months in prison or a fine, with proceedings initiated by the victim. In addition, Article 266-b prescribes a maximum prison term of two years in the case of public defamation aimed at a group of persons because of their race, colour, national or ethnic origin, religion or \"sexual inclination\".\nFinland.\nIn Finland, defamation is a crime, according to the Criminal Code (Chapter 24, Sections 9 and 10), punishable with a fine, or, if aggravated, with up to two years' imprisonment or a fine. Defamation is defined as spreading a false report or insinuation apt to cause harm to a person, or otherwise disparaging someone. Defamation of the deceased may also constitute an offence if apt to cause harm to surviving loved ones. In addition, there is a crime called \"dissemination of information violating personal privacy\" (Chapter 24, Section 8), which consists in disseminating information, even accurate, in a way that is apt to harm someone's right to privacy. Information that may be relevant with regard to a person's conduct in public office, in business, or in a comparable position, or of information otherwise relevant to a matter of public interest, is not covered by this prohibition. Finnish criminal law has no provisions penalizing the defamation of corporate entities, only of natural persons.\nFrance.\nCivil.\nWhile defamation law in most jurisdictions centres on the protection of individuals' dignity or reputation, defamation law in France is particularly rooted in protecting the privacy of individuals. While the broader scope of the rights protected make defamation cases easier to prove in France than, for example, in England; awards in defamation cases are significantly lower and it is common for courts to award symbolic damages as low as \u20ac1. Controversially, damages in defamation cases brought by public officials are higher than those brought by ordinary citizens, which has a chilling effect on criticism of public policy While the only statutory defence available under French defamation law is to demonstrate the truth of the defamatory statement in question, a defence that is unavailable in cases involving an individual's personal life; French courts have recognized three additional exceptions:\nCriminal.\nDefined as \"the allegation or [the] allocation of a fact that damages the honor or reputation of the person or body to which the fact is imputed\". A defamatory allegation is considered an insult if it does not include any facts or if the claimed facts cannot be verified.\nGermany.\nIn German law, there is no distinction between libel and slander. As of 2006[ [update]], German defamation lawsuits are increasing. The relevant offences of Germany's Criminal Code are \u00a790 (denigration of the Federal President), \u00a790a (denigration of the [federal] State and its symbols), \u00a790b (unconstitutional denigration of the organs of the Constitution), \u00a7185 (\"insult\"), \u00a7186 (defamation of character), \u00a7187 (defamation with deliberate untruths), \u00a7188 (political defamation with increased penalties for offending against paras 186 and 187), \u00a7189 (denigration of a deceased person), \u00a7192 (\"insult\" with true statements). Other sections relevant to prosecution of these offences are \u00a7190 (criminal conviction as proof of truth), \u00a7193 (no defamation in the pursuit of rightful interests), \u00a7194 (application for a criminal prosecution under these paragraphs), \u00a7199 (mutual insult allowed to be left unpunished), and \u00a7200 (method of proclamation).\nGreece.\nIn Greece, the maximum prison term for defamation, libel or insult was five years, while the maximum fine was \u20ac15,000.\nThe crime of insult (Article 361, \u00a7 1, of the Penal Code) may have led to up to one year of imprisonment or a fine, while unprovoked insult (Article\n361-A, \u00a7 1) was punished with at least three months in prison. In addition, defamation may have resulted in up to two months in prison or a fine, while aggravated defamation could have led to at least three months of prison, plus a possible fine (Article 363) and deprivation of the offender's civil rights. Finally, disparaging the memory of a deceased person is punished with imprisonment of up to six months (Penal Code, Article 365).\nIndia.\nIn India, a defamation case can be filed under either criminal law or civil law, or both.\nAccording to the Constitution of India, the fundamental right to free speech (Article 19) is subject to \"reasonable restrictions\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.\nAccordingly, for the purpose of criminal defamation, \"reasonable restrictions\" are defined in Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Section 499 of Indian Penal Code has now been replaced by Section 356 of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita). This section defines defamation and provides ten valid exceptions when a statement is not considered to be defamation. It says that defamation takes place, when someone \"by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person\". The punishment is simple imprisonment for up to two years, or a fine, or both (Section 500).\nSome other offences related to false allegations: false statements regarding elections (Section 171G), false information (Section 182), false claims in court (Section 209), false criminal charges (Section 211).\nSome other offences related to insults: against public servants in judicial proceedings (Section 228), against religion or religious beliefs (Section 295A), against religious feelings (Section 298), against breach of peace (Section 504), against modesty of women (Section 509).\nAccording to the Indian Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 defamation is prosecuted only upon a complaint (within six months from the act) (Section 199), and is a bailable, non-cognisable and compoundable offence (See: The First Schedule, Classification of Offences).\nIreland.\nAccording to the (revised) Defamation Act 2009, the last criminal offences (Sections 36\u200d\u2013\u200d37, blasphemy) seem to have been repealed. The statute of limitations is one year from the time of first publication (may be extended to two years by the courts) (Section 38).\nThe 2009 Act repeals the Defamation Act 1961, which had, together with the underlying principles of the common law of tort, governed Irish defamation law for almost half a century. The 2009 Act represents significant changes in Irish law, as many believe that it previously attached insufficient importance to the media's freedom of expression and weighed too heavily in support of the individual's right to a good name.\nIsrael.\nAccording to \"Defamation Prohibition Law\" (1965), defamation can constitute either civil or criminal offence.\nAs a civil offence, defamation is considered a tort case and the court may award a compensation of up to NIS\u00a0 to the person targeted by the defamation, while the plaintiff does not have to prove a material damage.\nAs a criminal offence, defamation is punishable by a year of imprisonment. In order to constitute a felony, defamation must be intentional and target at least two persons.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, there used to be different crimes against honour. The crime of injury (Article 594 of the Penal Code) referred to the act of offending someone's honour in their presence and was punishable with up to six months in prison or a fine of up to \u20ac516. The crime of defamation (Article 595, Penal Code) refers to any other situation involving offending one's reputation before many persons, and is punishable with a penalty of up to a year in prison or up to \u20ac1,032 in fine, doubled to up to two years in prison or a fine of \u20ac2,065 if the offence consists in the attribution of a determined fact. When the offence happens by the means of the press or by any other means of publicity, or in a public demonstration, the penalty is of imprisonment from six months to three years, or a fine of at least \u20ac516. Both of them were crimes, that is, the victim had the right of choosing, in any moment, to stop the criminal prosecution by withdrawing the (a formal complaint), or even prosecute the fact only with a civil action with no and therefore no criminal prosecution at all. Beginning from 15 January 2016, injury is no longer a crime but a tort, while defamation is still considered a crime like before.\nArticle 31 of the Penal Code establishes that crimes committed with abuse of power or with abuse of a profession or art, or with the violation of a duty inherent to that profession or art, lead to the additional penalty of a temporary ban in the exercise of that profession or art. Therefore, journalists convicted of libel may be banned from exercising their profession. Deliberately false accusations of defamation, as with any other crime, lead to the crime of (\"calumny\", Article 368, Penal Code), which, under the Italian legal system, is defined as the crime of falsely accusing, before the authorities, a person of a crime they did not commit. As to the trial, judgment on the legality of the evidence fades into its relevance.\nJapan.\nThe Constitution of Japan reads: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Article 21. Freedom of assembly and association as well as speech, press and all other forms of expression are guaranteed. No censorship shall be maintained, nor shall the secrecy of any means of communication be violated.\nCivil.\nUnder article 723 of the Japanese Civil Code, a court is empowered to order a tortfeasor in a defamation case to \"take suitable measures for the restoration of the [plaintiff's] reputation either in lieu of or together with compensation for damages\". An example of a civil defamation case in Japan can be found at http://.\nCriminal.\nThe Penal Code of Japan (translation from government, but still not official text) seems to prescribe these related offences:\nArticle 92, \"Damage to a Foreign National Flag\". Seems relevant to the extent that the wording: \"...defiles the national flag or other national emblem of a foreign state for the purpose of insulting the foreign state\", can be construed to include more abstract defiling; translations of the Japanese term (, ) include 'defacing'.\nArticle 172, \"False Accusations\". That is, false criminal charges (as in complaint, indictment, or information).\nArticle 188, \"Desecrating Places of Worship; Interference with Religious Service\". The Japanese term (, ) seems to include any act of 'disrespect' and 'blasphemy'\u00a0\u2013 a standard term; as long as it is performed in a place of worship.\nArticles 230 and 230-2, \"Defamation\" (, ). General defamation provision. Where the truth of the allegations is not a factor in determining guilt; but there is \"Special Provision for Matters Concerning Public Interest\", whereby proving the allegations is allowed as a defence. See also 232: \"prosecuted only upon complaint\".\nArticle 231, \"Insults\" (, ). General insult provision. See also 232: \"prosecuted only upon complaint\".\nArticle 233, \"Damage to Credibility; Obstruction of Business\". Special provision for damaging the reputation of, or 'confidence' (, ) in, the business of another.\nFor a sample penal defamation case, see , [ Vol. 23 No. 7 1966 (A) 2472], 975 (Supreme Court of Japan )\u00a0\u2013 also on . The defence alleged, among other things, violation of Article 21 of the Constitution. The court found that none of the defence's grounds for appeal amounted to lawful grounds for a final appeal. Nevertheless, the court examined the case , and found procedural illegalities in the lower courts' judgments (regarding the exclusion of evidence from testimony, as hearsay). As a result, the court quashed the conviction on appeal, and remanded the case to a lower court for further proceedings.\nMalaysia.\nIn Malaysia, defamation is both a tort and a criminal offence meant to protect the reputation and good name of a person. The principal statutes relied upon are the Defamation Act 1957 (Revised 1983) and the Penal Code. Following the practice of other common law jurisdictions like the United Kingdom, Singapore, and India, Malaysia relies on case law. In fact, the Defamation Act 1957 is similar with the English Defamation Act 1952. The Malaysian Penal Code is with the Indian and Singaporean Penal Codes.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, crimes of calumny, defamation and slanderous allegation () have been abolished in the Federal Penal Code as well as in fifteen states. These crimes remain in the penal codes of seventeen states, where penalty is, in average, from 1.1 years (for ones convicted for slanderous allegation) to 3.8 years in jail (for those convicted for calumny).\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, defamation is mostly dealt with by lodging a civil complaint at the District Court. Article 167 of book 6 of the Civil Code holds: \"When someone is liable towards another person under this Section because of an incorrect or, by its incompleteness, misleading publication of information of factual nature, the court may, upon a right of action (legal claim) of this other person, order the tortfeasor to publish a correction in a way to be set by court.\" If the court grants an injunction, the defendant is usually ordered to delete the publication or to publish a rectification statement.\nNorway.\nIn Norway, defamation was a crime punished with imprisonment of up to six months or a fine (Penal Code, Chapter 23, \u00a7 246). When the offence is likely to harm one's \"good name\" and reputation, or exposes him to hatred, contempt or loss of confidence, the maximum prison term went up to one year, and if the defamation happens in print, in broadcasting or through an especially aggravating circumstance, imprisonment may have reached two years (\u00a7 247). When the offender acts \"against his better judgment\", he was liable to a maximum prison term of three years (\u00a7 248). According to \u00a7 251, defamation lawsuits must be initiated by the offended person, unless the defamatory act was directed to an indefinite group or a large number of persons, when it may also have been prosecuted by public authorities.\nUnder the new Penal Code, decided upon by the Parliament in 2005, defamation would cease to exist as a crime. Rather, any person who believes he or she has been subject to defamation will have to press civil lawsuits. The Criminal Code took effect on 1 October 2015.\nPhilippines.\nCriminal.\nAccording to the Revised Penal Code of the Philippines (\"Title Thirteen\", \"Crimes Against Honor\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;ARTICLE 353. Definition of Libel.\u00a0\u2013 A libel is a public and malicious imputation of a crime, or of a vice or defect, real or imaginary, or any act, omission, condition, status, or circumstance tending to cause the dishonor, discredit, or contempt of a natural or juridical person, or to blacken the memory of one who is dead.\nRelated articles:\nIn January 2012, \"The Manila Times\" published an article on a criminal defamation case. A broadcaster was jailed for more than two years, following conviction on libel charges, by the Regional Trial Court of Davao. The radio broadcast dramatized a newspaper report regarding former speaker Prospero Nograles, who subsequently filed a complaint. Questioned were the conviction's compatibility with freedom of expression, and the trial in absentia. The United Nations Human Rights Committee recalled its General comment No. 34, and ordered the Philippine government to provide remedy, including compensation for time served in prison, and to prevent similar violations in the future.\nOnline.\nIn 2012, the Philippines enacted Republic Act 10175, titled \"Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012\". Essentially, this Act provides that libel is criminally punishable and describes it as: \"Libel \u2013 the unlawful or prohibited act as defined in Article 355 of the Revised Penal Code, as amended, committed through a computer system or any other similar means which may be devised in the future.\" Professor Harry Roque of the University of the Philippines has written that under this law, electronic libel is punished with imprisonment from six years and one day to up to twelve years. As of 2012[ [update]], five petitions claiming the law to be unconstitutional had been filed with the Philippine Supreme Court, one by Senator Teofisto Guingona III. The petitions all claim that the law infringes on freedom of expression, due process, equal protection and privacy of communication.\nPoland.\nIn Poland, defamation is a crime that consists of accusing someone of a conduct that may degrade him in public opinion or expose him \"to the loss of confidence necessary for a given position, occupation or type of activity\". Penalties include fine, limitation of liberty and imprisonment for up to a year (Article 212.1 of the Criminal Code). The penalty is more severe when the offence happens through the media (Article 212.2). When the insult is public and aims at offending a group of people or an individual because of his or their nationality, ethnicity, race, religion or lack of religion, the maximum prison term is three years.\nPortugal.\nIn Portugal, defamation crimes are: \"defamation\" (article 180 of the Penal Code; up to six months in prison, or a fine of up to 240 days), \"injuries\" (art. 181; up to three months in prison, or a fine up to 120 days), and \"offence to the memory of a deceased person\" (art. 185; up to 6 months in prison or a fine of up 240 days). Penalties are aggravated in cases with publicity (art. 183; up to two years in prison or at least 120 days of fine) and when the victim is an authority (art.184; all other penalties aggravated by an extra half). There is yet the extra penalty of \"public knowledge of the court decision\" (costs paid by the defamer) (art. 189 of Penal Code) and also the crime of \"incitement of a crime\" (article 297; up to three years in prison, or fine).\nRomania.\nSince 2014, defamation is no longer criminalized in the country.\nSaudi Arabia.\nIn Saudi Arabia, defamation of the state, or a past or present ruler, is punishable under terrorism legislation. In a 2015 case, a Saudi writer was arrested for defaming a former ruler of the country. Reportedly, under a [2014] counterterrorism law, \"actions that 'threaten Saudi Arabia's unity, disturb public order, or defame the reputation of the state or the king' are considered acts of terrorism. The law decrees that a suspect can be held incommunicado for 90 days without the presence of their lawyer during the initial questioning.\"\nSingapore.\nIn Singapore, Division 2 of Part 3 of the Protection from Harassment Act 2014 provides for individuals who have been affected by false statements online to seek a variety of court orders under the tort of harassment that are not available under the pre-internet tort of defamation:\nThis is distinct from and does not affect plaintiffs right of action under the common law torts of libel and slander as modified by the Defamation Act 1957. The Protection of Harassment Act 2014, which provides for criminal penalties in addition to civil remedies, is specifically designed to address a narrower scope of conduct in order to avoid outlawing an overly broad range of speech, and is confined to addressing speech that causes \"harassment, alarm, or distress\".\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, both true and false statements can be considered defamation. The penalties increase for false statements. It is also possible for a person to be criminally defamed when they are no longer alive.\nCriminal defamation occurs when a public statement damages the subject's reputation, unless the statement was true and presented solely for the public interest. In addition to criminal law, which allows for imprisonment (up to seven years in case the allegations are false) and monetary fines, one can also sue for damages with civil actions. Generally, criminal actions proceed civil ones with South Korean police as judicial investigators.\nOnline.\nIn October 2008, the \"Korea JoongAng Daily\" published an article on online attacks against celebrities, and their potential connection to suicides in the country. Before the death of Choi Jin-sil, there were rumours online of a significant loan to the actor Ahn Jae-hwan, who killed himself earlier due to debts. U;Nee hanged herself, unable to deal with remarks about her physical appearance and surgery. Jeong Da-bin committed suicide while suffering from depression, later linked to personal attacks about her appearance. Na Hoon-a was falsely rumoured to have been castrated by the \"yakuza\". Byun Jung-soo was falsely reported to have died in a car accident. A professor of information and social studies from the Soongsil University, warned how rumours around celebrities can impact their lives, in unexpected and serious ways.\nIn January 2009, according to an article in \"The Korea Times\", a Seoul court approved the arrest of online financial commentator Minerva, for spreading false information. According to the decision, Minerva's online comments affected national credibility negatively. Lawmakers from the ruling Grand National Party proposed a bill, that would allow imprisonment up to three years for online defamation, and would authorize the police to investigate cyber defamation cases without prior complaint.\nIn September 2015, according to an article in \"Hankook Ilbo\", submitted complaints for insults during online games were increasing. Complainants aimed for settlement money, wasting the investigative capacity of police departments. One person could end up suing 50 others, or more. This led to the emergence of settlement-money hunters, provoking others to insult them, and then demanding compensation. According to statistics from the Cyber Security Bureau of the National Police Agency, the number of cyber defamation and insult reports was 5,712 in 2010, 8,880 in 2014, and at least 8,488 in 2015. More than half of the complaints for cyber insults were game-related (the article mentions \"League of Legends\" specifically). Most of the accused were teenagers. Parents often paid settlement fees, ranging from 300,000 to 2,000,000 South Korean won (US$300\u20132000 as of 2015), to save their children from getting criminal records.\nFormer Soviet Union.\nIn the former Soviet Union, defamatory insults can \"only constitute a criminal offence, not a civil wrong\".\nSpain.\nIn Spain, the crime of calumny (Article 205 of the Penal Code) consists of accusing someone of a crime knowing the falsity of the accusation, or with a reckless contempt for truth. Penalties for cases with publicity are imprisonment from six months to two years or a fine of 12 to 24 months-fine, and for other cases only a fine of six to twelve months-fine (Article 206). Additionally, the crime of injury (Article 208 of the Penal Code) consists of hurting someone's dignity, depreciating his reputation or injuring his self-esteem, and is only applicable if the offence, by its nature, effects and circumstances, is considered by the general public as strong. Injury has a penalty of fine from three to seven months-fine, or from six to fourteen months-fine when it is strong and with publicity. According to Article 216, an additional penalty to calumny or injury may be imposed by the judge, determining the publication of the judicial decision (in a newspaper) at the expenses of the defamer.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, denigration () is criminalized by Chapter 5 of the Criminal Code. Article 1 regulates defamation () and consists of pointing out someone as a criminal or as \"having a reprehensible way of living\", or of providing information about them \"intended to cause exposure to the disrespect of others\". The penalty is a fine. It is generally not a requirement that the statements are untrue; it is enough if they statements are meant to be vilifying.\nArticle 2 regulates gross defamation () and has a penalty of up to two years in prison or a fine. In judging if the crime is gross, the court should consider whether the information, because of its content or the scope of its dissemination, is calculated to produce \"serious damage\". For example, if it can be established that the defendant knowingly conveyed untruths. Article 4 makes it a crime to defame a deceased person according to Article 1 or 2. Most obviously, the paragraph is meant to make it illegal to defame someone's parents as a way to bypass the law.\nArticle 3 regulates other insulting behaviour (), not characterized under Article 1 or 2, and is punishable with a fine or, if it is gross, with up to six months of prison or a fine. While an act of defamation involves a third person, it is not a requirement for insulting behaviour.\nUnder exemptions in the Freedom of the Press Act, Chapter 7, both criminal and civil lawsuits may be brought to court under the laws on denigration.\nSwitzerland.\nIn Switzerland, the crime of wilful defamation is punished with a maximum term of three years in prison, or with a fine of at least thirty days' worth, according to Article 174-2 of the Swiss Criminal Code. There is wilful defamation when the offender knows the falsity of his/her allegations and intentionally looks to ruin the reputation of one's victim (see Articles 174-1 and 174\u20132).\nOn the other hand, defamation is punished only with a maximum monetary penalty of 180 daily penalty units (Article 173\u20131). When it comes to a deceased or absent person, the statute of limitations is 30 years (after the death).\nTaiwan.\nCivil.\nAccording to the Civil Code of the Republic of China.\n\"Part I General Principles\", \"Chapter II Persons\", \"Section I Natural Persons\":\n\"Part II Obligations\", \"Chapter I General Provisions\"\n\"Section 1\u00a0\u2013 Sources of Obligations\", \"Sub-section 5 Torts\":\n\"Section 3\u00a0\u2013 Effects Of Obligations\", \"Sub-section 1 Performance\":\nCriminal.\nThe Criminal Code of the Republic of China (), under \"Chapter 27 Offenses Against Reputation and Credit\", lists these articles: \nOther related articles:\nIn July 2000, the Justices of the Judicial Yuan ()\u00a0\u2013 the Constitutional Court of Taiwan\u00a0\u2013 delivered the \"J.Y. Interpretation No. 509\" (\"The Defamation Case\"). They upheld the constitutionality of Art. 310 of the Criminal Code. In the Constitution, Article 11 establishes freedom of speech. Article 23 allows restrictions to freedoms and rights, to prevent infringing on the freedoms and rights of others. The court found that Art. 310 \u00b6\u00b6 1-2 were necessary and proportional to protect reputation, privacy, and the public interest. It seemed to extend the defence of truth in \u00b6 3, to providing evidence that a perpetrator had reasonable grounds in believing the allegations were true (even if they could not ultimately be proven). Regarding criminal punishments versus civil remedies, it noted that if the law allowed anyone to avoid a penalty for defamation by offering monetary compensation, it would be tantamount to issuing them a licence to defame.\nIn January 2022, an editorial in the \"Taipei Times\" (written by a law student from the National Chengchi University) argued against Articles 309 and 310. Its position was abolishing prison sentences in practice, on the way to full decriminalization. It argued that insulting language should be tackled via education, and not in the courts (with the exception of hate speech). According to the article, 180 prosecutors urged the Legislative Yuan to decriminalize defamation, or at least limit it to private prosecutions (in order to reserve public resources for major crimes, rather than private disputes and quarrels irrelevant to the public interest).\nIn June 2023, the Constitutional Court delivered its judgment \"Case on the Criminalization of Defamation II\". The court dismissed all the complaints and upheld the constitutionality of the disputed provisions. It emphasized that excluding the application of substantial truth doctrine on defamatory speeches concerning private matters with no public concern, is proportionate in protecting the victim's reputation and privacy. The court reaffirmed \"J.Y. Interpretation No. 509\" and further supplemented its decision. It elaborated on the offender's duty to check the validity of the defamatory statements regarding public matters, and dictated that the offender shall not be punished if there are objective and reasonable grounds for the offender to believe the defamatory statement is true. The court ruled that untrue defamatory statements concerning public matters shall not be punished unless they are issued under actual malice. This includes situations where the offender knowingly or under gross negligence issued said defamatory statement. In terms of the burden of proof for actual malice, the court ruled that it shall be on the prosecutor or the accuser. To prevent fake news from eroding the marketplace of ideas, the court pointed out that the media (including mass media, social media, and self-media) shall be more thorough than the general public in fact-checking.\nThailand.\nCivil.\nThe Civil and Commercial Code of Thailand provides that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A person who, contrary to the truth, asserts or circulates as a fact that which injurious to the reputation or the credit of another or his earnings or prosperity in any other manner, shall compensate the other for any damage arising therefrom, even if he does not know of its untruth, provided he ought to know it.\nA person who makes a communication the untruth of which is unknown to him, does not thereby render himself liable to make compensation, if he or the receiver of the communication has a rightful interest in it.\nThe Court, when given judgment as to the liability for wrongful act and the amount of compensation, shall not be bound by the provisions of the criminal law concerning liability to punishment or by the conviction or non-conviction of the wrongdoer for a criminal offence.\nIn practice, defamation law in Thailand has been found by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to be facilitate hostile and vexatious litigation by business interests seeking to suppress criticism.\nCriminal.\nThe Thai Criminal Code provides that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Section 326. Defamation\nWhoever, imputes anything to the other person before a third person in a manner likely to impair the reputation of such other person or to expose such other person to be hated or scorned, is said to commit defamation, and shall be punished with imprisonment not exceeding one year or fined not exceeding twenty thousand Baht, or both.\nSection 327. Defamation to the Family\nWhoever, imputing anything the deceased person before the third person, and that imputation to be likely to impair the reputation of the father, mother, spouse or child of the deceased or to expose that person hated or scammed to be said to commit defamation, and shall be punished as prescribed by Section 326.\nCriminal defamation charges in Thailand under Section 326 of the Criminal Code are frequently used to censor journalists and activists critical of human rights circumstances for workers in the country.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom abolished criminal libel on 12 January 2010 by section 73 of the \"Coroners and Justice Act 2009\". There were only a few instances of the criminal libel law being applied. Notably, the Italian anarchist Errico Malatesta was convicted of criminal libel for denouncing the Italian state agent Ennio Belelli in 1912.\nUnder English common law, proving the truth of the allegation was originally a valid defence only in civil libel cases. Criminal libel was construed as an offence against the public at large based on the tendency of the libel to provoke breach of peace, rather than being a crime based upon the actual defamation \"per se\"; its veracity was therefore considered irrelevant. Section 6 of the \"Libel Act 1843\" allowed the proven truth of the allegation to be used as a valid defence in criminal libel cases, but only if the defendant also demonstrated that publication was for the \"public benefit\".\nUnited States.\nCriminal.\nFewer than half of U.S. states have criminal defamation laws, but the applicability of those laws is limited by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, and the laws are rarely enforced. There are no criminal defamation or insult laws at the federal level. On the state level, 23 states and two territories have criminal defamation laws on the books: Alabama, Florida, Idaho, Illinois, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Texas, Utah, Virginia, Wisconsin, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands. In addition, Iowa criminalizes defamation through case law without statutorily defining it as a crime.\n\"Noonan v. Staples\" is sometimes cited as precedent that truth is not always a defence to libel in the U.S., but the case is actually not valid precedent on that issue because Staples did not argue First Amendment protection, which is one theory for truth as complete defence, for its statements. The court assumed in this case that the Massachusetts law was constitutional under the First Amendment without it being argued by the parties.\nOnline.\nIn response to the expansion of other jurisdictions' attempts to enforce judgements in cases of trans-border defamation and to a rise in domestic strategic lawsuits against public participation (SLAPPs) following the rise of the internet, the federal and many state governments have adopted statutes limiting the enforceability of offshore defamation judgments and expediting the dismissal of defamation claims. American writers and publishers are shielded from the enforcement of offshore libel judgments not compliant under the \"SPEECH Act\", which was passed by the 111th United States Congress and signed into law by President Barack Obama in 2010. It is based on the New York State \"2008 Libel Terrorism Protection Act\" (also known as \"Rachel's Law\", after Rachel Ehrenfeld who initiated the state and federal laws). Both the New York state law and the federal law were passed unanimously.\nVenezuela.\nIn March 2016, a civil action for defamation led to imposition of a four-year prison sentence on a newspaper publisher.\nYemen.\nIn 2024 Judge and member of the Supreme Judicial Council, Sabah al-Alwani was the subject of an online defamation campaign.\nUNESCO reports.\n2014.\nGlobal.\nAs of 2012, defamation, slander, insult and lese-majesty laws, existed across the world. According to ARTICLE 19, 174 countries retained criminal penalties for defamation, with full decriminalization in 21 countries. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) had an ongoing decriminalization campaign. UNESCO also provided technical assistance to governments on revising legislation, to align with international standards and best practices.\nThe use of civil defamation increased, often in lieu of criminal cases, resulting in disproportionate fines and damages, particularly against media and journalists critical of governments. Libel tourism enabled powerful individuals to limit critical and dissenting voices by shopping around the world for the jurisdictions most likely to approve their defamation suits.\nAs of 2011, 47% of countries had laws against blasphemy, apostasy or defamation of religion. According to the Pew Research Center, 32 had laws or policies prohibiting blasphemy, and 87 had defamation of religion laws.\nThe legal liability of internet intermediaries gained increasing importance. Private companies could be held responsible for user-generated content that was made accessible through their servers or services, if it was deemed illegal or harmful. Due to uncertain takedown procedures and the lack of legal resources, intermediaries sometimes were excessively compliant with takedown notices, often outside the legal system and with little recourse for the affected content producer. Intermediaries were at times held criminally liable for content posted by a user, when others perceived it violated privacy or defamation laws. Such cases indicated an emerging trend of preventive censorship, where companies conducted their own monitoring and filtering to avoid possible repercussions. This contributed to a process of privatized censorship, where some governments may rely on private-sector companies to regulate online content, outside of electoral accountability and without due process.\nDebate around defamation of religions, and how this impacts the right to free expression, continued to be an issue at a global level. In 2006, UNESCO's executive board adopted a decision on \"Respect for freedom of expression and respect for sacred beliefs and values and religious and cultural symbols\". In 2011, the United Nations Human Rights Council made further calls for strengthening religious tolerance and preventing hate speech. Similar resolutions were made in 2012 and 2013. In 2013, 87 governments agreed on the Rabat Plan of Action, for the prohibition of incitement to hatred.\nAfrica.\nBy 2013, at least 19% of the region had decriminalized defamation. In 2010, the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights adopted a resolution, calling on African Union (AU) member countries to repeal criminal defamation or insult laws. In 2012, the Pan-African Parliament passed a resolution encouraging AU heads of state to sign the Declaration of Table Mountain, calling for the abolition of insult and criminal defamation laws. Such laws frequently led to the arrest and imprisonment of journalists across the continent. It was signed by two countries. In most cases\u00a0\u2013 criminal or civil\u00a0\u2013 the burden of proof continued to be on the defendant, and it was rare to have public interest recognized as a defence. Members of government continued to initiate most such cases. There was a trend towards using civil defamation in lieu of criminal defamation, but with demands for extremely high damages and the potential to bankrupt media outlets\u00a0\u2013 although the courts often dismissed such cases. According to an analysis by the Pew Research Center's Forum on Religion and Public Life, laws against defamation of religion remained on the books in 13 countries (27%), four countries had laws penalizing apostasy, and two had anti-blasphemy laws.\nArab region.\nAll Arab States retained criminal penalties for defamation. Truth was rarely a defence to defamation and libel charges. In 2012, Algeria and Tunisia partially decriminalized defamation by eliminating prison terms. According to an analysis by the Pew Research Center's Forum on Religion and Public Life, sixteen countries (84%) had laws penalizing blasphemy, apostasy and/or defamation of religion. Lese-majesty laws existed in some parts of the region. There were vaguely worded concepts and terms, interpreted narrowly by the judiciary. The number of bloggers imprisoned was rising. Among some Gulf States in particular, citizen journalists and social media users reporting on political matters were arrested. The charges were defamation or insult, typically with respect to heads of state. There was a trend towards trying journalists and bloggers in military courts, particularly during and following the Arab Spring; although this was not limited to countries where such uprisings occurred.\nAsia-Pacific.\nThe majority of countries (86%) had laws imposing criminal penalties for defamation. Six countries decriminalized defamation. Both criminal and civil defamation charges against journalists and media organizations continued. Other legal trends included using charges of terrorism, blasphemy, inciting subversion of state power, acting against the state, and conducting activities to overthrow the state. In 2011, the Pew Research Center's Forum on Religion and Public Life found that anti-blasphemy laws existed in eight countries (18%), while 15 (34%) had laws against defamation of religion.\nCentral and Eastern Europe.\nFour countries in Central and Eastern Europe fully decriminalized defamation. An additional four abolished prison sentences for defamation convictions, although the offence remained in the criminal code.\nAt the same time, an emerging trend was using fines and sanctions. Civil defamation cases were increasingly used, as evidenced by the number of civil lawsuits and disproportionate fines against journalists and media critical of governments. In at least four countries, defamation laws were used by public officials, including heads of state, to restrict critical media across all platforms. Media and civil society increased pressure on authorities, to stop granting public officials a higher degree of protection against defamation in the media.\nBlasphemy was not a widespread phenomenon in Central and Eastern Europe, where country still had such a provision. According to the Pew Research Center's Forum on Religion &amp; Public Life, 17 countries had laws penalizing religious hate speech.\nLatin America and the Caribbean.\nThe Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) of the Organization of American States (OAS), recommended repealing or amending laws that criminalize \"desacato\", defamation, slander, and libel. Some countries proposed reforming the IACHR, which could have weakened the office of the special rapporteur, but the proposal was not adopted by the OAS General Assembly.\nSeven countries, three of which in the Caribbean, fully or partially decriminalized defamation. Another trend was abolishing \"desacato\" laws, which refer specifically to defamation of public officials. The OAS Special Rapporteur expressed concern over the use of terrorism or treason offences against those who criticize governments.\nDefamation, copyright, and political issues were identified as the principal motives for content removal.\nWestern Europe and North America.\nDefamation was a criminal offence in the vast majority of countries, occasionally leading to imprisonment or elevated fines. Criminal penalties for defamation remained, but there was a trend towards their repeal. Between 2007 and 2012, 23 of the 27 countries in Western Europe and North America imposed criminal penalties for various exercises of expression (including criminal libel, defamation, slander, insult, and lese-majesty laws\u00a0\u2013 but excluding incitement to violence).\nTwo countries decriminalized defamation in 2009, followed by another in 2010. In another case, there was no criminal libel at the federal level, and a minority of states still had criminal defamation laws. In general, criminal penalties for libel were imposed rarely, with two notable exceptions.\nAccording to the Pew Research Center's Forum on Religion &amp; Public Life, eight countries had blasphemy legislation, though these laws were used infrequently.\nThe range of defences available to those accused of invasion of privacy or defamation expanded, with growing recognition of the public-interest value of journalism. In at least 21 countries, defences to charges of defamation included truth and public interest. This included countries that had at least one truth or public interest defence to criminal or civil defamation (including countries where defence of truth was qualified or limited\u00a0\u2013 for example, to statements of fact as opposed to opinions, or to libel as opposed to insult).\nCivil defamation continued, particularly about content related to the rich and powerful, including public officials and celebrities. There were a high number of claims, prohibitive legal costs, and disproportionate damages. This prompted a campaign against what was seen by some as plaintiff-friendly libel laws in the United Kingdom; and that led to reforming the country's defamation law, resulting in the Defamation Act 2013.\nDue to legal protection of speech, and practical and jurisdictional limits on effectiveness of controls, censorship was increasingly carried out by private bodies. Privatized censorship by internet intermediaries involved: (i) the widening range of content considered harmful and justified to block or filter; (ii) inadequate due process and judicial oversight of decisions to exclude content or to conduct surveillance; and (iii) a lack of transparency regarding blocking and filtering processes (including the relationship between the state and private bodies, in the setting of filters and the exchange of personal data).\n2018.\nGlobal.\nAs of 2017, at least 130 UNESCO member states retained criminal defamation laws. In 2017, the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media issued a report on criminal defamation and anti-blasphemy laws among its member states, which found that defamation was criminalized in nearly three-quarters (42) of the 57 OSCE participating states. Many of the laws pertaining to defamation included specific provisions with harsher punishments for speech or publications critical of heads of state, public officials, state bodies, and the state itself. The report noted that blasphemy and religious insult laws existed in around one third of OSCE participating states; many of these combined blasphemy and/or religious insult with elements of hate speech legislation. A number of countries continued to include harsh punishments for blasphemy and religious insult.\nCountries in every region extended criminal defamation legislation to online content. Cybercrime and anti-terrorism laws passed throughout the world; bloggers appeared before courts, with some serving time in prison. Technological advancements strengthened governments' abilities to monitor online content.\nAfrica.\nBetween 2012 and 2017, four AU member states decriminalized defamation. Other national courts defended criminal defamation's place in their constitution [\"sic\"]. Regional courts pressured countries to decriminalize defamation. The ECOWAS Court of Justice, which had jurisdiction over cases pertaining to human rights violations since 2005, set a precedent with two rulings in favour of cases challenging the criminalization of defamation.\nIn the landmark case of \"Loh\u00e9 Issa Konat\u00e9 v. the Republic of Burkina Faso\", the African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights overturned the conviction of a journalist, characterizing it as a violation of the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the treaty of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). The journalist was subjected to censorship, excessive fines, and a lengthy imprisonment for defamation. Following this legally binding decision, the country in question proceeded to amend its laws and pay the journalist compensation.\nIn 2016, the Constitutional Court of Zimbabwe declared its criminal defamation laws unconstitutional. In 2017, the High Court of Kenya declared Section 194 (criminal defamation) of the Penal Code unconstitutional.\nCivil society and press freedom organizations lobbied for changes to the penal codes in their respective countries\u00a0\u2013 sometimes successfully. However, even in countries where libel or defamation were explicitly decriminalized, there were often other laws whose broad provisions allowed governments to imprison journalists for a wide range of reasons (cybercrime, anti-terrorism, incitement to violence, national security).\nThe majority of countries had defamation laws, that were used to charge and imprison journalists. Media outlets were suspended after publishing reports critical of the government or other political elites.\nArab region.\nLibel, defamation, slander, as well as emergency laws and anti-terrorism laws, were frequently used as tools of government control on media. Emergency laws often superseded the general law. Defamation laws tended to favour those who could afford costly legal expenses.\nGoogle transparency reports showed that several governments in the Arab region made requests to remove content (such as YouTube videos), based on allegations of insulting religion and defaming powerful figures.\nJournalists were predominantly jailed under anti-state laws, with charges ranging from spreading chaos, promoting terrorism, and inciting dissidence, to incitement against the ruling government. Charges for publishing or spreading false news were the next most frequent. Other defamation or religious insult laws were laid against journalists in several cases.\nAsia-Pacific.\nMost countries in South, Southeast, and East Asia, had civil and/or criminal defamation laws. Various cases indicated that such laws were used by political interests and powerful elites (individuals and corporations). Cases of online defamation were on the rise.\nOne recently enacted defamation law received condemnation, including from the United Nations. The law allowed journalists to be jailed if they were found questioning Sharia law or the affairs of the state. From 2014, criminal defamation laws were challenged, both in South and East Asian countries.\nCentral and Eastern Europe.\nSince 2014, use of criminal defamation and insult laws increased. New legal obligations were imposed on ISPs to monitor content, as a matter of national security\u00a0\u2013 particularly in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) sub-region.\nSince 2012, more countries in the South-East Europe sub-region decriminalized defamation. Of the , three repealed all general provisions on criminal defamation and insult, retained criminal defamation offences but without the possibility of imprisonment, and retained imprisonment as a possibility. Defamation of public officials, state bodies, or state institutions was criminalized in country. Other forms of criminal offences existed in some countries: insulting public officials, harming the reputation and honour of the head of state, insulting or defaming the state.\nCivil laws to protect the reputation of individuals or their privacy were increasingly used. There was an increase in the number of cases where politicians turned to the courts, seeking relief for reputational injuries. Civil defamation lawsuits by politicians limited press freedom, in at least one country of the CIS sub-region.\nLatin America and the Caribbean.\nThere were attempts to pass legislation allowing content removal based on different claims, including defamation and hate speech. Draft bills were proposed, criminalizing online publication of content deemed as hate speech, and allowing the executive to order take downs of such content. Several states tried to pass legislation creating special criminal offences for online content that could damage the reputation and/or honour of a person. As of 2017, none of these bills were approved.\nPublic officials throughout the region initiated criminal proceedings against internet users, predominantly against those opposing the ruling party. Claims were based on defamation laws, including charges against memes parodying political personalities.\nAntigua and Barbuda (in 2015), Jamaica (in 2013), and Grenada (in 2012), abolished criminal libel. Trinidad and Tobago partially repealed criminal libel in 2014. The Dominican Republic removed prison sentences for defamation of government bodies and public officials.\nNew cybercrime laws were passed in two Caribbean countries. In 2017, one country passed an anti-hate law that was criticized for stifling political debate.\nWestern Europe and North America.\nLegal developments varied across the region. While criminal defamation and insult laws were repealed in some countries, stronger defamation laws were produced or reintroduced in other countries.\nIn common law countries, criminal defamation laws mostly fell into disuse. In contrast, most civil law countries in Western Europe retained criminal defamation laws. In several Western European countries, defamation was sanctioned more harshly if it involved a public official. In some instances, heads of state were provided more protection to their reputation and punishments were more severe. Some governments strengthened criminal defamation laws to counter online hate speech or cyberbullying.\nThe European Court of Human Rights had limited influence in legal reforms according to the court's standards, where (suspended) prison sentences for defamation were considered a violation of Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights. Other high courts had a mixed record when evaluating criminal defamation and freedom of expression.\nAccording to the 2017 OSCE report, criminal defamation laws were in place in at least 21 of the 27 countries in Western Europe and North America. At least 13 states retained statutes penalizing blasphemy or religious insult.\n2022.\nGlobal.\nAs of 2022, at least 160 countries had criminal defamation laws on the books, down from 166 in 2015. At least 57 laws and regulations across 44 countries were adopted or amended since 2016, containing vague language or disproportionate punishments, threatening online freedom of expression and press freedom.\nAccording to reports provided by Meta, Google, and Twitter, the number of content removal requests received by those platforms from court orders, law enforcement, and executive branches of governments worldwide doubled in the last five years\u00a0\u2013 to a total of approximately 117,000 requests in 2020. Of these companies, only Google published data on the rationale for content removal requests made by governments; that data showed \"defamation\" and \"privacy and security\" as the leading justifications.\nDefamation and religions.\nChristianity.\nChristian religious texts (such as the Epistle of James\u00a0\u2013 full text on ), catechisms (like the one commissioned by the Council of Trent\u00a0\u2013 see \" from its Roman Catechism), and preachers (like Jean-Baptiste Massillon\u00a0\u2013 see his sermon titled \"), have argued against expressions (true and false) that can offend others.\nTheologian and catechist Joseph Deharbe, in , gives practical advice to the faithful: The commandment above all forbids giving false evidence in court. It is never lawful to tell a lie. In general, forbidden are lies, hypocrisy, detraction, calumny, slander, false suspicion, rash judgment; anything that can injure the honour or character of another. With two exceptions: for the good of the guilty, or when necessary to prevent a greater evil\u00a0\u2013 and then, only with charitable intentions and without exaggerations.\nThe \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" has entries for two related concepts, detraction and slander.\nDefamation and calumny seem to be used as synonyms for slander.\nDetraction.\nThe mortal sin of damaging another's good name, by revealing their faults or crimes (honestly believed real by the detractor). Contrasted with calumny, where the assertions are knowingly false.\nThe degree of sinfulness depends on the harm done, based on three things: \nA relatively small defect alleged against a person of eminent station (a bishop is given as example) might be a mortal sin. While an offence of considerable magnitude (drunkenness is given as example), attributed to a member of a social class in which such things frequently happen (a sailor is given as example), might constitute only a venial sin.\nIf the victim has been publicly sentenced, or their misdeeds are already notorious, it is lawful to refer to them\u00a0\u2013 unless the accused have reformed, or their deeds have been forgotten. But this does not apply to particular communities (a college or monastery are given as examples), where it would be unlawful to publish the fact outside said community. But even if the sin is not public, it may be revealed for the common good, or for the benefit of the narrator, listener, or culprit.\nThe damage from failing to reveal another's sin must be balanced against the evil of defamation [\"sic\"]. No more than necessary should be exposed, and fraternal correction is preferable. Journalists are allowed to criticize public officials. Historians must be able to document the causes and connections of events, and strengthen public conscience.\nThose who abet the principal's defamation, are also guilty. Detractors (or their heirs) must provide restitution. They must restore the victim's fame and pay them damages. According to the text, allegations cannot be taken back, reparation methods proposed by theologians are unsatisfactory, and the only way is finding the right occasion for a favourable characterization of the defamed.\nSlander.\nDefined as attributing fault to another, when the slanderer knows they are innocent. It combines damaging another's reputation and lying.\nAccording to the text, theologians say that the act of lying might not be grievous in itself, but advise mentioning it in confession to determine reparation methods. The important act is injuring a reputation (hence moralists do not consider slander distinct from detraction). The method of injury is negligible.\nIn a somewhat contradictory opinion, it is stated that there are circumstances where misdeeds can be lawfully exposed, but a lie is intrinsically evil and can never be justified.\nSlander violates commutative justice, so the perpetrator must make restitution. Atonement seems achievable by retracting the false statement, which undoes the injury (even if this requires exposing the perpetrator as a liar). Compensation for the victim's losses may also be required.\nIslam.\nIn a 2018 academic paper, the author (a law student from the International Islamic University of Malaysia) argued for harmonization between Malaysian laws and Islamic legal principles. Article 3 of the Constitution declares Islam as the state religion. Article 10 provides for freedom of speech, with expressly permitted restrictions for defamation-related offences.\nFirst, definitions of defamation from Malaysian and Islamic law are listed. According to the paper, definitions by Muslim scholars can include: mislead, accuse of adultery, and embarrass or discredit the dignity or honour of another. In the Quran, many more concepts might be included. The author concludes that Islamic definitions are better for classifying defamatory actions.\nSecond, freedom of speech is compared with teachings of Muhammad. Mentioned among others are: fragmentation of society, divine retribution by the angels in the afterlife, secrecy, loyalty, and treachery; dignity and honour are again mentioned. The author concludes that freedom of speech should be practised for the sake of justice, and can be lifted if it causes discomfort or unhealthy relationships in society.\nThird, Malaysian laws related to defamation are enumerated. According to the author, there were cases with exorbitant monetary awards, interference by third parties, and selective actions against political opposition; having a negative impact on society.\nFourth, the proposal of harmonization is discussed. The author proposes amending Malaysian laws to conform with Islamic legal principles, under the supervision of a specific department. Mentioned are: Islamic customary law (\"Adat\"), secondary sources of Islamic law (such as \"Urf\"), and \"other laws\" practised by people in various countries; provided that they are in line with Islamic divine law (\"Maqasid\"). The author concludes that in the Malaysian context, this proposed harmonization would be justified by Article 3 of the Constitution (with a passing reference to the \"supremacy of the Constitution\", apparently guaranteed in Article 4).\nFinally, the author enumerates proposed steps to bring about this legal reform. Defamation would include:\nThere would be three types of punishment for defamation:\nOther proposed measures include: right of reply, order of retraction, mediation via an ombudsman, empowering the Human Rights Commission of Malaysia, finding ways for people to express their views and opinions, education.\nJudaism.\n\"The Jewish Encyclopedia\" has two articles on the topic: calumny and slander.\nThe two terms seem to be conflated. It is not clear which, if any, corresponds to harmful and true speech, and which to harmful and false speech. Combined with Wikipedia's entry on \"lashon hara\" (terms are spelled somewhat differently), it might be deduced that: \nThe Wikipedia article on \"lashon hara\" equates it to detraction. And classifies all of slander, defamation, and calumny, as the same\u00a0\u2013 and equal to \"hotzaat shem ra\".\nCalumny.\nIt is described as a sin, based on both the Bible (\"gossip\") and rabbinic literature (\"leshon hara\", \"the evil tongue\"). Intentionally false accusations and also injurious gossip. Both forbidden in the Torah. Of the Ten Commandments, relevant is the ninth (in Judaism): Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.\nAccording to the article, the slanderous [\"sic\"] tongue ruins the slanderer, the listener, and the maligned. The divine presence will be denied to liars, hypocrites, scoffers, and slanderers. Slander is morally equated to idolatry, adultery, and murder.\nAccording to the authors, some rabbis saw quinsy, leprosy (related to Miriam speaking ill of Moses), stoning, as deserved punishments. And the Midrash attributes hardships of various figures (such as Joseph, Moses, Elijah, Isaiah) to sins of the tongue.\nAs for legal remedies, the article refers to ethical and religious sanctions from the Bible and the Talmud, arguing that the law cannot repair subtle damage to reputation\u00a0\u2013 with two exceptions. Bringing an evil name upon one's wife (punished with a fine and by disallowing divorce). Perjury, which would result in the perpetrator receiving same punishment, as the one their false testimony would have brought upon the falsely accused.\nThe authors conclude that calumny was met with righteous indignation and penal severity in Jewish thought, and this was in accordance with the ethical principle of treating the honour of others as one's own.\nSlander.\nDefined as \"false and malicious defamation\" (circular definition) of another's reputation and character, disgracing them in their community. Here, it is distinguished from \"leshon hara\" by being deliberately false. Punishments include fines and damages.\nAccording to the authors, the Law of Moses prescribed flagellation and monetary compensation for a husband who, without reasonable cause, questioned the virginity of his newly married wife; and divorce was disallowed (similarly with calumny). The article notes that after the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem, these laws prescribing fines and capital punishment ceased.\nRabbinical enactments against slander are described as very stringent. Abusive language might have been exempt from any legal liability, unless it was considered slander (against both the living and the deceased). Fines and excommunication were a possibility. But fasting and apology also seemed to be acceptable atonements.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28664", "revid": "34204912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28664", "title": "Sweetbread", "text": "Culinary name for types of offal\nSweetbread is a culinary name for the thymus or pancreas, typically from calf or lamb. Sweetbreads have a rich, slightly gamey flavor and a tender, succulent texture. They are often served as an appetizer or a main course and can be accompanied by a variety of sauces and side dishes. The etymology of the name is unclear.\nDescription.\nSweetbread is a culinary name for the thymus (also called throat, gullet, or neck sweetbread) or pancreas (also called stomach, belly or heart sweetbread), typically from calf () or lamb (). \nThe \"heart\" sweetbreads are more spherical, while the \"throat\" sweetbreads are more cylindrical. As the thymus is replaced by fibrous tissue in older animals, only pancreatic sweetbreads come from beef and pork. Like other edible non-muscle from animal carcasses, sweetbreads may be categorized as offal, \"fancy meat\", or \"variety meat\".4,23 Various other glands used as food may also sometimes be called \"sweetbreads\", including the parotid gland (\"cheek\" or \"ear\" sweetbread) and the sublingual glands (\"tongue\" sweetbreads or \"throat bread\"), as well as ovary and testicles.\nUse.\nSweetbreads are often served as an appetizer or a main course and can be accompanied by a variety of sauces and side dishes. They are a part of traditional French cuisine. In Henri-Paul Pellaprat's classic \"Modern French Culinary Art\", which was published in English in 1966, he includes six different recipes for sweetbreads, including versions with cream sauce, with ham, presented in pastry cases, and \"\u00e0 la Florentine\". In the 1961 classic \"Mastering the Art of French Cooking: Volume 1\", Julia Child and her co-authors also include six recipes for sweetbreads, with variations of cream and mushroom sauces, a version \"\u00e0 l\u2019Italienne\" including ham and mushrooms, and a gratin with Swiss cheese.\nIn a cookbook published in 1949, American chef James Beard included recipes for sweetbreads \"en brochette\", broiled sweetbreads, and three variations of saut\u00e9ed sweetbreads.\nSweetbreads are a component of the Creole cuisine of Louisiana, with recipes included in some of the earliest cookbooks published there. Many restaurants in New Orleans serve sweetbreads.\nSweetbread is a common Iranian street food and is often served as a kebab. One common preparation of sweetbreads involves soaking in salt water, then poaching in milk, after which the outer membrane is removed. Once dried and chilled, they are often breaded and fried. They are also used for stuffing or in p\u00e2t\u00e9s. They are grilled in many Latin American cuisines, such as in the Argentine asado; floured and pan-fried in Greece (sheep's thymus is usually used); and served in bread in Turkish cuisine.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"sweetbread\" is first attested in the 16th century, but the etymology of the name is unclear. \"Sweet\" is perhaps used since the thymus is sweet and rich-tasting, as opposed to savory-tasting muscle flesh. \"Bread\" may come from Middle English \"brede\", meaning \"roast meat\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28667", "revid": "44141905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28667", "title": "Principality of Sealand", "text": "Unrecognised micronation in the North Sea\nThe Principality of Sealand () is an unrecognised micronation on HM Fort Roughs (also known as Roughs Tower), an offshore platform in the North Sea. It is situated on Rough Sands, a sandbar located approximately from the coast of Suffolk and from the coast of Essex. Roughs Tower is a Maunsell Sea Fort that was built by the British in international waters during World War II. Since 1967, the decommissioned Roughs Tower has been occupied and claimed as a sovereign state by the family and associates of Paddy Roy Bates. Bates seized Roughs Tower from a group of pirate radio broadcasters in 1967 with the intention of setting up his own station there. Bates and his associates have repelled incursions from vessels from rival pirate radio stations and the UK's Royal Navy using firearms and petrol bombs. In 1987, the United Kingdom extended its territorial waters to 12 nautical miles, which places the platform in British territory. As of August 2024, Sealand has only one permanent resident.\nHistory.\nIn 1943, during World War II, Roughs Tower was constructed by the United Kingdom as one of the Maunsell Forts, primarily to defend the vital shipping lanes in nearby estuaries against German mine-laying aircraft. It consisted of a floating pontoon base with a superstructure of two hollow towers joined by a deck upon which other structures could be added. The fort was towed to a position above the Rough Sands sandbar, where its base was deliberately flooded to sink it in place. This is approximately from the coast of Suffolk, outside the then claim of the United Kingdom and, therefore, in international waters at the time. The facility was occupied by 150\u2013300 Royal Navy personnel throughout World War II; the last full-time personnel left in 1956. The Maunsell Forts were decommissioned in the 1950s.\nOccupation and establishment.\nRoughs Tower was occupied in February and August 1965 by Jack Moore and his daughter Jane, squatting on behalf of the pirate station Wonderful Radio London.\nOn 2 September 1967, the fort was occupied by Major Paddy Roy Bates, a British citizen and the owner of a pirate radio station, who ejected the competing group of pirate broadcasters. Bates intended to broadcast his pirate radio station\u2014called Radio Essex\u2014from the platform. Despite having the necessary equipment, he never began broadcasting. Bates declared the independence of Roughs Tower and deemed it the Principality of Sealand.\nIn 1968, British workmen entered what Bates claimed to be his territorial waters to service a navigational buoy near the platform. Michael Bates (son of Paddy Roy Bates) tried to scare the workmen off by firing warning shots from the fort. As Bates was a British subject at the time, he was summoned to court in England on firearms charges following the incident. The court ruled that the platform (which Bates was now calling Sealand) was outside British territorial limits, being beyond the limit which then applied to the country's waters. As a result, the case could not proceed as it was not within British jurisdiction. Bates considers this Sealand's first instance of \"de facto\" recognition.\nIn 1975, Bates introduced a constitution for Sealand, followed by a national flag, a national anthem entitled \"E Mare Libertas\", a currency, passports, and an immigration stamp.\n1978 attack and Sealand Rebel Government.\nIn August 1978, Alexander Achenbach, who described himself as the Prime Minister of Sealand, hired several German and Dutch mercenaries to lead an attack on Sealand while Bates and his wife were in Austria, invited by Achenbach to discuss the sale of Sealand. Achenbach had disagreed with Bates over plans to turn Sealand into a luxury hotel and casino with fellow German and Dutch businessmen. They stormed the platform and took Bates's son, Michael Bates, hostage. Michael was able to retake Sealand and capture Achenbach and the mercenaries. Achenbach, a German lawyer who held a Sealand passport, was charged with treason against Sealand, and was held unless he paid DM\u00a075,000 (more than US$35,000 or \u00a323,000). Germany then sent a diplomat from its London embassy to Sealand to negotiate for Achenbach's release. Roy Bates relented after several weeks of negotiations and subsequently claimed that the diplomat's visit constituted \"de facto\" recognition of Sealand by Germany.\nFollowing his repatriation, Achenbach and Gernot P\u00fctz proclaimed a government in exile, sometimes known as the Sealand Rebel Government or Sealandic Rebel Government, in Germany.\nExpansion of British territorial waters.\nIn 1987, the United Kingdom extended its territorial waters to 12 nautical miles, which put Sealand in waters internationally recognised as British.\nSealand previously sold fantasy passports (as termed by the Council of the European Union), which are not valid for international travel. In 1997, the Bates family revoked all Sealand passports, including those that they themselves had issued over the previous 22 years, due to the realisation that an international money laundering ring had appeared, using the sale of fake Sealand passports to finance drug trafficking and money laundering from Russia and Iraq. The ringleaders of the operation, based in Madrid but with ties to various groups in Germany\u2014including to the rebel Sealand Government in exile established by Achenbach\u2014had used fake Sealandic diplomatic passports and number plates. They were reported to have sold 4,000 fake Sealandic passports to Hong Kong citizens for an estimated $1,000 each.\nIn 2015, Bates asserted that Sealand's population is \"normally like two people\".\n2006 fire.\nOn the afternoon of 23 June 2006, the top platform of the Roughs Tower caught fire due to an electrical fault. A Royal Air Force rescue helicopter transferred one person to Ipswich Hospital, directly from the tower. The Harwich lifeboat stood by the Roughs Tower until a local fire tug extinguished the fire. All damage was repaired by November 2006.\nAttempted sales.\nIn January 2007, The Pirate Bay, an online index of digital content of entertainment media and software founded by the Swedish think tank , attempted to purchase Sealand after harsher copyright measures in Sweden forced them to look for a base of operations elsewhere. Between 2007 and 2010, Sealand was offered for sale through the Spanish estate company InmoNaranja, at an asking price of \u20ac750\u00a0million (\u00a3600\u00a0million, US$906\u00a0million), (approximately \u00a3985\u00a0million in 2024).\nDeath of founder.\nRoy Bates died at the age of 91 on 9 October 2012 after a diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease several years earlier. His son Michael took over the operation of Sealand, although he continued to live in Suffolk, where he and his sons were operating a family fishing business called Fruits of the Sea. Joan Bates, Roy Bates's wife, died in an Essex nursing home at the age of 86 on 10 March 2016.\nLegal status.\nIn 1987, the UK extended its territorial waters from , bringing Sealand into British territorial waters. In the opinion of law academic John Gibson, there is little chance that Sealand would be recognised as a nation due to it being a man-made structure.\nRecognition.\nSealand is not officially recognised by any established sovereign state. Nonetheless, the Sealand government claims it has been \"de facto\" recognised by the United Kingdom and Germany, on account of a UK court ruling and Germany's dispatch of a diplomat to Sealand.\nAdministration.\nIrrespective of its legal status, Sealand is managed by the Bates family as if it were a recognised sovereign entity and they are its hereditary royal rulers. Roy Bates styled himself as Prince Roy and his wife Princess Joan. Their son had been referred to as the Prince Regent by the Bates family between 1999 and Roy's death in 2012. In this role, he apparently served as Sealand's acting Head of State and also its Head of Government.\nAt a micronations conference hosted by the University of Sunderland in 2004, Sealand was represented by Michael Bates's son James. The facility is now occupied by one or more caretakers representing Michael Bates, who himself resides in Essex, England.\nBusiness operations.\nSealand has been involved in several commercial operations, including the issuing of coins and postage stamps and the establishment of an offshore Internet hosting facility, or data haven. The principality also sells noble titles on its online store, such as Lord and Baron.\nHavenCo.\nIn 2000, publicity was created about Sealand following the establishment of a new entity called HavenCo, a data haven, which effectively took control of Roughs Tower itself. Ryan Lackey, Haven's co-founder and a key participant in the country, left HavenCo under acrimonious circumstances in 2002, citing disagreements with the Bates family over management of the company. The HavenCo website went offline in 2008.\nSports.\nSealand is nominal home to multiple sports teams, including an association football team and an American football club. \nSealand's national association football team was founded in 2003, initially being a team from Vestbjerg representing the micronation. In 2009, the team was revised with Neil Forsyth as manager. Following Forsyth, the team has been managed by Julian Dicks and Ed Stubbs.\nThe micronation's American football club was founded in the summer of 2021 by husband-and-wife Mike and Nia Ireland and Mikey Gray. As of 2022, the club had men's, women's, and masters (players over 35) teams, and had over 200 players and staff.\nThe national flag of Sealand has been carried by mountaineers to the peaks of Muztagh Ata and Mount Everest. Additionally, athletes have represented Sealand in international kung fu and ultimate frisbee competitions.\nSealand itself has also been the site of skateboarding and a single-person half marathon. Richard Royal swam from Sealand to the British mainland in 2018, being recognised by the British Long Distance Swimming Association and the World Open Water Swimming Association in doing so.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28668", "revid": "14672439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28668", "title": "Sweetener", "text": "Substance added to food to give it the basic taste of sweetness\nA sweetener is a substance added to food or drink to impart the flavor of sweetness, either because it contains a type of sugar, or because it contains a sweet-tasting sugar substitute. Various natural non-sugar sweeteners (NSS) and artificial sweeteners are used to produce food and drink.\nList of sweeteners.\nMany artificial sweeteners have been invented and are now used in commercially produced food and drink. Natural non-sugar sweeteners also exist, such as glycyrrhizin found in liquorice.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28671", "revid": "51047554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28671", "title": "Susan Faludi", "text": "American feminist author and journalist\nSusan Charlotte Faludi (; born April 18, 1959) is an American feminist, journalist, and author. She won a Pulitzer Prize for Explanatory Journalism in 1991, for a report on the leveraged buyout of Safeway Stores, Inc., a report that the Pulitzer Prize committee commended for depicting the \"human costs of high finance\". She was also awarded the Kirkus Prize in 2016 for \"In the Darkroom\", which was also a finalist for the 2017 Pulitzer Prize in biography.\nEarly life and education.\nSusan Faludi was born in 1959 in Queens, New York, and grew up in Yorktown Heights, New York. She was born to Marilyn (Lanning), a homemaker and journalist, and Stef\u00e1nie Faludi, who was a photographer. Stef\u00e1nie Faludi, who was Jewish and a survivor of the Holocaust, had emigrated from Hungary. In 2004 she came out to Susan as a transgender woman and died in 2015. Susan Faludi has dual US &amp; Hungarian citizenship. Her maternal grandfather was also Jewish. \nFaludi attended Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and served as Managing Editor of \"The Harvard Crimson\". She graduated in 1981 with a Bachelor of Arts degree \"summa cum laude\". \nCareer.\nFaludi became a professional journalist, writing for \"The New York Times\", \"Miami Herald\", \"The Atlanta Journal-Constitution\", the \"San Jose Mercury News\", and \"The Wall Street Journal\", among other publications.\nDuring the 1980s, Faludi wrote several articles on feminism and the apparent resistance to the movement. Seeing a pattern emerge, she wrote her first book, \"\", which was released in late 1991. \nIn 2008\u20132009, Faludi was a fellow at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, and during the 2013\u20132014 academic year, she was the Tallman Scholar in the Gender and Women's Studies Program at Bowdoin College. Since January 2013, Faludi has been a contributing editor at \"The Baffler\" magazine in Cambridge, Massachusetts. \nIn 1996, Faludi was awarded \"honoris causa\" membership in Omicron Delta Kappa at SUNY Plattsburgh. In 2017, she was awarded an honorary doctoral degree from Stockholm University in Sweden.\nBooks.\n\"Backlash\".\nSusan Faludi's 1991 book \"\" argued that the 1980s saw a backlash against feminism, especially due to the spread of negative stereotypes against career-minded women. Faludi asserted that many who argue \"a woman's place is in the home, looking after the kids\" are hypocrites, since they have wives who are working mothers or, as women, they are themselves working mothers. This work won her the National Book Critics Circle Award for general nonfiction in 1991. The book has become a classic feminist text, warning women of every generation that the gains of feminism should not be taken for granted. \nIn 2014, high-profile women such as journalists Jill Abramson and Katha Pollitt, actress/writer Lena Dunham, and feminist novelist Roxane Gay, among many others, reread each of the chapters of the book and examined their contemporary relevance. In September 2015, Bustle.com included Backlash among its list of \"25 Bestsellers from the last 25 years you simply must make time to read.\" Reflecting on the legacy of the book in \"The New Yorker\" in July 2022, Molly Fischer called \"Backlash\" \"an era-defining phenomenon\" that \"presented a damningly methodical assessment of women\u2019s status in Reagan-era America.\" \"Backlash\" has also been translated into several foreign languages, including Spanish, Portuguese, Polish, German, Finnish, Korean, and Italian.\n\"Stiffed\".\nIn Faludi's 1999 book \"\", Faludi analyzes the state of the American man. Faludi argues that while many of those in power are men, most individual men have little power. American men have been brought up to be strong, support their families and work hard. But many men who followed this now find themselves underpaid or unemployed, disillusioned and abandoned by their wives. Changes in American society have affected both men and women, Faludi concludes, and it is wrong to blame individual men for class differences, or for plain differences in individual luck and ability, that they did not cause and from which men and women suffer alike.\n\"The Terror Dream\".\nIn \"The Terror Dream\", Faludi analyzes the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in light of prior American experience going back to insecurity on the historical American frontier such as in Metacom's Rebellion. Faludi argues that the 9/11 attacks reinvigorated a climate in America that is hostile to women, where women are viewed as weak and best suited to playing support roles for the men who protect them from attack. \n\"Kirkus Reviews\" averred that the book was a \"rich, incisive analysis of the surreality of American life in the wake of 9/11\", and that it was \"brilliant, illuminating and essential.\" Reviewing the book for \"Fresh Air\", Maureen Corrigan praised Faludi for her \"characteristic restraint and depth of research\" and for her \"rigorous insistence on truth\".\nIn contrast, the book was disparaged as a \"tendentious, self-important, sloppily reasoned work that gives feminism a bad name\" by \"The New York Times\" principal book reviewer, Michiko Kakutani. Kakutani's fellow \"New York Times\" critic, John Leonard, wrote: \"In \"The Terror Dream\" a skeptical Faludi reads everything, second-guesses everybody, watches too much talking-head TV and emerges from the archives and the pulp id like an exorcist and a Penthesilea.\" Writing in \"The Guardian\", Sarah Churchwell felt the book was \"a persuasive analysis of post-9/11 sexism\", but also said, \"Ultimately Faludi is guilty of her own exaggerations and mythmaking, strong-arming her argument into submission.\"\n\"In the Darkroom\".\nFaludi's most recent book is \"In the Darkroom\", published in 2016 by Henry Holt &amp; Co. It is about the \"fluidity and binaries\" of \"modern transsexuality\", inspired by Faludi's father coming out as a transgender woman. Writing in \"The New York Times\", Michelle Goldberg called Faludi's book a \"rich, arresting and ultimately generous investigation of her father.\" Writing in \"The Guardian\", Rachel Cooke described the book as \"an elegant masterpiece\" and \"a searching investigation of identity barely disguised as a sometimes funny and sometimes very painful family saga.\" \"In the Darkroom\" won the 2016 Kirkus Prize for nonfiction and was a finalist for the 2017 Pulitzer Prize in Biography. The book has been translated into multiple foreign languages, including Spanish, Italian, German, Korean, Polish, Portuguese, Hungarian, Turkish, Dutch, and Chinese.\nFaludi and feminism.\nFaludi has rejected the claim advanced by critics that there is a \"rigid, monolithic feminist 'orthodoxy,'\" noting in response that she has disagreed with Gloria Steinem about pornography and Naomi Wolf about abortion.\nLike Gloria Steinem, Faludi has criticized the obscurantism prevalent in academic feminist theorizing, saying, \"There's this sort of narrowing specialization and use of coded, elitist language of deconstruction or New Historicism or whatever they're calling it these days, which is to my mind impenetrable and not particularly useful.\" She has also characterized \"academic feminism's love affair with deconstructionism\" as \"toothless\", and warned that it \"distract[s] from constructive engagement with the problems of the public world\".\nPersonal life.\nFaludi is married to fellow author Russ Rymer.\nReferences.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28672", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28672", "title": "Oswald of Northumbria", "text": "King of Northumbria from 634 to 641/42; Christian saint\nOswald (; c 604 \u2013 5 August 641/642) was King of Northumbria from 634 until his death, and is venerated as a saint, of whom there was a particular cult in the Middle Ages.\nOswald was the son of \u00c6thelfrith of Bernicia and Acha of Deira and came to rule after spending a period in exile. After defeating the Welsh Gwyneddian ruler, Cadwallon ap Cadfan, at the Battle of Heavenfield, Oswald brought the two Northumbrian kingdoms of Bernicia and Deira once again under a single ruler and promoted the spread of Christianity in Northumbria. He was given a strongly positive assessment by the historian Bede, writing a little less than a century after Oswald's death, who regarded Oswald as a saintly king; it is also Bede who is the main source for present-day historical knowledge of Oswald. After eight years of rule, in which he was the most powerful ruler in Britain, Oswald was killed in the Battle of Maserfield while fighting the forces of Penda of Mercia, who then himself was defeated by Oswald's brother Oswiu.\nBackground, youth and exile.\nOswald's father, \u00c6thelfrith, was a successful Bernician ruler who, after some years in power in Bernicia, also became king of Deira and thus was the first to rule both of the kingdoms that would come to be considered the constituent kingdoms of Northumbria. It would, however, be anachronistic to refer to a Northumbrian people or identity at this early stage, when the Bernicians and the Deirans were still clearly distinct peoples. Oswald's mother, Acha of Deira, was a member of the Deiran royal line, whom \u00c6thelfrith apparently married as part of his acquisition of Deira or consolidation of power there. Oswald was apparently born in or around the year 604, since Bede says that he was killed at the age of 38 in 642; \u00c6thelfrith's acquisition of Deira is also believed to have occurred around 604.\n\u00c6thelfrith, who was for years a successful war-leader, especially against the native British, was eventually killed in the battle of the River Idle around 616 by Raedwald of East Anglia. This defeat meant that an exiled member of the Deiran royal line, Edwin (Acha's brother), became king of Northumbria and Oswald and his brothers fled to the north. Oswald thus spent the remainder of his youth in the Scottish kingdom of D\u00e1l Riata in northern Britain, where he was converted to Christianity. He may also have fought in Ireland during this period of exile. It has been considered that Oswald is one of the three Saxon princes mentioned in the Irish poem Togail Bruidne D\u00e1 Derga, being named as 'Osalt' in that work.\nVictory over Cadwallon.\nAfter Cadwallon ap Cadfan, the king of Gwynedd, in alliance with the pagan Penda of Mercia, killed Edwin of Deira in battle at Hatfield Chase in 633 (or 632, depending on when the years used by Bede are considered to have begun), Northumbria was split into its constituent kingdoms of Bernicia and Deira. Oswald's brother Eanfrith became king of Bernicia but was killed by Cadwallon in 634 (or 633) after attempting to negotiate peace. Subsequently Oswald, at the head of a small army (possibly with the aid of allies from the north, the Scots and/or the Picts), met Cadwallon in battle at Heavenfield, near Hexham. Before the battle, tradition says Oswald had a wooden cross erected; he knelt down, holding the cross in position until enough earth had been thrown in the hole to make it stand firm. He then prayed and asked his army to join in.\nAdomn\u00e1n in his \"Life of Saint Columba\" offers a longer account, which Abbot S\u00e9g\u00e9ne had heard from Oswald himself. Oswald, he says, had a vision of Columba the night before the battle, in which he was toldBe strong and act manfully. Behold, I will be with thee. This coming night go out from your camp into battle, for the Lord has granted me that at this time your foes shall be put to flight and Cadwallon your enemy shall be delivered into your hands and you shall return victorious after battle and reign happily. Oswald described his vision to his council and all agreed that they would be baptised and accept Christianity after the battle. In the battle that followed, the Welsh (Brytons) were routed despite their superior numbers; Cadwallon himself was killed.\nOverlordship.\nFollowing the victory at Heavenfield, Oswald reunited Northumbria and re-established the Bernician supremacy, which had been interrupted by Edwin. Bede says that Oswald held \"imperium\" for the eight years of his rule (both Bede and the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" say that Oswald's reign was actually considered to be nine years, the ninth year being accounted for by assigning to Oswald the year preceding his rule, \"on account of the heathenism practised by those who had ruled that one year between him and Edwin\"), and was the most powerful king in Britain. In the 9th-century \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" he is referred to as a Bretwalda. Adomn\u00e1n describes Oswald as \"ordained by God as Emperor of all Britain\".\nOswald seems to have been widely recognized as overlord, although the extent of his authority is uncertain. Bede makes the claim that Oswald \"brought under his dominion all the nations and provinces of Britain\", which, as Bede notes, was divided by language among the English, Britons, Scots and Picts; however he seems to undermine his own claim when he mentions at another point in his history that it was Oswald's brother Oswiu who made tributary the Picts and Scots. An Irish source, the Annals of Tigernach, records that the Anglo-Saxons banded together against Oswald early in his reign; this may indicate an attempt to put an end to Oswald's overlordship south of the Humber, which presumably failed.\nThe Mercians, who participated in Edwin's defeat in 633, seem to have presented an obstacle to Oswald's authority south of the Humber, although it has been generally thought that Oswald dominated Mercia to some degree after Heavenfield. It may have been to appease Oswald that Penda had Eadfrith, a captured son of Edwin (and thus a dynastic rival of Oswald), killed, although it is also possible that Penda had his own motives for the killing.\nOswald apparently controlled the Kingdom of Lindsey, given the evidence of a story told by Bede regarding the moving of Oswald's bones to a monastery there; Bede says that the monks rejected the bones initially because Oswald had ruled over them as a foreign king. To the north, it may have been Oswald who conquered the Gododdin. Irish annals record the siege of Edinburgh, thought to have been the royal stronghold of the Gododdin, in 638, and this seems to mark the end of the kingdom; that this siege was undertaken by Oswald is suggested by the apparent control of the area by his brother Oswiu in the 650s.\nOswald seems to have been on good terms with the West Saxons: he stood as sponsor to the baptism of their king, Cynegils, and married Cynegils' daughter. Her name is reported by only one source, Reginald of Durham's 12th century \"Vita S. Oswaldi\", which says that it was Kyneburga. Although Oswald had one known son, \u00c6thelwald, it is uncertain whether this was a son from his marriage to Cynegils' daughter or from an earlier relationship\u2014since \u00c6thelwald began ruling in Deira in 651, it has been argued that a son from this marriage would have been too young at the time to be trusted with this position, and therefore may have been older, the product of a relationship Oswald had during his exile.\nChristianity.\nAlthough Edwin had previously converted to Christianity in 627, it was Oswald who did the most to spread the religion in Northumbria. Shortly after becoming king he asked the Irish of D\u00e1l Riata to send a bishop to facilitate the conversion of his people. The Irish at first sent an \"austere\" bishop, who was unsuccessful in his mission, and subsequently sent Aidan, who proposed a gentler approach. Oswald gave the island of Lindisfarne to Aidan as his episcopal see. Aidan achieved great success in spreading the Christian faith. Bede mentions that Oswald acted as Aidan's interpreter when the latter was preaching, since Aidan did not know English well and Oswald had learned Irish during his exile.\nAlthough Oswald could be interpreted as a martyr for his death in battle, Bede puts a clear emphasis on Oswald being saintly as a king. Bede does not focus on his martyrdom as being primary to his sainthood: indeed it has been noted that Bede never uses the word 'martyr' in reference to Oswald. Bede's portrayal of Oswald stands out as unusual as a king regarded as saintly for his life while ruling, in contrast to a king who gives up the kingship in favour of religious life or who is venerated because of the manner of his death. Bede recounts Oswald's generosity to the poor and to strangers and tells a story highlighting this characteristic: on one occasion, at Easter, Oswald was sitting at dinner with Aidan and had \"a silver dish full of dainties before him\", when a servant, whom Oswald \"had appointed to relieve the poor\", came in and told Oswald that a crowd of the poor were in the streets begging alms from the king. According to Bede Oswald immediately had his food given to the poor and even had the dish broken up and distributed. Aidan was greatly impressed and seized Oswald's right hand, stating: \"May this hand never perish.\" Accordingly, Bede reports that the hand and arm remained uncorrupted after Oswald's death.\nDownfall.\nIt was a conflict with the pagan Mercians under Penda that proved to be Oswald's undoing. He was killed in 642, by the Mercians at the Battle of Maserfield, in Oswestry (although other candidates for the location of the battle have been suggested) and his body was dismembered. Bede mentions the story that Oswald \"ended his life in prayer\": he prayed for the souls of his soldiers when he saw that he was about to die. Oswald's head and limbs were placed on stakes.\nThe traditional identification of the battle site with Oswestry, probably in the territory of Powys at the time, suggests that Penda may have had British allies in this battle, and this is also suggested by surviving Welsh poetry which has been thought to indicate the participation of the men of Powys in the battle. It has also been considered that, if the traditional identification of the site as Oswestry is correct, Oswald was on the offensive, in the territory of his enemies. This could conflict with Bede's saintly portrayal of Oswald, since an aggressive war could hardly qualify as a just war, perhaps explaining why Bede is silent on the cause of the war, he says only that Oswald died \"fighting for his fatherland\", as well as his failure to mention other offensive warfare Oswald is presumed to have engaged in between Heavenfield and Maserfield. Oswald may have had an ally in Penda's brother Eowa, who was also killed in the battle, according to the \"Historia Britonnum\" and \"Annales Cambriae\"; while the source only mentions that Eowa was killed, not the side on which he fought, it has been speculated that Eowa was subject to Oswald and fighting alongside him in the battle, in opposition to Penda.\nVeneration and legacy.\nOswald soon came to be regarded as a saint. Bede says that the spot where he died came to be associated with miracles, and people took dirt from the site, which led to a hole being dug as deep as a man's height. Reginald of Durham recounts another miracle, saying that his right arm was taken by a bird (perhaps a raven) to an ash tree, which gave the tree ageless vigour; when the bird dropped the arm onto the ground, a spring emerged from the ground. Both the tree and the spring were, according to Reginald, subsequently associated with healing miracles. Aspects of the legend have been considered to have pagan overtones or influences\u2014this may represent a fusion of his status as a traditional Germanic warrior-king with Christianity. The name of the site, Oswestry, or \"Oswald's Tree\", is generally thought to be derived from Oswald's death there and the legends surrounding it. His feast day is 5 August. The cult surrounding him even gained prominence in parts of continental Europe; cf. O\u017ebalt in Slovenia.\nBede mentions that Oswald's brother Oswiu, who succeeded Oswald in Bernicia, retrieved Oswald's remains in the year after his death. In writing of one miracle associated with Oswald, Bede gives some indication of how Oswald was regarded in conquered lands: years later, when his niece Osthryth moved his bones to Bardney Abbey in Lindsey, its inmates initially refused to accept them, \"though they knew him to be a holy man\", because \"he was originally of another province, and had reigned over them as a foreign king\", and thus \"they retained their ancient aversion to him, even after death\". It was only after Oswald's bones were the focus of was said to be a miracle, in which, during the night, a pillar of light appeared over the wagon in which the bones were being carried and shone up into the sky, that they were accepted into the monastery: \"in the morning, the brethren who had refused it the day before, began themselves earnestly to pray that those holy relics, so beloved by God, might be deposited among them\".\nIn the early 10th century, Bardney was in Viking territory, and in 909, following a combined West Saxon and Mercian raid led by \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, daughter of Alfred the Great, St Oswald's relics were translated to a new minster in Gloucester, which was renamed St Oswald's Priory in his honour. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, and her husband \u00c6thelred, ealdorman of Mercia, were buried in the priory, and their nephew, King \u00c6thelstan, was a major patron of Oswald's cult.\nOswald's head was interred in Durham Cathedral together with the remains of Cuthbert of Lindisfarne (a saint with whom Oswald became posthumously associated, although the two were not associated in life; Cuthbert became bishop of Lindisfarne more than forty years after Oswald's death) and other valuables in a quickly made coffin, where it is generally believed to remain, although there are at least four other claimed heads of Oswald in continental Europe. One of his arms is said to have ended up in Peterborough Abbey later in the Middle Ages. The story is that a small group of monks from Peterborough made their way to Bamburgh where Oswald's uncorrupted arm was kept and stole it under the cover of darkness. They returned with it to Peterborough and in due time a chapel was created for the arm, Oswald's Chapel. Minus the arm, this can be seen to this day in the south transept of the cathedral. When creating this chapel the monks of Peterborough had thought of how they had acquired it and built into the chapel a narrow tower\u2014just big enough for a monk to climb to the top by an internal stair and stand guard over Oswald's arm 24 hours a day, every day of the year. The monk had to stand because the tower is not large enough for him to sit, sitting could lull him to sleep, and they knew what could happen when no-one was watching.\nSeveral churches bear the name of St Oswald, including The Church of Saint Oswald on the location of the wooden cross left by Oswald at Heavenfield, the night before the battle. This was rebuilt in 1717. The site is visible from the B6318 Military Road. St Oswald's Grasmere is purportedly on one of the sites he preached on, on a bank of the River Rothay. William Wordsworth's grave is located in the cemetery here. St Oswald's Church, Compton Abdale in Gloucestershire was dedicated to St Oswald following \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's foundation of St Oswald's Priory in 909. St Oswald's Catholic Church lies to the north of Peterborough City Centre.\nSome English place names record his reign, for example it has been claimed that Oswaldtwistle in Lancashire, meaning the twistle of Oswald, is linked to the saint, although it's more likely to be the name of the owner of the land. Kirkoswald in Cumbria is so named because it is believed that his body was taken there after his death. The local church is ascribed to him. Another Kirkoswald in Scotland also commemorates him.\nOswald is remembered in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival on 5 August.\nOswald is believed to have earned the nickname \"Lamnguin\" (White Blade), latinised as \"Lamnguinus\", which has led scholars to posit that he is the legendary king Languines appearing in the chivalric romance \"Amad\u00eds de Gaula\", where he is mentioned as Languines of Scotland (conflated with Northumbria in the Iberian romance), where he appears as a heroic king and a father-like figure for the young protagonist.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28677", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28677", "title": "Steve Lacy (saxophonist)", "text": "American jazz musician (1934\u20132004)\nSteve Lacy (born Steven Norman Lackritz; July 23, 1934 \u2013 June 4, 2004) was an American jazz saxophonist and composer recognized as one of the important players of soprano saxophone. Coming to prominence in the 1950s as a progressive dixieland musician, Lacy went on to a long and prolific career. He worked extensively in experimental jazz and to a lesser extent in free improvisation, but Lacy's music was typically melodic and tightly-structured. Lacy also became a highly distinctive composer, with compositions often built out of little more than a single questioning phrase, repeated several times.\nThe music of Thelonious Monk became a permanent part of Lacy's repertoire after a stint in the pianist's band, with Monk's works appearing on virtually every Lacy album and concert program; Lacy often partnered with trombonist Roswell Rudd in exploring Monk's work. Beyond Monk, Lacy performed the work of jazz composers such as Charles Mingus, Duke Ellington and Herbie Nichols; unlike many jazz musicians he rarely played standard popular or show tunes.\nEarly life and career.\nLacy began his career at sixteen playing Dixieland music with much older musicians such as Henry \"Red\" Allen, Pee Wee Russell, George \"Pops\" Foster and Zutty Singleton and then with Kansas City jazz players like Buck Clayton, Dicky Wells, and Jimmy Rushing. He then became involved with the avant-garde, performing on \"Jazz Advance\" (1956), the debut album of Cecil Taylor, and appearing with Taylor's groundbreaking quartet at the 1957 Newport Jazz Festival; he also made a notable appearance on an early Gil Evans album. His most enduring relationship, however, was with the music of Thelonious Monk: he recorded the first album to feature only Monk compositions (\"Reflections\", Prestige, 1958) and briefly played in Monk's band in 1960 and later on Monk's \"Big Band and Quartet in Concert\" album (Columbia, 1963).\nEurope and sextet.\nLacy's first visit to Europe came in 1965, with a visit to Copenhagen in the company of Kenny Drew; he went to Italy and formed a quartet with Italian trumpeter Enrico Rava and the South African musicians Johnny Dyani and Louis Moholo (their visit to Buenos Aires is documented on \"The Forest and the Zoo\", ESP, 1967). After a brief return to New York, he returned to Italy, then in 1970 moved to Paris, where he lived until the last two years of his life. He became a widely respected figure on the European jazz scene, though he remained less well known in the U.S.\nThe core of Lacy's activities from the 1970s to the 1990s was his sextet: his wife, singer/violinist Irene Aebi, soprano/alto saxophonist Steve Potts, pianist Bobby Few, bassist Jean-Jacques Avenel, and drummer Oliver Johnson (later John Betsch). Sometimes this group was scaled up to a large ensemble (e.g. \"Vespers\", Soul Note, 1993, which added Ricky Ford on tenor sax and Tom Varner on French horn), sometimes pared down to a quartet, trio, or even a two-saxophone duo. He played duos with pianist Eric Watson. Lacy also, beginning in the 1970s, became a specialist in solo saxophone; he ranks with Sonny Rollins, Anthony Braxton, Evan Parker, and Lol Coxhill in the development of this demanding form of improvisation.\nLacy was interested in all the arts: the visual arts and poetry in particular became important sources for him. Collaborating with painters and dancers in multimedia projects, he made musical settings of his favourite writers: Robert Creeley, Samuel Beckett, Tom Raworth, Taslima Nasrin, Herman Melville, Brion Gysin and other Beat writers, including settings for the Tao Te Ching and haiku poetry. As Creeley noted in the Poetry Project Newsletter, \"There's no way simply to make clear how particular Steve Lacy was to poets or how much he can now teach them by fact of his own practice and example. No one was ever more generous or perceptive.\"\nLater career.\nIn 1992, he was the recipient of a MacArthur Fellowship (nicknamed the \"genius grant\").\nHe also collaborated with a wide range of musicians, from traditional jazz to the avant-garde to contemporary classical music. Outside of his regular sextet, his most regular collaborator was pianist Mal Waldron, with whom he recorded a number of duet albums (notably \"Sempre Amore\", a collection of Ellington/Strayhorn material, Soul Note, 1987).\nLacy played his 'farewell concerts to Europe' in Belgium, in duo and solo, for a small but motivated public. This happened in Brussels, Antwerp, Ghent, Bruges and Mons. In duo he played with Fred Van Hove, Jo\u00eblle L\u00e9andre, Mikhail Bezverkhni, Ir\u00e8ne Aebi, Frederic Rzewski, Christopher Culpo and the dancer Shiro Daimon. This recollection is published by Naked Music, Afkikker, Ghent. In Ghent he played with the classical violinist Mikhail Bezverkhni, winner of Queen Elisabeth Concours. Two of these concerts were organized by Rita De Vuyst, his last muse in Europe, to whom he dedicated his solo CD Mother Goose solo @ afkikker. This CD is published within the book, \"Bone\", a tribute to Lacy. He returned to the United States in 2002, where he began teaching at the New England Conservatory of Music in Boston, Massachusetts. One of his last public performances was in front of 25,000 people at the close of a peace rally on Boston Common in March 2003, shortly before the US-led invasion of Iraq.\nAfter Lacy was diagnosed with liver cancer in August 2003, he continued playing and teaching until weeks before his death on June 4, 2004, at the age of 69.\nDiscography.\nAs leader/co-leader.\nCompilations\nWith Mal Waldron.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs sideman.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28678", "revid": "49256941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28678", "title": "Sabah", "text": "State of Malaysia in Borneo\nSabah () is a state of Malaysia located in northern Borneo, in the region of East Malaysia. Sabah has land borders with the Malaysian state of Sarawak to the southwest and Indonesia's North Kalimantan province to the south. The Federal Territory of Labuan is an island just off Sabah's west coast. Sabah shares maritime borders with Vietnam to the west and the Philippines to the north and east. Kota Kinabalu is the state capital and the economic centre of the state, and the seat of the Sabah State government. Other major towns in Sabah include Sandakan and Tawau. The 2020 census recorded a population of 3,418,785 in the state. It has an equatorial climate with tropical rainforests, abundant with animal and plant species. The state has long mountain ranges on the west side which forms part of the Crocker Range National Park. Kinabatangan River, the second longest river in Malaysia runs through Sabah. The highest point of Sabah, Mount Kinabalu is also the highest point of Malaysia.\nThe earliest human settlement in Sabah can be traced back to 20,000\u201330,000 years ago along the Darvel Bay area at the Madai-Baturong caves. The state has had a trading relationship with China starting from the 14th century AD. Sabah came under the influence of the Bruneian Empire in the 14th and 15th centuries. The state was subsequently acquired by the British North Borneo Chartered Company in the 19th century. During World War II, North Borneo was occupied by the Japanese for three years. It became a British Crown Colony in 1946. On 31 August 1963, the newly-renamed Sabah was granted self-governance by the British. Following this, Sabah became one of the founding members of the Federation of Malaysia (established on 16 September 1963) alongside the Crown Colony of Sarawak, the Colony of Singapore (expelled in 1965), and the Federation of Malaya (Peninsular Malaysia or West Malaysia). The federation was opposed by neighbouring Indonesia, which led to the Indonesia\u2013Malaysia confrontation over three years along with the threats of annexation by the Philippines along with the Sultanate of Sulu, threats which continue to the present day.\nSabah exhibits notable diversity in ethnicity, culture and language. The head of state is the governor, also known as the Yang di-Pertua Negeri, while the head of government is the chief minister and his Cabinet. The government system is closely modelled on the Westminster parliamentary system and has one of the earliest state legislature systems in Malaysia. Sabah is divided into five administrative divisions and 27 districts. Malay is the official language of the state; and Islam is the state religion, but other religions may be practised. Sabah is known for its traditional musical instrument, the sompoton. Sabah has abundant natural resources, and its economy is strongly export-oriented. Its primary exports include oil, gas, timber and palm oil. The other major industries are agriculture and ecotourism.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the name \"Sabah\" is uncertain, and many theories have arisen. One theory is that when it was part of the Bruneian Sultanate, it was referred to as \"Saba\" because of the presence a variety of banana called \"pisang saba\" (also known as \"pisang menurun\"), which are grown widely on the coast of the region and popular in Brunei. The Bajau community referred to it as \"pisang jaba\".\nAdditionally, during the Majapahit era, when Brunei was a vassal state of Majapahit, the Old Javanese eulogy of Nagarakretagama described the area in what is now Sabah as \"Seludang\".\nAlthough the Chinese since the Han dynasty had been associated with the island of Borneo, they did not have any specific names for the area. Instead during the Song dynasty, they referred to the whole island as \"Po Ni\" (also pronounced \"Bo Ni\"), which is the same name they used to refer to the Sultanate of Brunei at the time. Due to the location of Sabah in relation to Brunei, it has been suggested that \"Sabah\" was a Brunei Malay word meaning upstream or \"in a northerly direction\". Another theory suggests that it came from the Malay word \"sabak\" which means a place where palm sugar is extracted.\nIt is nicknamed \"Land Below the Wind\" (Negeri Di Bawah Bayu in Malay language) as the state lies below the typhoon belt of East Asia and is not often hit by typhoons.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe earliest known human settlement in the region existed 20,000\u201330,000 years ago, as evidenced by stone tools and food remains found by excavations along the Darvel Bay area at Madai-Baturong caves near the Tingkayu River. The earliest inhabitants in the area were thought to be similar to Aboriginal Australians, but the reason for their disappearance is unknown. In 2003, archaeologists discovered the Mansuli valley in the Lahad Datu District, which dates back 235,000 years. The archaeological site at Skull Hill (\"Bukit Tengkorak\") in Semporna District was the largest pottery making site in Neolithic Southeast Asia.\nSultanates of Brunei and Sulu influences.\nDuring the 7th century AD, a settled community known as Vijayapura, a tributary to the Srivijaya empire, was thought to have existed in northwest Borneo. The earliest independent kingdom in Borneo, supposed to have existed from the 9th century, was Po Ni, as recorded in the Chinese geographical treatise \"Taiping Huanyu Ji\". It was believed that Po Ni existed at the mouth of Brunei River and was the predecessor to the Bruneian Empire. When China was conquered by the Mongol Empire, all Chinese vassal states were subsequently controlled by the Mongol emperors of China. Early in 1292, Kublai Khan is said to have sent an expedition to northern Borneo, before departing for the invasion of Java in 1293. As a result of this campaign, it is believed that many of his followers in addition to other Chinese traders eventually settled and established their own enclave at Kinabatangan River.\nIn the 14th century, Brunei and Sulu were part of the Majapahit Empire but in 1369, Sulu and the other Philippine kingdoms successfully rebelled and Sulu even attacked Brunei which was still a Majapahit tributary, the Sulus specifically invaded Northeast Borneo at Sabah the Sulus were then repelled but Brunei became weakened. In 1370, Brunei transferred its allegiance to Ming dynasty China. The Maharaja Karna of Borneo then paid a visit to Nanjing with his family until his death. He was succeeded by his son Hsia-wang who agreed to send tribute to China once every three years. After that, Chinese junks came to northern Borneo with cargoes of spices, bird nests, shark fins, camphor, rattan and pearls. More Chinese traders eventually settled in Kinabatangan, as stated in both Brunei and Sulu records. A younger sister of Ong Sum Ping (Huang Senping), the governor of the Chinese settlement then married Sultan Ahmad of Brunei. Perhaps due to this relationship, a burial place with 2,000 wooden coffins, some estimated to be 1,000 years old, were discovered in Agop Batu Tulug Caves and around the Kinabatangan Valley area. It is believed that this type of funeral culture was brought by traders from Mainland China and Indochina to northern Borneo as similar wooden coffins were also discovered in these countries. This was in addition to the discovery of Chinese ceramics from a shipwreck in Tanjung Simpang Mengayau estimated to be from between 960 and 1127 AD from the Song dynasty and the Vietnamese \u0110\u00f4ng S\u01a1n drum in Bukit Timbang Dayang on Banggi Island that was between 2,000 and 2,500 years old.\nDuring the reign of Sultan Bolkiah of Brunei between 1485 and 1524, the sultanate extended over northern Borneo and the Sulu Archipelago, as far as \"Kota Seludong\" (present-day Manila) with its influence extending as far of Banjarmasin, taking advantage of maritime trade after the fall of Malacca to the Portuguese. Many Brunei Malays migrated to Sabah during this period, beginning after the Bruneian conquest of the territory in the 15th century. But plagued by internal strife, civil war, piracy and the arrival of western powers, the Bruneian Empire began to shrink. The first Europeans to visit Brunei were the Portuguese, who described the capital of Brunei at the time as surrounded by a stone wall. The Spanish followed, arriving soon after Ferdinand Magellan's death in 1521, when the remaining members of his expedition sailed to the islands of Balambangan and Banggi in the northern tip Borneo; later, in the Castilian War of 1578, the Spanish who had sailed from New Spain and had taken Manila from Brunei, unsuccessfully declared war on Brunei by briefly occupying the capital before abandoning it. The Sulu region gained its independence in 1578, forming the Sultanate of Sulu.\nWhen the civil war broke out in Brunei between sultans Abdul Hakkul Mubin and Muhyiddin, the Sultan of Sulu asserted their claim to Brunei's territories in northern Borneo. The Sulus claimed that Sultan Muhyiddin had promised to cede the northern and eastern portion of Borneo to them in compensation for their help in settling the civil war. The territory seems have not been ceded formally, but the Sulus continued to claim the territory, with Brunei weakened and unable to resist. After the war with the Spanish, the area in northern Borneo began to fall under the influence of the Sulu Sultanate. The seafaring Bajau-Suluk and Illanun people then arrived from the Sulu Archipelago and started settling on the coasts of north and eastern Borneo, many of them fleeing from the oppression of Spanish colonialism. While the thalassocratic Brunei and Sulu sultanates controlled the western and eastern coasts of Sabah respectively, the interior region remained largely independent from either kingdoms. The Sultanate of Bulungan's influence was limited to the Tawau area, which came under the influence of the Sulu Sultanate before gaining its own rule after the 1878 treaty between the British and Spanish governments.\nBritish North Borneo.\nIn 1761, Alexander Dalrymple, an officer of the British East India Company, concluded an agreement with the Sultan of Sulu to allow him to set up a trading post in northern Borneo, although this was to prove a failure. Following the British occupation of Manila in 1763, the British freed Sultan Alimuddin of Sulu from the Spanish and allowed him to return to his throne; this was welcomed by the Sulu people and by 1765, Dalrymple managed to obtain Balambangan Island off the north coast of Borneo, having concluded a Treaty of Alliance and Commerce with the Sultan Alimuddin as a sign of gratitude for the British aid. A small British factory was then established in 1773 on the island. The British saw the island as a suitable location to control the trade route in the East, capable of diverting trade from the Spanish port of Manila and the Dutch port of Batavia especially with its strategic location between the South China Sea and Sulu Sea. But the British abandoned the island two years later when Sulu pirates began attacking. This forced the British to seek refuge in Brunei in 1774, and to temporarily abandon their attempts to find alternative sites for the factory. Although an attempt was made in 1803 to turn Balambangan into a military station, the British did not re-establish any further trading posts in the region until Stamford Raffles founded Singapore in 1819.\nIn 1846, the Sultan of Brunei ceded the island of Labuan on the west coast of Sabah to Britain through the Treaty of Labuan, and in 1848 it became a British Crown Colony. Seeing the presence of British in Labuan, the American consul in Brunei, Claude Lee Moses, obtained a ten-year lease in 1865 for a piece of land in northern Borneo. Moses then passed the land to the American Trading Company of Borneo, owned by Joseph William Torrey, Thomas Bradley Harris and Chinese investors. The company choose Kimanis (which they renamed \"Ellena\") as a site for a settlement. Requests for financial backing from the US government proved futile and the settlement was later abandoned. Before he left, Torrey managed to sell all his rights to the Austrian Consul in Hong Kong, Gustav von Overbeck. Overbeck then went to Brunei, where he met the Temenggong to renew the concession. Brunei agreed to cede all territory in northern Borneo under its control, with the Sultan receiving an annual payment of 12,000 Spanish dollars, while the Temenggong received a sum of 3,000.\nIn 1872, the Sultanate of Sulu granted use of an area of land in the Sandakan Bay to William Frederick Schuck, a former agent of the German consular service who had lived on the Sulu island of Jolo since 1864. The arrival of German warship at the Sulu Sea in 1872 to investigate the Sulu-Spanish conflict made the sultanate believe Schuck was connected with the German government. The sultanate authorised Schuck to establish a trading port to monopolise the rattan trade in the northeast coast, where Schuck could operate freely, without the Spanish blockade. He continued this operation until this land also was ceded to Overbeck, with the Sultan receiving an annual payment of $5,000, by a treaty signed in 1878.\nAfter a series of transfers, Overbeck tried to sell the territory to Germany, Austria-Hungary and Italy but they rejected his offer. Overbeck then co-operated with the British Dent brothers (Alfred Dent and Edward Dent) for financial backing to develop the land, with the Dent company persuading him that any investors would need guarantees of British military and diplomatic support. Overbeck agreed to this co-operation, especially with regard to the counterclaims of the Sultan of Sulu, part of whose territory in the Sulu Archipelago had been occupied by Spain. Overbeck, however, withdrew in 1879 and his treaty rights were transferred to Alfred Dent, who in 1881 formed the North Borneo Provisional Association Ltd to administer the territory. In the following year, Kudat was made its capital but due to frequent pirate attacks, the capital was moved to Sandakan in 1884. To prevent further disputes over intervention, the governments of the United Kingdom, Spain and Germany signed the Madrid Protocol of 1885, recognising the sovereignty of the King of Spain over the Sulu Archipelago in return for the relinquishment of all Spanish claims over northern Borneo. The arrival of the company brought prosperity to the residents of northern Borneo, with the company allowing indigenous communities to continue their traditional lifestyles, but imposing laws against headhunting, ethnic feuds, slave trade, and piracy. North Borneo then became a protectorate of the United Kingdom in 1888 despite facing local resistance from 1894 to 1900 by Mat Salleh and Antanum in 1915.\nSecond World War.\nThe Japanese forces landed in Labuan on 3 January 1942, during the Second World War, and later invaded the rest of northern Borneo. From 1942 to 1945, Japanese forces occupied North Borneo, along with most of the rest of the island, as part of the Empire of Japan. The British saw Japanese advances in the area as motivated by political and territorial ambitions rather than economic factors. The residing British and the locals were compelled to obey and gave in to the brutality of the Japanese. The occupation drove many people from coastal towns to the interior, fleeing the Japanese and seeking food. The Malays generally appeared to be favoured by the Japanese, although some of them faced repression, while other groups such as the Chinese and indigenous peoples were severely repressed. The Chinese were already resisting the Japanese occupation, especially with the Sino-Japanese War in mainland China. Local Chinese formed a resistance, known as the Kinabalu Guerillas, led by Albert Kwok, with broad support from various ethnic groups in northern Borneo such as Dusun, Murut, Suluk and Illanun peoples. The movement was also supported by Mustapha Harun. Kwok along with many other sympathisers were, however, executed after the Japanese foiled their movement in the Jesselton Revolt.\nAs part of the Borneo campaign to retake the territory, Allied forces bombed most of the major towns under Japanese control, including Sandakan, which was razed to the ground. The Japanese ran a brutal prisoner of war camp known as Sandakan camp. The majority of the POWs were British and Australian soldiers captured after the fall of Malaya and Singapore. The prisoners suffered inhuman conditions, and amidst continuous Allied bombardments, the Japanese forced them to march to Ranau, about away, in an event known as the Sandakan Death March. The number of prisoners were reduced to 2,345, with many of them killed en route either by friendly fire or by the Japanese. Only six of the several hundred Australian prisoners lived to see the war's end. In addition, of the total of 17,488 Javanese labourers brought in by the Japanese during the occupation, only 1,500 survived mainly due to starvation, harsh working conditions and maltreatment. In March 1945, Australian forces launched Operation Agas to gather intelligence in the region and launch guerrilla warfare against the Japanese. The Australian Imperial Forces initiated the Battle of North Borneo on 10 June 1945. Japan's remaining forces surrendered on 2 September 1945, following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.\nBritish crown colony.\nAfter the Japanese surrender, North Borneo was administered by the British Military Administration and on 15 July 1946 became a British Crown colony. The Crown Colony of Labuan was integrated into this new colony. During the ceremony, both the Union Jack and Flag of the Republic of China were raised from the bullet-ridden Jesselton Survey Hall building. The Chinese were represented by Philip Lee who had been part of the resistance movement against the Japanese and who eventually supported the transfer of power to the Crown colony. He said: \"Let their blood be the pledge of what we wish to be\u2014His Majesty's most devoted subjects.\"\nDue to massive destruction in Sandakan during the war, Jesselton was chosen to replace the capital while the Crown continued to rule North Borneo until 1963. The Crown colony government established many departments to oversee the welfare of its residents and to revive the economy of North Borneo after the war. Upon Philippine independence in 1946, seven of the British-controlled Turtle Islands (including Cagayan de Tawi-Tawi and Mangsee Islands) off the north coast of Borneo were ceded to the Philippines as had been negotiated by the American and British colonial governments.\nMalaysia.\nOn 31 August 1963, North Borneo attained self-governance. The Cobbold Commission had been set up in 1962, to determine whether the people of Sabah and Sarawak favoured the proposed union of a new federation called Malaysia, and found that the union was generally favoured by the people. Most ethnic community leaders of Sabah, namely, Mustapha Harun representing the native Muslims, Donald Stephens representing the non-Muslim natives, and Khoo Siak Chew representing the Chinese, would eventually support the union. After a discussion culminating in the Malaysia Agreement and 20-point agreement, on 16 September 1963 North Borneo (as Sabah) was united with Malaya, Sarawak and Singapore, to form the independent Malaysia.\nFrom before the formation of Malaysia until 1966, Indonesia adopted a hostile policy towards British-backed Malaya, leading to the Indonesia\u2013Malaysia confrontation after Malaysia was established. The war stemmed from what Indonesian president Sukarno perceived as an expansion of British influence in the region and his intention to wrest control over all of Borneo under the Greater Indonesian concept. Meanwhile, the Philippines, beginning with president Diosdado Macapagal on 22 June 1962, claimed Sabah through the heirs of the Sultanate of Sulu. Macapagal, considering Sabah to be property of the Sultanate of Sulu, saw the attempt to integrate Sabah, Sarawak and Brunei into the Federation of Malaysia as \"trying to impose authority of Malaya into these states\".\nFollowing the successful formation of Malaysia, Donald Stephens became the first chief minister of Sabah. The first Yang di-Pertua Negara (later restyled Yang di-Pertua Negeri in 1976) was Mustapha Harun. The leaders of Sabah demanded that their freedom of religion be respected, that all lands in the territory be under the power of state government, and that native customs and traditions be respected and upheld by the federal government; declaring that in return Sabahans would pledge their loyalty to the Malaysian federal government. An oath stone was officiated by Donald Stephens on 31 August 1964 in Keningau as a remembrance to the agreement and promise for reference in the future. Sabah held its first state election in 1967. In the same year, the name of the state capital was changed from \"Jesselton\" to \"Kota Kinabalu\".\nAn airplane crash on 6 June 1976 killed Stephens along with four other state cabinet ministers. On 14 June 1976, the state government of Sabah led by the new chief minister Harris Salleh signed an agreement with Petronas, the federal government-owned oil and gas company, granting it the right to extract and earn revenue from petroleum found in the territorial waters of Sabah in exchange for 5% in annual revenue as royalties based on the 1974 Petroleum Development Act. The state government of Sabah ceded Labuan to the Malaysian federal government, and Labuan became a federal territory on 16 April 1984. In 2000, the state capital Kota Kinabalu was granted city status, making it the 6th city in Malaysia and the first city in the state. Prior to a territorial dispute between Indonesia and Malaysia since 1969 over two islands of Ligitan and Sipadan in the Celebes Sea, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) made a final decision to award both islands to Malaysia in 2002 based on their \"effective occupation\".\nIn February 2013, Sabah's Lahad Datu District was penetrated by followers of Jamalul Kiram III, the self-proclaimed Sultan of Sulu. In response, Malaysian military forces were deployed to the region, which resulted in 72 deaths (56 Sultanate militants, nine Malaysian security personnel, and six civilians). Following the elimination of insurgents, an Eastern Sabah Security Command was established.\nPolitics.\nGovernment.\nSabah (together with its neighbour Sarawak) has a greater level of autonomy in administration, immigration, and judiciary which differentiates it from the Malaysian Peninsula states. The Yang di-Pertua Negeri is the head of state although its functions are largely ceremonial. Next in the hierarchy are the state legislative assembly and the state cabinet. The chief minister is the head of government as well the leader of the state cabinet. The legislature is based on the Westminster system and therefore the chief minister is appointed based on his or her ability to command the majority of the state assembly. While local authorities being fully appointed by the state government owing to the suspension of local elections by the federal government. Legislation regarding state elections is within the powers of the federal government and not the state. The assembly meets at the state capital, Kota Kinabalu. Members of the state assembly are elected from 73 constituencies which are delineated by the Election Commission of Malaysia and do not necessarily have the same voter population sizes. A general election for representatives in the state assembly must be held every five years, when the seats are subject of universal suffrage for all citizens above 21 years of age. Sabah is also represented in the federal parliament by 25 members elected from the same number of constituencies.\nPrior to the formation of Malaysia in 1963, the then North Borneo interim government submitted a 20-point agreement to the Malayan government as conditions before North Borneo would join the federation. Subsequently, North Borneo legislative assembly agreed on the formation of Malaysia on the conditions that North Borneo's rights would be safeguarded. North Borneo then entered Malaysia as an autonomous state with autonomous laws in immigration control and Native Customary Rights (NCR), and the territory name was changed to \"Sabah\". However, under the administration of the United Sabah National Organisation (USNO) led by Mustapha Harun, this autonomy has been gradually eroded with federal government influence and hegemony with a popular belief among Sabahans that both USNO and UMNO have been working together in permitting illegal immigrants from the southern Philippines and Indonesia to stay in the state and become citizens to vote for Muslim parties. This was continued under the Sabah People's United Front (BERJAYA) administration led by Harris Salleh with a total of 73,000 Filipino refugees from the southern Philippines were registered. In addition, the cession of Labuan island to federal government by the Sabah state government under BERJAYA rule and unequal sharing and exploitation of Sabah's resources of petroleum have become grievances often raised by Sabahans, which has resulted in strong anti-federal sentiments and even occasional call for secession from the federation among the people of Sabah. Those who spread secession agenda often landed in law enforcement hand due to the controversial ISA act, such as 1991 Sabah political arrests.\nUntil the 2008 Malaysian general election, Sabah along with the states of Kelantan and Terengganu, were the only three states in Malaysia that had ever been ruled by opposition parties not part of the ruling BN coalition. Under Joseph Pairin Kitingan, PBS formed the state government after winning the 1985 state election and ruled Sabah until 1994. In the 1994 state election, despite PBS winning the elections, subsequent cross-overs of PBS assembly members to the BN component party resulted in BN having the majority of seats and hence took over the helm of the state government. A unique feature of Sabah politics was a policy initiated by Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad in 1994 whereby the chief minister's post is rotated among the coalition parties every two years regardless of the party in power at the time, thus theoretically giving an equal amount of time for each major ethnic group to rule the state. However, in practice, this system was problematic as it is too short for any leader to carry out long-term plans. This practice was then since stopped. Political intervention by the federal authorities, for example, an introduction and later abolition of the chief minister's post and earlier PBS-BERJAYA conflict in 1985, along with co-opting rival factions in East Malaysia, are examples of political tactics used by the then UMNO-led federal government to control and manage the autonomous power of the Borneo states. The federal government however tend to view that these actions are justifiable as the display of parochialism among East Malaysians is not in harmony with nation building. This complicated Federal-State relationship has become a source of major contention in Sabah politics.\nIn the 2018 general election, Shafie Apdal's Sabah Heritage Party (WARISAN) secured an electoral pact with the Democratic Action Party (DAP) and People's Justice Party (PKR) of the Pakatan Harapan (PH) coalition. On 9 May 2018, this coalition and the Barisan Nasional ended in a tie. However, as six BN elected representatives crossed over to WARISAN, and after a short-lived constitutional crisis, a coalition of WARISAN, DAP and PKR formed a majority government on 12 May 2018 and became effective since that day. In conjunction with the celebration of Malaysia Day in 2018 under the new government, Prime Minister Mahathir has promised to restore Sabah (together with Sarawak) status as an equal partner to Malaya who together forming the Malaysian federation in accordance to the Malaysia Agreement. However, through the process of the proposed amendment to the Constitution of Malaysia in 2019, the first bill for the amendment failed to pass following the failure to reach two-thirds majority support (148 votes) in the Parliament with only 138 agreed with the move while 59 abstained from the voting. Subsequently, a second bill for the amendment was tabled in 2021 and was passed unanimously by the Malaysian Parliament.\nAdministrative division.\nSabah consists of five administrative divisions, which are in turn divided into 30 districts. For each district, the state government appoints a village headman (known as \"ketua kampung\") for each village. The administrative divisions were inherited from the provinces of the British administration. During the British rule, a Resident was appointed to govern each division and provided with a palace (\"Istana\"). The post of the Resident was abolished and replaced with district officers for each of the district when North Borneo became part of Malaysia. As in the rest of Malaysia, local government comes under the purview of state government. However, ever since the suspension of local government elections in the midst of the Malayan Emergency, which was much less intense in Sabah than it was in the rest of the country, there have been no local elections. Local authorities have their officials appointed by the executive council of the state government.\nBRUNEI \nINDONESIA \nPHILIPPINES \n\ua730.\u1d1b.\u029f\u1d00\u0299\u1d1c\u1d00\u0274 \ns\u1d00\u0280\u1d00\u1d21\u1d00\u1d0b \nBalabac Strait \nCelebesSea \nSouthChinaSea \nSuluSea \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Kudat Division\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0West Coast Division\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Interior Division\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Sandakan Division\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Tawau Division\nSecurity.\nThe Ninth Schedule of the Constitution of Malaysia states that the Malaysian federal government is solely responsible for foreign policy and military forces in the country. Before the formation of Malaysia, North Borneo security was the responsibility of Great Britain, Australia and New Zealand. In the wake of threats of \"annexation\" from the Philippines after President Ferdinand Marcos signed a bill by including Sabah as part the Republic of the Philippines on its maritime baselines in the Act of Congress on 18 September 1968, the British responds in the next day by sending their Hawker Hunter fighter-bomber jets to Kota Kinabalu with the jets stopped over at the Clark Air Base not far from the Philippines capital of Manila. British Army senior officer Michael Carver then reminded the Philippines that Britain would honour its obligations under the Anglo-Malayan Defence Agreement (AMDA) if fighting broke out. In addition, a large flotilla of British warships would sail to Philippines waters near Sabah en route from Singapore along with the participation of ANZUS forces. The AMDA treaty have since been replaced by the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) although the present treaty does not include East Malaysian states as its main priority, British security protection intervention can still be included over the two states. Citing in 1971 when British Prime Minister Edward Heath been asked in Parliament of London on what threats the British intended to counter under the FPDA, the Prime Minister replied: to \"forces outside [Malaysia] in southern Thailand and north of the Malaysian border\".\nThe area in eastern Sabah facing the southern Philippines and northern Indonesia have since been put under the Eastern Sabah Security Command (ESSCOM) and Eastern Sabah Security Zone (ESSZONE) following the infiltration of militants, illegal immigrants and smuggling of goods and subsidies items into and from the southern Philippines and Indonesia.\nTerritorial disputes.\nSabah has had several territorial disputes with neighbouring Indonesia and the Philippines. In 2002, both Malaysia and Indonesia submitted to arbitration by the ICJ on a territorial dispute over the Ligitan and Sipadan islands which were later won by Malaysia. There are also several other disputes yet to be settled with Indonesia over the overlapping claims on the Ambalat continental shelf in the Celebes Sea and land border dispute between Sabah and North Kalimantan. Malaysia's claim over a portion of the Spratly Islands is also based on sharing a continental shelf with Sabah.\nThe Philippines claims much of eastern Sabah. It claims that the territory is connected with the Sultanate of Sulu and was only leased to the North Borneo Chartered Company in 1878 with the Sultanate's sovereignty never being relinquished. Malaysia however, considers this dispute as a \"non-issue\", as it interprets the 1878 agreement as that of cession and that it deems that the residents of Sabah had exercised their right to self-determination when they joined to form the Malaysian federation in 1963. A group of 200 armed Filipinos identifying themselves as the Royal Security Forces of the Sultanate of Sulu and North Borneo landed in the district of Lahad Datu and took control of the Tanduo village in 2013, with the objective of reinforcing the Philippine claim over the eastern region of Sabah. This Lahad Datu incident resulted in the deaths of 56 members of the Sulu group, nine Malaysian security force members including six civilians.\nBefore this incident, Malaysia continued to pay an annual cession payment amounting to roughly $1,000 to the indirect heirs of the Sultan honouring an 1878 agreement, where North Borneo \u2013 today's Sabah \u2013 was conceded by the Sultan of Sulu to a British company. However, the Malaysian government halted the payments after this incident. As a result, the self-proclaimed Sulu heirs pursued this case for legal arbitration vis-a-vis the original commercial deal. Since then, the Sulu claimants have been accused of \"forum shopping\". In 2017, the heirs showed their intention to start arbitration in Spain and asked for $32.2 billion in compensation. In 2019, Malaysia responded for the first time. The attorney general at the time offered to start making yearly payments again and to pay 48,000 Malaysian ringgit (about $10,400) for past dues and interest, but only if the heirs gave up their claim. The heirs did not accept this offer and the case, led by Spanish arbiter Gonzalo Stampa, continued without Malaysia being involved. In February 2022, Gonzalo Stampa awarded US$14.9 billion to the Sultan of Sulu's heirs, who then attempted to enforce the award against Malaysian state-owned assets around the world. It is noteworthy that on 27 June 2023, the Hague Court of Appeal dismissed the Sulus' bid and ruled in favour of the Malaysian government, which hailed the decision as a \"landmark victory\". In 2024 Stampa was convicted of contempt of court for \"knowingly disobeying rulings and orders from the Madrid High Court of Justice\", and sentenced to six months in prison. On 3 October 2024, Malaysia's Federal Court upheld the death sentences of seven Filipino men involved in the 2013 Lahad Datu invasion, which had resulted in the deaths of nine Malaysian security personnel. The ruling was seen as a step toward ensuring justice and strengthening national security in Malaysia.\nOn 7 November 2024, the French Court of Cassation\u2014the highest court in the French judicial system\u2014annulled a $15 billion arbitration ruling against Malaysia. This decision marked a significant legal victory for Malaysia and reinforced its sovereignty in a dispute with the self-proclaimed Sulu heirs. The ruling highlighted irregularities in the arbitration process led by Gonzalo Stampa and raised concerns about practices such as forum shopping and unregulated litigation funding in European courts. The French court's decision was deemed a significant \"win\" for Malaysia that effectively marked the end of the Sulu case by several publications, including Law.com and Law360. Keith Ellison, former vice-chairman of the Democratic National Committee and Minnesota attorney general, pointed out that the case highlighted the enormous scope for \"corruption\", irresponsible profiteering, and foreign influence operations to subvert arbitration proceedings\".\nThe French court had declared the arbitration clause in the case invalid. It mainatined that the agreement appointed the British Consul General in Brunei as arbitrator, and since the position no longer existed, the arbitration could not take place. The verdict underscored the need for international arbitration agreements to be interpreted in accordance with the principles of good faith and utility, \"without reference to the law of any State\".\nProfessor Caroline Kleiner of the University of Paris Cit\u00e9 called the ruling a major shift in arbitration law and hearing. In her review published in Kluwer Law International, she said the decision would help French courts participate in the development of international law on the enforcement of foreign arbitral awards per a universalist approach, rather than the trend of exceptionalism that is currently being pursued.\nFollowing Malaysia's legal victory in the French Court, Paul Cohen argued that the ruling allows the Sulu heirs to lease Sabah to other nations, such as China and the Philippines. He also filed a fresh $18 billion claim against Spain, alleging that his clients had been denied justice. Cohen also suggested that accepting the French court's decision implies recognition of the Sulu Sultanate descendants' sovereignty over Sabah, which Malaysia disputes. In response, Malaysia's Minister of Law and Institutional Reform in the Prime Minister Department, Azalina Othman dismissed Cohen's statements as baseless and reaffirmed Sabah's status as part of Malaysia, citing historical and legal foundations such as the Cobbold Commission and the 1963 referendum. The Philippine claim can be originated based on three historical events; such as the Brunei Civil War from 1660 until 1673, treaty between Dutch East Indies and the Bulungan Sultanate in 1850 and treaty between Sultan Jamal ul-Azam with Overbeck in 1878.\nFurther attempts by several Filipino politicians such as Ferdinand Marcos to \"destabilise\" Sabah proved to be futile and led to the Jabidah massacre in Corregidor Island, Philippines. As a consequence, this led the Malaysian government to once supporting the insurgency in southern Philippines. Although the Philippine claim to Sabah has not been actively pursued for some years, some Filipino politicians have promised to bring it up again, while the Malaysian government have asked the Philippines not to threaten ties over such issue. To further discourage pursuit of the claim the Malaysian government passed a barter trade ban, at the behest of the Royal Malaysia Police and the Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister, between Malaysia and the Philippines as it was seen to only benefit one side while threatening the security of the state. The ban was positively received by many Sabahans, although there was opposition from other political parties as well as from the residents of neighbouring Philippine islands due to a sharp rise in living costs after the ban took effect. Barter trade activity was resumed on 1 February 2017 upon the agreement by both Malaysian and the Philippine authorities to fortify their respective borders with increased surveillance and security enforcement. Despite the return of barter trade activity, the state of Sabah maintained that they will remain vigilant in trading with the Philippines. In 2016, Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte and Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak have agreed to set aside the two countries' dispute over Sabah for the meantime.\nGeography.\nThe total land area of Sabah is nearly surrounded by the South China Sea in the west, Sulu Sea in the northeast and Celebes Sea in the southeast. Sabah has a total of coastline, of which have been eroding. Because of Sabah coastline facing three seas, the state receive an extensive marine resources. In 1961, Sabah including neighbouring Sarawak, which had been included in the International Maritime Organization (IMO) through the participation of the United Kingdom, became joint associate members of the IMO. Its exclusive economic zone (EEZ) is much larger towards the South China Sea and Celebes Sea than to the Sulu Sea. The state coastline is covered with mangrove and nipah forests. The mangroves cover about 331,325 hectares of the state land and constitute 57% of the total mangroves in the country. Both coastal areas in the west coast and east coast are entirely dominating by sand beaches, while in sheltered areas the sand was mixed with mud. The northern area of Tanjung Simpang Mengayau has a type of pocket beach. The areas in the west coast has a large freshwater wetlands, with the Klias Peninsula hosts a large area of tidal wetlands and a wetland centre known as the Kota Kinabalu Wetland Centre was designated as a Ramsar site in 2016. The western part of Sabah is generally mountainous, containing three highest peak. The main mountain ranges is the Crocker Range with several mountains varying height from about 1,000 metres to 4,000 metres. Adjacent to the Crocker Range is the Trus Madi Range with Mount Trus Madi, with a height of 2,642 metres. The highest peak is the Mount Kinabalu, with a height around 4,095 metres. It is one of the highest peak between the Himalayas and New Guinea. While located not far from Mount Kinabalu is Mount Tambuyukon, with a height of 2,579 metres.\nThese mountains and hills are traversed by an extensive network of river valleys and are in most cases covered with dense rainforest. There are lower ranges of hills extending towards the western coasts, southern plains, and the interior or central part of Sabah. The central and eastern portions of Sabah are generally lower mountain ranges and plains with occasional hills. In the east coast located the Kinabatangan River, which is the second-longest river in Malaysia after Rajang River in Sarawak with a length of 560 kilometres. The river begins from the western ranges and snakes its way through the central region towards the east coast out into the Sulu Sea. Other major rivers including the Kalabakan River, Kolopis River, Liwagu River, Padas River, Paitan River, Segama River and Sugut River, in addition to Babagon River, Bengkoka River, Kadamaian River, Kalumpang River, Kiulu River, Mawao River, Membakut River, Mesapol River, Nabawan River, Papar River, Pensiangan River, Tamparuli River and Wario River.\nThe land of Sabah is located in a tropical geography with equatorial climate. It experiences two monsoon seasons of northeast and southwest. The northeast monsoon occurs from November to March with heavy rains, while the southwest monsoon prevails from May to September with less rainfall. It also received two inter-monsoon season from April to May and September to October. The average daily temperature varies from to , with a considerable amount of rain from 1,800 millimetres to 4,000 millimetres. The coastal areas occasionally experience severe storms as the state is situated south of the typhoon belt. Due to its location is very close to the typhoon belt, Sabah experience the worst Tropical Storm Greg on 25 December 1996. The storm left more than 100 people dead, with another 200\u2013300 missing, 3,000\u20134,000 people left homeless. As Sabah also lies within the Sunda Plate with a compression from the Australian and Philippine Plate, it is prone to earthquake with the state itself have experienced three major earthquakes since 1923, with the 2015 earthquake being the latest major earthquake. The Crocker Ranges together with Mount Kinabalu was formed since during the middle Miocene period after being uplifted by the Sabah Orogeny through compression. There was some snow here in 1975 and 1993.\nBiodiversity.\nThe Semporna Peninsula on the north-eastern coast of Sabah is identified as a hotspot of high marine biodiversity importance in the Coral Triangle.\nThe jungles of Sabah host a diverse array of plant and animal species. Most of Sabah's biodiversity is located in the forest reserve areas, which formed half of its total landmass of 7.34\u00a0million hectares. Its forest reserve are part of the 20 million hectares equatorial rainforests demarcated under the \"Heart of Borneo\" initiative. The forests surrounding the river valley of Kinabatangan River is the largest forest-covered floodplain in Malaysia. The Crocker Range National Park is the largest national park in the state, covering an area of 139,919 hectares. Most of the park area are covered in dense forest and important as a water catchment area with its headwater connecting to five major rivers in the west coast area. Kinabalu National Park was inscribed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2000 for its richness in plant diversity combined with its unique geological, topographical, and climatic conditions. The park hosts more than 4,500 species of flora and fauna, including 326 bird and around 100 mammal species along with over 110 land snail species.\nTiga Island is formed through the eruption of mud volcano in 1897. The island is now part of the Tiga Island National Park together with Kalampunian Besar and Kalampunian Damit islands as a tourist attractions, with a mud bath tourism. The Tunku Abdul Rahman National Park is a group of five islands of Gaya, Manukan, Mamutik, Sapi and Sulug. These islands are believed to once connected to the Crocker Range but separated when sea levels rose since the last ice age. The Tun Mustapha Marine Park is the largest marine park located in the north of Sabah. It covers the three major islands of Banggi, Balambangan and Malawali. Another marine park is the Tun Sakaran Marine Park located in the south-east of Sabah. The park comprising the islands of Bodgaya, Boheydulang, Sabangkat and Salakan along with sand cays of Maiga, Mantabuan and Sibuan. Bodgaya is gazetted as a forest reserve, while Boheydulang as a bird sanctuary. These islands are formed by Quaternary pyroclastic material that was ejected during explosive volcanic activities.\nThe Tawau Hills National Park established as a natural water catchment area. The park contains rugged volcanic landscapes including a hot spring and spectacular waterfalls. Bordering the Philippine Turtle Islands is the Turtle Islands National Park, it consists of three islands of Selingaan, Bakkungan Kechil and Gulisaan which is notable as the nesting place for green turtle and hawksbill sea turtle. Other important wildlife regions in Sabah include the Maliau Basin, Danum Valley, Tabin, Imbak Canyon and Sepilok. These places are either designated as national parks, wildlife reserves, virgin jungle reserves, or protection forest reserve. Beyond the coasts of Sabah lie a number of islands rich with coral reefs such as Ligitan, Sipadan, Selingaan, Tiga and Layang-Layang (Swallow Reef). Other main islands including the Jambongan, Timbun Mata, Bum Bum and the divided Sebatik. The Sabah state government has enacted several laws to protect its forests and endangered wildlife species under the Animals Ordinance 1962, Forest Enactment 1968 and the Wildlife Conservation Enactment 1997 among others. Under the Wildlife Conservation Enactment, any persons hunting inside conservation lands are liable for imprisonment for five years and fined with RM50,000. The state government also plans to implement seasonal huntings as part of its conservation efforts to prevent the continuous lose of its endangered wildlife species while maintaining the state indigenous hunting traditions.\nConservation issues.\nSince the post-World War II timber boom driven by the need of raw materials from industrial countries, Sabah forests have been gradually eroded by uncontrolled timber exploitation and the conversion of Sabah forest lands into palm oil plantations. Since 1970, forestry sector have contributed for over 50% of the state revenue, of which a study conducted in 1997 revealed the state had almost depleted all of its virgin forests outside the conservation areas. The state government were determined to maintain the state biodiversity while to make sure the state economy continue to alive. While in the same time facing hard task to control such activities although there is laws to prevent it. The need for development and basic necessities also became an issue while to preserving the nature. Mining activities had directly released pollutants of heavy metals into rivers, reservoirs, ponds and affecting groundwater through the leaching of mine tailings. An environmental report released in 1994 reported the presence of heavy metal at the Damit/Tuaran River that exceeded the water quality safe levels for consumption. The water in Liwagu River also reported the presence of heavy metal which was believed to be originated from the Mamut Mine. Forest fire also have become the latest concern due to drought and fires set by irresponsible farmers or individuals such as what happened in the 2016 forest fires, where thousands of hectares of forest reserves in Binsuluk on the west coast of Sabah were lost.\nRampant fish bombing has destroyed many coral reefs and affecting fisheries production in the state. Moreover, the illegal activities of the extraction of river sand and gravel in the rivers of Padas, Papar and Tuaran had become the latest concern along with the wildlife and marine hunting and poaching. Due to severe deforestation along with massive wildlife and marine poaching, the Sumatran rhino have been declared as extinct in early 2015. Some other species that was threatened with extinction is banteng, bearded pig, clouded leopard, dugong, elephant, false gharial, green turtle, hawksbill sea turtle, orangutan, pangolin, proboscis monkey, river shark, roughnose stingray, sambar deer, shark and sun bear. Although the indigenous community are also involved in hunting, they hunt based on their spiritual believes and practice, and on a small scale, which differentiates them from poachers. Well-known indigenous practices, such as \"\"maganu totuo\" or \"montok kosukopan\", \"tuwa di powigian\", \"managal\" or \"tagal\" and \"meminting\"\", have helped to maintain resources and prevent their depletion.\nEconomy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSabah's economy is mainly based on primary sector such as agriculture, forestry and petroleum. Currently, the tertiary sector plays an important part to the state economy, especially in tourism and services. With its richness in biodiversity, the state is offering ecotourism. Although in recent years the tourism industry has been affected by attacks and kidnapping of tourists by militant groups based in the southern Philippines, it remained stable with the increase of security in eastern Sabah and the Sulu Sea. The tourism sector contribute 10% share of the state Gross domestic product (GDP) and was predicted to increase more. Majority of the tourists come from China (60.3%), followed by South Korea (33.9%), Australia (16.3%) and Taiwan (8.3%). Tourism plays a crucial role in the state's economy as the third largest income generating sectors with the state itself recorded a total of 3,879,413 tourist arrivals in 2018, a growth of 5.3% compared to 3,684,734 in 2017. Since the 1950s, rubber and copra are the main source of agricultural economy of North Borneo. The timber industry started to emerged in the 1960s due to high demand of raw materials from industrial countries. This was however replaced by petroleum in the 1970s after the discovery of oil in the area of west coast Sabah. In the same year, cocoa and palm oil was added to the list. The Sabah state government managed to increase the state fund from RM6\u00a0million to RM12\u00a0billion and poverty was down by almost half to 33.1% in 1980. The state rapid development on primary sector has attracted those job seekers in neighbouring Indonesia and the Philippines as the state labour force itself are not sufficient. The state GDP at the time ranked behind Selangor and Kuala Lumpur, being the third richest although the manufacturing sector remained small. However, by 2000, the state started to become the poorest as it still dependent on natural resources as its primary sources of income comparing to those secondary sector producer states. Thus the Sabah Development Corridor (SDC) was established in 2008 by Prime Minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi with a total investment of RM105\u00a0billion for 18 years to increase the state GDP to RM63.2\u00a0billion by 2025. Around RM5.83\u00a0billion were allocated each year for infrastructures development along with the creation of 900,000 jobs. The federal government targeted to eradicate hardcore poverty by the end Ninth Malaysia Plan (9MP) with overall poverty halved from 23% in 2004 to 12% in 2010 and 8.1% in 2012. Since its establishment in 2008, the state GDP increase to 10.7% which was higher than the national economic growth of 4.8% and the world economic growth of 2.7%. Following the world financial crisis in 2009, Sabah GDP recorded 4.8% growth compared to \u22121.5% for national level and \u22120.4% for world level.\nFrom 2010 to 2011, the state experienced a slower growth due to weaker performance on the oil and gas sector. Based on 2014 survey, Sabah GDP recorded a 5.0% growth and remained as the largest contributor in agriculture sector with 18.1%, followed by Sarawak, Johor, Pahang and Perak. Its GDP per capita however are still lowest with RM19,672, the third lowest after Kelantan (RM11,815) and Kedah (RM17,321) from all 13 states. In the same year, the state export value stood at RM45.3\u00a0billion with an import value of RM36.5\u00a0billion. Machinery and transportation equipment accounted for most of the imported products followed by fuel, mineral lubricants and others. While Sabah mostly exports raw petroleum and palm oil. The state currently has a total of eight ports with two in Sepanggar while each one in Kota Kinabalu, Sandakan, Tawau, Kudat, Kunak and Lahad Datu that was operated and maintained by the Sabah Ports Authority owned by Suria Group. As part of the Eleventh Malaysia Plan (11MP), the federal government has approved an allocation of RM800\u00a0million to expand the cargo handling of Sapangar Bay Container Port from 500,000 to 1.25\u00a0million TEUs per annum as well to accommodate larger ship like Panamax-size vessels. An additional allocation of RM333.51\u00a0million was given in the same year, making it a total of RM1.13\u00a0billion with the project will start in 2017. The fisheries industries remain the important part of Sabah primary sector economy with a contribution for about 200,000 metric tonnes of fish worth RM700 annually as well contributing 2.8% to the state annual GDP. While the aquaculture and marine fish cage sector have produce 35,000 metric tons of brackish and fresh waters aquaculture and 360 metric ton of groupers, wrasses, snappers and lobsters worth around RM60\u00a0million and RM13\u00a0million respectively. Sabah is also one of the producer of seaweed, with most of the farms are located in the seas around Semporna. Although recently the seaweed industry was heavily affected by spate of kidnappings perpetrated by the southern-Philippine-based Abu Sayyaf militant group.\nAs of 2015, Sabah was producing 180,000 barrel of oil equivalent per day and currently receives 5% oil royalty (percentage of oil production paid by the mining company to the lease owner) from Petronas over oil explorations in Sabah territorial waters based on the 1974 Petroleum Development Act. Majority of the oil and gas deposits are located on Sabah Trough basin in the west coast side. Sabah was also given a 10% stake in Petronas liquefied natural gas (LNG) in Bintulu, Sarawak. Income inequality and the high cost living remain the major economic issues in Sabah. The high cost living has been blamed on the Cabotage Policy, although the cause was due to the smaller trade volumes, cost of transport and efficiency of port to handle trade. The government has set to review the Cabotage Policy even thought the cause was due to other reasons with the World Bank has stated that the result was due to weak distribution channels, high handling charges and inefficient inland transportation. It was finally agreed to exempt the policy from 1 June 2017; with foreign ships will go directly to ports in the East without need to go to West Malaysia although Cabotage Policy on transshipment of goods within Sabah and Sarawak and the federal territory of Labuan remain. Prime Minister Najib also promised to narrow development gap between Sabah and the Peninsular by improving and built more infrastructures in the state, in which it was continued under the Pakatan Harapan (PH) administration where the new federal government also said the state should develop in par with Peninsular with the federal government will be consistent in commitment to helping develop the state as stated by Deputy Prime Minister Wan Azizah Wan Ismail. Based on a latest record, the total unemployment in the state have been reduced from 5.1% (2014) to 4.7% (2015), although the number of unemployment was still high. Slum is almost non-existent in Malaysia but due to the high number of refugees arriving from the troubling southern Philippines, Sabah has since seen a significant rise on its numbers. To eliminate water pollution and improve a better hygiene, the Sabah state government are working to relocate them into a better housing settlement. As part of the BIMP-EAGA, Sabah also continued to position itself as a main gateway for regional investments. Foreign investment are mainly concentrated in the Kota Kinabalu Industrial Park (KKIP) areas. Although country such as Japan have mainly focusing their various development and investment projects in the interior and islands since after the end of Second World War. Following America's abandonment in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPPA) economic agreements in early 2017, Sabah began to turns its trade to China and India markets. To further accelerate its economic growth, Sabah also targets several more countries as its main trade partners including Germany, South Korea, Thailand and the United Arab Emirates as the destinations of exports for food-based products, Brunei, Indonesia, Taiwan, the United States and New Zealand as the destinations for palm oil and logistics sector, Russia as the destination for the oil and gas industry and Japan and Vietnam as the destinations for the wood-based furniture industry.\nInfrastructure.\nSabah's public infrastructure are still lagged behind mostly due to its geographical challenges as the second largest state in Malaysia. The Sabah Ministry of Infrastructure Development (formerly known as Ministry of Communication and Works) is responsible for all public infrastructure planning and development in the state. To narrow the development gap, the federal government are working to build more infrastructures and improve the already available one. In 2013, Sabah state government allocates RM1.583\u00a0billion for infrastructure and public facilities development, of which the state were allocated another RM4.07\u00a0billion by the federal government in 2015 Malaysian Budget. Since the Eight Malaysia Plan (8MP) until 2014, a total of RM11.115\u00a0billion has been allocated for various infrastructure projects in the state. Under the Tenth Malaysia Plan (10MP), infrastructure in the rural areas was given attention with the increase of rural water, electricity supply and road coverage. Further large infrastructure allocation were delivered to both Sabah and Sarawak under the 2020 Malaysian Budget which include budget on improving connectivity and developing digital infrastructures for high speed internet in the rural areas.\nEnergy and water resources.\nElectricity distribution in the state as well in the Federal Territory of Labuan are operated and managed by the Sabah Electricity Sdn. Bhd. (SESB). Sabah electrics are mostly generated from diesel power plant, hydropower and combined cycle power plants. The only main hydroelectric plant is the Tenom Pangi Dam. The combined cycle power plant called Kimanis Power Plant was completed in 2014, supplying 300\u00a0MW, with 285 MW nominal capacity. The plant is a joint venture between Petronas and NRG Consortium that also includes facilities such as gas pipeline of Sabah\u2013Sarawak Gas Pipeline and a terminal of Sabah Oil and Gas Terminal. There is another two combined cycle power plants with a capacity of 380 MW operated by Ranhill Holdings Berhad. In 2009, the electricity coverage covers 67% of the state population and by 2011 increase to 80%. The coverage reach 100% in 2012 after an allocation of RM962.5\u00a0million from the federal government were given to expand the coverage under the 2012 National Budget. The electrical grid is divided into two of West Coast and East Coast which has been integrated since 2007. The West Coast Grid supplies electricity to Kota Kinabalu, Papar, Beaufort, Keningau, Kota Belud, Kota Marudu, Kudat and Labuan with a capacity of 488.4 MW and maximum demand of 396.5\u00a0MW. While the East Coast Grid supplies electricity to the major towns of Sandakan, Kinabatangan, Lahad Datu, Kunak, Semporna and Tawau with a capacity of 333.02\u00a0MW and maximum demand of 203.3\u00a0MW.\nIn 2018, the federal government upgraded the electrical grid of Sabah to reduce power interruption. Neighbouring Sarawak also provide additional electricity power to Sabah in 2025. Electricity interconnection between Sabah, the Indonesian province of North Kalimantan and the Philippine province of Palawan as well for the whole Mindanao islands are also in the process as part of the BIMP-EAGA and Borneo-Mindanao power interconnection under the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Power Grid; with the interconnection with Palawan is expected to be commenced in the nearest future. Since 2007, there is an attempt to establish a coal power plant in Lahad Datu which receiving opposition from local residents and non-governmental organisations for the pollution that would be caused by the plant. Thus Sabah has start to exploring alternative ways to generate electricity with the usage of renewable energy such as solar, mini hydro, biomass, geothermal and micro-algae and tidal technologies. The Japanese government has extended aid totalling RM172,190.93 for the solar electrification project in the island of Larapan in Sabah's east coast in 2010. In 2016, a research by United States GeothermEx Inc. and Jacobs New Zealand indicated the existence of an active geothermal system centred around the flanks of Mount Maria on Apas Kiri where it is suitable for Malaysia's first geothermal plant. The construction for the first geothermal plant that expected to be completed in 2017 however was abandoned by the previous government in the mid-2016 with no sign of further progress. A South Korean company GS Caltex also sets to build Malaysia's first bio-butanol plant in the state.\nPiped water supply in the state is managed by the Sabah State Water Department, an agency under the control of Sabah Ministry of Infrastructure Development. Operating with 73 water treatments plants, an average of 1.19\u00a0billion litres of water are distributed daily to meet Sabahan residents demands. The coverage of water supply in major towns has reach 100% while in rural areas, the coverage still around 75% with total public pipes length up to 15,031 kilometres. Some communities use gravity water systems. The only water supply dam in the state is the Babagon Dam which holds 21,000 million litres of water. To meet the increase demands, another dam named as Kaiduan Dam was being proposed to be built although being met with protest from local villagers who living on the proposed site. Sabah has a natural gas demand of per day at standard conditions in 2013, which increase to per day in 2015. As Malaysia's liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) are much cheaper through the subsidy that was given by the federal government, it was found out in 2015 that around 20,000 LPG cylinders in Sabah east coast were smuggled by immigrants from neighbouring Indonesia and the southern Philippines in a monthly basis to their countries that leading to many Sabahans hard to retrieve enough supplies of LPG. As a counter-measure, the Malaysian Ministry of Domestic Trade, Co-operatives and Consumerism (MDTCAC) has temporarily cancelled all permits to sell gas cylinders into neighbouring countries with a new policy will be implemented to control such illegal activities.\nTelecommunication and broadcasting.\nTelecommunication in Sabah and Sarawak were originally administered by Posts and Telecommunication Department until 1967, and maintained by the British Cable &amp; Wireless Communications before all telecommunications management in the state been takeover by Peninsular-based company. The British telecommunication company have establish a submarine cable that linking Kota Kinabalu with Singapore and Hong Kong. Following the expansion of the Peninsular-based company on 1 January 1968, Sabah Posts and Telecommunication Department was merged with the Peninsular telecommunication department to form Telecommunications Department Malaysia. All operations under Telecommunications Department Malaysia was then transferred to Syarikat Telekom Malaysia Berhad (STM) which become a public listed company in 1991 with the federal government retained a majority shareholding. There are also other telecommunication companies operating in the state although only providing cellular phone facilities. In 2006, the state has the lowest Direct Exchange Line (DEL) penetration rate, with cellular and internet dial-up penetrations rate only 6.5 per 100 inhabitants. Most residents from the low income groups would rather use mobile phones internet or use internet at their offices instead of setting up internet access at home due to the expensive cost and slow services. Until the end of 2014, there were only 934 telecommunication hotspots in Sabah. Due to this, the government are working to increase the penetration and capability of internet connection as well to bridge the gap between Sabah and the Peninsular. From 2016, Unifi fibre optic coverage began to expand to other towns aside from the main city and major towns, alongside Celcom and Maxis by the following year with a speed up to 100\u00a0Mbit/s. In 2019, Digi launches its home fibre broadband in Sabah with speed up to 1\u00a0Gbit/s. The mobile telecommunications in Sabah are mostly use 5G and 4G with the state internet being upgraded by the Malaysia's federal government through the \"Pelan Jalinan Digital Negara\" (JENDELA) initiative. In 2025, U Mobile expanded their 5G network in Kota Kinabalu through the ULTRA5G in conjunction with the celebration of both Sabah Day and Malaysia's National Day.\nThe previous state internet traffic are routed through a hub in Malaysia's capital of Kuala Lumpur, passing through a submarine cable connecting the Peninsular with Kota Kinabalu. The systems are considered as costly and inefficient especially due to the price of leasing bandwidth with the large distance. In 2000, there is a plan to establish Sabah own internet hub but the plan was unreachable due to the high cost and low usage rates in the state. Other alternative plan including using the Brunei internet gateway in a short term before establishing Sabah own gateway. By 2016, the federal government has start to establish the first internet gateway for East Malaysia with the laying of 60 terabyte submarine cable which are developed by a private company named Xiddig Cellular Communications Sdn. Bhd. at a cost of about RM850 million through the Private Funding Initiative (PFI). Under the 2015 Malaysian Budget project of 1Malaysia Cable System Project (SKR1M), a new submarine cable for high speed internet has been built from Kota Kinabalu to Pahang in the Peninsular which completed in 2017. The 1Malaysia submarine cable system linking the state capital with Miri, Bintulu and Kuching in Sarawak together with Mersing in Johor with an increase of bandwidth capacity up to 12 terabyte per second. Another submarine cable, the BIMP-EAGA Submarine and Terrestrial (BEST) Cable Project is currently being built from Kota Kinabalu to Tawau to connecting Sabah with Brunei, Kalimantan and Mindanao which will be completed in 2018. In early 2016, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed between the state government and China's largest networking company, Huawei to set Sabah to become information and communications technology (ICT) hub by leveraging on Huawei's ICT expertise. More free high speed Wi-Fi hotspots are being planned in Sabah, especially to the state capital.\nSabah launched its radio service on 9 November 1955, which became a part of Radio Malaysia when it joined Malaysia in 1963 and later part of the bigger Radio Televisyen Malaysia (RTM) in 1969, when the nation's radio and television operations merged. On 28 December 1971, RTM launched a third TV station solely for Sabah, known as Rangkaian Ketiga or Network Three. But following the construction of earth satellite station near Kuantan, Pahang and Kinarut for communications and television broadcast via the Indian Ocean Intelsat III satellite and the introduction of TV1 on 30 August 1975 and TV2 on 31 August 1983 in the state, it ceased to air by mid-1985. RTM has four branches in the state - a main office in capital city Kota Kinabalu and three other offices in Keningau, Sandakan and Tawau. The main office produces news and shows for RTM's television channels and operates two state radio channels, namely Sabah FM and Sabah V FM, whereas three other offices operate district radio channels such as Keningau FM, Sandakan FM and Tawau FM.\nOther radio channels in the state include KK FM which is operated by Universiti Malaysia Sabah, and Bayu FM which is only available through Astro, the Malaysian main satellite television. Several newly independent radio station have recently been launched in the state, namely Kupi-Kupi FM in 2016, KK12FM and VOKFM in 2017. Other Peninsular-based radio stations also had set up their offices in the state to tap the emerging market. Sabahan DJs are mostly hired and local state songs will be played to meet Sabahan listeners taste and slang. Television broadcasting in the state is divided into terrestrial and satellite television. As Malaysia aims for digital television transition, all analogue signal will be shut down soon. There are two types of free-to-air television provider such as MYTV Broadcasting (digital terrestrial) and Astro NJOI (satellite). On the other hand, IPTV is available via the Unifi TV through Unifi fibre optic internet subscription. The state first established newspaper is the Sabah Times (rebranded as the New Sabah Times), founded by Fuad Stephens, who became the first Chief Minister of Sabah. Other main newspapers include the independent Daily Express, Overseas Chinese Daily News, the Sarawak-based The Borneo Post, the Peninsular-based Sin Chew Daily and the Brunei-based Borneo Bulletin.\nTransportation.\nSabah has a total of road network in 2016, of which are sealed road. Before the formation of Malaysia, the state together with Sarawak only has rudimentary road systems. Most trunk roads was then constructed from the 1970s until the 1980s under the World Bank loans. In 2005, 61% of road coverage in the state were still gravel and unpaved, comprising federal roads and state roads, of which are sealed while the remaining were gravel and unpaved roads. This led to great disparity between roads in the state with those in the Peninsular, with only 38.9% are sealed while 89.4% have been sealed in the Peninsular. Due to this, SDC was implemented to expand the road coverage in Sabah along with the construction of Pan-Borneo Highway. Since the 9MP, various road projects has been undertaken under the SDC and around RM50 million has been spent to repairs Sabah main roads since the 8MP. The high cost to repair roads frequently has led the Sabah state government to find other alternative ways to connecting every major districts by tunnelling roads through highlands which will also saving time and fuel as the distance being shortened as well to bypass landslides. In early 2016, the expansion project of Pan-Borneo Highway has been launched to expand the road size from single carriageway to four-lane road, while city highway been expand from four-lane to eight-lane as well with the construction of new routes which will connect the state with Sarawak, Brunei and the Trans Kalimantan Highway in Indonesia. The project is divided into two packages: the first package covering the West Coast area will complete in 2021, while the second covering the East Coast area will finish in 2022. All state roads are maintained under the state's Public Works Department, while federal roads maintained by the national Public Works Department.\nSabah uses a dual carriageway with the left-hand traffic rule. All major towns in Sabah provide public transportation services such as buses, taxis and vans along with Grab services. The KK Sentral operating express bus services from the city to Beaufort, Sipitang, Menumbok, Lawas and Brunei. The BRT Kota Kinabalu is currently under construction to provide bus rapid transit (BRT) system in Kota Kinabalu. A rail transport through the Western Line operated by the Sabah State Railway provides daily services for commuters, travellers, as well as for cargo transportation. A separate company owned by Sutera Harbour known as the North Borneo Railway operates leisure tour for tourists. The train station and terminal is located in Tanjung Aru, not far from the city airport. Other main stations including in Papar, Beaufort and Tenom. The current Aeropod projects on the main station in Tanjung Aru will modernise the station and provide a provision for future light rail transit (LRT). In early 2016, the state government has purchased a new diesel multiple unit (DMU) for about RM8 million to replace the old train used between Beaufort and Tenom while the rail line from Halogilat and Tenom will be upgrading by the federal government at the cost of RM99.5 million along with the arrival of another three DMUs that will be received in early 2018. Kota Kinabalu International Airport is the main gateway to Sabah. In 2005, the Malaysian federal government approved major renovation and refurbishment works to the main terminal (Terminal 1) as well as a runway expansion with construction began in 2006. As a result of the expansion, the airport is able to accommodate large passenger aircraft such as the Boeing 747. It has also become the second busiest airport in Malaysia, after Kuala Lumpur International Airport (KLIA) in West Malaysia. In 2018, the Malaysia Airlines conducts test flight for its new long-range capability passenger aircraft of Airbus A350 to the airport from Kuala Lumpur as a replacement to the largest aircraft of Airbus A380 since it is too large for Malaysian aviation markets. Other smaller airports in Sabah including Kudat Airport, Lahad Datu Airport, Sandakan Airport and Tawau Airport. Layang-Layang Airport in Swallow Reef served as a military and civilian airport. Three airlines fly from Peninsular Malaysia to Sabah: Malaysia Airlines, AirAsia, and Malindo Air. Sabah Air is a helicopter chartered flight company owned by the Sabah state government, serving flights for aerial sightseeing to interested customers as well for the transportation of state government servants.\nSabah has a total of eight ports operating in Sepanggar, Kota Kinabalu, Sandakan, Tawau, Kudat, Kunak and Lahad Datu. The Sapangar Bay Container Port is the main transshipment hub for the BIMP-EAGA region. Another port, the Sapangar Bay Oil Terminal is the main terminal for refined petroleum products and liquid chemical in the West Coast. Kota Kinabalu Port remain as a general cargo port. While all ports in the northern and eastern Sabah served to handle palm oil related products such as fertiliser, palm kernel as well for general cargo. Ferry service in the West Coast side provide trips to Labuan from the Jesselton Point Waterfront and Menumbok Ferry Terminal in Kuala Penyu. In the East Coast, the service are provided from the Tawau Ferry Terminal to Nunukan and Tarakan in Kalimantan, Indonesia. There is also ferry services from Sandakan to Zamboanga City and a new one that was planned from Kudat to Buliluyan, Bataraza of Palawan in the Philippines, but both services were terminated at the moment due to lack of security enforcement from the Philippine side prior to the persistent attack by pirates and kidnapping by militant groups based in the Sulu Archipelago of the southern Philippines. The planned ferry service from Kudat to Palawan was restored on 1 February 2017 after the increasing of security enforcement from the Philippines side, but were postponed again until present mainly due to both ferry operators from Malaysia and the Philippines facing difficulties in complying with the necessary requirements and permits imposed by both national and state authorities.\nHealthcare.\nSabah has four major government hospitals: Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Queen Elizabeth Hospital II, Duchess of Kent Hospital and Tawau Hospital followed by 13 other government districts hospitals, women and children hospital, mental hospital, public health clinics, and rural clinics. Besides government-owned hospitals and clinics, there are also a number of private hospitals such as: Gleneagles Kota Kinabalu, KPJ Specialist Hospital, Damai Specialist Centre (DSC), Rafflesia Specialist Centre (RSC) and Jesselton Medical Centre (JMC). There is also an addiction treatment facility known as Solace Sabah in the state capital to treat problems related to alcoholism and drug addiction.\nIn 2011, the state's doctor-patient ratio was 1:2,480 \u2013 lower than the World Health Organization (WHO) recommendation of 1 doctor to 600 patients. Because of the heavy workload and lack of interest from younger graduates, Sabah is facing the shortage of doctors. Many doctors who once served under the government hospitals have decided to move to private hospitals instead because of the heavy workload with low salaries in government hospitals although private hospitals won't easily recruiting them with some applications have been turned down. Thus to prevent the continuous shortage of doctors, the federal government has initiated various measure to produce more physicians with massive funds has been allocated to healthcare sector in every year country budget.\nEducation.\nAll primary and secondary schools are under the jurisdiction and observation of the Sabah State Education Department, under the guidance of the national Ministry of Education. The oldest schools in Sabah are: St. Michael's School Sandakan (1886), St. Michael's School Penampang (1888), All Saints' School, Likas (1903) and St. Patrick's School Tawau (1917). Based on 2013 statistics, Sabah has a total of 207 government secondary schools, five international schools (comprising Charis International School, Kinabalu International School, Sayfol International School, as well the Indonesian School of Kota Kinabalu and Japanese School of Kota Kinabalu). and nine Chinese independent schools. Sabah has a considerable number of indigenous students enrolled in Chinese schools.\nSabah state government also emphasises pre-school education in the state. This was followed with the aid from Sabah Foundation (Yayasan Sabah) and Nestl\u00e9 who helped to establish pre-schools in the state. Sabah has two public universities: Universiti Malaysia Sabah (UMS) and Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM). Universiti Tun Abdul Razak (UNIRAZAK) has set up their regional centre in Kota Kinabalu. As of 2016, there is around 15 private colleges, two private university colleges together with other newly established colleges. In 1960, the overall literacy rate in North Borneo was only 24%. The recent findings in 2011 found the literacy rate have increase to 79%. Most of secondary schools leavers also did not continue their studies after completing their Sijil Pelajaran Malaysia (SPM) mainly due to financial burdens as well as a lack of interest and confidence to continue their studies in local higher learning institutes. A 2015 survey found that only 16,000 out of more than 20,000 secondary schools leavers continued their studies.\nIn early 2016, Sabah had a total number of 42,047 teachers teaching in various pre-schools, primary and secondary schools. Following the decentralisation of power from the federal government to state government as well to improve the education in the state, there has been a target to recruit 90% of teachers from Sabah itself. The Sabah State Library is the main public library in the state. There are 11 Indonesian schools (beside the main Indonesian school in the state capital) spreading across Sabah mainly for Indonesian migrants children residing in the state. Since 2014, Filipino migrants children also have been enrolled in Alternative Learning Centres (ALC) that were set-up by Filipino volunteers in Sabah in collaboration with various local non-governmental organisations (NGO).\nDemographics.\nEthnicity and immigration.\nAccording to the 2020 Malaysian census, the population of Sabah stands at 3,418,785, making Sabah the third most populous state in Malaysia with the highest non-citizen population at 810,443. However, as Malaysia is one of the least densely populated countries in Asia, Sabah is particularly sparsely populated with most of the population concentrated in the coastal areas since towns and urban centres have massively expanded. People from Sabah are generally called Sabahans and identify themselves as such. There are an estimated 42 ethnic groups with over 200 sub-ethnic groups with separate own languages, cultures and belief systems. The three largest indigenous groups in Sabah are the Kadazan-Dusun, Bajau and the Murut. There are large Rungus People, Orang Sungai, Bruneian Malays, Lundayeh, Suluk and other Bumiputera ethnic minorities, while the Chinese makes up the main non-indigenous population. High migration to the state was noticeable in the 1970s, when hundreds of thousands of Filipino refugees, mostly the Moros, began arriving due to the Moro conflict in the county. There are also Indonesian labourers from Kalimantan, Sulawesi and Lesser Sunda Islands. The arrival of uncontrollable illegal immigration have cause major impact on political, economic and socio-cultural problem particularly on local indigenous peoples. The arrival of these illegal immigrants and the slow economic growth have forced Sabahans to immigrate to Peninsular Malaysia or overseas to find better paying jobs and income opportunities.\nReligion.\nIslam is the predominant religion in Sabah, although its society remained secular. In the 2020 census, the percentage of Muslims was around 69.6%, while that of Christians was 24.7% and that of Buddhism 5.1%. In 1960, the population percentage of Muslims was only 37.9%, while the percentage of Christians was 16.6% and almost half of the population professed other religions, that is at 45.5%. The increase was mainly contributed through the uncontrolled high immigration rate and controversial mass conversions in recent decades.\nThe \"Colony of North Borneo Annual Report, 1960\", notes that major indigenous groups maintained pagan beliefs, while coastal areas were majority Muslim. Other religions mentioned were traditional Chinese beliefs and various Christian denominations. Many indigenous groups saw conversions to Christianity, in part due to cultural compatibility such as having no ban on pork.\nSeveral other religions, such as Chinese folk religion as well as the Indian religions of Hinduism and Sikhism, are also practised in the state.\nLanguages.\nMalay is the main language spoken in the state, although with a different creole from Sarawak Malay and Peninsular Malay. The state has its own slang for Malay which originated either from indigenous words, Brunei Malay, Bajau, Suluk and Dusun languages. The indigenous languages of Sabah can be divided into four language families of Dusunic, Murutic, Paitanic and Sama\u2013Bajau. The indigenous languages however facing extinction due to widespread use of Malay language particularly in home as parents often see the indigenous language as inconvenient especially in job related. However, as awareness for the indigenous language becoming more obvious, more modern parents insist on passing down their mother tongue language. As the Hakka forms the majority of Chinese in Sabah, the Hakka dialect is the most commonly spoken Chinese dialect in the state apart from Cantonese and Hokkien dialects. Semporna is home to the only Chavacano-speaking community in Malaysia. Semporna's Chavacano speakers are refugees (or descendants of refugees) who fled the Moro conflict of the Philippines. A large number of these refugees live in Malaysia illegally. Chavacano is a co-official language there.\nFollowing the change of the government after the 2018 general election, the new Sabah government has stated that there is no restriction on the usage of English in the state, adding that even if the Education Ministry stated that it is unlawful for English be used in Sabah, the restrictions will not be allowed to be imposed in the state, and that the state government will undo the previous improper law since the restrictions will only cause more damage to their younger generations especially when they need to work in private firms or organisations that require English proficiency. The new state government also stated that they will look into the matters if there is a need for a change in the state law.\nCulture.\nSabah culture is diverse due to a wide range of different ethnicity. In the coastal areas, Sabahan culture has been influenced by the Bruneian Malays and West Coast Bajaus on the west coast side while in the east coast it is influenced by either East Coast Bajau, Bugis, and Suluk cultures with Islam being the important part of their lives. Christianity plays an important part to the indigenous cultures in the interior side in the daily lives of the Kadazan-Dusun, Lundayeh, Murut and Rungus beside their old practice of the traditional Animism and Paganism. The indigenous culture however are in danger and facing extinction due to widespread cultural assimilation from Peninsular to the state. Controversial Malayisation take place in the state since Malaya-based political parties took over the Sabah Government.\nThere is a number of cultural villages exhibiting Sabah indigenous cultures such as the Borneo Cultural Village, Mari Mari Cultural Village, and Monsopiad Heritage Village, where cultural performances are also performed. Sabah Museum houses a number of collection of various artefacts, brassware and ceramics covering the diverse culture of Sabah, natural history, trade history and Islamic civilisation together with an ethnobotanical garden and science and technology centre. Other museums include the Agop Batu Tulug Museum, Agnes Keith House (\"Newlands\"), Pogunon Community Museum, Sandakan Heritage Museum, Teck Guan Cocoa Museum and 3D Wonders Museum. There is also a number of preserved British, German and Japanese colonial architecture such as the Atkinson Clock Tower, Batu Tinagat Lighthouse, Jesselton Hotel, ruins of Kinarut Mansion, the Sabah Tourism Board building, Tawau Bell Tower together with a number of memorials and monuments. Other unique tourist attractions include the \"Rumah Terbalik\" (Upside Down House) and Borneo Ant House.\nFine arts and crafts.\nHandicraft and souvenir productions are part of the tourism products in Sabah. In addition, the Sabah Crafts Exotica programme has been held annually since 2011 in different small local museums. Following the various initiatives by state government to encourage local entrepreneurs for state handicrafts, there were a total of 526 entrepreneurs in 2012 which increased to 1,483 in 2013 and 1,702 in 2014 with total sales value up from RM31 million to RM56 million.\nEvery ethnic groups in Sabah are known for their traditional music instruments, the coastal people of Bajau, Brunei Malays, Bugis, Illanun, Kedayan and Suluks known for their gendang, kompang and kulintangan; while the interior people such as the Dusun known with their bungkau, sompoton and turali, the Lun Bawang/Lun Dayeh with their bass, the Kadazan with their tongkungon, the Murut with their tagunggak, the Rungus with their sundatang, tontog and turuding; suling is mostly played by all the interior ethnic groups of Kadazan-Dusun, Murut, Rungus and Lun Bawang/Lun Dayeh in the state. Every ethnic groups also known for their traditional dances; both Kadazan-Dusun were known for their \"Sumazau\" dance, the Murut with their \"Magunatip\", the Rungus with their \"Mongigol Sumundai\", The Lun Bawang/Lun Dayeh with their \"Alai Busak Baku\", the Brunei Malays with their \"Adai-Adai\", the West Coast Bajau with their \"Limbai\" and \"Kuda Pasu\", the East Coast Bajau and Suluk with their \"Pangalay\" (also known as \"Daling-Daling\" or \"Mengalai\"), Bisaya with their \"Liliput\" and the Cocos Malays with their \"Dansa\" and \"Nona Mansaya\" along with many other dances from other sub-ethnic groups. Beside that, the state of Sabah is also known for batik production though the industry are still small than the major batik producer states in the east coast of Peninsular Malaysia. The state batik has since been commercialised to enter the international market.\nCuisine.\nNotable dishes in Sabah include the Beaufort mee, bosou, hinava, ngiu chap, pinasakan, Sipitang satay, Tuaran mee, tuhau, the bambangan fruit (\"mangifera pajang\") along with many others. Apart from these, Sabah also features a number of snacks like amplang, cincin, lidah, roti kahwin, UFOs pinjaram and Sandakan tart and dessert like lamban, nuba tingaa, punjung, sinamu and Tuaran coconut pudding. Every ethnic group has its own cuisine with different styles of preparing, cooking, serving and eating the food. Examples of Sabah-based companies promoting dairy product and state drinks are like the Desa Cattle, Tenom coffee and Sabah Tea. The indigenous people features a number of alcoholic drinks such as bahar, kinomol, lihing, montoku, sagantang, sikat and tuak; with the state itself becoming the third-highest in alcohol consumption in the country after Kuala Lumpur and Sarawak. The English Tea House and Restaurant in Sandakan is another attraction promoting the British tea culture. Other international shops and restaurants such as for Western food, Middle Eastern food, Bruneian food, Indonesian food, Filipino food, Japanese food, Korean food, Russian food, Taiwanese food, Thai food and Vietnamese food have their presence there. The increasing number of tourists on the purpose of culinary tourism has since raised the local awareness on the importance of local food to state tourism.\nPortrayal in media.\nMuch of the information of the territory was kept in the records of \"Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society\" (since 1820) and \"British North Borneo Herald\" (since 1883). Joseph Hatton published one of the earliest book titled \"North Borneo \u2013 Explorations and Adventures in the Equator\" (1886) based on the exploration notes leave by his son Frank Hatton, who served under the North Borneo Chartered Company; his son was accidentally killed during his journey in Segama River on North Borneo. Ada Pryer wrote a book about her life in North Borneo titled \"A Decade in Borneo\" (1894, re-issued 2001) as her husband, William Pryer, also served for the North Borneo Chartered Company. The earliest known footage of North Borneo is from three American movies by Martin and Osa Johnson titled \"Jungle Adventures\" (1921), \"Jungle Depths of Borneo\" (1937) and \"Borneo\" (1937). Australian author Wendy Law Suart lived in North Borneo capital between 1949 and 1953 and wrote a book titled \"The Lingering Eye \u2013 Recollections of North Borneo\" based on her experiences there.\nEnglish author K.G. Tregonning wrote a book about his travel to Jesselton from Singapore in a book titled \"North Borneo\" (1960). Various other American films have been taken in the state, such as the \"Three Came Home\" (1950), a Hollywood film based on the memoir of Agnes Newton Keith in her book depicting the situation of World War II in Sandakan. Keith also wrote three other books about the state: \"Land Below the Wind\", \"White Man Returns\" and \"Beloved Exiles\". A Japanese film called \"Sandakan No. 8\" (1974) directed by Kei Kumai tells the story of prostitution by \"Karayuki-san\" in Sandakan Japanese brothel based on the 1972 book \"Sandakan Brothel No. 8: An Episode in the History of Lower-Class\" by Yamazaki Tomoko. In the Earl Mac Rauch novelisation of the American \"Buckaroo Banzai\" novel (Pocket Books, 1984; repr. 2001), as well in the DVD film, Buckaroo's archenemy Hanoi Xan is said to have his secret base in Sabah, in a \"relic city of caves\". \"Bat*21\" (1988), another American film depicting the Vietnam War, was shot at various locations in the suburbs north of Kota Kinabalu, including Menggatal, Telipok, Kayu Madang and Lapasan. Another English author, Redmond O'Hanlon, also wrote a book titled \"Into the Heart of Borneo\" (1984) about Borneo island. While Sydney-based Australian author Lynette Ramsay Silver wrote two books about the history of Sabah: \"Sandakan \u2013 A Conspiracy of Silence\" (1998) and \"Blood Brothers \u2013 Sabah and Australia 1942\u20131945\" (2010). In early 2016, a \"Roll of Honour\" immortalising 2,479 British and Australian soldiers who died in Sabah during the World War II was presented by a British Royal Artillery veteran to Sabah State Tourism, Culture and Environment Department; the roll lists a record of the identity of every prisoner of war (POW) during the Sandakan Death March. In 2017, an English woman named Mary Christina Lewin (Tina Rimmer), who had lived in North Borneo since 1949, was given the 'Sabah Cultural Icon' as the first person to receive the award for her lifelong contribution to the people in the territory and her biggest role as educationist and artist who portrayed the life scene of North Borneo through her artworks.\nFollowing the beginning of Malaysian films in 1970s along with the foundation of Sabah Film Production, several local films have been produced and filmed in the state by the state production, including \"Keluarga Si Comat\" (1975) and \"Hapuslah Air Matamu\" (1976) (produced with a collaboration with Indonesian Film Production). Abu Bakar Ellah (popularly known as Ampal) then became the leading artist of Sabah comedy film with his film \"Orang Kita\". In the present day, state-produced dramas and documentaries are usually aired either on TVi, TV1 or TV2 while state musics aired on radios through Bayu FM, Kupi-Kupi FM, Sabah FM and Sabah vFM. Sabah was featured in the British popular reality show \"\" and the American show \"Eco-Challenge Borneo\" in 2000. In 2001, the state was featured in a 2001 Filipino documentary titled \"Sabah: Ang Bagong Amerika?\" by Vicky Morales on the story of Filipino immigrants from the Sulu Archipelago escaping poverty and starvation in the Philippines by entering Sabah illegally to earn livehood but facing risk being caught, tortured and deported as Malaysian laws are getting strict on illegal migration. In 2003, the state was featured on \"The Amazing Race\" for the first time as well on a 2009 Hong Kong drama of \"Born Rich\". The state was also featured in a 2014 American documentary \"Sacred Planet\" and featured again in a new edition of \"The Amazing Race\" as well on a Korean reality show programme titled the \"Law of the Jungle\", both in 2014. In early 2017, Hong Kong film industry once again choose Sabah as one of the location for a new romance film titled \"She Will Be Loved\".\nHolidays and festivals.\nSabahans observe a number of holidays and festivals throughout the year. Apart from the national Independence Day, Malaysia Day celebrations and the State Governor's birthday, Sabah celebrates Sabah Day annually on 31 August. Every ethnic groups celebrate their own festivals and the culture of open house (\"rumah terbuka\") with the visits of families and friends from other races and religion are a norm especially with the interracial marriage between different ethnic groups of different background. Sabah are the only state in Malaysia to declare the Kaamatan celebration a public holiday. Both Sabah and Sarawak are also the only two states in Malaysia that declare Good Friday a public holiday. Many festivals are being held annually in Sabah such as the Bon Odori Festival, Sabah Jazz, Borneo Bird Festival, Borneo Bug Fest, Borneo Eco Film Festival, Kota Kinabalu Food Fest, Kota Kinabalu Jazz Festival, Sabah Dragon Boat Festival, Sabah Fest, Sabah International Folklore Festival and Sabah Sunset Music Festival.\nSports.\nNorth Borneo sent its own teams to participate in the 1956 Summer Olympic Games, 1958 and 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games, as well on the 1962 Asian Games before its athletes started representing Malaysia after 1963. To produce more athletes and to improve and raise the standard of sports in the state after Sabah became part of Malaysia, the Sabah State Sports Council was established in 1972. In addition, the Sabah Sports and Cultural Board Sports was created on 1 September 1976 before being frozen in December 1978 for more than two years until 1 January 1981 due to specific reasons. On 31 December 1996, the board been split into Sport Authority of Sabah and Sabah Cultural Board with a new board been established as the Sabah Sports Board that was maintained until present. Sabah became the host of SUKMA Games in 2002 and was crowned overall champions of the 2022 Para SUKMA Games. The state also sends athletes to participate in the Borneo Games, with some of them representing Malaysia at several international sporting events such as the SEA Games, Asian Games, Commonwealth Games and the Olympic Games. Since 2003, the State Sports Council organises the Sabah Games (SAGA), a biennial state-level multi-sport event aimed at scouting young sports talent to represent the State at national sporting events. From an inter-zone event, the Games evolved into an inter-district event in 2009, with each of Sabah's districts rotate among themselves as host. Sabah features various international sporting events, such as the annual Borneo International Marathon and Mount Kinabalu International Climbathon. Besides focusing on main sports, Sabah also features eleven traditional sports.\nThere are 12 sports complex within the state together with three main stadiums. Likas Stadium is the main stadium for the state football association of Sabah F.C., followed by Penampang Stadium and Tawau Stadium. Sabah F.C. (formerly Sabah FA) was founded in 1963 with the association have won one title each on the Malaysia FA Cup in 1995, Malaysia Premier League in 1996 and 2019, President Cup Malaysia in 1999, 13 titles in the past Borneo Cup and 11 titles in the women's football Tun Sharifah Rodziah Cup. The association was returned to private sector in early 1996, which had long under the purview of the state government. But following the argument between the association and Sabah Sports Board, Sabah FA was suspended by the state sports council on 15 January 1998 and the management was put under the national sport ministry. The move was seen as breaching FIFA rules that stated there should be no government interference on football organisations. The persistent problems plaguing the Sabah FA since 1980s have significantly deteriorating the team performances and demoralising players in addition to the scandals that have embroiling the Malaysian football in 1994. In 2019, both Sabah and Sarawak Sports Ministries work together to establish the East Malaysia Sports Commission to facilitate the organisation of more sports programmes in the two territories including other places in the Borneo islands. With the increase of youth interests on e-sports, Sabah government also targeting to develop the sports as part of the tourism development in the state.\nInternational relations.\nSabah is a sister state/province to Jiangxi Province in China, Ratchaburi Province in Thailand and East Kalimantan in Indonesia.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28679", "revid": "30911873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28679", "title": "Sumatra", "text": "Region and island in western Indonesia\nSumatra () is one of the Sunda Islands of western Indonesia. It is the largest island that is fully within Indonesian territory, as well as the sixth-largest island in the world at 482,286.55\u00a0km2 (182,812\u00a0mi.2), including adjacent islands such as the Simeulue, Nias, Mentawai, Enggano, Riau Islands, Bangka Belitung and Krakatoa archipelago.\nSumatra is an elongated landmass spanning a diagonal northwest\u2013southeast axis. The Indian Ocean borders the northwest, west, and southwest coasts of Sumatra, with the island chain of Simeulue, Nias, Mentawai, and Enggano off the western coast. In the northeast, the narrow Strait of Malacca separates the island from the Malay Peninsula, which is an extension of the Eurasian continent. In the southeast, the narrow Sunda Strait, containing the Krakatoa archipelago, separates Sumatra from Java. The northern tip of Sumatra is near the Andaman Islands, while off the southeastern coast lie the islands of Bangka and Belitung, Karimata Strait and the Java Sea. The Bukit Barisan mountains, which contain several active volcanoes, form the backbone of the island, while the northeastern area contains large plains and lowlands with swamps, mangrove forest and complex river systems. The equator crosses the island at its centre in West Sumatra and Riau provinces. The climate of the island is tropical, hot, and humid. Lush tropical rain forest once dominated the landscape.\nSumatra has a wide range of plant and animal species but has lost almost 50% of its tropical rainforest in the last 35 years. Many species are now critically endangered, such as the Sumatran ground cuckoo, the Sumatran tiger, the Sumatran elephant, the Sumatran rhinoceros, and the Sumatran orangutan. Deforestation on the island has also resulted in serious seasonal smoke haze over neighbouring countries, such as the 2013 Southeast Asian haze which caused considerable tensions between Indonesia and affected countries Malaysia and Singapore. The widespread deforestation and other environmental destruction in Sumatra and other parts of Indonesia has often been described by academics as an ecocide.\nEtymology.\nSumatra was known in ancient times by the Sanskrit names of ('Island of Gold') and ('Land of Gold'), because of the gold deposits in the island's highlands. The earliest known mention of the current form \"Sumatra\" was in 1017, when the local king Haji Sumatrabhumi (\"king of the land of Sumatra\") sent an envoy to China. Arab geographers referred to the island as (\"Lamuri\", \"Lambri\" or \"Ramni\") in the tenth through thirteenth centuries, in reference to a kingdom near modern-day Banda Aceh which was the first landfall for traders. The island has also been known by other names, including \"Andalas\" or \"Percha Island\". Scholars suggest that mention of Suwarnadwipa in the Hindu Epic the \"Ramayana\" may be a reference to Sumatra. According to experts on \"The Ramayana,\" the epic is one of the first sources to document the relationship between India and the Indonesian archipelago.\nIn the late 13th century, Marco Polo referred to the kingdom as , while his contemporary fellow Italian traveller Odoric of Pordenone used the form . Later in the 14th century the local form \"Sumatra\" became popular abroad due to the rising power of the kingdom of Samudera Pasai and the subsequent Sultanate of Aceh.\nFrom then on, subsequent European writers mostly used \"Sumatra\" or similar forms of the name for the entire island.\nHistory.\nBy the year 692, the Melayu Kingdom was absorbed by Srivijaya. Srivijaya's influence waned in the 11th century, specifically in the year 1025, after suffering defeat at the hands of the Chola Empire in southern India By the end of the 12th century, Srivijaya had been reduced to a kingdom, and its dominant role in South Sumatra ended with the last king, Ratu Sekekhummong, who founded the milestone of Kepaksian Sekala Brak in the 13th century AD with the Dalom building. At the same time, the spread of Islam in Indonesia occurred gradually and indirectly, starting from the western regions such as the Sumatra area which became the first place for the spread of Islam in the archipelago, then Java, then to the eastern regions of Indonesia, Sulawesi and Maluku. The island of Sumatra is also an area in the archipelago that received the spread of Islam first compared to other islands or other areas. The island of Sumatra became the first area to receive the spread of Islam because of the position of the island of Sumatra which is close to the Malacca strait. The initial process of Islamization related to trade and also the formation of the kingdom. Islam entered Sumatra through pious Arabs and Tamil traders in the 6th and 7th centuries AD. At the beginning and end of the 13th century the formation of the kingdom, the king of the Samudra kingdom had converted to Islam. Marco Polo visited the island in 1292, and his fellow Italian Odoric of Pordenone in 1321.\nAceh in the north of Sumatra became known in the 16th century as trading centre for the pepper trade by shipping quality piperaceae (\"pepper\"). Aceh became the main commercial centre of the Aceh Sultanate and trading routes were established to the Mediterranean via the Red Sea to rival the Portuguese shipping lanes. The reign of Iskandar Muda is known as the \"golden age\" of Sumatra because he extended the cultural influence of the Aceh Sultanate to Padang and Johor. The Aceh Sultanate sustained the rivalry with the Johor sultanate, the Dutch, and the Portuguese throughout the 16th and 17th century. When the Dutch were weakened in the 18th century the British empire began to actively intervene in Aceh, establishing close relations between Banda Aceh and Penang. In the 17th and 18th century the Aceh Sultanate battled the Siak sultanate in the south of Sumatra. The port city of Banda Aceh was recorded in European historical writings since the 13th century. In terms of economic development the port of Banda Aceh only started to face competition in the 18th century when more ports were constructed in Sumatra for maritime transport. Nevertheless, major pepper suppliers used the port of Banda Aceh at the beginning of the 19th century. The port in Medan grew swiftly in the late 19th and early 20th century. Meanwhile the medium sized port of Palembang faced a stiff economic decline as the heritage of the Srivijaya empire was superseded by the economic policy of the Singhasari and Majapahit. The Palembang sultanate experienced a terminal decline in the early 19th century.\nWith the coming of the Dutch Empire, the many Sumatran princely states gradually fell under their control. Aceh posed major obstacles, as the Dutch were involved in the long and costly Aceh War (1873\u20131903).\nDuring the Second World War, Japan invaded Sumatra in 1942.\nThe Free Aceh Movement fought against Indonesian government forces in the Aceh Insurgency from 1976 to 2005. Security crackdowns in 2001 and 2002 resulted in several thousand civilian deaths.\nThe island was heavily impacted by both the 1883 Krakatoa eruption and the 2004 Boxing Day Tsunami.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSumatra's population as of 2023 was estimated to be about 60,795,669\u00a0; it has about the same number of inhabitants as South Africa, making it the fifth-most populous island in the world. Yet because it is such a large island, it is not densely populated: it has an average of about 126 people per km2. \nEthnic groups.\nThe largest indigenous ethnic groups in Sumatra are Malays, Minangkabaus, Bataks, Acehnese, and Lampungs. Other major non-indigenous ethnic groups are Javanese, Sundanese, and Chinese.\nBelow are 11 largest ethnic groups in Sumatra based on the 2010 census (including Riau Islands, Bangka Belitung, Nias, Mentawai, Simeulue and islands around it)\nLanguages.\nThere are over 52 languages spoken, all of which (except Chinese and Tamil) belong to the Malayo-Polynesian branch of the Austronesian language family. Within Malayo-Polynesian, they are divided into several sub-branches: Chamic (which are represented by Acehnese in which its closest relatives are languages spoken by Ethnic Chams in Cambodia and Vietnam), Malayic (Malay, Minangkabau and other closely related languages), Northwest Sumatra\u2013Barrier Islands (Batak languages, Gayo and others), Lampungic (includes Proper Lampung and Komering) and Bornean (represented by Rejang in which its closest linguistic relatives are Bukar Sadong and Land Dayak spoken in West Kalimantan and Sarawak (Malaysia)). Northwest Sumatra\u2013Barrier Islands and Lampungic branches are endemic to the island. Like all parts of Indonesia, Indonesian (which was based on Riau Malay) is the official language and the main lingua franca. Although Sumatra has its own local lingua franca, variants of Malay like Medan Malay and Palembang Malay are popular in North and South Sumatra, especially in urban areas. Minangkabau (Padang dialect) is popular in West Sumatra, some parts of North Sumatra, Bengkulu, Jambi and Riau (especially in Pekanbaru and areas bordered with West Sumatra) while Acehnese is also used as an inter-ethnic means of communication in some parts of Aceh province.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe majority of people in Sumatra are Muslims (87.12%), while 10.69% are Christians, and less than 2.19% are Buddhists and Hindus. Sumatra\u2019s diverse Muslim communities coexist with various ethnic and religious groups, reflecting the region\u2019s broader tradition of religious tolerance and social cohesion.\nAdministration.\nSumatra is one of seven geographical regions of Indonesia, which includes its adjacent smaller islands. Sumatra was one of the eight original provinces of Indonesia between 1945 and 1948. Including adjacent archipelagoes normally included with Sumatra (such as the Riau Islands, Nias and the Bangka-Belitung group), it now covers ten of Indonesia's 38 provinces, which are set out below with their areas and populations.\nGeography.\nThe longest axis of the island runs approximately northwest\u2013southeast, crossing the equator near the centre. At its widest point, the island spans . The interior of the island is dominated by two geographical regions: the Barisan Mountains in the west and swampy plains in the east. Sumatra is the closest Indonesian island to mainland Asia.\nTo the southeast is Java, separated by the Sunda Strait. To the north is the Malay Peninsula (located on the Asian mainland), separated by the Strait of Malacca. To the east is Borneo, across the Karimata Strait. West of the island is the Indian Ocean.\nSumatra is a highly seismic island. The Great Sumatran fault (a strike-slip fault), and the Sunda megathrust (a subduction zone), run the entire length of the island along its west coast. Huge earthquakes have been recorded throughout history. In 1797, an 8.9 earthquake shook Western Sumatra, and in 1833, a 9.2 earthquake shook Bengkulu and Western Sumatra. Both events caused large tsunamis. Earthquakes are very common throughout the coastal area of the west and center of the island, and tsunamis are common due to the high seismicity in the area.\nOn 26 December 2004, the western coast and islands of Sumatra, particularly Aceh province, were struck by a tsunami following the Indian Ocean earthquake. This was the longest earthquake recorded, lasting between 500 and 600 seconds (8.33\u201310 minutes). More than 170,000 Indonesians were killed, primarily in Aceh. Other recent earthquakes to strike Sumatra include the 2005 Nias\u2013Simeulue earthquake and the 2010 Mentawai earthquake and tsunami.\nLake Toba is the site of a supervolcanic eruption that occurred around 74,000 years ago, representing a climate-changing event. The most important rivers in Sumatra belong to the catchment area of the South China Sea. Heading north to south, the Asahan, Rokan, Siak, Kampar, Indragiri, Batanghari flow into the Malacca Strait, while the island's largest river, the Musi, flows into the sea at Bangka Strait in the south. To the east, big rivers carry silt from the mountains, forming the vast lowland interspersed by swamps. Even if mostly unsuitable for farming, the area is currently of great economic importance for Indonesia. It produces oil from both above and below the soil \u2013 palm oil and petroleum.\nSumatra is the largest producer of Indonesian coffee. Small-holders grow Arabica coffee (\"Coffea arabica\") in the highlands, while Robusta (\"Coffea canephora\") is found in the lowlands. Arabica coffee from the regions of Gayo, Lintong and Sidikilang is typically processed using the Giling Basah (wet hulling) technique, which gives it a heavy body and low acidity.\nBy population, Medan is the largest city in Sumatra. Medan is also the most visited and developed city in Sumatra.\nFlora and fauna.\nSumatra supports a wide range of vegetation types that are home to a rich variety of species, including 17 endemic genera of plants. Unique species include the Sumatran pine which dominates the Sumatran tropical pine forests of the higher mountainsides in the north of the island and rainforest plants such as \"Rafflesia arnoldii\" (the world's largest individual flower), and the titan arum (the world's largest unbranched inflorescence).\nThe island is home to 201 mammal species and 580 bird species. There are nine endemic mammal species on mainland Sumatra and 14 more endemic to the nearby Mentawai Islands. There are about 300 freshwater fish species in Sumatra. There are 93 amphibian species in Sumatra, 21 of which are endemic to Sumatra.\nThe Sumatran tiger, Sumatran rhinoceros, Sumatran elephant, Sumatran ground cuckoo, Sumatran orangutan and Tapanuli orangutan are all critically endangered, indicating the highest level of threat to their survival. In October 2008, the Indonesian government announced a plan to protect Sumatra's remaining forests.\nThe island includes more than 10 national parks, including three which are listed as the Tropical Rainforest Heritage of Sumatra World Heritage Site \u2013 Gunung Leuser National Park, Kerinci Seblat National Park and Bukit Barisan Selatan National Park. The Berbak National Park is one of three national parks in Indonesia listed as a wetland of international importance under the Ramsar Convention.\nSumatra has lost almost 50% of its tropical rainforest since 1980. Many species are now critically endangered, such as the Sumatran ground cuckoo, the Sumatran tiger, the Sumatran elephant, the Sumatran rhinoceros, and the Sumatran orangutan. Deforestation on the island has also resulted in serious seasonal smoke haze over neighbouring countries, such as the 2013 Southeast Asian haze which caused considerable tensions between Indonesia and affected countries Malaysia and Singapore. The widespread deforestation and other environmental destruction in Sumatra and other parts of Indonesia has often been described by academics as an ecocide.\nRail transport.\nSeveral unconnected railway networks built during Netherlands East Indies exist in Sumatra, such as the ones connecting Banda Aceh-Lhokseumawe-Besitang-Medan-Tebingtinggi-Pematang Siantar-Rantau Prapat in Northern Sumatra (the Banda Aceh-Besitang section was closed in 1971, but is currently being rebuilt). Padang-Solok-Bukittinggi in West Sumatra, and Bandar Lampung-Palembang-Lahat-Lubuklinggau in Southern Sumatra.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28680", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28680", "title": "Sarkel", "text": "Ruined fortress in Russia\nSarkel (or \u0160arkel, literally \"white house\" in the Khazar language) was a large limestone-and-brick fortress in what is now Rostov Oblast of Russia, on the left bank of the lower Don River.\nIt was built by the Khazars with Byzantine assistance in the 830s or 840s. It was named Sarkel, or 'white-house', because of the white limestone bricks used in its construction.\nLocation.\nSarkel was located on a hill, on the left bank of the Don River. It is currently under water, after the construction of the Tsimlyansk Reservoir. The left bank of the river was much lower, compared to the right, so a lot of it was flooded.\nAcross the Don River from Sarkel, on the right bank, there was located another large Khazar fortress roughly contemporary with Sarkel. This site is known as Pravoberezhnoye Tsimlyanskoye site, although its ancient name is unknown. It is still there, on the much higher right bank, although suffering from erosion because of encroaching water.\nConstruction.\nSarkel was built to protect the north-western border of the Khazar state in 833. The Khazars asked their ally, Byzantine emperor Theophilus, for engineers to build a fortified capital, and Theophilus sent his chief engineer Petronas Kamateros. In recompense for these services, the Khazar khagan ceded Chersonesos and some other Crimean dependencies to Byzantium.\nHistorians have been unable to determine why such a strong fortress was built on the Don. They generally assert that the costly construction must have been due to the rise of a strong regional power that posed a threat to the Khazars. Alexander Vasiliev and George Vernadsky, among others, argue that Sarkel was built to defend a vital portage between the Don and the Volga from the Rus' Khaganate. Other historians believe this polity was situated many hundred miles to the north. Another nascent power, the Hungarians, was not particularly threatening to the Khazars as long as they paid tribute to the khagan.\nConstantine Porphyrogenitus records in his work De Administrando Imperio that the Khazars asked the Emperor Theophilos to have the fortress of Sarkel built for them. His record is connected to the Hungarians on the basis that the new fortress must have become necessary because of the appearance of a new enemy of the Khazars, and other peoples could not be taken into account as the Khazars\u2019 enemies at that time. In the 10th century, a Persian explorer and geographer Ahmad ibn Rustah mentioned that the Khazars entrenched themselves against the attacks of the Hungarians.\nHistory.\nThe city served as a bustling commercial center, as it controlled the Volga-Don portage, which was used by the Rus to cross from the Black Sea to the Volga and thence to the Caspian and Baltic. The route was known as the \"Khazarian Way\". A garrison fortified at Sarkel included Oghuz and Pecheneg mercenaries.\nSarkel's fortress and city were captured by Kievan Rus' under prince Sviatoslav I in 965. The city was renamed Belaya Vezha (Slavic for \"White Tower\" or \"White Fortress\") and settled by Slavs. It remained Slavic until the 12th century, when the district was taken over by the Kipchaks.\nMikhail Artamonov excavated the site in the 1930s. It was the most ambitious excavation of a Khazar site ever undertaken. Among many Khazar and Rus items, Artamonov discovered Byzantine columns used in the construction of Sarkel. The site is now submerged by the Tsimlyansk Reservoir, completed in 1952, so no further excavations may be conducted.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28682", "revid": "50506397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28682", "title": "Streaming media", "text": "Multimedia delivery method\nStreaming media is multimedia delivered through a network for playback using a media player. Media is transferred in a \"stream\" of packets from a server to a client and is rendered in real-time or near real-time; this contrasts with file downloading, a process in which the end-user obtains an entire media file before consuming the content. Streaming is more commonly used for video on demand, streaming television, and music streaming services over the Internet.\nWhile streaming is most commonly associated with multimedia from a remote server over the Internet, it also includes offline multimedia between devices on a local area network. For example, using DLNA and a home server, or in a personal area network between two devices using Bluetooth (which uses radio waves rather than IP). Online streaming was initially popularized by RealNetworks and Microsoft in the 1990s and has since grown to become the globally most popular method for consuming music and videos, with numerous competing subscription services being offered since the 2010s. Audio streaming to wireless speakers, often using Bluetooth, is another use that has become prevalent during that decade. Live streaming is the real-time delivery of content during production, much as live television broadcasts content via television channels.\nDistinguishing delivery methods from the media applies specifically to, as most of the traditional media delivery systems are either inherently \"streaming\" (e.g., radio, television) or inherently \"non-streaming\" (e.g., books, videotapes, audio CDs). The term \"streaming media\" can apply to media other than video and audio, such as live closed captioning, ticker tape, and real-time text, which are all considered \"streaming text\".\nEtymology.\nThe term \"streaming\" was first used for tape drives manufactured by Data Electronics Inc. that were meant to slowly ramp up and run for the entire track; slower ramp times lowered drive costs. \"Streaming\" was applied in the early 1990s as a better description for video on demand and later live video on IP networks. It was first done by Starlight Networks for video streaming and Real Networks for audio streaming. Such video had previously been referred to by the misnomer \"store and forward video.\"\nPrecursors.\nBeginning in 1881, Th\u00e9\u00e2trophone enabled subscribers to listen to opera and theatre performances over telephone lines. This operated until 1932. The Telharmonium was patented in 1897. The concept of media streaming eventually came to America. The Tel-musici service operated in Delaware from 1909-1914.\nIn the early 1920s, George Owen Squier was granted patents for a system for the transmission and distribution of signals over electrical lines, which was the technical basis for what later became \"Muzak\", a technology for streaming continuous music to commercial customers without the use of radio.\nThe Telephone Music Service, a live jukebox service, began in 1929 and continued until 1997. The clientele eventually included 120 bars and restaurants in the Pittsburgh area. A tavern customer would deposit money in the jukebox, use a telephone on top of the jukebox, and ask the operator to play a song. The operator would find the record in the studio library of more than 100,000 records, put it on a turntable, and the music would be piped over the telephone line to play in the tavern. The music media began as 78s, 33s and 45s, played on the six turntables they monitored. CDs and tapes were incorporated in later years.\nThe business had a succession of owners, notably Bill Purse, his daughter Helen Reutzel, and finally Dotti White. The revenue stream for each quarter was split between 60% for the music service and 40% for the tavern owner. This business model eventually became unsustainable due to city permits and the cost of setting up these telephone lines.\nHistory.\nEarly development.\nAttempts to display media on computers date back to the earliest days of computing in the mid-20th\u00a0century. However, little progress was made for several decades, primarily due to the high cost and limited capabilities of computer hardware. From the late 1980s through the 1990s, consumer-grade personal computers became powerful enough to display various media. The primary technical issues related to streaming were having enough CPU and bus bandwidth to support the required data rates and achieving the real-time computing performance required to prevent buffer underruns and enable smooth streaming of the content. However, computer networks were still limited in the mid-1990s, and audio and video media were usually delivered over non-streaming channels, such as playback from a local hard disk drive or CD-ROMs on the end user's computer.\nTerminology in the 1970s was at best confusing for applications such as telemetered aircraft or missile test data. By then PCM [Pulse Code Modulation] was the dominant transmission type. This PCM transmission was bit-serial and not packetized so the 'streaming' terminology was often a confusion factor. In 1969 Grumman acquired one of the first telemetry ground stations [Automated Telemetry Station, 'ATS'] which had the capability for reconstructing serial telemetered data which had been recorded on digital computer peripheral tapes. Computer peripheral tapes were inherently recorded in blocks. Reconstruction was required for continuous display purposes without time-base distortion. The Navy implemented similar capability in DoD for the first time in 1973. These implementations are the only known examples of true 'streaming' in the sense of reconstructing distortion-free serial data from packetized or blocked recordings. 'Real-time' terminology has also been confusing in streaming context. The most accepted definition of 'real-time' requires that all associated processing or formatting of the data must take place prior to availability of the next sample of each measurement. In the 1970s the most powerful mainframe computers were not fast enough for this task at significant overall data rates in the range of 50,000 samples per second. For that reason both the Grumman ATS and the Navy Real-time Telemetry Processing System [RTPS] employed unique special purpose digital computers dedicated to real-time processing of raw data samples.\nIn 1990, the first commercial Ethernet switch was introduced by Kalpana, which enabled the more powerful computer networks that led to the first streaming video solutions used by schools and corporations.\nPractical streaming media was only made possible with advances in data compression due to the impractically high bandwidth requirements of uncompressed media. Raw digital audio encoded with pulse-code modulation (PCM) requires a bandwidth of 1.4Mbit/s for uncompressed CD audio, while raw digital video requires a bandwidth of 168Mbit/s for SD video and over 1000Mbit/s for FHD video.\nLate 1990s to early 2000s.\nDuring the late 1990s and early 2000s, users had increased access to computer networks, especially the Internet. During the early 2000s, users had access to increased network bandwidth, especially in the last mile. These technological improvements facilitated the streaming of audio and video content to computer users in their homes and workplaces. There was also an increasing use of standard protocols and formats, such as TCP/IP, HTTP, and HTML, as the Internet became increasingly commercialized, which led to an infusion of investment into the sector.\nThe band Severe Tire Damage was the first group to perform live on the Internet. On 24 June 1993, the band was playing a gig at Xerox PARC, while elsewhere in the building, scientists were discussing new technology (the Mbone) for broadcasting on the Internet using multicasting. As proof of PARC's technology, the band's performance was broadcast and could be seen live in Australia and elsewhere. In a March 2017 interview, band member Russ Haines stated that the band had used approximately \"half of the total bandwidth of the internet\" to stream the performance, which was a pixel video, updated eight to twelve times per second, with audio quality that was, \"at best, a bad telephone connection.\" In October 1994, a school music festival was webcast from the Michael Fowler Centre in Wellington, New Zealand. The technician who arranged the webcast, local council employee Richard Naylor, later commented: \"We had 16 viewers in 12 countries.\"\nRealNetworks pioneered the broadcast of a baseball game between the New York Yankees and the Seattle Mariners over the Internet in 1995. The first symphonic concert on the Internet\u2014a collaboration between the Seattle Symphony and guest musicians Slash, Matt Cameron, and Barrett Martin\u2014took place at the Paramount Theater in Seattle, Washington, on 10\u00a0November 1995.\nIn 1996, Marc Scarpa produced the first large-scale, online, live broadcast, the Adam Yauch\u2013led Tibetan Freedom Concert, an event that would define the format of social change broadcasts. Scarpa continued to pioneer in the streaming media world with projects such as Woodstock '99, Townhall with President Clinton, and more recently Covered CA's campaign \"Tell a Friend Get Covered\", which was livestreamed on YouTube.\nBusiness developments.\nXing Technology was founded in 1989 and developed a JPEG streaming product called \"StreamWorks\". Another streaming product appeared in late 1992 and was named StarWorks. StarWorks enabled on-demand MPEG-1 full-motion videos to be randomly accessed on corporate Ethernet networks. Starworks was from Starlight Networks, which also pioneered live video streaming on Ethernet and via Internet Protocol over satellites with Hughes Network Systems. Other early companies that created streaming media technology include Progressive Networks and Protocomm prior to widespread World Wide Web usage. After the Netscape IPO in 1995 (and the release of Windows 95 with built-in TCP/IP support), usage of the Internet expanded, and many companies \"went public\", including Progressive Networks (which was renamed \"RealNetworks\", and listed on Nasdaq as \"RNWK\"). As the web became even more popular in the late 90s, streaming video on the internet blossomed from startups such as Vivo Software (later acquired by RealNetworks), VDOnet (acquired by RealNetworks), Precept (acquired by Cisco), and Xing (acquired by RealNetworks).\nMicrosoft developed a media player known as ActiveMovie in 1995 that supported streaming media and included a proprietary streaming format, which was the precursor to the streaming feature later in Windows Media Player 6.4 in 1999. In June 1999, Apple also introduced a streaming media format in its QuickTime 4 application. It was later also widely adopted on websites, along with RealPlayer and Windows Media streaming formats. The competing formats on websites required each user to download the respective applications for streaming, which resulted in many users having to have all three applications on their computer for general compatibility.\nIn 2000, Industryview.com launched its \"world's largest streaming video archive\" website to help businesses promote themselves. Webcasting became an emerging tool for business marketing and advertising that combined the immersive nature of television with the interactivity of the Web. The ability to collect data and feedback from potential customers caused this technology to gain momentum quickly.\nAround 2002, the interest in a single, unified, streaming format and the widespread adoption of Adobe Flash prompted the development of a video streaming format through Flash, which was the format used in Flash-based players on video hosting sites. The first popular video streaming site, YouTube, was founded by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim in 2005. It initially used a Flash-based player, which played MPEG-4 AVC video and AAC audio, but now defaults to HTML video. Increasing consumer demand for live streaming prompted YouTube to implement a new live streaming service for users. The company currently also offers a (secure) link that returns the available connection speed of the user.\nThe Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) revealed through its 2015, earnings report that streaming services were responsible for 34.3 percent of the year's total music industry's revenue, growing 29 percent from the previous year and becoming the largest source of income, pulling in around $2.4\u00a0billion. US streaming revenue grew 57 percent to $1.6\u00a0billion in the first half of 2016 and accounted for almost half of industry sales.\nStreaming wars.\nThe term \"streaming wars\" was coined to describe the new era (starting in the late 2010s) of competition between video streaming services such as Netflix, Amazon Prime Video, Hulu, HBO Max, Disney+, Paramount+, Apple TV, Peacock, and many more.\nThe competition between increasingly popular online platforms, such as Netflix and Amazon, and legacy broadcasters and studios moving online, like Disney and NBC, has driven each service to find ways to differentiate from one another. A key differentiator has been offering exclusive content, often self-produced and created for a specific market segment. \nWhen Netflix first launched in 2007, it became one of the more dominant streaming platforms even though it initially offered no original content. It would be nearly six years before Netflix began offering its own shows, such as House of Cards, Orange Is the New Black, and Hemlock Grove. The legacy services also began producing original digital-only content, but they also began restricting their back catalog of shows and movies to their platforms, one of the most notable examples being Disney+. Disney took advantage of owning popular movies and shows like Frozen, Snow White, and the Star Wars and Marvel franchises, which could draw in more subscribers and make it a more serious competitor to Netflix and Amazon. Research suggests that this approach to streaming competition can be disadvantageous for consumers by increasing spending across platforms, and for the industry as a whole by dilution of subscriber base. Once specific content is made available on a streaming service, piracy searches for the same content decrease; competition or legal availability across multiple platforms appears to deter online piracy. Exclusive content produced for subscription services such as Netflix tends to have a higher production budget than content produced exclusively for pay-per-view services, such as Amazon Prime Video.\nThis competition increased during the first two years of the COVID-19 pandemic as more people stayed home and watched TV. \"The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a seismic shift in the film &amp; TV industry in terms of how films are made, distributed, and screened. Many industries have been hit by the economic effects of the pandemic\" (Totaro Donato). In August 2022, a CNN headline declared that \"The streaming wars are over\" as pandemic-era restrictions had largely ended and audience growth had stalled. This led services to focus on profit over market share by cutting production budgets, cracking down on password sharing, and introducing ad-supported tiers. A December 2022 article in \"The Verge\" echoed this, declaring an end to the \"golden age of the streaming wars\".\nIn September 2023, several streaming services formed a trade association named the Streaming Innovation Alliance (SIA), spearheaded by Charles Rivkin of the Motion Picture Association (MPA). Former U.S. representative Fred Upton and former Federal Communications Commission (FCC) acting chair Mignon Clyburn serve as senior advisors. Founding members include AfroLandTV, America Nu Network, BET+, The Africa Channel, Discovery+, FedNet, For Us By Us Network, In the Black Network, Max, Motion Picture Association, MotorTrend+, Netflix, Paramount+, Peacock, Pluto TV, Radiant, SkinsPlex, Telemundo, TelevisaUnivision, TVEI, Vault TV, Vix, and The Walt Disney Company. Notably absent were Apple, Amazon, Roku, and Tubi.\nUse by the general public.\nAdvances in computer networking, combined with powerful home computers and operating systems, have made streaming media affordable and easy for the public. Stand-alone Internet radio devices emerged to offer listeners a non-technical option for listening to audio streams. These audio-streaming services became increasingly popular; music streaming reached 4 trillion streams globally in 2023\u2014a significant increase from 2022\u2014jumping 34% over the year.\nIn general, multimedia content is data-intensive, so media storage and transmission costs are still significant. Media is generally compressed for transport and storage. Increasing consumer demand for streaming high-definition (HD) content has led the industry to develop technologies such as WirelessHD and G.hn, which are optimized for streaming HD content. Many developers have introduced HD streaming apps that work on smaller devices, such as tablets and smartphones, for everyday purposes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"Streaming creates the illusion\u2014greatly magnified by headphone use, which is another matter\u2014that music is a utility you can turn on and off; the water metaphor is intrinsic to how it works. It dematerializes music, denies it a crucial measure of autonomy, reality, and power. It makes music seem disposable, impermanent. Hence it intensifies the ebb and flow of pop fashion, the way musical 'memes' rise up for a week or a month and are then forgotten. And it renders our experience of individual artists/groups shallower.\"\n \u2014Robert Christgau, 2018\nA media stream can be streamed either \"live\" or \"on demand\". Live streams are generally provided by a method called \"true streaming\". True streaming sends the information straight to the computer or device without saving it to a local file. On-demand streaming is provided by a method called \"progressive download\". Progressive download saves the received information to a local file and then plays it from that location. On-demand streams are often saved to files for extended period of time, while live streams are available at one time only (e.g., during a football game).\nStreaming media is increasingly being coupled with the use of social media. For example, sites such as YouTube encourage social interaction in webcasts through features such as live chat, online surveys, user posting of comments online, and more. Furthermore, streaming media is increasingly being used for social business and e-learning.\nThe Horowitz Research State of Pay TV, OTT, and SVOD 2017 report said that 70 percent of those viewing content did so through a streaming service and that 40 percent of TV viewing was done this way, twice the number from five years earlier. Millennials, the report said, streamed 60 percent of the content.\nTransition from DVD.\nOne of the movie streaming industry's largest impacts was on the DVD industry, which drastically dropped in popularity and profitability with the mass popularization of online content. The rise of media streaming caused the downfall of many DVD rental companies, such as Blockbuster. In July 2015, \"The New York Times\" published an article about Netflix's DVD services. It stated that Netflix was continuing their DVD services with 5.3\u00a0million subscribers, which was a significant drop from the previous year. On the other hand, their streaming service had 65\u00a0million members. The shift to streaming platforms also led to the decline of DVD rental services. In July 2024, NBC News reported that RedBox, a DVD rental service that had operated for 22 years, would shut down due to the rapid incline of streaming platforms. As the rental services has been rapidly declining since 2010, the business had to file for bankruptcy, with 99% of households now subscribing to streaming services. Further reflecting the shift away from physical media, BestBuy has ceased selling DVDs.\nNapster.\nMusic streaming is one of the most popular ways in which consumers interact with streaming media. In the age of digitization, the private consumption of music has transformed into a public good, largely due to one player in the market: Napster.\nNapster, a peer-to-peer (P2P) file-sharing network where users could upload and download MP3 files freely, broke all music industry conventions when it launched in early 1999 in Hull, Massachusetts. The platform was developed by Shawn and John Fanning as well as Sean Parker. In an interview from 2009, Shawn Fanning explained that Napster \"was something that came to me as a result of seeing a sort of unmet need and the passion people had for being able to find all this music, particularly a lot of the obscure stuff, which wouldn't be something you go to a record store and purchase, so it felt like a problem worth solving.\"\nNot only did this development disrupt the music industry by making songs that previously required payment to be freely accessible to any Napster user, but it also demonstrated the power of P2P networks in turning any digital file into a public, shareable good. For the brief period of time that Napster existed, mp3 files fundamentally changed as a type of good. Songs were no longer financially excludable, barring access to a computer with internet access, and they were not rivals, meaning if one person downloaded a song, it did not diminish another user from doing the same. Napster, like most other providers of public goods, faced the free-rider problem. Every user benefits when an individual uploads an mp3 file, but there is no requirement or mechanism that forces all users to share their music. Generally, the platform encouraged sharing; users who downloaded files from others often had their own files available for upload as well. However, not everyone chose to share their files. There was no a built-in incentive specifically discouraging users from sharing their own files.\nThis structure revolutionized the consumer's perception of ownership over digital goods; it made music freely replicable. Napster quickly garnered millions of users, growing faster than any other business in history. At the peak of its existence, Napster boasted about 80\u00a0million users globally. The site gained so much traffic that many college campuses had to block access to Napster because it created network congestion from so many students sharing music files.\nThe advent of Napster sparked the creation of numerous other P2P sites, including LimeWire (2000), BitTorrent (2001), and the Pirate Bay (2003). The reign of P2P networks was short-lived. The first to fall was Napster in 2001. Numerous lawsuits were filed against Napster by various record labels, all of which were subsidiaries of Universal Music Group, Sony Music Entertainment, Warner Music Group, or EMI. In addition to this, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) also filed a lawsuit against Napster on the grounds of unauthorized distribution of copyrighted material, which ultimately led Napster to shut down in 2001. In an interview with the \"New York Times\", Gary Stiffelman, who represents Eminem, Aerosmith, and TLC, explained, \"I'm not an opponent of artists' music being included in these services, I'm just an opponent of their revenue not being shared.\"\nThe fight for intellectual property rights: \"A&amp;M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc.\".\nThe lawsuit \"A&amp;M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc.\" fundamentally changed the way consumers interact with music streaming. It was argued on 2 October 2000, and was decided on 12 February 2001. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that a P2P file-sharing service could be held liable for contributory and vicarious infringement of copyright, serving as a landmark decision for Intellectual property law.\nThe first issue that the Court addressed was fair use, which says that otherwise infringing activities are permissible so long as they are for purposes \"such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching [...] scholarship, or research.\" Judge Beezer, the judge for this case, noted that Napster claimed that its services fit \"three specific alleged fair uses: sampling, where users make temporary copies of a work before purchasing; space-shifting, where users access a sound recording through the Napster system that they already own in audio CD format; and permissive distribution of recordings by both new and established artists.\" Judge Beezer found that Napster did not fit these criteria, instead enabling their users to repeatedly copy music, which would affect the market value of the copyrighted good.\nThe second claim by the plaintiffs was that Napster was actively contributing to copyright infringement since it had knowledge of widespread file sharing on its platform. Since Napster took no action to reduce infringement and financially benefited from repeated use, the court ruled against the P2P site. The court found that \"as much as eighty-seven percent of the files available on Napster may be copyrighted and more than seventy percent may be owned or administered by plaintiffs.\"\nThe injunction ordered against Napster ended the brief period in which music streaming was a public good \u2013 non-rival and non-excludable in nature. Other P2P networks had some success at sharing MP3s, though they all met a similar fate in court. The ruling set the precedent that copyrighted digital content cannot be freely replicated and shared unless given consent by the owner, thereby strengthening the property rights of artists and record labels alike.\nMusic streaming platforms.\nAlthough music streaming is no longer a freely replicable public good, streaming platforms such as Spotify, Deezer, Apple Music, SoundCloud, YouTube Music, and Amazon Music have shifted music streaming to a club-type good. While some platforms, most notably Spotify, give customers access to a freemium service that enables the use of limited features for exposure to advertisements, most companies operate under a premium subscription model. Under such circumstances, music streaming is financially excludable, requiring that customers pay a monthly fee for access to a music library, but non-rival, since one customer's use does not impair another's.\nAn article written by the New York Times in 2021 states that \"streaming saved music.\" This is because it provided monthly revenue. Especially Spotify offers its free platform, but you can pay for their premium to get music ad-free. This allows access for people to stream music anywhere from their devices not having to rely on CDs anymore.\nThere is competition between services similar but lesser to the streaming wars for video media. As of 2019[ [update]], Spotify has over 207\u00a0million users in 78 countries, As of 2018[ [update]], Apple Music has about 60\u00a0million, and SoundCloud has 175\u00a0million. All platforms provide varying degrees of accessibility. Apple Music and Prime Music only offer their services for paid subscribers, whereas Spotify and SoundCloud offer freemium and premium services. Napster, owned by Rhapsody since 2011, has resurfaced as a music streaming platform offering subscription-based services to over 4.5\u00a0million users as of January 2017[ [update]].\nIn the evolving music streaming landscape, competition among platforms is shaped by various factors, including royalty rates, exclusive content, and market expansion strategies. A notable development occurred in January 2025, when Universal Music Group (UMG) and Spotify announced a new multi-year agreement. This partnership aims to enhance opportunities for artists and consumers through innovative subscription tiers and an enriched audio-visual catalog.\nThe music industry's response to music streaming was initially negative. Along with music piracy, streaming services disrupted the market and contributed to the fall in US revenue from $14.6\u00a0billion in 1999 to $6.3\u00a0billion in 2009. CDs and single-track downloads were not selling because content was freely available on the Internet. By 2018, however, music streaming revenue exceeded that of traditional revenue streams (e.g. record sales, album sales, downloads). Streaming revenue is now one of the largest driving forces behind the growth in the music industry.\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nBy August 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had streaming services busier than ever. The pandemic contributed to a surge in subscriptions, in the UK alone, 12 million people joined a new streaming service that they had not previously had. Global subscriptions skyrocketed passing 1 billion. Within the first 3 months, back in 2020, nearly 15.7 million people signed up for Netflix.\nAn impact analysis of 2020 data by the International Confederation of Societies of Authors and Composers (CISAC) indicated that remuneration from digital streaming of music increased with a strong rise in digital royalty collection (up 16.6% to EUR 2.4\u00a0billion), but it would not compensate the overall loss of income of authors from concerts, public performance and broadcast. \u00a0The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) recompiled the music industry initiatives around the world related to the COVID-19. In its State of the Industry report, it recorded that the global recorded music market grew by 7.4% in 2022, the 6th consecutive year of growth. This growth was driven by streaming, mostly from paid subscription streaming revenues which increased by 18.5%, fueled by 443 million users of subscription accounts by the end of 2020.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic has also driven an increase in misinformation and disinformation, particularly on streaming platforms like YouTube and podcasts.\nLocal/home streaming.\nStreaming also refers to the offline streaming of multimedia at home. This is made possible by technologies such as DLNA, which allow devices on the same local network to connect to each other and share media. Such capabilities are heightened using network-attached storage (NAS) devices at home, or using specialized software like Plex Media Server, Jellyfin or TwonkyMedia.\nTechnologies.\nBandwidth.\nA broadband speed of 2\u00a0Mbit/s or more is recommended for streaming standard-definition video, for example to a Roku, Apple TV, Google\u00a0TV or a Sony\u00a0TV Blu-ray Disc Player. 5\u00a0Mbit/s is recommended for high-definition content and 25\u00a0Mbit/s for ultra-high-definition content. Streaming media storage size is calculated from the streaming bandwidth and length of the media using the following formula (for a single user and file): storage size in megabytes is equal to length (in seconds) \u00d7 bit rate (in bit/s) / (8 \u00d7 1024 \u00d7 1024). For example, one hour of digital video encoded at 300\u00a0kbit/s (this was a typical broadband video in 2005 and it was usually encoded in resolution) will be: (3,600\u00a0s\u00a0\u00d7 300,000\u00a0bit/s)\u00a0/ (8\u00a0\u00d7 1024\u00a0\u00d7 1024) requires around 128\u00a0MB of storage.\nIf the file is stored on a server for on-demand streaming and this stream is viewed by 1,000 people at the same time using a Unicast protocol, the requirement is 300\u00a0kbit/s\u00a0\u00d7 1,000\u00a0= 300,000\u00a0kbit/s\u00a0= 300\u00a0Mbit/s of bandwidth. This is equivalent to around 135\u00a0GB per hour. Using a multicast protocol the server sends out only a single stream that is common to all users. Therefore, such a stream would only use 300\u00a0kbit/s of server bandwidth.\nIn 2018 video was more than 60% of data traffic worldwide and accounted for 80% of growth in data usage.\nProtocols.\nVideo and audio streams are compressed to make the file size smaller. Audio coding formats include MP3, Vorbis, AAC and Opus. Video coding formats include H.264, HEVC, VP8, VP9 and AV1. Encoded audio and video streams are assembled in a container bitstream such as MP4, FLV, WebM, ASF or ISMA. The bitstream is delivered from a streaming server to a streaming client (e.g., the computer user with their Internet-connected laptop) using a transport protocol, such as Adobe's RTMP or RTP.\nIn the 2010s, technologies such as Apple's HLS, Microsoft's Smooth Streaming, Adobe's HDS and non-proprietary formats such as MPEG-DASH emerged to enable adaptive bitrate streaming over HTTP as an alternative to using proprietary transport protocols. Often, a streaming transport protocol is used to send video from an event venue to a cloud transcoding service and content delivery network, which then uses HTTP-based transport protocols to distribute the video to individual homes and users. The streaming client (the end user) may interact with the streaming server using a control protocol, such as MMS or RTSP.\nThe quality of the interaction between servers and users is based on the workload of the streaming service; as more users attempt to access a service the quality may be affected by resource constraints in the service. Deploying clusters of streaming servers is one such method where there are regional servers spread across the network, managed by a singular, central server containing copies of all the media files as well as the IP addresses of the regional servers. This central server then uses load balancing and scheduling algorithms to redirect users to nearby regional servers capable of accommodating them. This approach also allows the central server to provide streaming data to both users as well as regional servers using FFmpeg libraries if required, thus demanding the central server to have powerful data processing and immense storage capabilities. In return, workloads on the streaming backbone network are balanced and alleviated, allowing for optimal streaming quality.\nDesigning a network protocol to support streaming media raises many problems. Datagram protocols, such as the User Datagram Protocol (UDP), send the media stream as a series of small packets. This is simple and efficient; however, there is no mechanism within the protocol to guarantee delivery. It is up to the receiving application to detect loss or corruption and recover data using error correction techniques. If data is lost, the stream may suffer a dropout. The Real-Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP), Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) and the Real-time Transport Control Protocol (RTCP) were specifically designed to stream media over networks. RTSP runs over a variety of transport protocols, while the latter two are built on top of UDP.\nHTTP adaptive bitrate streaming is based on HTTP progressive download, but contrary to the previous approach, here the files are very small, so that they can be compared to the streaming of packets, much like the case of using RTSP and RTP. Reliable protocols, such as the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), guarantee correct delivery of each bit in the media stream. It means, however, that when there is data loss on the network, the media stream stalls while the protocol handlers detect the loss and retransmit the missing data. Clients can minimize this effect by buffering data for display. While delay due to buffering is acceptable in video-on-demand scenarios, users of interactive applications such as video conferencing will experience a loss of fidelity if the delay caused by buffering exceeds 200\u00a0ms.\nUnicast protocols send a separate copy of the media stream from the server to each recipient. Unicast is the norm for most Internet connections but does not scale well when many users want to view the same television program concurrently. Multicast protocols were developed to reduce server and network loads resulting from duplicate data streams that occur when many recipients receive unicast content streams independently. These protocols send a single stream from the source to a group of recipients. Depending on the network infrastructure and type, multicast transmission may or may not be feasible. One potential disadvantage of multicasting is the loss of video on demand functionality. Continuous streaming of radio or television material usually precludes the recipient's ability to control playback. However, this problem can be mitigated by elements such as caching servers, digital set-top boxes, and buffered media players.\nIP multicast provides a means to send a single media stream to a group of recipients on a computer network. A connection management protocol, usually Internet Group Management Protocol, is used to manage the delivery of multicast streams to the groups of recipients on a LAN. One of the challenges in deploying IP multicast is that routers and firewalls between LANs must allow the passage of packets destined to multicast groups. If the organization that is serving the content has control over the network between server and recipients (i.e.,\u00a0educational, government, and corporate intranets), then routing protocols such as Protocol Independent Multicast can be used to deliver stream content to multiple local area network segments.\nPeer-to-peer (P2P) protocols arrange for prerecorded streams to be sent between computers. This prevents the server and its network connections from becoming a bottleneck. However, it raises technical, performance, security, quality, and business issues.\nContent delivery networks (CDNs) use intermediate servers to distribute the load. Internet-compatible unicast delivery is used between CDN nodes and streaming destinations.\nRecording.\nMedia that is livestreamed can be recorded through certain media players, such as VLC player, or through the use of a screen recorder. Live-streaming platforms such as Twitch may also incorporate a video on demand system that allows automatic recording of live broadcasts so that they can be watched later. YouTube also has recordings of live broadcasts, including television shows aired on major networks. These streams have the potential to be recorded by anyone who has access to them, whether legally or otherwise.\nRecordings can happen through any device that allows people to watch movies they do not have access to or be at a music festival they could not get tickets to. These live streaming platforms have revolutionized entertainment, creating new ways for people to interact with content. Many celebrities started live streaming during COVID-19 through platforms like Instagram, YouTube, and TikTok offering an alternate form of entertainment when concerts were postponed. Live streaming and recording allow for fans to communicate with these artists through chats and likes.\nView recommendation.\nMost streaming services feature a recommender system for viewing based on each user's view history in conjunction with all viewers' aggregated view histories. Rather than focusing on subjective categorization of content by content curators, there is an assumption that, with the immensity of data collected on viewing habits, the choices of those who are first to view content can be algorithmically extrapolated to the totality of the user base, with increasing probabilistic accuracy as to the likelihood of their choosing and enjoying the recommended content as more data is collected.\nApplications and marketing.\nUseful and typical applications of streaming are, for example, long video lectures performed online. An advantage of this presentation is that these lectures can be very long, although they can always be interrupted or repeated at arbitrary places. Streaming enables new content marketing concepts. For example, the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra sells Internet live streams of whole concerts instead of several CDs or similar fixed media in their Digital Concert Hall using YouTube for trailers. These online concerts are also spread over a lot of different places, including cinemas at various places on the globe. A similar concept is used by the Metropolitan Opera in New York. There is also a livestream from the International Space Station. In video entertainment, video streaming platforms like Netflix, Hulu, and Disney+ are mainstream elements of the media industry.\nMarketers have found many opportunities offered by streaming media and the platforms that offer them, especially in light of the significant increase in the use of streaming media during COVID lockdowns from 2020 onwards. While revenue and placement of traditional advertising continued to decrease, digital marketing increased by 15% in 2021, with digital media and search representing 65% of the expenditures.\nA case study commissioned by the WIPO indicates that streaming services attract advertising budgets with the opportunities provided by interactivity and the use of data from users, resulting in personalization on a mass scale with content marketing. Targeted marketing is expanding with the use of artificial intelligence, in particular programmatic advertisement, a tool that helps advertisers decide their campaign parameters and whether they are interested in buying advertising space online or not. One example of advertising space acquisition is Real-Time Bidding (RTB).\nChallenges.\nCopyright issues.\nFor over-the-top media service (OTT) platforms, the original content captures additional subscribers. This presents copyright issues and the potential for international exploitation through streaming, widespread use of standards, and metadata in digital files. The WIPO has indicated several basic copyright issues arising for those pursuing work in the film and music industries in the era of streaming.\nStreaming copyrighted content can involve making infringing copies of the works in question. The recording and distribution of streamed content is also an issue for many companies that rely on revenue based on views or attendance.\nGreenhouse gas emissions.\nThe net greenhouse gas emissions from streaming music were estimated at between 0.2 and 0.35\u00a0million metric tons CO2eq (between ) per year in the United States, by a 2019 study. This was an increase from emissions in the pre-digital music period, which were estimated at \" in 1977, 0.136 million () in 1988, and 0.157\u00a0million () in 2000.\" However, this is far less than other everyday activities such as eating. For example greenhouse gas emissions in the United States from beef cattle (burping of ruminants only - not including their manure) were in 2019.\nA 2021 study claimed that, based on the amount of data transmitted, one hour of streaming or videoconferencing \"emits of carbon dioxide ... requires of water and demands a land area adding up to about the size of an iPad Mini.\" The study suggests that turning the camera off during video calls can reduce the greenhouse gas and water use footprints by 96%, and that an 86% reduction is possible by using standard definition rather than high definition when streaming content with apps such as Netflix or Hulu. However, another study estimated a relatively low amount of , and concluded that watching a Netflix video for half an hour emitted only the same amount as driving a gasoline-fuelled car for about , so not a significant amount.\nOne way to decrease greenhouse gas emissions associated with streaming music is to make data centers carbon neutral by converting to electricity produced from renewable sources. On an individual level, the purchase of a physical CD may be more environmentally friendly if it is to be played more than 27 times. Another option for reducing energy use is downloading the music for offline listening to reduce the need for streaming over distance. The Spotify service has a built-in local cache to reduce the necessity of repeating song streams.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28684", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28684", "title": "Session Initiation Protocol", "text": "Voice-over-IP communications protocol\nThe Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) is a signaling protocol used for initiating, maintaining, modifying, and terminating communication sessions that involve multimedia elements such as voice, video, and messaging. It operates at the application layer of the Internet protocol suite and is widely used in Internet telephony, private IP-based telephone systems, and mobile communication over LTE networks through VoLTE. \nSIP is a text-based protocol modeled on the structure of HTTP and SMTP, enabling interoperability and integration with other Internet applications. It provides mechanisms for user location, session setup, and session management, making it a foundational component of modern IP multimedia systems.\nThe protocol defines the specific format of messages exchanged and the sequence of communications for cooperation of the participants. SIP is a text-based protocol, incorporating many elements of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP). A call established with SIP may consist of multiple media streams, but no separate streams are required for applications, such as text messaging, that exchange data as payload in the SIP message.\nSIP works in conjunction with several other protocols that specify and carry the session media. Most commonly, media type and parameter negotiation and media setup are performed with the Session Description Protocol (SDP), which is carried as payload in SIP messages. SIP is designed to be independent of the underlying transport layer protocol and can be used with the User Datagram Protocol (UDP), the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), and the Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP). For secure transmissions of SIP messages over insecure network links, the protocol may be encrypted with Transport Layer Security (TLS). For the transmission of media streams (voice, video) the SDP payload carried in SIP messages typically employs the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) or the Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP).\nHistory.\nSIP was originally designed by Mark Handley, Henning Schulzrinne, Eve Schooler and Jonathan Rosenberg in 1996 to facilitate establishing multicast multimedia sessions on the Mbone. The protocol was standardized as in 1999. In November 2000, SIP was accepted as a 3GPP signaling protocol and permanent element of the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) architecture for IP-based streaming multimedia services in cellular networks. In June 2002 the specification was revised in and various extensions and clarifications have been published since.\nSIP was designed to provide a signaling and call setup protocol for IP-based communications supporting the call processing functions and features present in the public switched telephone network (PSTN) with a vision of supporting new multimedia applications. It has been extended for video conferencing, streaming media distribution, instant messaging, presence information, file transfer, Internet fax and online games.\nSIP is distinguished by its proponents for having roots in the Internet community rather than in the telecommunications industry. SIP has been standardized primarily by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), while other protocols, such as H.323, have traditionally been associated with the International Telecommunication Union (ITU).\nProtocol operation.\nSIP is only involved in the signaling operations of a media communication session and is primarily used to set up and terminate voice or video calls. SIP can be used to establish two-party (unicast) or multiparty (multicast) sessions. It also allows modification of existing calls. The modification can involve changing addresses or ports, inviting more participants, and adding or deleting media streams. SIP has also found applications in messaging applications, such as instant messaging, and event subscription and notification.\nSIP works in conjunction with several other protocols that specify the media format and coding and that carry the media once the call is set up. For call setup, the body of a SIP message contains a Session Description Protocol (SDP) data unit, which specifies the media format, codec and media communication protocol. Voice and video media streams are typically carried between the terminals using the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) or Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP).\nEvery resource of a SIP network, such as user agents, call routers, and voicemail boxes, are identified by a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI). The syntax of the URI follows the general standard syntax also used in Web services and e-mail. The URI scheme used for SIP is \"sip\" and a typical SIP URI has the form \"sip:username@domainname\" or \"sip:username@hostport\", where \"domainname\" requires DNS SRV records to locate the servers for SIP domain while \"hostport\" can be an IP address or a fully qualified domain name of the host and port. If secure transmission is required, the scheme \"sips\" is used.\nSIP employs design elements similar to the HTTP request and response transaction model. Each transaction consists of a client request that invokes a particular method or function on the server and at least one response. SIP reuses most of the header fields, encoding rules and status codes of HTTP, providing a readable text-based format.\nSIP can be carried by several transport layer protocols including Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), User Datagram Protocol (UDP), and Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP). SIP clients typically use TCP or UDP on port numbers 5060 or 5061 for SIP traffic to servers and other endpoints. Port 5060 is commonly used for non-encrypted signaling traffic whereas port 5061 is typically used for traffic encrypted with Transport Layer Security (TLS).\nSIP-based telephony networks often implement call processing features of Signaling System 7 (SS7), for which special SIP protocol extensions exist, although the two protocols themselves are very different. SS7 is a centralized protocol, characterized by a complex central network architecture and dumb endpoints (traditional telephone handsets). SIP is a client-server protocol of equipotent peers. SIP features are implemented in the communicating endpoints, while the traditional SS7 architecture is in use only between switching centers.\nNetwork elements.\nThe network elements that use the Session Initiation Protocol for communication are called \"SIP user agents\". Each \"user agent\" (UA) performs the function of a \"user agent client\" (UAC) when it is requesting a service function, and that of a \"user agent server\" (UAS) when responding to a request. Thus, any two SIP endpoints may in principle operate without any intervening SIP infrastructure. However, for network operational reasons, for provisioning public services to users, and for directory services, SIP defines several specific types of network server elements. Each of these service elements also communicates within the client-server model implemented in user agent clients and servers.\nUser agent.\nA user agent is a logical network endpoint that sends or receives SIP messages and manages SIP sessions. User agents have client and server components. The user agent client (UAC) sends SIP requests. The user agent server (UAS) receives requests and returns a SIP response. Unlike other network protocols that fix the roles of client and server, e.g., in HTTP, in which a web browser only acts as a client, and never as a server, SIP requires both peers to implement both roles. The roles of UAC and UAS only last for the duration of a SIP transaction.\nA SIP phone is an IP phone that implements client and server functions of a SIP user agent and provides the traditional call functions of a telephone, such as dial, answer, reject, call hold, and call transfer. SIP phones may be implemented as a hardware device or as a softphone. As vendors increasingly implement SIP as a standard telephony platform, the distinction between hardware-based and software-based SIP phones is blurred and SIP elements are implemented in the basic firmware functions of many IP-capable communications devices such as smartphones.\nIn SIP, as in HTTP, the user agent may identify itself using a message header field (\"User-Agent\"), containing a text description of the software, hardware, or the product name. The user agent field is sent in request messages, which means that the receiving SIP server can evaluate this information to perform device-specific configuration or feature activation. Operators of SIP network elements sometimes store this information in customer account portals, where it can be useful in diagnosing SIP compatibility problems or in the display of service status.\nProxy server.\nA proxy server is a network server with UAC and UAS components that functions as an intermediary entity for the purpose of performing requests on behalf of other network elements. A proxy server primarily plays the role of call routing; it sends SIP requests to another entity closer to the destination. Proxies are also useful for enforcing policy, such as for determining whether a user is allowed to make a call. A proxy interprets, and, if necessary, rewrites specific parts of a request message before forwarding it.\nSIP proxy servers that route messages to more than one destination are called forking proxies. The forking of a SIP request establishes multiple dialogs from the single request. Thus, a call may be answered from one of multiple SIP endpoints. For identification of multiple dialogs, each dialog has an identifier with contributions from both endpoints.\nRedirect server.\nA redirect server is a user agent server that generates 3xx (redirection) responses to requests it receives, directing the client to contact an alternate set of URIs. A redirect server allows proxy servers to direct SIP session invitations to external domains.\nRegistrar.\nA registrar is a SIP endpoint that provides a location service. It accepts REGISTER requests, recording the address and other parameters from the user agent. For subsequent requests, it provides an essential means to locate possible communication peers on the network. The location service links one or more IP addresses to the SIP URI of the registering agent. Multiple user agents may register for the same URI, with the result that all registered user agents receive the calls to the URI.\nSIP registrars are logical elements and are often co-located with SIP proxies. To improve network scalability, location services may instead be located with a redirect server.\nSession border controller.\nSession border controllers (SBCs) serve as middleboxes between user agents and SIP servers for various types of functions, including network topology hiding and assistance in NAT traversal. SBCs are an independently engineered solution and are not mentioned in the SIP RFC.\nGateway.\nGateways can be used to interconnect a SIP network to other networks, such as the PSTN, which use different protocols or technologies.\nSIP messages.\nSIP is a text-based protocol with syntax similar to that of HTTP. There are two different types of SIP messages: requests and responses. The first line of a request has a \"method\", defining the nature of the request, and a Request-URI, indicating where the request should be sent. The first line of a response has a \"response code\".\nRequests.\nRequests initiate a functionality of the protocol. They are sent by a user agent client to the server and are answered with one or more SIP responses, which return a result code of the transaction, and generally indicate the success, failure, or other state of the transaction.\nResponses.\nResponses are sent by the user agent server indicating the result of a received request. Several classes of responses are recognized, determined by the numerical range of result codes:\nTransactions.\nSIP defines a transaction mechanism to control the exchanges between participants and deliver messages reliably. A transaction is a state of a session, which is controlled by various timers. Client transactions send requests and server transactions respond to those requests with one or more responses. The responses may include provisional responses with a response code in the form \"1xx\", and one or multiple final responses (2xx \u2013 6xx).\nTransactions are further categorized as either type \"invite\" or type \"non-invite\". Invite transactions differ in that they can establish a long-running conversation, referred to as a \"dialog\" in SIP, and so include an acknowledgment (ACK) of any non-failing final response, e.g., \"200 OK\".\nInstant messaging and presence.\nThe Session Initiation Protocol for Instant Messaging and Presence Leveraging Extensions (SIMPLE) is the SIP-based suite of standards for instant messaging and presence information. Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP) allows instant message sessions and file transfer.\nConformance testing.\nThe SIP developer community meets regularly at conferences organized by SIP Forum to test interoperability of SIP implementations. The TTCN-3 test specification language, developed by a task force at ETSI (STF 196), is used for specifying conformance tests for SIP implementations.\nPerformance testing.\nWhen developing SIP software or deploying a new SIP infrastructure, it is important to test the capability of servers and IP networks to handle certain call load: number of concurrent calls and number of calls per second. SIP performance tester software is used to simulate SIP and RTP traffic to see if the server and IP network are stable under the call load. The software measures performance indicators like answer delay, answer/seizure ratio, RTP jitter and packet loss, round-trip delay time.\nApplications.\n\"SIP connection\" is a marketing term for voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) services offered by many Internet telephony service providers (ITSPs). The service provides routing of telephone calls from a client's private branch exchange (PBX) telephone system to the PSTN. Such services may simplify corporate information system infrastructure by sharing Internet access for voice and data, and removing the cost for Basic Rate Interface (BRI) or Primary Rate Interface (PRI) telephone circuits.\nSIP trunking is a similar marketing term preferred for when the service is used to simplify a telecom infrastructure by sharing the carrier access circuit for voice, data, and Internet traffic while removing the need for PRI circuits.\nSIP-enabled video surveillance cameras can initiate calls to alert the operator of events, such as the motion of objects in a protected area.\nSIP is used in audio over IP for broadcasting applications where it provides an interoperable means for audio interfaces from different manufacturers to make connections with one another.\nImplementations.\nThe U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Advanced Networking Technologies Division provides a public-domain Java implementation that serves as a reference implementation for the standard. The implementation can work in proxy server or user agent scenarios and has been used in numerous commercial and research projects. It supports in full and a number of extension RFCs including (event notification) and (reliable provisional responses).\nNumerous other commercial and open-source SIP implementations exist. See List of SIP software.\nSIP-ISUP interworking.\nSIP-I, Session Initiation Protocol with encapsulated ISUP, is a protocol used to create, modify, and terminate communication sessions based on ISUP using SIP and IP networks. Services using SIP-I include voice, video telephony, fax and data. SIP-I and SIP-T are two protocols with similar features, notably to allow ISUP messages to be transported over SIP networks. This preserves all of the detail available in the ISUP header. SIP-I was defined by the ITU-T, whereas SIP-T was defined by the IETF.\nEncryption.\nConcerns about the security of calls via the public Internet have been addressed by encryption of the SIP protocol for secure transmission. The URI scheme SIPS is used to mandate that SIP communication be secured with Transport Layer Security (TLS). SIPS URIs take the form sips:user@example.com.\nEnd-to-end encryption of SIP is only possible if there is a direct connection between communication endpoints. While a direct connection can be made via Peer-to-peer SIP or via a VPN between the endpoints, most SIP communication involves multiple hops, with the first hop being from a user agent to the user agent's ITSP. For the multiple-hop case, SIPS will only secure the first hop; the remaining hops will normally not be secured with TLS and the SIP communication will be insecure. In contrast, the HTTPS protocol provides end-to-end security as it is done with a direct connection and does not involve the notion of hops.\nThe media streams (audio and video), which are separate connections from the SIPS signaling stream, may be encrypted using SRTP. The key exchange for SRTP is performed with SDES (), or with ZRTP (). When SDES is used, the keys will be transmitted via insecure SIP unless SIPS is used. One may also add a MIKEY () exchange to SIP to determine session keys for use with SRTP.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28685", "revid": "287161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28685", "title": "Squatting", "text": "Unauthorized occupation of property\nSquatting is the action of occupying an abandoned or unoccupied area of land or a building (usually residential) that the squatter does not own, rent or otherwise have lawful permission to use. The United Nations estimated in 2003 that there were one billion slum residents and squatters globally. Squatting is practiced worldwide, typically when people find empty buildings or land to occupy for housing.\nIn developing countries and least developed countries, shanty towns often begin as squatted settlements. In African cities such as Lagos, much of the population lives in slums. There are pavement dwellers in India and in Hong Kong as well as rooftop slums. Informal settlements in Latin America are known by names such as villa miseria (Argentina), pueblos j\u00f3venes (Peru) and asentamientos irregulares (Guatemala, Uruguay). In Brazil, there are favelas in the major cities and land-based movements in rural areas.\nIn industrialized countries, there are often residential squats and also left-wing squatting movements, which can be anarchist, autonomist or socialist in nature, for example in the United States. Oppositional movements from the 1960s and 1970s created freespaces in Denmark, the Netherlands and the self-managed social centres of Italy. Each local situation determines the context: in England and Wales, there were estimated to be 50,000 squatters in the late 1970s; in Athens, Greece, there are refugee squats. In Spain and the US, the 2010s saw many new squats following the 2008 financial crisis.\nOverview.\nThe practice of squatting historically stems from multiple sources, one of which is the development by illegalist and individualist anarchist groups, such as the \"Pieds plats\", of the concept of \"d\u00e9m\u00e9nagement \u00e0 la cloche de bois\" ('silent move-outs')\u2014the act of leaving a residence without notifying the landlord and ceasing to pay rent. This practice became an early precursor to squatting.\nThe majority of squatting is residential in nature. As a phenomenon, it tends to occur when a poor and homeless population makes use of derelict property or land through urban homesteading. According to a 2003 estimate by the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), there were about one billion people in squatter settlements and slums. According to housing researcher Kesia Reeve, \"squatting is largely absent from policy and academic debate and is rarely conceptualised, as a problem, as a symptom, or as a social or housing movement.\"\nIn many of the world's poorer countries, there are extensive slums or shanty towns, typically built on the edges of major cities and consisting almost entirely of self-constructed housing built without the landowner's permission. While these settlements may in time become upgraded, they often start off as squats with minimal basic infrastructure. Thus, there is no legal link to sewerage, electricity or water. Such settlements also exist in industrialized countries, such as for example Ca\u00f1ada Real on the outskirts of Madrid.\nSquatting can be related to left-wing movements, such as anarchist, autonomist, or socialist. It can be a means to conserve buildings or a protest action. Squats can be used by local communities as free shops, caf\u00e9s, venues, pirate radio stations or as multi-purpose self-managed social centres. Adverse possession, sometimes described as squatter's rights, is a method of acquiring title to property through possession for a statutory period under certain conditions. Countries where this principle exists include England and the United States, based on common law.\nAnarchist author Colin Ward asserts: \"Squatting is the oldest mode of tenure in the world, and we are all descended from squatters. This is as true of the Queen [of the United Kingdom] with her as it is of the 54 percent of householders in Britain who are owner-occupiers. They are all the ultimate recipients of stolen land, for to regard our planet as a commodity offends every conceivable principle of natural rights.\" Others have a different view; UK police official Sue Williams, for example, has stated that \"Squatting is linked to anti-social behaviour and can cause a great deal of nuisance and distress to local residents. In some cases, there may also be criminal activities involved.\" The public attitude toward squatting varies, depending on legal aspects, socioeconomic conditions, and the type of housing occupied by squatters. In particular, while squatting of municipal buildings may be treated leniently, squatting of private property can often lead to strongly negative reactions on the part of the general public and the authorities.\nBy region.\nAfrica.\nIn African countries such as Nigeria, informal settlements are created by migration from rural areas to urban areas. Reasons for squatting include the lack of low cost housing, unemployment and inability to access loans. In 1995, almost 70% of the population of the Nigerian capital Lagos were living in slums. The City of the Dead slum is a well-known squatter community in Cairo, Egypt. Between 1955 and 1975, the Cairo authorities built 39,000 public housing apartments but 2 million people moved there, mostly ending up in informal housing. In Alexandria, Egypt's second city, public housing was only 0.5% of the total housing stock, whereas informal housing was 68%. An estimated 3,500 people live in the Grande Hotel Beira in Mozambique. Informal settlements in Zambia, particularly around Lusaka, are known as kombonis. As of 2011, 64% of Zambians lived below the poverty line, whilst the United Nations predicted a 941% population increase by 2100.\nIn Liberia, squatting is one of three ways to access land, the other being ownership by deed or customary ownership. West Point was founded in Monrovia in the 1950s and is estimated to house between 29,500 and 75,000 people. During the First Liberian Civil War 1989\u20131997 and the Second Liberian Civil War 1999\u20132003, many people in Liberia were displaced and some ended up squatting in Monrovia. The Ducor Hotel fell into disrepair and was squatted, before being evicted in 2007. Recently, over 9,000 Burkinab\u00e9s were squatting on remote land and the Liberia Land Authority (LLA) has announced it will be titling all land in the country.\nIn South Africa, squatters tend to live in informal settlements or squatter camps on the outskirts of the larger cities, often but not always near townships. In the mid-1990s, an estimated 7.7 million South Africans lived in informal settlements: a fifth of the country's population. The figure was estimated to be 15 million in 2004. In Cape Town and Durban, there have been sustained conflict between the city council and a shack dwellers' movement known as Abahlali baseMjondolo. The organisation has represented the squatters in land occupations such as the Macassar Village in 2009 and the Cape Town and Durban Marikana land occupations in 2013 (both named after the Marikana massacre). It also successfully challenged the KZN Slums Act, which sought to mandate the eviction of slums but was eventually declared unconstitutional.\nThere have been a number of similar conflicts between shack dwellers, some linked with the Western Cape Anti-Eviction Campaign, and the city council in Cape Town. One of the most high-profile cases was the eviction of squatters in the N2 Gateway homes in the suburb of Delft, where over 20 residents were shot, including a three-year-old child. There have been numerous complaints about the legality of the government's actions. Many of the families then squatted on Symphony Way, a main road in the township of Delft, before being forced to move to a camp called Blikkiesdorp.\nSquatting in Sudan is defined as the \"acquisition and construction of land, within the city boundaries for the purpose of housing in contradiction to Urban Planning and Land laws and building regulations.\" These informal settlements arose in Khartoum from the 1920s onwards, swelling in the 1960s. By the 1980s, the government was clearing settlements in Khartoum and regularizing them elsewhere. It was estimated that in 2015 that were 200,000 squatters in Khartoum, 180,000 in Nyala, 60,000 in Kassala, 70,000 in Port Sudan and 170,000 in Wad Madani.\nLand squats occurred in what would become Zimbabwe in the 1970s and were routinely evicted. Only Epworth persisted on account of its size (around 50,000 people). After Zimbabwe was created in 1980, peasant farmers and squatters disputed the distribution of land. Informal settlements have developed on the periphery of cities such as Chitungwiza and the capital Harare. In 2005, Operation Murambatsvina (\"Operation Drive Out Filth\") organised by President Robert Mugabe evicted an estimated 700,000 people and affected over two million people.\nMiddle East.\nIsraeli settlements are communities of Israeli citizens living in the Palestinian territories. The international community considers the settlements in occupied territory to be illegal,\nIn March 2018, Israeli settlers were evicted from a house they had illegally occupied in Hebron, a Palestinian city in the West Bank. The fifteen families had argued that they had bought the house, but the High Court of Justice ruled that they had to leave. The Israel Defense Forces declared the building a closed military zone and it was unclear if the Palestinian owners could regain possession. The settlers had already occupied the house and been evicted in 2012. In October 2018, Fatou Bensouda, the Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court stated that Israel's planned demolition of Bedouin village Khan al-Ahmar could constitute a war crime.\nGecekondu is a Turkish word meaning a house put up quickly without proper permissions, a squatter's house, and by extension, a shanty or shack. From the 1960s onwards, these settlements have provided a means of housing for poor workers and new migrants arriving in cities such as Ankara and Istanbul. From the 1980s onwards, property developers have upgraded many gecekondu areas. Shortly after the 2013 Gezi Park protests in Istanbul, Don Ki\u015fot (Don Quixote) was squatted in the Kad\u0131k\u00f6y district. It was stated to be the city's first occupied and self-managed social centre; Cafera\u011fa Mahalle Evi (community centre Cafera\u011fa), also in Kad\u0131k\u00f6y, was squatted soon afterwards and evicted in December 2014. A place was occupied in Be\u015fikta\u015f district of Istanbul on March 18, 2014, and named Berkin Elvan Student House, after a 15-year-old boy who was shot during the Gezi protests and later died. Atopya was squatted in Ankara in June 2014 by anarchists, who claimed it was the city's first political squat.\nSouth and East Asia.\nSquatters in Malaysia live on both privately owned and government-owned land. Some squatters have lived on land owned by national electricity company Tenaga Nasional for over five decades. Squatters in Indonesia live on both privately owned and government-owned land. For example, the former Kalisosok Prison in Surabaya has been squatted since 2000s after being used as a prison for over 100 years. In Thailand, although evictions have reduced their visibility or numbers in urban areas, many squatters still occupy land near railroad tracks, under overpasses, and waterways. Commercial squatting is common in Thailand, where businesses temporarily seize nearby public real estate (such as sidewalks, roadsides, beaches, etc.) and roll out their enterprise, and at closing time they fold it in and lock it up, thus avoiding the extra cost of having to rent more property. In the early 2000s, the government estimated that 37% of the population lived in low-income urban communities, over half of which were squatting public land or renting precariously. The National Housing Authority stated over 100,000 families were living under threat of immediate eviction.\nIn China, informal settlements are known as urban villages. Squatter settlements occurred in Hong Kong in 1946, after its wartime occupation by Japan. After 700,000 people migrated from mainland China to Hong Kong between 1949 and 1950; the squatter population was estimated at 300,000, with people sleeping wherever they could find a space. A fire at Shek Kip Mei in December 1953 resulted in over 50,000 slum-dwellers being left homeless. Rooftop slums then developed, when people began to live illegally on the roofs of urban buildings. In addition, the Kowloon Walled City became an area for squatters, housing up to 50,000 people in Hong Kong.\nIn Mumbai, India, there are an estimated 10 to 12 million inhabitants, and six million of them are squatters. The squatters live in a variety of ways. Some possess two- or three-story homes built out of brick and concrete which they have inhabited for years. Geeta Nagar is a squatter village based beside the Indian Navy compound at Colaba. Squatter Colony in Malad East has existed since 1962, and now, people living there pay a rent to the city council of 100 rupees a month. Dharavi is a community of one million squatters. The stores and factories situated there are mainly illegal and so are unregulated, but it is suggested that they do over $1 million in business every day. Other squatters are pavement dwellers, with very few possessions. Activists such as Jockin Arputham, Prema Gopalan and Sheela Patel are working for better living conditions for slum dwellers, through organisations such as Mahila Milan and Slum Dwellers International. In the 2016 Mathura clash, members of Azad Bharat Vidhik Vaicharik Kranti Satyagrahi (Free India Legal Ideas Revolutionary Protesters) who had been living in Mathura's largest public park Jawahar Bagh for two years were evicted in a large police operation. At least 24 squatters were killed.\nAfter World War II many people were left homeless in the Philippines and they built makeshift houses called \"barong-barong\" on abandoned private land. The first mass eviction on record in Manila was 1951 and the largest was in late 1963 and early 1964 when 90,000 people were displaced. By 1978, there were estimated to be two million squatters in Manila, occupying 415 different locations. The number of squatters grew during the early 1980s, and attempts to relocate squatters to low-cost housing projects were made by the national government. The sites were not received well, as it moved people far away from their employment and social networks. Projects included the redevelopment of the former Smokey Mountain landfill in Tondo, the BLISS housing project in Taguig, and the establishment of Barangay Bagong Silang as a resettlement area for slum dwellers residing in Manila. Philippine law distinguishes between squatters who squat because of poverty and those who squat in hopes of getting a payment to leave the property. In 1982, Imelda Marcos referred to the latter group as \"professional squatters [...] plain land-grabbers taking advantage of the compassionate society\". Philippines-based media and journalists refer to squatters as \"informal settlers\". The Community Mortgage Program was set up in 1992, aiming to help low-income families transition from squatting to affordable housing. By 2001, around 106,000 families had found secure housing in over 800 separate communities.\nCentral and Eastern Europe.\nThe trajectory of squatting in central and eastern Europe is different from that of western Europe because, until recently, countries were part of the Communist Bloc and squatting is generally not tolerated. \nIn 1980s Soviet Russia, there was a practice used by artists and musicians to acquire communal rooms and then expand into other rooms. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, there were many collectively organised housing occupations by families and refugees. The groups would attempt to legalise in some cases and not in others. There were also art squats, for example, in Saint Petersburg, there were Pushkinskaya 10, Na Fontanke and Synovia doktora Pelia. In the early 1990s, the Government of Moscow prepared to renovate buildings, but then ran out of money, meaning that squatters occupied prime real estate. By 1996, 40 percent of Tverskaya Street was rented illegally or squatted.\nSquatting in the Czech Republic began in its modern form when anarchist and punk activists inspired by squatting movements in Amsterdam and Berlin occupied derelict houses following the 1989 Velvet Revolution. Ladronka (1993\u20132000) became internationally famous as a hub for counter-cultural activities and anarchist organisation. Squat Milada was occupied in 1997 and evicted in 2009. Its longevity was in part due to the building not existing in the cadastre. Klinika was an occupied social centre between 2014 and 2019. These three social centres, all in Prague, were the city's three most important political squats.\nStarting from December 2012, Greek Police initiated extensive raids in a number of squats in Athens, arresting and charging with offences all illegal occupants (mostly anarchists). Squats including Villa Amalia were evicted. A march in support of the 92 arrestees drew between 3,000 and 8,000 people. After Villa Amalia, Villa Skaramanga and then Villa Lela Karagianni were evicted. Lela Karagianni had been squatted since 1998 and was later reoccupied. The name came from the street, named for a Greek World War II resistance leader of that name. From 2015 onwards Athens has seen refugee squats in response to the European migrant crisis which are anarchist and self-organised. In 2019, several squats in Exarcheia were evicted by the Greek state. Some of the migrants evicted set up a camp outside the Parliament at Syntagma Square.\nThere was a large squatting movement in the newly formed state of Austria following the First World War. Famine was a significant problem for many people in Austria and the \"Siedler\" (settler) movement developed as these people tried to create shelter and a source of food for themselves. The Ernst Kirchweger Haus (EKH) in Vienna was squatted as a social centre in 1990 and legalised in 2008. In 2014, 1,500 riot police officers, a tank-like police vehicle, a police water cannon and helicopters were used to clear a building occupied by the group Pizzeria Anarchia in Vienna.\nWestern Europe.\nIn many West European countries, since the 1960s and 1970s, there are both squatted houses used as residences and self-managed social centres where people pursue social and cultural activities. In Belgium, the village of Doel was slowly occupied by squatters and used by street artists after becoming a ghost village when the plans to expand Port of Antwerp stalled. Christiania in Copenhagen, Denmark, is an independent community of almost 900 people founded in 1971 on the site of an abandoned military zone. In Copenhagen, as in other European cities such as Berlin and Amsterdam, the squatter movement was large in the 1980s. It was a social movement, providing housing and alternative culture. A flashpoint came in 1986 with the Battle of Ryesgade. Another flashpoint came in 2007 when Ungdomshuset was evicted. While not technically a squat until 14 December 2006, it was a social centre used by squatters and people involved in alternative culture more generally. After a year of protests, the city council donated a new building. The Dublin Housing Action Committee (DHAC) was active between 1968 and 1971, occupying buildings to protest the housing crisis in Ireland. The Prohibition of Forcible Entry and Occupation Act of 1971 criminalized squatting. Squatters can gain title to land and property by adverse possession as governed by the 1957 Statute of Limitations Act. From the 1990s onwards, there have been occasional political squats such as Disco Disco, Magpie and Grangegorman. In early twentieth century France, several artists who would later become world-famous, such as Guillaume Apollinaire, Amedeo Modigliani and Pablo Picasso squatted at the , in Montmartre, Paris. Paris moved to legitimize some popular artist squats in the mid-2000s by purchasing and renovating the buildings for artist\u2013residents. An example is Les Frigos. In the 2010s there have been several land squats protesting against large infrastructure projects. These are known collectively as Zone to Defend or ZAD (French: zone \u00e0 d\u00e9fendre). The first and largest was the ZAD de Notre-Dame-des-Landes, which successfully opposed an airport project near Nantes.\nGeneva in Switzerland had 160 buildings illegally occupied and more than 2,000 squatters, in the middle of the 1990s. The RHINO (, in English: \"Return of Inhabitants to Non-Occupied Buildings\") was a 19-year-long squat in Geneva. It occupied two buildings on the Boulevard des Philosophes, a few blocks away from the main campus of the University of Geneva. The RHINO organisation often faced legal troubles, and Geneva police evicted the inhabitants on July 23, 2007. There were large riots in Z\u00fcrich when the Binz occupation was evicted in 2013. The squatters moved to another building.\nDuring the public opposition in the 1970s, squatting in West German cities led to what Margit Mayer termed \"a self-confident urban counterculture with its own infrastructure of newspapers, self-managed collectives and housing cooperatives, feminist groups, and so on, which was prepared to intervene in local and broader politics\". The Autonomen movement protected squats against eviction and participated in radical direct action in cities such as Berlin. The squats were mainly for residential and social use. Squatting became known by the term , from (\"renovating\") and ' (\"occupying\"). Well-known contemporary squats include K\u00f8pi in Berlin and Rote Flora in Hamburg. Legalised housing projects include Hafenstra\u00dfe in Hamburg and Kiefernstra\u00dfe in D\u00fcsseldorf. The Mietsh\u00e4user Syndikat was founded in 1992 by people who had been squatting in Freiburg im Breisgau in the 1980s to provide a way of transforming private property into collective ownership, including squats. Squatting has also been used as a tactic for campaigning purposes, such as the Anatopia project, which protested against a Mercedes-Benz test track. Squatters moved into the former factory site of J.A. Topf &amp; S\u00f6hne in Erfurt in April 2001 and remained there until they were evicted by police in April 2009. The firm made crematoria for Nazi concentration camps. The squatters ran culture programs which drew attention to the history of the company. The occupation was known simply as ' (the occupied house) and was one of the most well known actions of left-radicals of that period in Germany. A book about the occupation was published in 2012, entitled \"Topf &amp; S\u00f6hne \u2013\" \"\" (\"Topf &amp; S\u00f6hne \u2013 Occupation of a crime scene\"). Since 2012, Hambach Forest has been occupied by activists seeking to prevent its destruction by the energy company RWE. While the majority of squatting in Germany still comes from left-wing actors there are also examples of right-wing squatting. An example for right-wing squatting in Berlin is the occupation of Weitlingstra\u00dfe 122. The house was occupied by neo-Nazis in 1990, when a lot of houses in former GDR where empty. They named similar social issues as leftist squatters as their reason for squatting. The space was used for different purposes ranging from a place to live, gather or party, to producing propaganda and planning right-wing terrorist activities. The squat dissolved at the end of 1990 because of disagreements in the heterogenous group of squatters.\nIn Reykjav\u00edk, the capital of Iceland, there is a small tradition of squatting. In 1919, anarchists occupied a building and were quickly evicted. Squatters occupied an empty house in downtown Reykjav\u00edk on Vatnsstigur street in April 2009. The squatters set up a freeshop and had plans for a social centre, but the occupation was quickly evicted by the police and 22 people were arrested. Vatnsstigur 4 was briefly resquatted on May 7, 2009, in solidarity with the Rozbrat squat in Poland, which was threatened with eviction. Also in 2009, a group of graffiti artists called the Pretty Boys occupied Hverfisgata 34. Their intention was to make a clandestine gallery and then when they were not evicted, they legalised the space and called it Gallery Bosnia. When the Reykjav\u00edkur Akadem\u00edan (the Reykjav\u00edk Academy) was evicted at short notice from Hringbraut 121 in November 2011, it was occupied in protest. The space, which had hosted lectures and also Iceland's trade union and anarchist libraries, was moved to another location but the occupiers were unhappy that the new use of the building would be a guest house for tourists. An art exhibition was organised, with a camera obscura, live music and shadow theatre.\nIn Italy, despite the lack of official data, it appears that about 50,000 buildings all over the country are unused or abandoned and thus subject to squatting. Squatting has no legal basis, but many squats are used as social centres. The first occupations of abandoned buildings began in 1968 with the left-wing movements Lotta Continua and Potere Operaio. Out of the breakup of these two movements was born Autonomia Operaia, which was composed of a Marxist\u2013Leninist and Maoist wing and also an anarchist and more libertarian one. These squats had Marxist\u2013Leninist (but also Stalinist and Maoist) ideals and came from the left wing of Autonomia. The militants of the Italian armed struggle (the New Red Brigades) were connected to these squats. There are many left-wing self-organised occupied projects across Italy such as Cascina Torchiera and Centro Sociale Leoncavallo in Milan and Forte Prenestino in Rome. In Rome there is also a far-right social centre, Casa Pound. This situation has so far received the approval of Italian courts, which have been reluctant to defend the owners' rights. In contrast with the dominant jurisprudence, new case-law (from the Rome Tribunal and the Supreme Court of Cassation) instructs the government to pay damages in case of squatting if the institutions have failed to prevent it.\nRegarding squatting in the Netherlands, the Dutch use the term \"krakers\" to refer to people who squat houses with the aim of living in them (as opposed to people who break into buildings for the purpose of vandalism or theft). Notable squats in cities around the country include ACU and Moira in Utrecht, the Poortgebouw in Rotterdam, OCCII, OT301 and Vrankrijk in Amsterdam, the Grote Broek in Nijmegen, Vrijplaats Koppenhinksteeg in Leiden, De Vloek in The Hague and the Landbouwbelang in Maastricht. Land squats include Ruigoord and Fort Pannerden. On 1 June 2010, squatting in the Netherland became illegal and punishable when a decree was sent out that the squatting ban would be enforced from 1 October. Following legal challenges, on October 28, 2011, the Supreme Court of the Netherlands decided that the eviction of a squat can only occur after an intervention of a judge. The Dutch government assessed the effectiveness of the new law in 2015, releasing a report giving statistics on arrests and convictions between October 2010 and December 2014. During this time period, 529 people have been arrested for the act of occupying derelict buildings in 213 separate incidents. Of the 529 arrests, 210 were found guilty. Of those convicted, 39 people were imprisoned for the new offence.\nIn Francoist Spain migrant workers lived in slums on the periphery of cities. After the Spanish transition to democracy, residential squatting occurred in Spanish cities such as Barcelona, Bilbao, Madrid, Valencia and Zaragoza. The number of squatted social centres in Barcelona grew from under thirty in the 1990s to around sixty in 2014, as recorded by \"Info Usurpa\" (a weekly activist agenda). The influential Kasa de la Muntanya was occupied in 1989. In 2014, the ultimately unsuccessful attempts to evict the long-running social centre of Can Vies provoked major riots. Another long-running squat is Can Masdeu, which survived a concerted eviction attempt in 2002. Eleven occupiers suspended themselves off the walls of the building for several days. Younger squatters set up self-managed social centres which hosted events and campaigns. The 1995 Criminal Code among other things criminalised squatting, but failed to stop it. Social centres exist in cities across the country, for example Can Masdeu and Can Vies in Barcelona and Eskalera Karakola and La Ingobernable in Madrid. In the Basque Country the centres are known as gaztetxes. A well-known example was Kukutza in Bilbao.\nSquatting in England and Wales has a long history. The occupation and cultivation of untended land motivated the Peasants' Revolt of 1381 and the Diggers in the 17th century. In the 20th century, squatters turned to abandoned buildings. Mass squats were organised in a number of prominent public buildings in central London, culminating in the occupation of 144 Piccadilly in 1969. The London Street Commune or \"Hippydilly\" garnered worldwide attention. There were estimated to be 50,000 squatters throughout Britain in the late 1970s, with the majority (30,000) living in London. The BBC reported in 2011 that the government estimated that there were \"20,000 squatters in the UK\" and \"650,000 empty properties\". On 1 September 2012, under Section 144 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, squatting in residential property was criminalised by the Cameron\u2013Clegg coalition, punishable by up to six months in prison or a \u00a35000 fine, or both. The same year saw the first successful prosecution for squatting, resulting in a 12-week jail sentence. Section 61 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 provides police with additional power to remove trespassers when there is damage to land or property, trespassers are abusive, insulting or threatening or there are over six vehicles on premises related to squatters. In the late 1960s, people in Northern Ireland were forced to squat through both poverty and a lack of decent housing. In County Tyrone, there were allegations of unfair housing provision on the basis of politics and religion. When a house in the village of Caledon, near Dungannon, was allocated to a young Protestant woman, Emily Beattie, it caused protests. She was secretary to a solicitor who worked for the Unionist councillor who had given her the house and two Catholic families who had been overlooked complained that the same councillor had scotched plans to build houses for Catholics in the Dungannon area. Several days after the woman had moved in, the Catholic squatters in the house next door were evicted. Austin Currie, then a young politician, complained both at the local council and at Stormont about the situation. He then symbolically occupied the woman's house for a few hours, before being evicted by the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC). One of the policeman was the woman's brother who himself moved into the house later on. The incident quickly became a media sensation and in August the civil rights movement arranged one of its first marches, from Coalisland to Dungannon. This was followed in October by a civil rights march in Derry which was organised by the Derry Housing Action Committee and the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association. The march was repressed by the RUC. In 2012, activists from Occupy Belfast squatted a Bank of Ireland building in Belfast city centre and used it as a social space. Squatting in Northern Ireland was unaffected by the recent law change in England and Wales, and remains a civil matter. \nSquatting in Scotland is a criminal offence, punishable by a fine or imprisonment, under the Trespass (Scotland) Act 1865. The owner or lawful occupier of the property has the right to evict squatters without notice or applying to the court for an eviction order, although when evicting, they cannot do anything that would break the law, for example, use violence.\nNevertheless, the 19th and early 20th centuries saw various land raids in which cottars attempted to occupy land for subsistence farming. In 1948, the Seven Men of Knoydart unsuccessfully squatted land owned by the Nazi-supporting Lord Brocket. There have been several road protest land squats such as Bilston Glen and Pollok Free State. The former premises of the Forest Caf\u00e9 in Edinburgh were squatted in 2011 and activists occupied a former shelter in Glasgow in 2021, during COP26. \nIn 2010, a representative of the UK Bailiff Company claimed that the number of people squatting in Wales was at its highest for 40 years. The high number of businesses failing in urban Wales has led to squatting becoming a growing issue in large cities like Swansea and Cardiff. Experts said \"the majority [of squatters] are forced into the lifestyle by financial pressures.\" Based on the internal database of UK Bailiff Company, there were 100 cases of squatting in 2009, the highest for 40 years, following trends estimated by the Advisory Service for Squatters that squatting has doubled in England and Wales since 1995. As with England, from 1 September 2012, squatting in a residential building was made a criminal offence subject to arrest, fine and imprisonment. Cardiff Squatters Network was formed in December 2012, to network together squatters citywide, and host \"skill-share\" workshops on squatting legally in commercial buildings.\nNorth America.\nIn Canada, there are two systems to register the ownership of land. Under the land title system, squatter rights, formally known as adverse possession, were abolished. However, under the registry system, these rights have been preserved. If a person occupies land for the required period of time as set out in provincial limitation acts and during that time no legal action is taken to evict them, then the ownership of the land transfers from the legal owner to the squatter. Road allowance communities were settlements established by M\u00e9tis people in the late 1800s through most of the 20th century on road allowances at the margins of settler society. M\u00e9tis people were dispossessed from their land in the late 19th century, so they frequently squatted in these unclaimed and marginal spaces. The Frances Street Squats in Vancouver were a row of six buildings squatted for nine months in 1990. They were evicted in a large operation and a film was subsequently made, called \"The Beat of Frances Street\". In recent years, there have been a number of public squats which have brought together the two main contemporary reasons for squatting \u2013 homelessness and activism. Examples are the Pr\u00e9fontaine squat in Overdale, a district of Montreal (2001), the Woodward's Squat in Vancouver (2002), the Infirmary Squat in Halifax (2002), the Pope Squat in Toronto (2002), the Seven Year Squat in Ottawa (2002), the Water Street Squat in Peterborough (2003), and the North Star hotel in Vancouver (2006). These were squats organised by anti-poverty groups which tended to be short-lived. The Woodward's building was a derelict department store which had stood empty for nine years. After being evicted from the building, two hundred squatters set up a tent city on the pavement outside. The action is credited with putting in motion the eventual redevelopment of the building. The Peterborough Coalition Against Poverty (PCAP) publicly squatted 1130 Water Street, a building which stood empty after a fire. The group offered to repair the place and return it to its use as low-income housing. City officials agreed to the repairs and then City Council voted to demolish the building. The cost of demolition was $8,900 and the cost of repairs had been projected to be $6,900. The North Star hotel was temporarily squatted as a protest against emptiness by the Vancouver Anti-Poverty Committee. In 2011, the \"Occupy Toronto squat team\" squatted a basement at 238 Queen Street West and offered to take on a lease for 99 cents per year. They were evicted after eight hours.\nSquatting in the United States occurred historically in large numbers during both the California Gold Rush and World War II. Hoovervilles were homeless camps built across the country during the Great Depression in the 1930s. They were named after Herbert Hoover, who was president of the country at the time. During the Great Recession (2007\u20132009) more shanty towns appeared with others squatting in foreclosed homes. During the hippie movement, squatters in New Mexico established the commune of Tawapa near the Sandia Mountains. However, they were kicked out in the 1990s because they did not have the legal rights to the land.\nCommunity organizations have abetted squatters in taking over vacant buildings not only as a place to live but also a part of larger campaign to shine a light on inequity in housing and advocate change in housing and land issues. In 2002, the New York City administration agreed to work with eleven squatted buildings on the Lower East Side in a deal brokered by the Urban Homesteading Assistance Board with the condition the apartments would eventually be turned over to the tenants as low-income housing cooperatives.\nLatin America and the Caribbean.\nIn Latin American and Caribbean countries, informal settlements result from internal migration to urban areas, lack of affordable housing and ineffective governance. During the 1950s and 1960s, many Latin American cities demolished squatter settlements and would quickly evict land invasions. In Chile, the government of Eduardo Frei Montalva (1964\u20131970) began to permit shanty towns and the government of Salvador Allende (1970\u20131973) encouraged them, but under the military junta from 1973 onwards squatters were again quickly evicted. Likewise in Argentina, under the military dictatorship there was a zero tolerance policy. Nevertheless, forced by hunger and unemployment to take action, 20,000 squatters occupied 211 hectares of disused privately owned land on the periphery of Buenos Aires in 1981, forming six new settlements. They collectively resisted the eviction attempts and by 1984 had outlasted the dictatorship. The election of a democratic government led to the local councils becoming more open to negotiation.\nMore recently, governments have switched from a policy of eradication to one of giving squatters title to their lands, as part of various programs to move people out of slums and to alleviate poverty. Inspired by the World Bank and the thinking of economists such as Hernando de Soto, the programs aim to provide better housing and to promote entrepreneurship, for the former squatters can use their houses as collateral to secure business loans. Former squatters found that it was hard to maintain the property title over time after deaths or divorces and that banks changed their loan requirements so as to exclude them. In Nicaragua, squatting occurred after the 1972 Nicaragua earthquake. In Peru, the name given to the squatter zones is pueblos j\u00f3venes (literally \"young towns\"). In the 1980s, there were more than 300 pueblos j\u00f3venes surrounding the capital Lima, housing over one million people. In Argentina they are known as villa miseria (literally \"misery settlement\"), and as asentamiento in Uruguay and Guatemala.\nThe population of Ecuador's capital Quito grew sevenfold between 1950 and 2001. There are three types of slums in the city, namely barrios perif\u00e9ricos (shanty towns on the edge of the city), conventillos (dilapidated tenements in the urban centre) and rural shanty towns from where inhabitants commute to work in the city. An estimated 170,000 people were living in slums in 1992. In Guayaquil, Ecuador's largest city and main port, around 600,000 people in the early 1980s were either squatting on self-built structures over swamplands or living in inner-city slums. Illegal settlements frequently resulted from land invasions, in which large groups of squatters would build structures and hope to prevent eviction through strength in numbers.\nFrom the beginning of the 19th century, there was internal migration from rural areas to cities such as Cochabamba in Bolivia. By 1951, the migrants had begun to seize land and build informal settlements. The land invasions continued despite the authorities often evicting them and from 1945 until 1976, 10 per cent of development in Cochabamba was illegal. From the 1970s the government has attempted to regularize the squatter settlements and the programs have largely failed due to corruption. A fresh initiative set up in 2002 did not prevent new settlements being squatted. In the 1990s, La Paz had 48 unauthorised graveyards where the poor buried their dead. The land was squatted and there was no record of how many people were buried in the cemeteries. There are also squatters in the forest lowlands who are illegal loggers. Indigenous peoples occupied a gold mine at Tacacoma in 2015 which they said was on their ancestral land. When 200 police officers attempted to evict them, four were taken hostage and one died.\nIn Brazil, informal settlements are called favelas; a famous example is Rocinha in Rio de Janeiro, home to up to 180,000 people. The squats are mostly inhabited by the poorest strata of society, and usually lack much infrastructure and public services, but in some cases, already have reached the structure needed for a city. As of 2004, across Brazil there were 25 million people living in favelas. After failed attempts in the 1960s and 1970s to bulldoze slums out of existence, the authorities moved towards a policy of toleration. In S\u00e3o Paulo, until 1972 favelas were usually demolished; after that time they were permitted, meaning that in the next decade the number of squatters rose to one million. The largest favela is Heli\u00f3polis, with over 200,000 inhabitants as of 2018. It has been officially recognized as a regular neighborhood of the city. There are also a number of squatter buildings in the inner city, the most famous of which was a 22-storey building called Prestes Maia, whose inhabitants were ordered to leave in 2006. Various occupations in buildings and unoccupied areas in big cities, led by groups such as the Homeless Workers' Movement (MTST) or Downtown Roofless Movement (MSTC), have occurred. There are also rural squatter movements in Brazil, such as the Landless Workers' Movement (MST), which organise land occupations. For example, in Pontal do Paran\u00e1 in the state of Paran\u00e1 112 occupations were carried out, housing 6,500 families.\nThe Colombian Constitution of 1991 states that housing is a universal human right. In 2010, Colombia was the country with the second most internally displaced people in the world, at an estimated 4 million. This was the result of an extended civil conflict between rebels, paramilitaries, cocaine traders and the state, which left 40% of rural land without legal title. In the capital Bogot\u00e1, squatting has traditionally not been the main technique for land acquisition; people tend to purchase land legally and then subdivide or develop it illegally, creating \"pirate neighbourhoods\". In 1970, 45.9% of Bogot\u00e1's population lived in these pirate neighbourhoods, as compared to 1.1% who were squatting.\nFollowing the Haitian Revolution (1791\u20131804), squatters in Haiti acquired smallholdings across the country. Cit\u00e9 Soleil was founded in 1958 to house workers, then grew rapidly to 80,000 people in the 1980s and 400,000 people in the 1990s. It became the largest slum in Haiti, housing people displaced from other areas. There is little infrastructure and the area frequently becomes flooded. Following the 2010 Haiti earthquake, 1.5 million people were displaced. One year later, 100,000 squatters had left the aid camps and were occupying land next to an official camp called Corail.\nOceania.\nOn island nations such as Fiji, Kiribati and Samoa, informal settlements are known as squatter settlements. Unlike most Pacific Island countries, it is possible to sell or buy customary land in Kiribati. Zoning laws are not implemented by the government and not widely recognised by local people. On the island of Kiritimati, squatters live in both villages and on old Burns Philp copra plantations. On Rarotonga, the largest island in Cook Islands, three informal settlements are inhabited by people from Manihiki, Penrhyn and Pukapuka. The 3,000 dwellers are known as squatters although they have permission to live on the customary land.\nIn the 19th century, the British government claimed to own all of Australia and tried to control land ownership. Wealthy farmers of livestock claimed land for themselves and thus were known as squatters. This type of squatting is covered in greater detail at Squatting (Australian history). During the late 1940s the squatting of hundreds of empty houses and military camps, forced federal and state governments to provide emergency shelter during a period when Australians faced a shortage of more than 300 000 homes. In more recent times, there have been Australian squats in Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney. The Aboriginal Tent Embassy was set up in 1972 and is a permanent protest occupation. The 2016 Bendigo Street housing dispute saw squatters successfully contesting road-building plans. The Midnight Star squat was used as a self-managed social centre in a former cinema, before being evicted after being used as a convergence space during the 2002 World Trade Organization meeting.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28687", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28687", "title": "South Holland", "text": "Province of the Netherlands\nSouth Holland ( ) is a province of the Netherlands with a population of over 3.8 million as of January 2023 and a population density of about , making it the country's most populous province and one of the world's most densely populated areas. Situated on the North Sea in the west of the Netherlands, South Holland covers an area of , of which is water. It borders North Holland to the north, Utrecht and Gelderland to the east, and North Brabant and Zeeland to the south. The provincial capital is the Dutch seat of government The Hague, while its largest city is Rotterdam. The Rhine-Meuse-Scheldt delta drains through South Holland into the North Sea. Europe's busiest seaport, the Port of Rotterdam, is located in South Holland.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nArchaeological discoveries in Hardinxveld-Giessendam indicate that the area of South Holland has been inhabited since at least c. 7,500 years before present, probably by nomadic hunter-gatherers. Agriculture and permanent settlements probably originated around 2,000 years later, based on excavations near Vlaardingen. In the classical antiquity, South Holland was part of the Roman Province of Germania Inferior, and the border of the Roman Empire ran along the Old Rhine and reached the North Sea near Katwijk. The Romans built fortresses along the border, such as Praetorium Agrippinae near modern-day Valkenburg, Matilo near modern-day Leiden, and Albaniana near modern-day Alphen aan den Rijn. A city was founded near modern-day Voorburg, Forum Hadriani. It was built according to the grid plan, and facilitated a square, a court, a bathhouse and several temples.\nAfter the departure of the Romans, the area belonged to the Frisian Kingdom, after which it was conquered by the Frankish king Dagobert I in 636. In 690, the Anglo-Saxon monk Willibrord arrived near Katwijk and was granted permission to spread Roman Catholicism by the Frankish king Pepin II. He accordingly founded a church in Oegstgeest, after which the entire area was gradually Christianised. The area was appointed to East Francia in the Treaty of Verdun in 843, after which the king granted lands to Gerolf, who had helped him claim the lands. This was the birth of the County of Holland. Gerolf was later succeeded by Dirk I, who continued to rule Holland under the Frankish king. In 1248, count William II ordered the construction of the Ridderzaal, which was later finished by his son and successor Floris V.\nThe first city in South Holland to receive city rights was Dordrecht, which did so in 1220. The city retained a dominant position in the area until it was struck by a series of floods in the late 14th century. The same century also saw a series of civil wars, the Hook and Cod wars, concerning the succession of count William IV. Both his daughter Jacqueline and his brother John, the latter supported by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, claimed the throne. The conflict ended in 1490, with John victorious.\nOverall, the area of South Holland remained largely agrarian throughout the late Middle Ages. This changed around 1500, when Holland became Europe's most urbanised area. During the Eighty Years' War, the area of South Holland was the scene of the Capture of Brielle, the Siege of Leiden and the assassination of William the Silent.\nThe United Netherlands declared their independence in 1581, and Holland quickly emerged as the country's dominant province, with important trading cities such as Leiden, Delft, Gouda and Dordrecht. In 1575, the Netherlands' first university was founded in Leiden by William the Silent. The Hague, which had originated around the castle of the counts of Holland, became its new political centre. Both the States of Holland and the States General seated in the Binnenhof. The Dutch Golden Age blossomed in the 17th century. The south of Holland, back then often referred to as the \"Zuiderkwartier\" (literally \"South Quarter\"), was the birthplace and residence of scientists such as Antoni van Leeuwenhoek and Christiaan Huygens, philosophers such as Baruch Spinoza and Pierre Bayle, and painters such as Johannes Vermeer, Rembrandt van Rijn and Jan Steen.\nAs a province.\nThe province of South Holland as it is today has its origins in the period of French rule from 1795 to 1813. This was a time of bewildering changes to the Dutch system of provinces. In 1795, the Batavian Republic was proclaimed and the old order was swept away by a series of constitutional changes in the following years. In the Constitution enacted on 23 April 1798, the old borders were radically changed. The republic was reorganised into eight departments with roughly equal populations. The south of Holland was split up into three departments. The islands in the south were merged with Zeeland and the west of North Brabant to form the Department of the Scheldt and Meuse. The north of the area became the Department of the Delf. A small region in the east of the area became part of the Department of the Rhine, which spanned much of Gelderland and Utrecht. In 1801, the old borders were restored when the department of Holland was created. The reorganisation had been short-lived, but it gave birth to the concept of a division of Holland, creating less dominant provinces. In 1807, Holland was reorganised once again. This time, the department was split in two. The south, what would later become South Holland, was called the Department of Maasland. This also did not last long. In 1810, all the Dutch provinces were integrated into the French Empire, and Maasland was renamed Bouches-de-la-Meuse.\nAfter the defeat of the French in 1813, this organisation remained unchanged for a year or so. When the 1814 Constitution was introduced, most borders were restored to their situation before the French period. The north and south of Holland were reunited as the province of Holland. However, the division had not completely been undone. Since its re-establishment in 1814, Holland had always had two King's Commissioners, one for the north and one for the south. Even though the province had been reunited, the two areas were still treated differently in some ways and the idea of dividing Holland remained alive. In 1840, it was decided to once again split Holland into North and South Holland, because the province of Holland was deemed too dominant in area, population and wealth. In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, five municipalities were transferred from South Holland to Utrecht; Oudewater in 1970, Woerden in 1989, Vianen in 2002, Leerdam and Zederik in 2019.\nThe construction of the Nieuwe Waterweg in 1863 marked the start of the growth of the Port of Rotterdam. On 14 May 1940, during the Second World War, the centre of Rotterdam was destroyed by a German bombardment. The subsequent German occupation of the Netherlands resulted in anti-Jewish measures, and many members of Dutch resistance were captured and executed on the Waalsdorpervlakte. At the same time, the Atlantikwall was constructed along the coast. After the Second World War, in 1953, the south of South Holland was heavily struck by the North Sea flood, which took the lives of 677 South Hollanders. After this, the Dutch government decided for the construction of the Delta Works, which came to an end with the completion of the Maeslantkering in 1997.\nGeography.\nSouth Holland covers an area of , of which is water. It borders the North Sea to the west, North Holland to the north, Utrecht and Gelderland to the east, and North Brabant and Zeeland to the south. Beside the dunes along the North Sea coast, the province is almost entirely flat and mostly consists of polders. The centre of South Holland and the area along the coast in the west are largely urban, part of the Randstad conurbation, while the east of the province is more agrarian and belongs to the Groene Hart, literally \"Green Heart\". The south of the province is a collection of islands in the Rhine\u2013Meuse\u2013Scheldt delta. For census reasons, South Holland is divided into five regions: Rijnmond, South, West, East, and Southwest.\nThe Duin- en Bollenstreek is a region in the northwest of South Holland, around Katwijk, that features coastal dunes and the cultivation of flower bulbs. To the south of the region lie mostly pastures on sand soil, that form the transition to more urban area. This urban area runs along the Old Rhine, from Katwijk via Rijnsburg to Leiden and Zoeterwoude-Rijndijk. South of Leiden and north of The Hague lies an area where a landscape of dunes bordering the North Sea in the west transitions to one of peat more to the east. The easternmost tip of South Holland is part of De Biesbosch, one of the largest national parks of the Netherlands and one of the last freshwater tide areas in Europe. Other parks in South Holland, although no national parks, include Delftse Hout east of Delft, Ackerdijkse Plassen, a bird reserve north of Rotterdam, and Buytenpark and Westerpark near Zoetermeer. The Kagerplassen are a collection of lakes north-east of Leiden, popular for boating, watersports, fishing, camping and walking.\nThe southern part of South Holland consists of a number of islands of the Rhine\u2013Meuse\u2013Scheldt delta. Although technically islands in the sense that they are surrounded by rivers, canals or other bodies of water, most of these islands are well connected to the rest of the province via bridges, tunnels and dams. The southern islands, most notably Goeree-Overflakkee (1 on the map), Tiengemeten (2), Hoeksche Waard (6) and Voorne-Putten (4/5), are largely agrarian, while more to the north, the islands are more urban, such as Dordrecht (7), IJsselmonde (9) and Rozenburg (10), while other islands, like Rozenburg (10), are mostly used for petrochemical industry. Together, these cities form the Rijnmond conurbation, centred on the city of Rotterdam. Together with Haaglanden (centred on The Hague) and Delfland (centred on Delft) in the north, and the Drechtsteden to the south-east, this conurbation in turn forms the South Wing of the Randstad conurbation, which spans across South Holland, North Holland and Utrecht.\nOther regions in South Holland include Alblasserwaard, Gouwestreek (\"The Gouwe Area\"), Hoeksche Waard, Krimpenerwaard, Rijnland (\"Rhineland\"), Rijnstreek (\"The Rhine Area\"), Vijfheerenlanden and Westland (roughly including Hook of Holland and the municipalities of Westland and Midden-Delfland).\nClimate.\nLike the rest of the Netherlands, South Holland experiences a temperate oceanic climate, a Cfb-class according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. The climate is influenced by the North Sea and the Atlantic Ocean, which results in relatively cooler summers and milder winters. Rain showers are common in the fall and winter seasons. Because of the flat surface, wind storms are also not uncommon in the winter. Although rain occurs all year long, the first six months of the year are relatively dry. Eastern winds can result in temporary continental climate conditions with relatively warm and dry summers and cold and stormy winters. The temperature varies between the 2\u00a0\u00b0C and 6\u00a0\u00b0C in the winter and 17\u00a0\u00b0C and 20\u00a0\u00b0C in the summer.\nMunicipalities.\nSouth Holland is divided into 50 municipalities.\nEconomy.\nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the region was 163.8 billion \u20ac in 2018. This contributes to the gross domestic product of the Netherlands by 21.2%. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 38,700 \u20ac or 128% of the EU27 average in the same year. South Holland's labour force amounts to 1,661,000 people; 47.1% of the total population. The unemployment rate is 6.1% in 2013.\nThe main sectors of economical activity in this province are among others:\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2015, 18.2% of the population belonged to the Protestant Church in the Netherlands while 14.5% were Roman Catholic, 7.5% Muslim, 1.8% Hindu and 5.7% belonged to other churches or faiths. Over half (52.2%) of the population identified as non-religious.\nNotable residents.\nAmong the well-known scientists originating from South Holland are:\nSeveral prominent painters originate from this province; including:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28688", "revid": "147617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28688", "title": "Subordinate", "text": ""}
{"id": "28690", "revid": "50609585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28690", "title": "Screaming Lord Sutch", "text": "English musician, satirical party leader (1940\u20131999)\nScreaming Lord Sutch (born David Edward Sutch, 10 November 1940 \u2013 16 June 1999) was an English musician and perennial parliamentary candidate.\nHe was the founder of the Official Monster Raving Loony Party and served as its leader from 1983 to 1999, during which time he stood in numerous parliamentary elections. He holds the record for contesting the most Parliamentary elections: 39 between 1963 and 1997. As a singer, he variously worked with Keith Moon, Jeff Beck, Jimmy Page, Ritchie Blackmore, Charlie Watts, John Bonham, Noel Redding, Mitch Mitchell and Nicky Hopkins, and is known for his recordings with Joe Meek including \"Jack the Ripper\" (1963).\nEarly life.\nSutch was born at New End Hospital in Hampstead, north London, and grew up in Harrow.\nMusical career.\nIn the 1960s, inspired by Screamin' Jay Hawkins, he changed his stage name to \"Screaming Lord Sutch, 3rd Earl of Harrow\", despite having no connection with the peerage. It later became customary for the UK press to refer to him as \"Screaming Lord Sutch\", or simply \"Lord Sutch\".\nDuring the 1960s, Screaming Lord Sutch was known for his horror-themed stage show, dressing as Jack the Ripper, pre-dating the shock rock antics of Arthur Brown and Alice Cooper. Accompanied by his band, the Savages, he started by coming out of a black coffin (once being trapped inside of it, an incident parodied in the film \"Slade in Flame\"). Other props included knives and daggers, skulls and \"bodies\". Sutch booked themed tours, such as 'Sutch and the Roman Empire', where Sutch and the band members would be dressed up as Roman soldiers. Fellow musician Chas McDevitt has claimed that he gave the idea for a Screamin' Jay Hawkins-inspired act to Sutch's manager Paul Lincoln after seeing Hawkins perform in New York in 1957, having already considered emulating Hawkins himself by starting his act by emerging from a silk-lined coffin but deciding that he \"(didn't have) the personality to carry this off\", stating that \"no one in this country had heard of Hawkins until the mid-60s\".\nDespite a self-confessed lack of vocal talent, Sutch released horror-themed singles during the early to mid-1960s, the most popular being \"Jack the Ripper\". His single \"The Cheat\" has been cited as a recording. Early works included recordings produced by audio pioneer Joe Meek.\nIn 1963, Sutch and his manager, Reginald Calvert, took over Shivering Sands Army Fort, a Maunsell Fort off Southend, and in 1964 started Radio Sutch, intending to compete with other pirate radio stations such as Radio Caroline. Broadcasts consisted of music and Mandy Rice-Davies reading \"Lady Chatterley's Lover\". Sutch tired of the station, and sold it to Calvert, after which it was renamed Radio City and lasted until the Marine Broadcasting Offences Act came into force in 1967. In 1966 Calvert was shot dead by Oliver Smedley over a financial dispute. Smedley was acquitted on grounds of self-defence.\nAbout this time, Ritchie Blackmore left the band. Roger Warwick left to set up an R&amp;B big band for Freddie Mack.\nSutch's album \"Lord Sutch and Heavy Friends\" was named in a 1998 BBC poll as the worst album of all time, a status it also held in Colin Larkin's book \"The Top 1000 Albums of All Time\", despite the fact that Jimmy Page, John Bonham, Jeff Beck, Noel Redding and Nicky Hopkins performed on it and helped write it. \nFor his follow-up, \"Hands of Jack the Ripper\", Sutch assembled British rock celebrities for a concert at the Carshalton Park Rock 'n' Roll Festival. The show was recorded (though only Sutch knew), and it was released to the surprise of the musicians. Musicians on the record included Ritchie Blackmore (guitar); Matthew Fisher (keyboard); Carlo Little (drums); Keith Moon (drums); Noel Redding (bass) and Nick Simper (bass).\nIn 2017, his song \"Flashing Lights\" was featured in \"Logan Lucky\", directed by Steven Soderbergh.\nPolitical activities.\nIn the 1960s, Sutch stood in parliamentary elections, often as representative of the National Teenage Party. His first was in 1963, when he contested the Stratford by-election caused by the resignation of John Profumo. He gained 208 votes. His next was at the 1966 general election when he stood in Harold Wilson's Huyton constituency. Here, he received 585 votes.\nHe founded the Official Monster Raving Loony Party on 16 June 1982 at the Golden Lion Hotel in Ashburton, Devon, and fought the 1983 Bermondsey by-election. In his career, he contested over 40 elections. He was recognisable at election counts by his flamboyant clothes and top hat. In 1968, he officially added \"lord\" to his name by deed poll. In the mid 1980s, the deposit paid by candidates was raised from \u00a3150 to \u00a3500. This did little to deter Sutch, who increased the number of concerts he performed to pay for campaigns. He achieved his highest poll and vote share at Rotherham in 1994 with 1,114 votes and a 4.2 per cent vote share.\nAt the Bootle by-election in May 1990, he secured more votes than the candidate of the Continuing Social Democratic Party (SDP), led by former Foreign Secretary David Owen. Within days, the SDP dissolved itself. In 1993, when the British National Party gained its first local councillor, Derek Beackon, Sutch pointed out that the Official Monster Raving Loony Party already had six. He contested 39 parliamentary elections \u2013 a record number \u2013 losing his deposit in all of them.\nHe appeared as himself in the first episode of ITV comedy \"The New Statesman\", coming second ahead of Labour and the SDP, in the 1987 election which saw Alan B'Stard elected to Parliament.\nAdverts in the 1990s for Heineken Pilsener boasted that \"Only Heineken can do this\". One had Sutch at 10 Downing Street after becoming Prime Minister.\nScreaming Lord Sutch, renowned for his flamboyant style and humour, actively encouraged young people to take an interest in politics. As founder of the National Teenage Party and later the Official Monster Raving Loony Party, he campaigned to lower the voting age and emphasised the importance of youth participation in democracy. Visiting schools and youth gatherings across Britain, Sutch delivered lively talks that mixed satire with civic engagement, urging teenagers to see the ballot box as a means of change. His blend of rock-and-roll showmanship and political parody made him an unlikely yet memorable advocate for voter awareness among Britain\u2019s youth.\nSutch pulled out of the 1997 general election to take care of his sick mother in South Harrow. Later that year he contested his last two by-elections, in Uxbridge and Winchester.\nIn 1999 Sutch starred in a Coco Pops advert as a returning officer announcing the results of its renaming competition.\nA number of Sutch's Loony Party policies were later adopted by mainstream parties and became law. Specifically:\nPersonal life.\nSutch was friends with Cynthia Payne, and at one time lived at her house. \nSutch had a history of depression, and killed himself by hanging on 16 June 1999 at his late mother's house. At the inquest, his fianc\u00e9e Yvonne Elwood said he had manic depression, now known as bipolar disorder. He is buried beside his mother, who died shortly before the 1997 General Election. He is survived by a son, Tristan Lord Gwynne Sutch, born in 1975 to American model Thann Rendessy.\nIn 1991, his autobiography, \"Life as Sutch: The Official Autobiography of a Raving Loony\" (co-written with Peter Chippindale), was published. In 2005 Graham Sharpe, who had known him since the late 1960s, wrote the first biography, \"The Man Who Was Screaming Lord Sutch\".\nDiscography.\nCompilations.\nPosthumously released:\nExtended plays.\nPosthumously released:\nElections contested.\nNotes:-\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28691", "revid": "11689218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28691", "title": "Protein secondary structure", "text": "General three-dimensional form of local segments of proteins\n&lt;imagemap&gt;\nFile:Protein structure (2)-en.svg\nProtein secondary structure is the local spatial conformation of the polypeptide backbone excluding the side chains. The two most common secondary structural elements are alpha helices and beta sheets, though beta turns and omega loops occur as well. Secondary structure elements typically spontaneously form as an intermediate before the protein folds into its three dimensional tertiary structure.\nSecondary structure is formally defined by the pattern of hydrogen bonds between the amino hydrogen and carboxyl oxygen atoms in the peptide backbone. Secondary structure may alternatively be defined based on the regular pattern of backbone dihedral angles in a particular region of the Ramachandran plot regardless of whether it has the correct hydrogen bonds.\nThe concept of secondary structure was first introduced by Kaj Ulrik Linderstr\u00f8m-Lang at Stanford in 1952. Other types of biopolymers such as nucleic acids also possess characteristic secondary structures.\nTypes.\nThe most common secondary structures are alpha helices and beta sheets. Other helices, such as the 310 helix and \u03c0 helix, are calculated to have energetically favorable hydrogen-bonding patterns but are rarely observed in natural proteins except at the ends of \u03b1 helices due to unfavorable backbone packing in the center of the helix. Other extended structures such as the polyproline helix and alpha sheet are rare in native state proteins but are often hypothesized as important protein folding intermediates. Tight turns and loose, flexible loops link the more \"regular\" secondary structure elements. The random coil is not a true secondary structure, but is the class of conformations that indicate an absence of regular secondary structure.\nAmino acids vary in their ability to form the various secondary structure elements. Proline and glycine are sometimes known as \"helix breakers\" because they disrupt the regularity of the \u03b1 helical backbone conformation; however, both have unusual conformational abilities and are commonly found in turns. Amino acids that prefer to adopt helical conformations in proteins include methionine, alanine, leucine, glutamate and lysine (\"MALEK\" in amino-acid 1-letter codes); by contrast, the large aromatic residues (tryptophan, tyrosine and phenylalanine) and C\u03b2-branched amino acids (isoleucine, valine, and threonine) prefer to adopt \u03b2-strand conformations. However, these preferences are not strong enough to produce a reliable method of predicting secondary structure from sequence alone.\nLow frequency collective vibrations are thought to be sensitive to local rigidity within proteins, revealing beta structures to be generically more rigid than alpha or disordered proteins. Neutron scattering measurements have directly connected the spectral feature at ~1 THz to collective motions of the secondary structure of beta-barrel protein GFP.\nHydrogen bonding patterns in secondary structures may be significantly distorted, which makes automatic determination of secondary structure difficult. There are several methods for formally defining protein secondary structure (e.g., DSSP, DEFINE, STRIDE, ScrewFit, http://).\nDSSP classification.\nThe Dictionary of Protein Secondary Structure, in short DSSP, is commonly used to describe the protein secondary structure with single letter codes. The secondary structure is assigned based on hydrogen bonding patterns as those initially proposed by Pauling et al. in 1951 (before any protein structure had ever been experimentally determined). There are eight types of secondary structure that DSSP defines:\n'Coil' is often codified as '\u00a0' (space), C (coil) or '\u2013' (dash). The helices (G, H and I) and sheet conformations are all required to have a reasonable length. This means that 2 adjacent residues in the primary structure must form the same hydrogen bonding pattern. If the helix or sheet hydrogen bonding pattern is too short they are designated as T or B, respectively. Other protein secondary structure assignment categories exist (sharp turns, Omega loops, etc.), but they are less frequently used.\nSecondary structure is defined by hydrogen bonding, so the exact definition of a hydrogen bond is critical. The standard hydrogen-bond definition for secondary structure is that of DSSP, which is a purely electrostatic model. It assigns charges of \u00b1\"q\"1\u00a0\u2248\u00a00.42\"e\" to the carbonyl carbon and oxygen, respectively, and charges of \u00b1\"q\"2\u00a0\u2248\u00a00.20\"e\" to the amide hydrogen and nitrogen, respectively. The electrostatic energy is\nformula_1\nAccording to DSSP, a hydrogen-bond exists if and only if \"E\" is less than . Although the DSSP formula is a relatively crude approximation of the \"physical\" hydrogen-bond energy, it is generally accepted as a tool for defining secondary structure.\nSST classification.\nSST is a Bayesian method to assign secondary structure to protein coordinate data using the Shannon information criterion of Minimum Message Length (MML) inference. http:// treats any assignment of secondary structure as a potential hypothesis that attempts to explain (compress) given protein coordinate data. The core idea is that the best secondary structural assignment is the one that can explain (compress) the coordinates of a given protein coordinates in the most economical way, thus linking the inference of secondary structure to lossless data compression. SST accurately delineates any protein chain into regions associated with the following assignment types:\nSST detects \u03c0 and 310 helical caps to standard \u03b1-helices, and automatically assembles the various extended strands into consistent \u03b2-pleated sheets. It provides a readable output of dissected secondary structural elements, and a corresponding PyMol-loadable script to visualize the assigned secondary structural elements individually.\nExperimental determination.\nThe rough secondary-structure content of a biopolymer (e.g., \"this protein is 40% \u03b1-helix and 20% \u03b2-sheet.\") can be estimated spectroscopically. For proteins, a common method is far-ultraviolet (far-UV, 170\u2013250\u00a0nm) circular dichroism. A pronounced double minimum at 208 and 222\u00a0nm indicate \u03b1-helical structure, whereas a single minimum at 204\u00a0nm or 217\u00a0nm reflects random-coil or \u03b2-sheet structure, respectively. A less common method is infrared spectroscopy, which detects differences in the bond oscillations of amide groups due to hydrogen-bonding. Finally, secondary-structure contents may be estimated accurately using the chemical shifts of an initially unassigned NMR spectrum.\nPrediction.\nPredicting protein tertiary structure from only its amino sequence is a very challenging problem (see protein structure prediction), but using the simpler secondary structure definitions is more tractable.\nEarly methods of secondary-structure prediction were restricted to predicting the three predominate states: helix, sheet, or random coil. These methods were based on the helix- or sheet-forming propensities of individual amino acids, sometimes coupled with rules for estimating the free energy of forming secondary structure elements. The first widely used techniques to predict protein secondary structure from the amino acid sequence were the Chou\u2013Fasman method and the GOR method. Although such methods claimed to achieve ~60% accurate in predicting which of the three states (helix/sheet/coil) a residue adopts, blind computing assessments later showed that the actual accuracy was much lower.\nA significant increase in accuracy (to nearly ~80%) was made by exploiting multiple sequence alignment; knowing the full distribution of amino acids that occur at a position (and in its vicinity, typically ~7 residues on either side) throughout evolution provides a much better picture of the structural tendencies near that position. For illustration, a given protein might have a glycine at a given position, which by itself might suggest a random coil there. However, multiple sequence alignment might reveal that helix-favoring amino acids occur at that position (and nearby positions) in 95% of homologous proteins spanning nearly a billion years of evolution. Moreover, by examining the average hydrophobicity at that and nearby positions, the same alignment might also suggest a pattern of residue solvent accessibility consistent with an \u03b1-helix. Taken together, these factors would suggest that the glycine of the original protein adopts \u03b1-helical structure, rather than random coil. Several types of methods are used to combine all the available data to form a 3-state prediction, including neural networks, hidden Markov models and support vector machines. Modern prediction methods also provide a confidence score for their predictions at every position.\nSecondary-structure prediction methods were evaluated by the http:// and continuously benchmarked, e.g. by EVA (benchmark). Based on these tests, the most accurate methods were Psipred, SAM, PORTER, PROF, and SABLE. The chief area for improvement appears to be the prediction of \u03b2-strands; residues confidently predicted as \u03b2-strand are likely to be so, but the methods are apt to overlook some \u03b2-strand segments (false negatives). There is likely an upper limit of ~90% prediction accuracy overall, due to the idiosyncrasies of the standard method (DSSP) for assigning secondary-structure classes (helix/strand/coil) to PDB structures, against which the predictions are benchmarked.\nAccurate secondary-structure prediction is a key element in the prediction of tertiary structure, in all but the simplest (homology modeling) cases. For example, a confidently predicted pattern of six secondary structure elements \u03b2\u03b1\u03b2\u03b2\u03b1\u03b2 is the signature of a ferredoxin fold.\nApplications.\nBoth protein and nucleic acid secondary structures can be used to aid in multiple sequence alignment. These alignments can be made more accurate by the inclusion of secondary structure information in addition to simple sequence information. This is sometimes less useful in RNA because base pairing is much more highly conserved than sequence. Distant relationships between proteins whose primary structures are unalignable can sometimes be found by secondary structure.\nIt has been shown that \u03b1-helices are more stable, robust to mutations, and designable than \u03b2-strands in natural proteins, thus designing functional all-\u03b1 proteins is likely to be easier that designing proteins with both helices and strands; this has been recently confirmed experimentally.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28692", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28692", "title": "Sabermetrics", "text": "Analysis of baseball statistics\nSabermetrics (originally SABRmetrics) is the original or blanket term for sports analytics for the empirical analysis of baseball, especially the development of advanced metrics based on baseball statistics that measure in-game activity. The term is derived from the movement's progenitors, members of the Society for American Baseball Research (SABR), founded in 1971, and was coined by Bill James, \n(in 1980, according to SABR.org), who is one of its pioneers and considered its most prominent advocate and public face.\nThe term moneyball refers to the use of metrics to identify \"undervalued players\" and sign them to what ideally will become \"below market value\" contracts; it began as an effort by small-market teams to compete with the much greater resources of big-market ones.\nEarly history.\nEnglish-American sportswriter Henry Chadwick developed the box score in New York City in 1858. This was the first way statisticians were able to describe the sport of baseball by numerically tracking various aspects of game play. The creation of the box score has given baseball statisticians a summary of the individual and team performances for a given game.\nWhat would become the earliest Sabermetrics research in the 1970s and 1980s began in the middle of the 20th century with the writings of Earnshaw Cook, one of the earliest baseball analysts. Cook's 1964 book \"Percentage Baseball\" was one of the first of its kind. At first, most organized baseball teams and professionals dismissed Cook's work as meaningless. The idea of a science of baseball statistics began to achieve legitimacy in 1977 when Bill James began releasing \"Baseball Abstracts\", his annual compendium of baseball data. However, James's ideas were slow to find widespread acceptance.\nBill James believed there was a widespread misunderstanding about how the game of baseball was played, claiming the sport was not defined by its rules but actually, as summarized by engineering professor Richard J. Puerzer, \"defined by the conditions under which the game is played \u2013 specifically, the ballparks but also the players, the ethics, the strategies, the equipment, and the expectations of the public.\" Early Sabermetricians \u2013 sometimes considered baseball statisticians \u2013 began trying to enhance such fundamental baseball statistics as batting average (simply hits divided by at-bats) with advanced mathematical formulations. The correlation between team batting average and runs scored was also examined, as runs \u2013 not hits \u2013 win ballgames. Thus, a good measure of a player's worth would be his ability to help his team score runs, which was observed to be highly correlated with his number of times on base \u2013 leading to the development of a new stat, \"on-base percentage\".\nBefore Bill James popularized sabermetrics, Davey Johnson, then a second baseman playing for the early 1970s Baltimore Orioles of Major League Baseball (MLB), used an IBM System/360 at team owner Jerold Hoffberger's brewery to write a FORTRAN-based baseball computer simulation. In spite of his results, he was unable to persuade his manager Earl Weaver that he should bat second in the lineup. He wrote IBM BASIC programs to help him manage the Tidewater Tides, and after becoming manager of the New York Mets in 1984, he arranged for a team employee to write a dBASE II application to compile and store advanced metrics on team statistics. Craig R. Wright was another employee in MLB, working with the Texas Rangers in the early 1980s. During his time with the Rangers, he became known as the first front office employee in MLB history to work under the title \"sabermetrician\".\nDavid Smith founded Retrosheet in 1989, with the objective of computerizing the box score of every major league baseball game ever played, in order to more accurately collect and compare the statistics of the game.\nThe Oakland Athletics began to use a more quantitative approach to baseball by focusing on sabermetric principles in the 1990s. This initially began with Sandy Alderson as the general manager of the team when he used the principles toward obtaining relatively undervalued players. His ideas were continued when Billy Beane took over as general manager in 1997, a job he held until 2015, and hired his assistant Paul DePodesta. During the 2002 season, a noted \"moneyball\" Oakland A's team went on to win 20 games in a row, a term (and approach to the game) which soon gained national recognition when Michael Lewis published \"\" (where \"unfair\" reflected the disparity in resources available to the big market teams versus the small) in 2003 to detail Beane's use of advanced metrics. In 2011, a film based on Lewis' book \u2013 also called \"Moneyball \u2013\" was released and gave broad exposure to the techniques used in the Oakland Athletics' front office.\nTraditional measurements.\nSabermetrics reflected a desire by a handful of baseball enthusiasts to expand their understanding of the game by revealing new insights that may have been hidden in its traditional statistics. Their early efforts ultimately evolved into evaluating players in every aspect of the game, including batting, pitching, baserunning, and fielding. \nBatting measurements.\nA ballplayer's batting average (BA) (simply hits divided by at-bats) was the historic measure of a player's offensive performance, enhanced by slugging percentage (SA) which incorporated their ability to hit for power. \nBill James, along with other early sabermetricians, was concerned that batting average did not incorporate other ways a batter can reach base besides a hit \u2013 as a batter on base can score runs, and runs, not hits, win ballgames. \nEven though slugging percentage and an early form of on-base percentage (OBP) \u2013 which takes into accounts base on balls (\"walks\") and hit-by-pitches \u2013 date to at least 1941, pre-dating both Bill James (born 1949) and SABR (formed 1971), enhanced focus was put on the relationship of times on base and run scoring by early SABR-era baseball statistical pioneers. \nSA and OBP were combined to create the modern statistic on-base plus slugging (OPS). OPS is the sum of the on-base percentage and the slugging percentage. This modern statistic has become useful in comparing players and is a powerful method of predicting runs scored by any given player. An enhanced version of OPS, \"OPS+\", incorporates OPS, historic statistics, ballpark considerations, and defensive position weightings to attempt to allow player performance from different eras to be compared.\nSome other advanced metrics used to evaluate batting performance are weighted on-base average, secondary average, runs created, and equivalent average.\nPitching measurements.\nThe traditional measure of pitching performance is the earned run average (ERA). It is calculated as earned runs allowed per nine innings. Earned run average does not separate the ability of the pitcher from the abilities of the fielders that he plays with. Another classic measure for pitching is a pitcher's winning percentage. Winning percentage is calculated by dividing wins by the total number of decisions (wins plus losses). Winning percentage is also heavily dependent on the pitcher's team, particularly on the number of runs it scores.\nSabermetricians have attempted to find different measures of pitching performance that exclude the performances of the fielders involved. One of the earliest developed, and one of the most popular in use, is walks plus hits per inning pitched (WHIP), which while not completely defense-independent, tends to indicate how many times a pitcher is likely to put a player on base (either via walk, hit-by-pitch, or base hit) and thus how effective batters are against a particular pitcher in reaching base.\nA later development was the creation of defense independent pitching statistics (DIPS) system. Voros McCracken has been credited with the development of this system in 1999. Through his research, McCracken was able to show that there is little to no difference between pitchers in the number of hits they allow on balls put into play \u2013 regardless of their skill level. Some examples of these statistics are defense-independent ERA, fielding independent pitching, and defense-independent component ERA. Other sabermetricians have furthered the work in DIPS, such as Tom Tango who runs the \"Tango on Baseball\" sabermetrics website.\n\"Baseball Prospectus\" created another statistics called the peripheral ERA. This measure of a pitcher's performance takes hits, walks, home runs allowed, and strikeouts while adjusting for ballpark factors. Each ballpark has different dimensions when it comes to the outfield wall so a pitcher should not be measured the same for each of these parks.\nBatting average on balls in play (BABIP) is another useful measurement for determining pitchers' performance. When a pitcher has a high BABIP, they will often show improvements in the following season, while a pitcher with low BABIP will often show a decline in the following season. This is based on the statistical concept of regression to the mean. Others have created various means of attempting to quantify individual pitches based on characteristics of the pitch, as opposed to runs earned or balls hit.\nAdvanced methods.\nValue over replacement player (VORP) This statistic attempts to demonstrate how much a player contributes to his team in comparison to a hypothetical player performing at the minimum level needed to hold a roster position on a major league team. It was invented by Keith Woolner, a former writer for the sabermetric group/website \"Baseball Prospectus\".\nWins above replacement (WAR) is another popular sabermetric statistic for evaluating a player's contributions to his team. Similar to VORP, WAR compares a given player to a replacement-level player in order to determine the number of additional wins the player provides to his team relative to an average ballplayer at his position. WAR, like VORP a \"cumulative\" statistic, heavily reflects the amount of a player's playing time.\n\"Static\" statistics based on simple ratios of already accumulated data (like batting average) and accumulative tallies (such as pitching wins) do not fully reveal all aspects of the game represented in their numeric totals. Advanced metrics are increasingly developed and targeted to addressing \"in-game\" activities (such as when a team should attempt to steal a base, and when to bring closers in).\nApplications.\nSabermetrics are commonly used for everything from sportswriting to baseball Hall of Fame consideration, selecting player match-ups and evaluating in-game strategic options. Advanced statistical measures may be utilized in determining in-season and end-of-the-season awards (such as Player of the Week and MVP). Those which are most useful in evaluating past performance and predicting future outcomes are valuable in determining a player's contributions to his team, potential trades, contract negotiations, and arbitration.\nRecently, sabermetrics has been expanded to examining ballplayer minor league performance in AA and AAA ball in a manner similar to evaluating it at the Major League level, known as Minor-League Equivalency. \nAdvancements since 1985.\nBill James' two books, \"The Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract\" (1985) and \"Win Shares\" (2002) have continued to advance the field of sabermetrics. The work of his former assistant Rob Neyer, who later became a senior writer at ESPN.com and national baseball editor of SBNation, also contributed to popularizing sabermetrics since the mid-1980s.\nNate Silver, a former writer and managing partner of \"Baseball Prospectus\", invented PECOTA (\"Player Empirical Comparison and Optimization Test Algorithm\") in 2002\u20132003, introducing it to the public in the book \"Baseball Prospectus\" in 2003. It assumes that the careers of similar players will follow a similar trajectory.\nBeginning in the 2007 baseball season, MLB started looking at technology to record detailed information regarding each pitch that is thrown in a game. This became known as the PITCHf/x system, which uses video cameras to record pitch speed at its release point and crossing the plate, location, and angle (if any) of a break. \nFanGraphs is a website that utilizes this information and other play-by-play data to publish advanced baseball statistics and graphics.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28693", "revid": "128551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28693", "title": "Smooth ER", "text": ""}
{"id": "28694", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28694", "title": "Space Quest", "text": "Video game series\nSpace Quest is a series of six comic science fiction adventure games released between 1986 and 1995. The games follow the adventures of a hapless janitor named Roger Wilco who finds himself entangled in intergalactic plots.\nInitially created for Sierra On-Line by Mark Crowe and Scott Murphy (who called themselves the \"Two Guys from Andromeda\"), the games parody science fiction properties such as \"Star Wars\" and \"Star Trek\" as well as pop-culture phenomena from McDonald's to Microsoft. The series' sense of humor is characterized by puns and farcical storylines. Roger Wilco is depicted as an underdog who saves the universe (often by accident), only to be ignored or punished for violating minor regulations in the process.\nThe \"Space Quest\" games have been called \"beloved cult classics\" and influential adventure games of their era. Numerous collections of the games have been released since the 1990s, and the games continue to be sold on modern storefronts.\nDevelopment.\nMark Crowe and Scott Murphy met at Sierra. Crowe already worked at the company in marketing, and Murphy joined as a programmer. Both shared an interest in science fiction and felt that Sierra needed a game to distinguish from fantasy-themed titles such as Sierra's flagship \"King's Quest\" and \"The Black Cauldron\", the latter they both worked on. The two also felt the studio released games with serious storylines and lacked a comedy game, with a protagonist who was a \"regular guy\" rather than a hero.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Sierra was in a mindset where everything was medieval and it was all fairly serious. I wanted to do a game that was more fun. We even liked the idea of 'fun death'! I mean, if the player is gonna die or fail, they should at least get a laugh out of it.\"\nScott Murphy\nSierra management was reluctant to greenlight a science fiction comedy game, thinking it would not sell, and studio head Ken Williams turned down the first game pitch in 1985. Crowe and Murphy created a short prototype in their free time and pitched Williams again, who was finally convinced.\n\"Space Quest I\" was developed in Sierra's in-house AGI engine. The game was designed by \"trial and error\" as game development was still a new discipline and not formalized. Both writing and artwork were improvised throughout development, with the game being updated throughout even the quality assurance process.\nGames.\n\"Space Quest: The Sarien Encounter\".\nThe original \"Space Quest\" game was released in October 1986 as an intentional departure from Sierra's more serious, medieval-themed games. A remake was released in 1991 as \"Space Quest I: Roger Wilco in the Sarien Encounter\".\n\"Space Quest II: Vohaul's Revenge\".\nReleased in 1987, \"Space Quest II\" follows Roger Wilco a few months after the events of the first game. The sequel was well received and seen by critics as an improvement over the first.\n\"Space Quest III: The Pirates of Pestulon\".\nThe third \"Space Quest\" game, released in 1989, was the first to be developed with Sierra's SCI engine, the successor to the earlier AGI engine, and was the first \"Space Quest\" game to feature sound card support.\n\"Space Quest IV: Roger Wilco and the Time Rippers\".\n\"Space Quest IV\" debuted in 1991, and would be the first \"Space Quest\" game to release on CD-ROM the following year. The game featured 256-color graphics, a point-and-click interface, and the CD-ROM release included recorded voice acting.\n\"Space Quest V: Roger Wilco \u2013 The Next Mutation\".\nReleased in 1993, \"Space Quest V\" was the first \"Space Quest\" game to be developed outside of Sierra and the first to be developed without Scott Murphy. The game's development was led by Mark Crowe at Dynamix, a subsidiary of Sierra.\n\"Space Quest 6: Roger Wilco in The Spinal Frontier\".\nThe final \"Space Quest\" was released in 1995. The game saw a troubled development, with Sierra employee Josh Mandel leading development and Scott Murphy serving as a consultant. Mark Crowe was not involved.\nCancelled games.\nSeventh \"Space Quest\" game.\nIn early 1997, Sierra began development of a seventh entry in the series with Scott Murphy as director. Employees of Sierra reported that work was underway on a prototype, and Murphy stated that the game would feature multiplayer for the first time.\nIn August 1997, Sierra released a \"Space Quest\" collection that included a promotional video announcing a \"late 1998\" release date for what was then called \"Space Quest 7\". Before the end of the year, however, game development was paused indefinitely in favor of projects believed to be more valuable. Two years later, Sierra would see massive layoffs and development on a seventh \"Space Quest\" formally ceased.\nUntitled Escape Factory game.\nRumors circulated in 2002 that a developer called Escape Factory was working on a new \"Space Quest\" game. Production assets leaked in subsequent years would confirm the rumor, but the project was never formally announced nor formally confirmed by the developers or Sierra. In contrast to the rest of the series, the game would have been a 3D action-adventure.\nEscape Factory canceled the still-unnamed project after a year of development for an unexplained \"variety of reasons.\" Concept art, screenshots, and video footage of early builds of the game have been published online. Industry sources claimed the game was being planned for the PlayStation 2 and Xbox but not home PCs.\nLegacy.\n\"Space Quest\" has been remembered as an influential adventure and comedy game series. Along with other Sierra titles, \"Space Quest\" \"defined the form\" of point-and-click adventures. Critics have credited the games for being dense with \"geeky\" humor and for \"paving the way\" for future comedy adventure games. The series would be referenced by many future games as well as an enduring fan community, known in particular for the release of numerous fan games, such as 2011's \"\".\n\"SpaceVenture\".\nOn March 25, 2012, Mark Crowe and Scott Murphy announced they had reunited under a company called Two Guys from Andromeda and planned an original adventure game set in space. Chris Pope (also known as SpacePope) co-founded the company and would serve as executive producer. The game, titled \"SpaceVenture\", was intended to be a spiritual successor to the \"Space Quest\" series, starring a blue-collar spaceship worker named Ace Hardway. The \"SpaceVenture\" Kickstarter campaign launched on May 12, 2012 and narrowly reached its funding goal on June 12. \n\"SpaceVenture\" soon entered development hell, experiencing a steady stream of setbacks, delays, and shifting release dates. By 2015, the game was considered \"extraordinarily late\", and an early, backers-only version would not be released until 2022. The game was not released to the public until April 1, 2025 when it was published on Steam Early Access\u2014technically, still incomplete.\nCritics proposed several explanations for the game's lengthy development. The developers appeared to be \"out of their depth\" with the Unity engine, lacking the expertise and resources to manage the project. The schedule was also impacted by a variety of personal problems unrelated to development, as well as misfortunes such as the death of Gary Owens in 2015 (narrator of \"Space Quest IV\" and \"Space Quest 6\" and planned to return for \"SpaceVenture\").\n\"SpaceVenture\" received negative reviews, with reviewers noting the game still felt buggy and unfinished. The backers-only version was criticized as a bug-ridden \"mess,\" and the 2025 release described as a \"disaster.\" As the game released in early access, it is still unclear when or if it will be finished.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28695", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28695", "title": "Mercy rule", "text": "Rule that ends a sports event due to an insurmountable lead\nA mercy rule, slaughter rule, knockout rule, or skunk rule ends a two-competitor sports competition earlier than the scheduled endpoint if one competitor has a very large and presumably insurmountable scoring lead over the other. It is called the \"mercy\" rule because it spares further humiliation for the loser. It is common in youth sports in North America, where running up the score is considered unsporting. It is especially common in baseball and softball in which there is no game clock and a dominant team could in theory continue an inning endlessly.\nThe rules vary widely, depending on the level of competition, but nearly all youth sports leagues and high school sports associations and many college sports associations in the United States have mercy rules for sports including baseball, softball, American football and association football.\nHowever, mercy rules usually do not take effect until a prescribed point in the game (like the second half of an association football game). Thus, one team, particularly if it is decidedly better than a weaker opponent, can still \"run up the score\" before the rule takes effect. For instance, in American football, one team could be ahead by 70 points with three minutes left in the first half; in baseball, the better team could have a 20-run lead in the second inning, but the game would still continue.\nAmerican football.\nMiddle and high school football.\n34 U.S. states have implemented a mercy rule at the middle or high school football level, commonly involving a \"continuous clock,\" a timing mechanism where the game clock continuous to run during most stoppages, such as incomplete passes or plays out of bounds. This rule is typically triggered when one team gains a substantial lead, during the second half of the game. For example, in 2022, Louisiana adopted a variation of this rule, instituting a running clock when the point differential reaches 42 at any point during the game. This greatly decreases the amount of time taken for a game to complete, which reduces the leading team's chances to score more and the time that the trailing team must spend in facing an insurmountable deficit. In most states, the clock stops only for scores, timeouts (officials', injury, or charged), or the end of the quarter. Plays that would normally stop the clock, such as penalties, incomplete passes, going out of bounds, or change of possession, would not stop the clock. The rule varies by state; for example, the clock does not stop upon a score in Colorado, Indiana, Kansas (regular-season games only), or Missouri (fourth quarter only).\nIn most states, once the point differential is reduced to below the mercy rule-invoking amount, normal timing procedures resume until either the end of the game or the mercy rule-invoking point differential is re-established; in Colorado, Georgia, Kansas and Louisiana, the clock continues to run even if the differential falls below the threshold. Most states that have mercy rules waive this rule for a championship game.\nIn some states, coaches and game officials may choose to end a game at their own discretion at any time during the second half if the continuous clock rule is in effect; that usually happens if a lopsided margin continues to increase or if threatening weather is imminent. Sometimes the coach of the team that is losing agrees to shorten the length of a quarter in addition to the continuous clock rule. Although it is rare, some states or high school conferences have rules in which the team with a very large lead may not run a certain play for the rest of the game, such as a deep pass or outside run.\nIn some states (where 8-man and 6-man football is widely used), the rules call for a game to end when one team is ahead by a certain score (like 45 or 50 points) at halftime or any time thereafter. In other states with 6- or 8-man football, continuous clock rules are used, and the rule may be modified; for instance, in Iowa, the rule goes into effect if the 35-point differential is reached at any time after the first quarter.\nIn a variant on the mercy rule used in Connecticut high school football from 2006 to 2016, the team's coach was issued a one-game suspension (i.e., for the team's next game) if at any point the team had a 50-point lead. In 2016 it was replaced with a running clock rule.\nCollege football.\nThe National Collegiate Athletic Association's mercy rule provides, \"Any time during the game, the playing time of any remaining period or periods and the intermission between halves may be shortened by mutual agreement of the opposing head coaches and the referee.\" (NCAA Football Rule 3-2-2-a) NCAA Football Approved Ruling 3-2-2-I cites an example: \"At halftime the score is 56\u20130. The coaches and the referee agree that the third and fourth quarters should be shortened to 12 minutes each. The coaches also request that the second half be played with a 'running clock' i.e., that the game clock not be stopped.\" The NCAA Football Rules Committee determined, \"The remaining quarters may be shortened to 12 minutes each. However, the 'running clock' is not allowed; normal clock rules apply for the entire game.\"\nThe most recent example of an NCAA football game shortened by invoking this rule occurred on September 13, 2024, when the South Alabama Jaguars played the Northwestern State Demons. After the third quarter, with the Jaguars leading the Demons 87\u201310, both coaches agreed to shorten the fourth quarter to six minutes, resulting in 51 minutes of play. This was the most points scored by a FBS team since 1991. The shortened game resulted in some sportsbooks voiding bets due to house rules requiring 55 minutes of play for the game to count.\nOn September 7, 2024, the Georgia Bulldogs led the Tennessee Tech Golden Eagles 45\u20130 at the end of the third quarter. Both coaches agreed to shorten the fourth quarter to ten minutes. The final score was 48\u20133.\nOn August 29, 2024, the Arkansas Razorbacks led the Arkansas\u2013Pine Bluff Golden Lions 49\u20130 at halftime. By mutual agreement, the coaches agreed on ten minute lengths for the third and fourth quarters. The final score was 70\u20130, and some sportsbooks voided bets due to an insufficient game length.\nOctober 1, 2022, when the Syracuse Orange played the Wagner Seahawks. The mismatched Wagner team trailed the 4-0 Syracuse team 49\u20130 at halftime. In the second half coaches and the referee agreed to 10 minute quarters. Syracuse head coach Dino Babers made the controversial choice of leaving some of Syracuse's starting players in late into the second half. The final score of the game was 59\u20130.\nSeptember 21, 2019, Ohio State was leading Miami (OH) 76\u20135 in Columbus, Ohio with 2:40 left in the 4th quarter when the game was temporarily suspended due to lightning. Both coaches agreed to end the game with the final score standing as is.\nSeptember 1, 2018, the rule was enacted during a game Georgia played against Austin Peay in Athens, Georgia.\u00a0 With the score 45\u20130 in the 3rd quarter and a high heat index, the Austin Peay Coach Will Healy suggested to Georgia head coach Kirby Smart that they play a 10-minute fourth quarter instead of the typical 15 minute fourth quarter.\u00a0 The coaches and referee agreed and the game was shortened.\nSeptember 24, 2016, the Missouri Tigers led Delaware State 58\u20130 at halftime. The coaches agreed to shorten the third and fourth quarters from 15 minutes to 10 minutes each, shortening the total game time from 60 minutes to 50 minutes. Missouri added three touchdowns in the abbreviated second half to make the final score 79\u20130, setting team records for the most points scored in a game (79), the greatest margin of victory (79), and the largest number of touchdowns scored (11).\nAlso in 2016, the game between Clemson and South Carolina State had both the third and fourth quarters shortened from 15 minutes to 12 as a result of Clemson leading the game at half 45\u20130. The final score of the game was 59\u20130.\nEarlier in 2016, the game between Texas State and Arkansas saw the fourth quarter shortened to 10 minutes when severe thunderstorms were approaching Donald W. Reynolds Razorback Stadium. Arkansas led 42\u20133 at the end of the third quarter, and the final period was scoreless. A similar scenario took place in 2017 in the game between TCU and Kansas, where the coaches agreed to a running clock for the final 12:49 of the game due to severe thunderstorms approaching Amon G. Carter Stadium.\nIn a 2013 game, Old Dominion University (ODU) was losing to the University of North Carolina (UNC) 80\u201320 when ODU coach Bobby Wilder asked for the fourth quarter to be shortened by five minutes, which UNC coach Larry Fedora agreed to. Fedora also directed his quarterback to take a knee on fourth and goal with 1:53 remaining to not run up the score.\nIn a 1988 game, Kansas Jayhawks coach Glen Mason asked if a running clock could be used after his team trailed 49\u20130 at halftime to the Auburn Tigers. Auburn coach Pat Dye and the officials agreed, and Auburn ended up a 56\u20137 winner.\nIn 2015, another shortened game occurred when the Boston College Eagles dominated the Howard Bison 62\u20130 by halftime. The coaches agreed to remove five minutes from each quarter of the second half of the game.\nDespite the NCAA Football Rules Committee's subsequent ruling (A.R. 3-2-2-I) that a \"running clock\" is not permitted, a continuous clock was used September 5, 2013, beginning in the fourth quarter when the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets had a 63\u20130 lead against the Elon Phoenix. That was at the request of Elon coach Jason Swepson and agreed upon by Georgia Tech coach Paul Johnson. Georgia Tech won the game 70\u20130.\nHowever, in the Mississippi Association of Community and Junior Colleges, a running clock is allowed if the team is ahead by 38 points or more. This rule, unique only to the MACJC, was instituted in 2013.\nSoccer.\nInternational Blind Sports Federation rules require that any time during a game in which one team has scored ten more goals than the other team that game is deemed completed. In U.S. high school soccer, most states use a mercy rule that ends the game if one team is ahead by ten or more goals at any point from halftime onward, effectively turning it into The Soccer Tournament in that an Elam ending type target score of one team being ahead by ten goals is set. Once the lead is up to ten goals, the game ends. Youth soccer leagues use variations on the rule.\nBaseball and softball.\nInternational competitions are sanctioned by the World Baseball Softball Confederation (WBSC), formed by the 2013 merger of the International Baseball Federation (IBAF) and International Softball Federation (ISF).\nIn international baseball competition and the World Baseball Classic (WBC), games are ended when one team is ahead by 10 runs, once at least seven completed innings are played by the trailing team. In seven-inning contests (women's competition and doubleheaders), the same applies after five innings of a seven-inning game.\nThe inaugural WBC in 2006 followed the IBAF mercy rule, with an additional rule stopping a game after five innings when a team is ahead by at least 15 runs. The mercy rules applied to the round-robin (now double-elimination) matches only, not to the semi-finals or final.\nIn a six-inning game such as Little League Baseball and Softball, rules call for the game to end if the winning team is ahead by 15 runs after three innings played or 10 runs after four innings played by the trailing team. In a seven-inning game at the intermediate level or higher, the corresponding run rule is applied for 15 runs after four innings, or 10 runs after five innings. Little League refers to this rule as the \"run rule\", instead of the \"mercy rule\".\nSoftball rules are different for fast/modified fast pitch and slow pitch. In WBSC-sanctioned competitions, the run-ahead rule (the WBSC terminology) is, for fast or modified fast pitch, 20 runs after three innings, 15 after four, or 8 after 5. In slow pitch, the margin is 20 runs after four innings or 15 after five. The NCAA has also adopted the rule.\nIn regular season or conference tournament NCAA and NAIA college baseball, the IBAF rule may be implemented. Most NCAA conferences implement the rule for player safety (specifically pitchers) and time constraints in a blowout win. The rule is not allowed in NCAA tournament play (regionals, super regionals and Men's College World Series), in which all games must be at least nine innings.\nIn NCAA softball (where the rule is called the \"run rule\"), the rule is invoked if one team is ahead by at least eight runs after five innings and, unlike with college baseball, applies in the NCAA tournament as well, including in the championship series since 2023. In American high school softball, most states use a mercy rule of 20 runs ahead in three innings or 10 in five innings. (In either case, if the home team is ahead by the requisite number of runs, the game will end after the top half of the inning.) In American softball, \"run-rule\" has become a verb, with the winning team in a game which ends due to this rule often said to have \"run-ruled\" its opponent (also expressed as the losing team having been \"run-ruled\").\nMost state high school associations (where games are seven innings) use the IBAF Women's rule after five innings have been played by the trailing team; some associations further the rule by ending a game after either three or four innings if the lead is at least 15 runs. For softball, the rule is 12 after three innings and 10 after five. However, since the home team has the last at-bat, the rules usually allow visiting teams to score an unlimited number of runs in the top half of an inning. That can be prevented by invoking the rule only after the home team has completed its half of the inning.\nIn Baseball5, a WBSC variation of baseball and softball which is played to five innings, a team which leads by 15 runs after three innings or 10 after four innings automatically wins.\nDue to the untimed nature of innings, some leagues either impose caps on the number of runs that can be scored in one inning (usually in the 4-8 range) or limit the number of plate appearances in an inning (typically, such a limit will consist of one rotation of the batting order). Such rules ensure that games will complete in a reasonable length of time, but it can also mean that a lead of a certain size becomes insurmountable by the cap, which can be prevented by not invoking the rule in such circumstances.\nBasketball.\nIn high school basketball, many states have a \"continuous clock\" rule, similar to American football, which takes effect in the second half after a lead grows to a prescribed point (in Iowa, 35 points or more; in Kansas, 30 points or more but only in the fourth quarter; in Louisiana, the rule is invoked at any time during the game when one team gains a 35-point lead). The clock stops only for charged, officials' or injury time-outs; or at the end of the third quarter (and the first and second quarters in Louisiana if the 35-point margin is reached in the first half; the normal 10-minute halftime is still taken). The clock would not stop when it would normally stop, such as for fouls, free throws, out-of-bounds plays or substitutions.\nThe rules vary when normal timing procedures take effect after a lead is diminished (such as because of the trailing team's rally); for instance, in Iowa, normal timing procedures are enforced if the lead is lowered to 25 points but re-instituted once the lead grows back to 35 or more points. By comparison, in Kansas and Louisiana, if the running clock is triggered, it will not stop except for a timeout or an injury even if the differential is reduced to under 30 points. As with other sports, some states offer provisions to allow a team to end the game early by mutual decision of the coaches (for instance, if a large lead continues to grow and the talent disparity is obvious).\nBoxing.\nIn amateur boxing, from 1992 until 2013 (when the computer scoring system was abandoned and replaced by the 10-point must system), when if a boxer trails by more than 20 points, the referee stops the fight and the boxer that is leading automatically wins; bouts which end this way may be noted as \"RSC\" (referee stopped contest) with notations for an outclassed opponent (RSCO) or outscored opponent (RSCOS). It would not be declared injury (RSCI) or head injury (RSCH).\nWhile a boxer who loses on the mercy rule is scored RSCO and would be similar to a technical knockout in professional boxing, it is not scored a loss by knockout, and the mandatory suspension for losing on a knockout did not apply for an Outclassed loss.\nCurling.\nIn curling, the losing team can concede at any time, except for international competitions, where they need to wait until the completion of the 6th end to do so (and 8th end in play-off games).\nIn curling conducted by Special Olympics Canada, games end if 6 ends have passed and one team leads by 10 points.\nGoalball.\nIn the Paralympic team sport for the vision-impaired, goalball, a maximum goal difference is when 'any time one team has scored ten goals more than the team it is playing'. The game ends immediately upon that goal. This rule commenced on 1 January 2002.\nWrestling.\nIn American collegiate wrestling and high school wrestling, a wrestler wins by technical fall, and the match ends, if he builds a 15-point lead. If a wrestler gains a 15-point lead by having his opponent in a near-fall, the referee will allow the offensive wrestler the opportunity to win by fall without liability to be reversed and pinned. The bout ends when a fall is awarded or the near-fall ends.\nIn freestyle wrestling, a wrestler wins by technical fall if he builds a 10-point lead. In Greco-Roman, a wrestler wins by technical fall if he builds an 8-point lead."}
{"id": "28696", "revid": "300949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28696", "title": "Sumbawa", "text": "Island in Indonesia\nSumbawa, is an Indonesian island, located in the middle of the Lesser Sunda Islands chain, with Lombok to the west, Flores to the east, and Sumba further to the southeast. Along with Lombok, it forms the province of West Nusa Tenggara, but there have been plans (currently held in abeyance) by the Indonesian government to split the island off into a separate province. Traditionally, the island is known as the source of sappanwood, as well as honey and sandalwood. Its savanna-like climate and vast grasslands are used to breed horses and cattle, as well as to hunt deer.\nSumbawa has an area of (three times the size of Lombok) with a population (at the 2020 Census) of 1,561,461; the official estimate as at mid-2024 was 1,669,787. It marks the boundary between the islands to the west, which were influenced by religion and culture spreading from India, and the region to the east which was less influenced. In particular, this applies to both Hinduism and Islam. While the name \"Sumbawa\" is used by outsiders for the whole island, locally the term is only applied to the western half (Sumbawa and West Sumbawa Regencies), while the eastern half is referred to by inhabitants as \"Bima\" (meaning the city as well as Bima and Dompu Regencies), as the two parts of the island are divided by geography, culture and language.\nEtymology.\nSumbawa come from Portuguese Cumbava or Cimbava, assimilated from the locally used name \"Sambawa\" (still found as such in Makassarese, cf. also \"Semawa\" in the Sumbawa language). This name is probably derived from Sanskrit \"\u015b\u0101mbhawa\", meaning 'related to \"\u015aambhu\" (\u0936\u092e\u094d\u092d\u0941 'the Benevolent', a name for Shiva)'.\nHistory.\nThe 14th-century Nagarakretagama mentioned several principalities identified to be on Sumbawa; Dompu, Bima, Sape, and one on the Sang Hyang Api island just off the coast of northeast Sumbawa. Four principalities in western Sumbawa were dependencies of the Majapahit Empire of eastern Java. Because of Sumbawa's natural resources, it was regularly invaded by outside forces \u2013 from the Javanese, Balinese, and Makassar, to the Dutch and Japanese. The Dutch first arrived in 1605 but did not effectively rule Sumbawa until the early 20th century.\nFor a short period, the Balinese kingdom of Gelgel ruled a part of western Sumbawa. The eastern and central parts of the island were traditionally divided into four sultanates: Sumbawa, Sanggau, Dompo, and Bima, which had links to the Bugis and Makassar peoples of South Sulawesi.\nHistorical evidence indicates that people on Sumbawa island were known in the East Indies for their honey, horses, sappanwood, which is used to make red dye, and sandalwood, which is used for incense and medications. The area was thought to be highly productive agriculturally. In the 18th century, the Dutch introduced coffee plantations on the western slopes of Mount Tambora, a volcano on the north side of Sumbawa, thus creating the Tambora coffee variant.\nTambora's colossal eruption in 1815 was the most powerful in recorded history, ejecting of ash and debris into the atmosphere. The eruption killed up to 71,000 people and triggered a period of global cooling known as the \"Year Without a Summer\" in 1816. It also apparently destroyed a culture of Papuan affinity, known to archaeologists as the \"Tambora culture\".\nAdministration.\nSumbawa is administratively divided into four regencies (\"kabupaten\") and one kota (city). The regencies and cities are listed below with their administrative capitals, their areas, and their populations at the 2010 census and the 2020 census, together with the official estimates as of mid-2024.\nProposals have been under consideration since 2013 by the People's Representative Council (\"Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat\" or DPR) to create a separate Sumbawa Island province; there is no information as to whether the remaining part of the present province (i.e. the districts comprising Lombok Island) would then be renamed. However, since 2013 the Indonesian Government have maintained a moratorium on the intended creation of new provinces, regencies and cities.\nDemographics.\nIslam, the dominant faith of the island, was introduced by the Makassarese of Sulawesi.\nSumbawa had, historically speaking, three major linguistic groups who spoke languages that were unintelligible to each other. The Sumbawa people centered on the western side of the island speak Basa Semawa (Indonesian: \"Bahasa Sumbawa\") which is similar to the Sasak language from nearby Lombok; the Bima people in the east speak Nggahi Mbojo (\"Bahasa Bima\"), which is closer to the languages spoken on Flores and Sumba. They were once separated by the Tambora culture, which spoke a language related to neither. After the demise of Tambora due to the 1815 eruption, local kingdoms based in Sumbawa Besar and Bima became the two focal points of Sumbawa. This division of the island into two parts remains today; Sumbawa Besar and Bima are the two largest towns on the island (although the town of Dompu to the west of Bima has a greater urban area population than Sumbawa Besar), and are the centers of distinct cultural groups that share the island. The Don Donggo or \"Mountain People\" are a small minority ethnic group who occupy the cloudy highlands west of Bima Bay.\nThe population of the island (including minor outlying islands) was 1.56 million at the latest decennial census in 2020, comprising 29.46% of the population of the entire Province of West Nusa Tenggara's 5.32 million people; the official estimate as at mid-2024 was 1,670,000 - of whom 683,000 inhabit the western half and 987,000 the eastern half of the island.\nDue to the lack of work opportunities on the island and its frequent droughts, many people on the island seek work in the Middle East as laborers or domestic servants; some 500,000 workers, or over 10% of the population of West Nusa Tenggara, have left the country to work overseas such as China and Singapore.\nGeography.\nThe island is bounded by bodies of water; to the west is Alas Strait, south is the Indian Ocean, Saleh Bay creates a major north-central indentation in the island, and the Flores Sea runs the length of the northern coastline. The Sape Strait lies to the east of the island and separates Sumbawa from Flores and the Komodo Islands, there are several bays and gulfs, most notably Bima Bay, Cempi Bay, and Waworada Bay.\nSumbawa's most distinguishing features are Saleh Bay and the Sanggar Peninsula. On the latter stands Mount Tambora (8\u00b014\u201941\u201d S, 117\u00b059\u201935\u201d E), a large stratovolcano famous for its VEI 7 eruption in 1815, one of only a few eruptions of such magnitude in the last 2,000 years. The eruption obliterated most of Tambora's summit, reducing its height by about a third and leaving a six-kilometer-wide caldera. Regardless, Tambora remains the highest point on the island. Highlands rise in four spots on the island, as well as on Sangeang Island. The large western lobe of Sumbawa is dominated by a large central highland, and Tambora, Dompu, and Bima each have more minor highlands.\nThere are several large surrounding islands, most notably Moyo Island, volcanically active Sangeang Island, and the tourist Komodo Islands (administered under Flores) to the east.\nSumbawa is part of the Lesser Sunda deciduous forests ecoregion.\nList of offshore islands.\nThere are several smaller offshore islands which fall within the regencies based on Sumbawa Island:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"We want to say that there has been a decline, but a slow decline. There is no seriousness from the government.\" (About around 20 children died from malnutrition in Sumbawa in October 2012) \u2014Ida, Alliance of Prosperous Villages (ADS)\nMany of the island residents are at risk of starvation when crops fail due to lack of rainfall. The majority of the population works in agriculture. Tourism is just beginning, with a few surf spots renowned for being world-class, Jelenga and Supersuck Beaches near the mine, as well as Hu'u and Lakey Beach in the Gulf of Cempi.\nNewmont Mine.\nA large gold and copper mine, Newmont Mining Corporation's Batu Hijau mine began commercial operations in 2000, a decade after the copper and gold were discovered. Newmont holds a 45% stake in the operation through its shareholding in PT Newmont Nusa Tenggara. A local unit of Japan's Sumitomo Corporation has a 35% share. The mine is located in southwest Sumbawa.\nDue to the mine, Sumbawa Barat Regency along with other remote mining towns, and Jakarta, has the highest GDP per capita rates in Indonesia, Sumbawa Barat's is 156.25 million rupiah (US$17,170) as of 2010[ [update]], Newmont and its partners have invested about $1.9 billion in the mine. The reserves are expected to last until 2034, making Batu Hijau one of the largest copper mines in the world.&lt;br&gt;\nIt is also one of the worst water-polluting mines, notably with at least three pipe breaks since its opening in 1999.\nAnother important deposit of gold and copper has been discovered in 2020 near Onto. PT Sumbawa Timur Mining (STM) hopes to start exploitation in 2030.\nTransport.\nThere is a road network in Sumbawa, but it is poorly maintained and has long portions of rough gravel. Frequent ferry service to Sumbawa (Poto Tano) from Lombok (Labuhan Lombok) exists; however, the ferry service to Flores from Sape is infrequent. Bima is the largest city on Sumbawa and has ferry and bus services directly to Java and Bali, though service breakdowns are common.\nThe most convenient way to reach Sumbawa is via air. Commercial flights connect the island's main airport, the Bima Airport, to Denpasar and Makassar.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28698", "revid": "1601788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28698", "title": "Spike Milligan", "text": "Irish comedian and writer (1918\u20132002)\nTerence Alan \"Spike\" Milligan (16 April 1918 \u2013 27 February 2002) was an Anglo-Irish comedian, writer, musician, poet, playwright and actor. The son of an English mother and Irish father, he was born in British India, where he spent his childhood before relocating in 1931 to England, where he lived and worked for the majority of his life.\nMilligan was the co-creator, main writer, and a principal cast member of the British radio comedy programme \"The Goon Show\", performing a range of roles including the characters Eccles and Minnie Bannister. He was the earliest-born and last surviving member of the Goons. He took his success with \"The Goon Show\" into television with \"Q5\", a surreal sketch show credited as a major influence on the members of \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\".\nHe wrote and edited many books, including \"Puckoon\" (1963) and a seven-volume autobiographical account of his time serving during the Second World War, beginning with \"\" (1971). He also wrote comical verse, with much of his poetry written for children, including \"Silly Verse for Kids\" (1959).\nEarly life and education.\nTerence Alan Milligan was born in Ahmednagar, India, on 16 April 1918 during the British Raj, the son of an Irish father, Leo Alphonso Milligan, a regimental sergeant-major in the British Indian Army, and English mother, Florence Mary Winifred (n\u00e9e Kettleband). He spent his childhood in Poona and later in Rangoon, then capital of British Burma. He was educated at the Convent of Jesus and Mary, Poona, and later at St Paul's High School, Rangoon. His father remained in the Indian Army after the end of the First World War, steadily promoted till \"the family's lifestyle became almost lavish\"; Milligan considered that \"My old man lived the life of a gentleman on sergeant's pay\".\nAfter Army cuts meant his father's position was no longer required, Milligan travelled by sea, from India to England for the first time. He arrived on a winter's morning and was bemused by the climate, so different from India's, remembering the dock's \"terrible noise, and everything so cold and grey.\" The Milligan family lived in England in somewhat straitened circumstances, Leo Milligan only being able to find \"a poorly paid job in the Associated Press photo library\"; Milligan recalled his mother being \"often tense and angry... a domestic tyrant\" due to having to manage on \"next to no income\". After moving to Brockley, south east London from the age of 12 in 1931, Milligan attended Brownhill Road School (later to be renamed Catford Boys School) and St Saviours School, Lewisham High Road.\nAfter leaving school, he worked as a clerk in the Woolwich Arsenal, played the cornet and discovered jazz. He also joined the Young Communist League to demonstrate his hatred of Oswald Mosley's British Union of Fascists, who were gaining support near his home in south London.\nDisliking his first name, he began to call himself \"Spike\" after hearing the band Spike Jones and his City Slickers on Radio Luxembourg.\nSecond World War.\nDuring most of the late 1930s and early 1940s, Milligan performed as an amateur jazz vocalist, guitarist, and trumpeter before, during and after being called up for military service in the fight against Nazi Germany, but even then he wrote and performed comedy sketches as part of concerts to entertain troops. After his call-up, but before being sent abroad, he and fellow musician Harry Edgington (whose nickname \"Edge-ying-Tong\" inspired one of Milligan's most memorable musical creations, the \"Ying Tong Song\") composed surreal stories, filled with puns and skewed logic, as a way of staving off the boredom of life in barracks. A biographer describes his early dance band work: \"He managed to croon like Bing Crosby and win a competition: he also played drums, guitar and trumpet, in which he was entirely self taught.\" Milligan acquired a double bass, on which he took lessons and would pluck in jazz sessions. He had perfect pitch.\nDuring the Second World War, Milligan served as a signaller in D Battery (later 19 Battery), 56th Heavy Regiment, Royal Artillery, as Gunner Milligan, 954024. The unit was equipped with the obsolete First World War era BL 9.2-inch howitzer and based in Bexhill on the south coast of England. Milligan describes training with these guns in part two of \"Adolf Hitler: My Part in His Downfall\", claiming that, during training, gun crews resorted to shouting \"bang\" in unison as they had no shells with which to practise. \nMilligan's unit saw action as part of the First Army in the North African campaign and then in the succeeding Italian campaign. Milligan was appointed lance bombardier and was about to be promoted to bombardier, when he was wounded in action in the Italian theatre at the Battle of Monte Cassino. Subsequently, hospitalised for a mortar wound to the right leg and shell shock, he was demoted back to gunner by an unsympathetic commanding officer (identified in his war diaries as Major Evan \"Jumbo\" Jenkins).\nAfter hospitalisation, Milligan drifted through various rear-echelon military jobs in Italy, eventually becoming a full-time entertainer. He played the guitar with a jazz and comedy group called \"The Bill Hall Trio\" in concert parties for the troops. After being demobilised, Milligan remained in Italy playing with the trio but returned to Britain soon after. While he was with the Central Pool of Artists (a group he described as composed \"of bomb-happy squaddies\") he began to write parodies of their mainstream plays, which displayed many of the key elements of what would later become \"The Goon Show\" (originally called \"Crazy People\") with Peter Sellers, Harry Secombe and Michael Bentine.\nCareer.\n\"The Goon Show\".\nMilligan returned to jazz in the late 1940s and made a precarious living with the Hall trio and other musical comedy acts. He was also trying to break into the world of radio, as a performer or script writer. His first success in radio was as writer for comedian Derek Roy's show. After a delayed start, Milligan, Peter Sellers, Harry Secombe and Michael Bentine joined forces in a comedy project, \"The Goon Show\". During its first season the BBC titled the show as \"Crazy People\", or in full, \"The Junior Crazy Gang featuring those Crazy People, the Goons\", to make the programme palatable to BBC officials, by connecting it with the popular group of theatre comedians known as The Crazy Gang.\nThe first episode was broadcast on 28 May 1951 on the BBC Home Service. Milligan did not perform as much in the early shows, but eventually became a lead performer in almost all of the \"Goon Show\" episodes, portraying a wide range of characters including Eccles, Minnie Bannister, Jim Spriggs and the nefarious Count Moriarty. He was also the primary author of most of the scripts, although he co-wrote many scripts with collaborators, most notably Larry Stephens and Eric Sykes. Most of the early shows were co-written with Stephens (and edited by Jimmy Grafton) but this partnership faltered after Series 3. Milligan wrote most of Series 4 but collaborated with Eric Sykes from Series 5 (coinciding with the birth of the Milligans' second child, Se\u00e1n) and through most of Series 6, a development that grew out of his business collaboration with Sykes in Associated London Scripts. Milligan and Stephens reunited during Series 6 but towards the end of Series 8 Stephens was sidelined by health problems and Milligan worked briefly with John Antrobus. The Milligan-Stephens partnership was finally ended by Stephens' death from a brain haemorrhage in January 1959; Milligan later downplayed and disparaged Stephens' contributions.\n\"The Goon Show\" was recorded before a studio audience and during the audience warm-up session, Milligan would play the trumpet, while Peter Sellers played on the orchestra's drums. For the first few years the shows were recorded live, direct to 16-inch transcription disc, which required the cast to adhere closely to the script, but by Series 4, the BBC had adopted the use of magnetic tape. Milligan eagerly exploited the possibilities the new technology offered: the tapes could be edited, so the cast could now ad-lib freely, and tape also enabled the creation of groundbreaking sound effects. Over the first three series, Milligan's demands for increasingly complex sound effects (or \"grams\", as they were then known) pushed technology and the skills of the BBC engineers to their limits\u2014effects had to be created mechanically (through foley) or played back from discs, sometimes requiring the use of four or five turntables simultaneously. With magnetic tape, these effects could be produced in advance and the BBC engineers were able to create highly complex, tightly edited effects \"stings\" that would have been difficult using Foley or disc. In the later years of the series many \"Goon Show\" \"grams\" were produced by members of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop, an example being the \"Major Bloodnok's Stomach\" effect, realised by Dick Mills.\nAlthough the Goons elevated Milligan to national stardom, the demands of writing and performing the series took a heavy toll. During Series 3 he had the first of several serious mental breakdowns, which also marked the onset of a decades-long cycle of bipolar disorder. In late 1952, possibly exacerbated by suppressed tensions between the Goons' stars, Milligan apparently became irrationally convinced that he had to kill Sellers. When he attempted to gain entry to Sellers's neighbouring flat, armed with a potato knife, he accidentally walked straight through the plate-glass front door. He was hospitalised, heavily sedated for two weeks, and spent almost two months recuperating; fortunately for the show, a backlog of scripts meant that his illness had little effect on production. Milligan later blamed the pressure of writing and performing \"The Goon Show\" for his breakdown and the failure of his first marriage.\nTelevision.\nMilligan made several forays into television as a writer-performer, in addition to his many guest appearances on interview, variety and sketch comedy series from the 1950s to the 2000s. \"The Idiot Weekly, Price 2d\" (1956), starring Peter Sellers, was the first attempt to translate Goons humour to TV; it was followed by \"A Show Called Fred\" and \"Son of Fred\", both made during 1956 and directed by Richard Lester, who went on to work with The Beatles. During a visit to Australia in 1958, a similar special was made for the Australian Broadcasting Commission, \"The Gladys Half-Hour\", which also featured local actors Ray Barrett and John Bluthal, who would appear in several later Milligan projects. In 1961, Milligan co-wrote two episodes of the popular sitcom \"Sykes and a...\", co-starring Sykes and Hattie Jacques and the one-off \"Spike Milligan Offers a Series of Unrelated Incidents at Current Market Value\".\nThe 15-minute series \"The Telegoons\" (1963), was the next attempt to transplant the Goons to television, this time using puppet versions of the familiar characters. The initial intention was to \"visualise\" original recordings of 1950s Goon Show episodes but this proved difficult, because of the rapid-fire dialogue and was ultimately frustrated by the BBC's refusal to allow the original audio to be used. Fifteen-minute adaptations of the original scripts by Maurice Wiltshire were used instead, with Milligan, Sellers and Secombe reuniting to provide the voices; according to a contemporary press report, they received the highest fees the BBC had ever paid for 15-minute shows. Two series were made in 1963 and 1964 and (presumably because it was shot on 35 mm film rather than video) the series has reportedly been preserved in the BBC archives.\nMilligan's next major TV venture was the sketch comedy series \"The World of Beachcomber\" (1968), made in colour for BBC 2; it is believed all 19 episodes are lost. In the same year, the three Goons reunited for a televised re-staging of a vintage \"Goon Show\" for Thames Television, with John Cleese substituting for the late Wallace Greenslade.\nIn early 1969, Milligan starred in brownface in the situation comedy \"Curry and Chips\", created and written by Johnny Speight and featuring Milligan's old friend and colleague Eric Sykes. \"Curry and Chips\" set out to satirise racist attitudes in Britain in a similar vein to Speight's earlier creation, the hugely successful \"Till Death Us Do Part\", with Milligan \"browning up\" to play Kevin O'Grady, a half-Pakistani\u2013half-Irish factory worker. Milligan was also involved in the programme \"The Melting Pot\".\nDirector John Goldschmidt's film \"The Other Spike\" dramatised Milligan's nervous breakdown in a film for Granada Television, for which Milligan wrote the screenplay and in which he played himself. Later that year, he was commissioned by the BBC to write and star in \"Q5\", the first in the innovative \"Q...\" TV series, acknowledged as an important forerunner to \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\", which premiered several months later. There was a hiatus of several years, before the BBC commissioned \"Q6\" in 1975. \"Q7\" appeared in 1977, \"Q8\" in 1978, \"Q9\" in 1980 and \"There's a Lot of It About\" in 1982. Milligan's daughter, Laura, conceived and co-wrote an animated series called \"The Ratties\" (1987). Milligan narrated the 26 five-minute episodes. He later voiced the animated series \"Wolves, Witches and Giants\", which aired on ITV from 1995 to 1998.\nPoetry and other writings.\nMilligan wrote verse, considered to be within the genre of literary nonsense. For example: \"It's due to pigeons that alight; on Nelson's hat that makes it white.\" His poetry has been described by comedian Stephen Fry as \"absolutely immortal \u2014 greatly in the tradition of Lear.\" One of his poems, \"On the Ning Nang Nong\", was voted the UK's favourite comic poem in 1998 in a nationwide poll, ahead of other nonsense poets including Lewis Carroll and Edward Lear. This nonsense verse, set to music, became a favourite in Australia, performed week after week by the ABC children's programme \"Playschool\". Milligan included it on his album \"No One's Gonna Change Our World\" in 1969, to aid the World Wildlife Fund. In December 2007 it was reported that, according to OFSTED, it is among the ten most commonly taught poems in primary schools in Britain.\nWhile depressed, he wrote serious poetry, much of which is compiled in \"Open Heart University\". He also wrote a novel \"Puckoon\" and a series of war memoirs, including ' (1971), \"\"Rommel?\" \"Gunner Who?\": A Confrontation in the Desert\" (1974), ' (1976) and \"\" (1978). Milligan's seven volumes of memoirs cover the years from 1939 to 1950 (his call-up, war service, first breakdown, time spent entertaining in Italy and return to Britain).\nMilligan also wrote comedy songs, including \"Purple Aeroplane\", which was a parody of the Beatles' song \"Yellow Submarine\". He wrote the lyric to saxophonist/composer Duncan Lamont's \"English Folk Song\", heard on jazz singer Tina May's 2021 album, \"52nd Street (and Other Tales)\". He was the narrator for Lamont's \"Sherlock Holmes Suite\", commissioned by the City of London to commemorate the first appearance of Sherlock Holmes in \"The Strand\" magazine.\nTheatre.\n\"Treasure Island\".\nBernard Miles gave Milligan his first straight acting role, as Ben Gunn, in the Mermaid Theatre production of \"Treasure Island\". Miles described Milligan as,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0a man of quite extraordinary talents\u00a0... a visionary who is out there alone, denied the usual contacts simply because he is so different he can't always communicate with his own species.\n\"Treasure Island\" played twice daily through the winter of 1961\u20131962 and was an annual production at the Mermaid Theatre for some years. In the 1968 production, Barry Humphries played the role of Long John Silver, with Willie Rushton as Squire Trelawney and Milligan as Ben Gunn. To Humphries, Milligan's \"best performance must surely have been as Ben Gunn\u00a0..., Milligan stole the show every night, in a makeup which took at least an hour to apply. His appearance on stage always brought a roar of delight from the kids in the audience and Spike had soon left the text far behind as he went off into a riff of sublime absurdity\".\n\"The Bedsitting Room\".\nIn 1961\u20131962, during the long pauses between the matinee and the evening show of \"Treasure Island\", Milligan began talking to Miles about the idea he and John Antrobus were exploring, of a dramatised post-nuclear world. This became the one-act play \"The Bedsitting Room\", which Milligan co-wrote with John Antrobus and which premiered at the Marlowe Theatre, Canterbury on 12 February 1962. It was adapted to a longer play and staged by Miles at London's Mermaid Theatre, making its debut on 31 January 1963. It was a critical and commercial success and was revived in 1967 with a provincial tour before opening at London's Saville Theatre on 3 May 1967. Richard Lester later directed the film, released in 1969.\n\"Oblomov\".\nTiring of comedic roles, Milligan sought out more serious material. He had read Ivan Goncharov's \"Oblomov\" and felt a kinship with the title character, who declines to leave his bed to face the world. According to Scudamore's biography:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Milligan's fans and the theatrical world in general found it hard to believe that he was to appear in a straight play\u00a0... He refused to be serious when questioned about his motives. In the story, Oblomov decides to spend his life in bed. Spike decided to identify with his character, and told disbelieving reporters that he thought it would be a nice comfortable rest for him. This was of course, prevarication. Spike was actually intrigued with Oblomov and had read a translation of Ivan Goncharov's novel.\nThe novel had been adapted for the stage by Italian writer Riccardo Aragno. Aragno's script for \"Oblomov\" was bought by Milligan's production company in early 1964. Milligan had long nurtured hopes of moving from comedy to serious drama. Milligan rehearsed for seven weeks with director Frank Dunlop and the cast members Joan Greenwood, Bill Owen, and Valentine Dyall at the Lyric Hammersmith.\nThe first preview was on 6 October 1964. During this performance Milligan was struck by stage fright and forgot nearly all of his lines. He quickly began making up things to say to the cast, turning the drama into an impromptu improv session. Noticing that a drama critic who'd given rave reviews to Milligan's other stage comedies was in the audience, Milligan ended the first performance by shouting \"Thank God, Milton Shulman's in!\"\nThe play was savaged in the theatrical press but \"Oblomov\"'s producers had booked the play into the Lyric for three weeks. Anxious to recoup their investment by any means, they gave Milligan carte-blanche on stage. Milligan's antics included starting the play while sitting with the audience, yelling for the cast to entertain him. Another night he wore a false arm that fell out of his sleeve when co-star Ian Flintoff, playing Oblomov's doctor, shook Milligan's hand. When Flintoff complained to Bill Kerr, a friend of Milligan, that he was making a mockery of their hard work Kerr replied: \"We have to put up with all the shit, mate, because it pays the rent.\"\nJoan Greenwood, who played Olga, later recalled that her husband Andr\u00e9 Morell thought the first performance was so appalling that they should get Greenwood out of her contract. According to Scudamore,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nobody seemed at all comfortable in their roles and the audience began to hoot with laughter when Milligan's slipper inadvertently went spinning across the stage into the stalls. That was the end of Spike's playing straight. The audience demanded a clown, he became a clown. When he forgot his words, or disapproved of them, he simply made up what he felt to be more appropriate ones. That night there were no riotous first night celebrations and most of the cast seemed to go home stunned. The following night Milligan began to ad lib in earnest. The text of the show began to change drastically. The cast were bedevilled and shaken but they went along with him\u00a0... Incredibly, the show began to resolve itself. The context changed completely. It was turned upside down and inside out. Cues and lines became irrelevant as Milligan verbally rewrote the play each night. By the end of the week, \"Oblomov\" had changed beyond recognition. Andre Morell came again\u00a0... and afterwards said 'the man is a genius. He must be a genius\u2014it's the only word for him. He's impossible\u2014but he's a genius!'.\nThe play continued to run as an improv comedy. The decision soon caused it to break all box office records at the Lyric. After five weeks it was renamed \"Son of Oblomov\" and moved on 2 December 1964 to the Comedy Theatre in the West End. It ran there for 559 performances. As the play was substantially new each night it drew record numbers of repeat traffic.\nOn 22 April 1965, Queen Elizabeth and her family attended as part of her 39th birthday celebration. Just after the curtain rose, a group of four latecomers attempted to slink to their seats directly in front of the royal family. Milligan immediately shouted: \"Turn up the house lights! Start everything again!\" He pointed to the blushing foursome and cried, \"That's cost you your knighthood!\"\nThen, noticing that Peter Sellers was seated between Prince Charles and Princess Margaret, Milligan asked in a loud voice: \"Is there a Sellers in the house?\" Sellers immediately shouted, \"Yes!\" Milligan launched into a vaudeville routine about Prince Philip's suspenders, with Sellers participating from his seat with the royals. This culminated in Milligan giving a high-kick, lobbing one of his bedroom slippers at Sellers, only just missing Prince Philip's head. Once back in bed with co-star Joan Greenwood, Milligan spent the rest of the performance poking fun at the Queen for bringing her son to such a racy play. The play ended with Milligan unsheathing a katana on stage and asking the Queen to knight him for his efforts that night; she declined. The performance ran 45 minutes over its scheduled ending. Prince Charles reportedly saw the play five times.\nIn a 1988 interview with Bernard Braden, Milligan described theatre as being important to him,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;First it was a means of livelihood. And I had sort of lagged behind my confederates, that I\u00a0... remained in the writing seat. And I realise that basically I was quite a good clown\u00a0... and the one and only chance I ever had to prove that was in \"Oblomov\" when I clowned my way out of what was a very bad script\u00a0... I clowned it into a West End success and uh, we kept changing it all the time. It was a tour de force of improvisation\u00a0... all that ended it was I got fed up with it, that's all.\"\nKen Russell films.\nIn 1959 Ken Russell made a short 35 mm film about and with Milligan entitled \"Portrait of a Goon\". The making of the film is detailed in Paul Sutton's 2012 authorised biography \"Becoming Ken Russell\". In 1971 Milligan played a humble village priest in Russell's film \"The Devils\". The scene was cut from the release print and is considered lost but photographs from the scene, together with Murray Melvin's memory of that day's filming, are included in Sutton's 2014 book \"Six English Filmmakers\".\nAd-libbing.\nAs illustrated in the description of his involvement in theatre, Milligan often ad-libbed. He also did this on radio and television. One of his last screen appearances was in the BBC dramatisation of Mervyn Peake's \"Gormenghast\" and he was (almost inevitably) noted as an ad-libber.\nOne of Milligan's ad-lib incidents occurred during a visit to Australia in the late 1960s. He was interviewed live on air and remained in the studio for the news broadcast that followed, during which Milligan constantly interjected, adding his own name to news items. As a result, he was banned from making any further live appearances on the ABC. The ABC also changed its national policy so that guests had to leave the studio after interviews were complete. A tape of the bulletin survives and has been included in an ABC Radio audio compilation, and also on the BBC tribute CD, \"Vivat Milligna\".\nFilm and television director Richard Lester recalls that the television series \"A Show Called Fred\" was broadcast live. \"I've seen very few moments of genius in my life but I witnessed one with Spike after the first show. He had brought around a silent cartoon\" and asked Lester if his P.A. took shorthand. \"She said she did. 'Good, this needs a commentary.' It was a ten-minute cartoon and Spike could have seen it only once, if that. He ad-libbed the commentary for it and it was perfect. I was open-mouthed at the raw comedy creation in front of me.\"\nCartoons and art.\nMilligan contributed occasional cartoons to the satirical magazine \"Private Eye\". Most were visualisations of one-line jokes. For example, a young boy sees the Concorde and asks his father \"What's that?\". The reply is \"That's a flying groundnut scheme, son.\" Milligan was a keen painter.\nAdvertising.\nIn 1967, applying a satirical angle to a fashion for the inclusion of Superman-inspired characters in British television commercials, Milligan dressed up in a \"Bat-Goons\" outfit, to appear in a series of television commercials for BP. A contemporary reporter found the TV commercials \"funny and effective\". Milligan appeared with Peter Sellers in an advert for Benson &amp; Hedges in 1973. Milligan requested that his fee was paid to ASH: Action on Smoking and Health. When this was refused, he gave the money to charity instead. The advert was popular with the public and also won several industry awards. From 1980 to 1982, he advertised for the English Tourist Board, playing a Scotsman on a visit around the different regions of England. Other advertising appearances included television commercials for Kellogg's Corn Flakes, the Leyland Mini, Commonwealth Bank of Australia, and Planters nuts.\nOther contributions.\nIn the 1970s, Charles Allen compiled a series of stories from British people's experiences of life in the British Raj, called \"Plain Tales from the Raj\" and published in 1975. Milligan was the youngest contributor, describing his life in India when it was under British rule. In it he mentions the imperial parades there,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The most exciting sound for me was the sound of the Irregular Punjabi Regiment playing the \"dhol\" and \"surmai\" [a type of drum]\u2014one beat was dum-da-da-dum, dum-da-da-dum, dum-da-da-dum! They wore these great long pantaloons, a gold dome to their turbans, khaki shirts with banded waistcoats, double-cross bandoliers, leather sandals, and they used to march very fast, I remember, bursting in through the dust on the heels of an English regiment. They used to come in with trailed arms and they'd throw their rifles up into the air, catch it with their left hand\u2014always to this dum-da-da-dum, dum-da-da-dum\u2014and then stamp their feet and fire one round, synchronising with the drums. They'd go left, right, left, right, \"shabash\"! \"Hai\"! Bang! Dum-da-da-dum\u2014it was sensational!\nMusic composition.\nIn 1988, while visiting his mother in Woy Woy (on the shores of Brisbane Water), Milligan composed and orchestrated a \"Grand Waltz for Brisbane Water\" and gave it to the symphony orchestra of nearby Gosford. Symphony Central Coast has performed it occasionally since, including a 2020 YouTube video as a COVID-19 isolation project.\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\nMilligan married his first wife, June (Marchinie) Marlow, in 1952; Peter Sellers was best man. They had three children, Laura, Se\u00e1n and S\u00edle, and divorced in 1960.\nHe married Patricia Ridgeway in June 1962, with George Martin as best man and the marriage produced one child, Jane Milligan. The marriage ended with Patricia's death from breast cancer in 1978.\nHe reportedly had two children by other mothers.\nHis third wife was Shelagh Sinclair, to whom he was married from 1983 until his death on 27 February 2002. Shelagh, who was 25 years younger than Milligan, died in June 2011. Upon marrying Shelagh, Milligan made a new will which left his entire estate to his wife. The children unsuccessfully attempted to overturn the will. A High Court judge ruled that Shelagh was entitled to his whole estate, and his children should receive only \"what was surplus to requirements\".\nFour of his children collaborated with documentary makers on a multi-platform programme called \"I Told You I Was Ill: The Life and Legacy of Spike Milligan\" (2005).\nIn October 2008, an array of Milligan's personal effects was sold at auction by Shelagh, who was moving into a smaller home. These included his vast library of books and memorabilia and a grand piano salvaged from a demolition and apparently played every morning by Paul McCartney, a neighbour in Rye in East Sussex. His children were distressed by the sale.\nHealth.\nMilligan had bipolar disorder for most of his life, having many serious mental breakdowns, several lasting over a year. He spoke candidly about his condition and its effect on his life,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have got so low that I have asked to be hospitalised and for deep narcosis (sleep). I cannot stand being awake. The pain is too much\u00a0... Something has happened to me, this vital spark has stopped burning\u2014I go to a dinner table now and I don't say a word, just sit there like a dodo. Normally I am the centre of attention, keep the conversation going\u2014so that is depressing in itself. It's like another person taking over, very strange. The most important thing I say is 'good evening' and then I go quiet.\nNationality.\nMilligan was born in the British Empire to an English mother, and felt that he was thus entitled to British citizenship, especially after having served in the British Army for six years. When British law related to Commonwealth-born residents (which had given him a secure place) changed, he applied for a British passport in 1960. The application was refused, partly because he would not swear an Oath of Allegiance. Through his Irish father, he avoided statelessness by becoming an Irish citizen in 1962 and remained so for the rest of his life; this status gave him almost the same rights as a British citizen.\nReligion.\nMilligan was agnostic, saying that he \"sometimes prayed in moments of desperation on the off chance that somebody might be listening, but he always felt that he was talking to a void\". Milligan was raised Catholic and expressed the view that \"someone raised a Catholic was always a Catholic\", referring to himself as a Catholic throughout his life.\nLegal troubles.\nIn 1974 Milligan was arrested for shooting a trespasser with an air rifle. He defended himself in court and was given a conditional discharge.\nHumour with the Prince of Wales.\nPrince Charles was a fan of Milligan. When Milligan received the Lifetime Achievement Award at the British Comedy Awards in 1994, the prince sent a congratulatory message to be read out on live television. Milligan interrupted the message to call the prince a \"little grovelling bastard\". He later faxed the prince, saying: \"I suppose a knighthood is out of the question?\"\nIn reality, he and the prince were very close friends, and Milligan had already been made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 1992 (honorary because of his Irish citizenship). He was made an honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE) in 2001.\nOn 23 July 1981, the Prince of Wales and Lady Diana Spencer were presented with a poem about the forthcoming Royal Wedding, delivered to Buckingham Palace on a 3-foot-9-inch parchment scroll, written under the pen name MacGoonical. A ridiculous verse written in the style of William McGonagall, the ode was commissioned by the Legal and General Assurance society as a \"mark of esteem and affection\". The verse, titled \"Ode to His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales on the occasion of his Weeding\", begins:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCampaigning.\nHe was a strident campaigner on environmental matters, particularly arguing against unnecessary noise, such as the use of \"muzak\".\nIn 1971, Milligan caused controversy by attacking an art exhibition at the Hayward Gallery with a hammer. The artwork included catfish, oysters, and shrimp that were to be electrocuted. He was a staunch and outspoken opponent of the scourge of domestic violence, dedicating one of his books to Erin Pizzey.\nDeath.\nMilligan retained his black humour into later life. In 1980, during the funeral of Peter Sellers, he quipped to Harry Secombe, \"I hope you die before me, because I don't want you to sing at my funeral.\" (A recording of Secombe singing was played at Milligan's memorial service.) In 1990, he also wrote his own obituary, in which he stated repeatedly that he \"wrote the \"Goon Show\" and died\".\nMilligan died from kidney failure, at the age of 83, on 27 February 2002, at his home on Dumb Woman's Lane near Rye, Sussex. On the day of his funeral, 8 March 2002, his coffin was carried to St Thomas Church in Winchelsea, East Sussex, and was draped in the flag of Ireland. He had once quipped that he wanted his headstone to bear the words: \"I told you I was ill.\" He was buried at St Thomas' churchyard but the Chichester diocese refused to allow this epitaph. A compromise was reached with the Gaelic translation of \"I told you I was ill\", , and in English, \"Love, light, peace\". The additional epitaph can be read as \"Great love for you Shelagh\".\nAccording to a letter published in the \"Rye and Battle Observer\" in 2011, Milligan's headstone was removed from St Thomas' churchyard in Winchelsea and moved to be alongside the grave of his wife, but was later returned.\nLegacy.\nFrom the 1960s, Milligan was a regular correspondent with Robert Graves. Milligan's letters to Graves usually addressed a question to do with classical studies. The letters form part of Graves's bequest to St John's College, Oxford.\nThe film of \"Puckoon\", starring Sean Hughes, including Milligan's daughter, actress Jane Milligan, was released after his death.\nMilligan lived for several years in Holden Road, Woodside Park, Finchley, north London, and at The Crescent, Barnet, and was a contributing founder and strong supporter of the Finchley Society. His house in Woodside Park has since been demolished but there is a blue plaque in his memory on the block of flats now on the site.\nA memorial bench featuring a bronze likeness of Milligan sits near his former home in Finchley. Over ten years the Finchley Society, led by friend and local resident Barbara Warren, raised funds\u2014the Spike Milligan Statue Fund\u2014to commission a bench and statue of him by local sculptor John Somerville and erected in the grounds of Avenue House at Stephens House and Gardens in East End Road, Finchley. The memorial was unveiled on 4 September 2014 at a ceremony attended by local dignitaries and showbusiness celebrities including Roy Hudd, Michael Parkinson, Maureen Lipman, Terry Gilliam, Kathy Lette, Denis Norden and Lynsey de Paul.\nThere is a campaign to erect a statue in the London Borough of Lewisham where he grew up. After coming to England from India in the 1930s, he lived at 50 Riseldine Road, Brockley and attended Brownhill Boys' School (later Catford Boys' School, which was demolished in 1994). There is a plaque and bench at the Wadestown Library, Wellington, New Zealand, in an area called \"Spike Milligan Corner\".\nIn a 2005 poll to find the \"Comedians' Comedian\", he was voted among the top 50 comedy acts, by fellow comedians and comedy insiders. In a BBC poll in August 1999, Milligan was voted the \"funniest person of the last 1,000 years\".\nIn the feature film adaptation of his novel \"Adolf Hitler: My Part in His Downfall\", Milligan was played by Jim Dale, while Milligan played his father. He was portrayed by Edward Tudor-Pole in \"The Life and Death of Peter Sellers\" (2004). In a 2008 stage play, \"Surviving Spike\", Milligan was played by Michael Barrymore.\nOn 9 June 2006, it was reported that Richard Wiseman had identified Milligan as the writer of the world's funniest joke as decided by the Laughlab project. Wiseman said the joke contained all three elements of what makes a good gag, anxiety, a feeling of superiority and an element of surprise.\nEddie Izzard described Milligan as \"The Godfather of Alternative Comedy\". \"From his unchained mind came forth ideas that just had no boundaries. And he influenced a new generation of comedians who came to be known as 'alternative'.\"\nMembers of Monty Python greatly admired him. In one interview, which was widely quoted at the time, John Cleese stated \"Milligan is the Great God to all of us\". The Pythons gave Milligan a cameo role in their 1979 film \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\", when Milligan happened to be holidaying in Tunisia, near where the film was being shot; he was re-visiting where he had been stationed during the war. Graham Chapman gave him a minor part in \"Yellowbeard\".\nAfter their retirement, Milligan's parents and his younger brother Desmond moved to Australia. His mother lived the rest of her long life in the coastal town of Woy Woy on the New South Wales Central Coast, just north of Sydney. Spike became a regular visitor to Australia and made radio and TV programmes there, including \"The Idiot Weekly\" with Bobby Limb. He also wrote several books including \"Puckoon\" during a visit to his mother's house in Woy Woy. Milligan named the town \"the largest above-ground cemetery in the world\" when visiting in the 1960s.\nMilligan's mother became an Australian citizen in 1985, partly in protest at the circumstances which led to her son's ineligibility for British citizenship; Milligan was reportedly considering applying for Australian citizenship at the time. The suspension bridge on the cyclepath from Woy Woy to Gosford was renamed the Spike Milligan Bridge in his memory and a meeting room in the Woy Woy Public Library is also named after him.\nOther radio shows.\nMilligan contributed his recollections of his childhood in India for the acclaimed 1970s BBC audio history series \"Plain Tales From The Raj\". The series was published in book form in 1975 by Andr\u00e9 Deutsch, edited by Charles Allen.\nBooks.\n\"According to\" books.\nAccording to Spike Milligan is a series of literary pastiche novels. Each part of the series was a rewriting of an original novel, with surreal comic elements added.\nMemoirs.\nThe War (and Peace) Memoirs. (The seven memoirs were also recorded as talking books with Milligan reciting them.)\nRecordings.\nDoes not include \"Goon Show\"-related recordings\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28699", "revid": "33582946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28699", "title": "Sylvia Plath", "text": "American poet and writer (1932\u20131963)\nSylvia Plath (; October 27, 1932\u00a0\u2013 February 11, 1963) was an American poet and author. She is credited with advancing the genre of confessional poetry and is best known for \"The Colossus and Other Poems\" (1960), \"Ariel\" (1965), and \"The Bell Jar\" (1963), a semi-autobiographical novel published one month before her suicide. \"The Collected Poems\" was published in 1981, which included previously unpublished works. For this collection Plath was awarded a Pulitzer Prize for Poetry in 1982, making her the fourth person to receive this honor posthumously.\nBorn in Boston, Massachusetts, Plath graduated from Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts and then the University of Cambridge in England, where she was a Fulbright student at Newnham College. In 1959, Plath took a creative writing seminar with Robert Lowell at Boston University, alongside poets Anne Sexton and George Starbuck. She married fellow poet Ted Hughes in 1956 in London. In 1957, they briefly moved to the United States, but moved back to England in winter 1959. Their relationship was tumultuous and, in her letters, Plath alleges abuse at his hands. They had two children, Frieda and Nicholas, before separating in 1962.\nPlath was clinically depressed for most of her adult life and was treated multiple times with early versions of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). She died by suicide in 1963.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nPlath was born on October 27, 1932, in Boston, Massachusetts. Her mother, Aurelia Schober Plath (1906\u20131994), was the American-born daughter of Austrian immigrants, and her father, Otto Plath (1885\u20131940), was from Grabow in Prussia, German Empire. Plath's father was an entomologist and a professor of biology at Boston University who wrote a book about bumblebees in 1934.\nOn April 27, 1935, Plath's brother Warren Joseph was born. In 1936 the family moved from 24 Prince Street in Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, to 92 Johnson Avenue, Winthrop, Massachusetts. Since 1920, Plath's maternal grandparents, the Schobers, had lived in a section of Winthrop called Point Shirley, a location mentioned in Plath's poetry.\nOtto Plath died on November 5, 1940, a week and a half after his daughter's eighth birthday, of complications following the amputation of a foot due to untreated diabetes. He had become ill shortly after a close friend died of lung cancer. Comparing the similarities between his friend's symptoms and his own, Otto became convinced that he, too, had lung cancer and did not seek treatment until his diabetes had progressed too far. Raised as a Unitarian, Plath experienced a loss of faith after her father's death and remained ambivalent about religion throughout her life. Her father was buried in Winthrop Cemetery in Massachusetts. A visit to her father's grave later prompted Plath to write the poem \"Electra on Azalea Path\".\nAfter Otto's death, Aurelia moved her children and her parents to 26 Elmwood Road, Wellesley, Massachusetts, in 1942. Plath commented in her essay \"Ocean 1212-W\", one of her final works, that her first nine years \"sealed themselves off like a ship in a bottle\u2014beautiful, inaccessible, obsolete, a fine, white flying myth\".\nPlath published her first poem at the age of eight in the \"Boston Herald\"'s children's section. Over the next few years, Plath published multiple poems in regional magazines and newspapers. At age 11, Plath began keeping a journal. In addition to writing, she showed early promise as an artist, winning an award for her paintings from the Scholastic Art &amp; Writing Awards in 1947. \"Even in her youth, Plath was ambitiously driven to succeed.\"\nPlath attended Bradford Senior High School, which is now Wellesley High School in Wellesley, Massachusetts, graduating in 1950. An influential English teacher was Wilbury Crockett, who she referred to as \"my own Mr. Crockett\". Just after graduating from high school, she had her first national publication in \"The Christian Science Monitor.\"\nCollege years and depression.\nIn 1950, Plath attended Smith College, a private women's liberal arts college in Massachusetts, where she excelled academically. While at Smith, she first lived in Haven House and later in Lawrence House, where a plaque can be found outside her old room. She edited \"The Smith Review.\" After her third year of college, Plath was awarded a coveted position as a guest editor at \"Mademoiselle\" magazine, during which she spent a month in New York City. The experience was not what she had hoped for, and many of the events that took place during that summer were later used as inspiration for her novel \"The Bell Jar\".\nShe was furious at not being at a meeting that \"Mademoiselle\" editor Cyrilly Abels had arranged with Welsh poet Dylan Thomas, a writer whose work she loved, according to one of her boyfriends, \"more than life itself\". She loitered around the White Horse Tavern and the Chelsea Hotel for two days, hoping to meet Thomas, but he was already on his way home. A few weeks later, she slashed her legs \"to see if she had enough courage to kill herself.\" During this time, she was not accepted into a Harvard University writing seminar with author Frank O'Connor. Following ECT for depression, Plath made her first medically documented suicide attempt on August 24, 1953, by crawling under the front porch and taking her mother's sleeping pills.\nShe survived this first suicide attempt, later writing that she \"blissfully succumbed to the whirling blackness that I honestly believed was eternal oblivion\". She spent the next six months in psychiatric care, receiving more electric and insulin shock treatment under the care of Ruth Beuscher. Her stay at McLean Hospital and her Smith scholarship were paid for by the author Olive Higgins Prouty, who had also recovered from a mental breakdown. According to Plath's biographer Andrew Wilson, Olive Higgins Prouty \"would take Dr Tillotson to task for the badly managed ECT, blaming him for Sylvia's suicide attempt\".\nPlath seemed to make a good recovery and returned to college. In January 1955, she submitted her thesis \"The Magic Mirror: A Study of the Double in Two of Dostoyevsky's Novels\", and in June graduated from Smith with an A.B., \"summa cum laude\". She was a member of the Phi Beta Kappa academic honor society, and had an IQ of around 160.\nShe obtained a Fulbright Scholarship to study at Newnham College, one of the two women-only colleges of the University of Cambridge in England, where she lived in Whitstead, a detached house situated on the edge of the college grounds. Plath continued actively writing poetry and publishing her work in the student newspaper \"Varsity\". At Newnham, she studied with Dorothea Krook, whom she held in high regard. She spent her first-year winter and spring holidays traveling around Europe.\nCareer and marriage.\nPlath met poet Ted Hughes on February 25, 1956, at a party to launch a poetry journal, St. Botolph's Review. In a 1961 BBC interview now held by the British Library Sound Archive, Plath describes how she met Hughes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I'd read some of Ted's poems in this magazine and I was very impressed and I wanted to meet him. I went to this little celebration and that's actually where we met... Then we saw a great deal of each other. Ted came back to Cambridge and suddenly we found ourselves getting married a few months later... We kept writing poems to each other. Then it just grew out of that, I guess, a feeling that we both were writing so much and having such a fine time doing it, we decided that this should keep on. Plath described Hughes as \"a singer, story-teller, lion and world-wanderer\" with \"a voice like the thunder of God\".\nThe couple married on June 16, 1956, at St George the Martyr in Holborn, London, in honor of Bloomsday, with Plath's mother as the sole witness. They spent their honeymoon in Paris and Benidorm, Spain. Plath returned to Newnham in October to begin her second year. During this time, they both became deeply interested in astrology and the supernatural, using ouija boards.\nIn June 1957, Plath and Hughes moved to the United States; beginning in September, Plath taught at Smith College, her alma mater. She found it difficult to both teach and have enough time and energy to write, and in the middle of 1958, the couple moved to Boston, where they lived at 9 Willow St. in Beacon Hill. Plath took a job as a receptionist in the psychiatric unit of Massachusetts General Hospital and in the evenings attended a creative writing seminar given by poet Robert Lowell (also attended by the writers Anne Sexton and George Starbuck).\nBoth Lowell and Sexton encouraged Plath to write from her personal experience. She openly discussed her depression with Lowell and her suicide attempt with Sexton, who led her to write from a more female perspective. Plath began to consider herself as a more serious, focused writer. At this time, Plath and Hughes met the poet W.S. Merwin, who admired their work and was to remain a lifelong friend. Plath resumed psychoanalytic treatment in December, working with Ruth Beuscher.\nIn summer 1959, Plath and Hughes went on an eight-week camping across Canada, the United States and Mexico, after which they stayed at the Yaddo artist colony in Saratoga Springs, New York, in fall. Plath stated that at Yaddo she learned \"to be true to my own weirdnesses\", but she remained anxious about writing confessionally, from deeply personal and private material.\nThe couple moved back to England in December 1959 and lived in London at 3 Chalcot Square, near the Primrose Hill area of Regent's Park, where an English Heritage plaque records Plath's residence from 1960-1961. Their daughter Frieda Rebecca was born on April 1, 1960, and in October, Plath published \"The Colossus\", her first collection of poetry.\nIn February 1961, Plath's second pregnancy ended in miscarriage; several of her poems, including \"Parliament Hill Fields\", address this event. In a letter to her therapist, Plath wrote that Hughes beat her two days before the miscarriage. In August, she finished her semi-autobiographical novel \"The Bell Jar\"; immediately afterwards, the family moved to Court Green in the small market town of North Tawton, Devon. Her son Nicholas Farrar was born on January, 17, 1962. In mid-1962, Plath and Hughes began to keep bees, which would be the subject of many Plath poems.\nBefore moving away from London in August 1961, the couple sublet their flat at Chalcot Square to the Canadian poet David Wevill and his wife Assia (n\u00e9e Gutmann) Wevill. The couples became friends and Plath and Hughes invited the Wevills to visit them at their new house in Devon in May 1962. Hughes was immediately struck with Assia, as she was with him. In July 1962, Plath discovered Hughes was having an affair with Wevill. In September, as a last attempt to save their relationship, Plath and Hughes traveled to Cleggan in Ireland to visit the poet Richard Murphy; a trip that would end in disaster, with Hughes abandoning Plath to go to Spain with Wevill. In October, Plath and Hughes separated for good and Hughes moved back to London, leaving Plath and their children behind in Devon.\nBeginning in October 1962, Plath experienced a great burst of creativity and composed most of the poems on which her reputation now rests, writing at least 26 of the poems of her second collection \"Ariel\", which would be published posthumously (1965 in the UK, 1966 in the US) during the final months of her life. In December 1962, she returned alone to London with their children and rented, on a five-year lease, a flat at 23 Fitzroy Road\u2014around the corner from her previous flat at Chalcot Square. William Butler Yeats once lived in the house, which bears an English Heritage blue plaque for the Irish poet. Plath was pleased by this fact and considered it a good omen.\nThe winter of 1962\u20131963 was one of the coldest on record in the UK; the pipes froze, the children\u2014now two years old and nine months\u2014were often sick, and the house had no telephone. Her depression returned but she kept on writing poetry, which would be published after her death. Her only novel, \"The Bell Jar\", was published in January 1963 under the pen name Victoria Lucas and was met with critical indifference.\nFinal depressive episode and death.\nBefore her death, Plath tried at least once to take her own life. On August 24, 1953, she overdosed on sleeping pills. In June 1962, she drove her car off the side of the road into a nearby clearing, after learning about Hughes' and Wevill's affair. The poetry critic and Plath's friend Al Alvarez always maintained that Plath told him it was a suicide attempt, but another friend claimed that Plath herself described the incident as \"not a conscious suicide but a blind destructive urge over which she had no conscious control\" and Hughes himself told Alvarez that it was a minor accident due to a \"feverish blackout\".\nIn January 1963, Plath spoke with John Horder, her general practitioner. She described the current depressive episode she was experiencing; it had been ongoing for six or seven months. While for most of the time she had been able to continue working, her depression had worsened and become severe, \"marked by constant agitation, suicidal thoughts and inability to cope with daily life.\" Plath struggled with insomnia, taking medication at night to induce sleep, and frequently woke up early. She had lost 20 pounds (9\u00a0kg) in a short time. However, she continued to take care of her physical appearance and did not outwardly speak of feeling guilty or unworthy.\nHorder prescribed her an anti-depressant, a monoamine oxidase inhibitor, a few days before her suicide. Knowing she was at risk with two young children, he made strenuous efforts to have her admitted to a hospital; when that failed, he arranged for a live-in nurse.\nHughes claimed in a hand-written note to the literary critic Keith Sagar, discovered in 2001, that the anti-depressants prescribed were a \"key factor\" in Plath's suicide. He said Plath had previously had an adverse reaction to a prescription she had taken when they lived in the U.S. These pills were sold in England under a different name, and although Hughes did not name the pills explicitly, he claimed a new doctor had prescribed them to Plath without realizing she had taken them before with adverse effects. Several commentators have argued that because anti-depressants may take up to three weeks to take effect, her prescription from Horder would not have taken full effect prior to her death; however, others have pointed out that adverse effects of anti-depressants can begin immediately.\nThe live-in nurse was due to arrive at nine on the morning of February 11, 1963, to help Plath with the care of her children. Upon arrival, she could not get into the flat but eventually gained access with the help of a workman. They found Plath dead with her head on the oven door, having sealed the kitchen door and the room upstairs with her sleeping children inside with tape, towels, and cloths. She was 30years old.\nPlath's intentions have been debated. That morning, she asked her downstairs neighbor, art historian Trevor Thomas (1907\u20131993), what time he would be leaving. She also left a note reading \"Call Dr. Horder\", including the doctor's phone number. It is argued Plath turned on the gas at a time when Thomas would have been likely to see the note, but the escaping gas seeped downstairs and also rendered Thomas unconscious while he slept. However, in her biography \"Giving Up: The Last Days of Sylvia Plath\", Plath's friend Jillian Becker wrote, \"According to Mr. Goodchild, a police officer attached to the coroner's office... [Plath] had thrust her head far into the gas oven... [and] had really meant to die.\" Horder also believed her intention was clear. He stated that \"No one who saw the care with which the kitchen was prepared could have interpreted her action as anything but an irrational compulsion.\" Plath had described the quality of her despair as \"owl's talons clenching my heart\".\nAftermath.\nAn inquest was held on February 15 and concluded that the cause of death was suicide by carbon monoxide poisoning. Hughes was devastated; they had been separated for six months, due to his affair with Assia Wevill. In a letter to an old friend of Plath's from Smith College, he wrote: \"That's the end of my life. The rest is posthumous.\" Wevill also committed suicide using a gas stove, six years later, in 1969.\nPlath's gravestone in Heptonstall's parish churchyard of St. Thomas the Apostle bears the inscription that Hughes chose for her: \"Even amidst fierce flames the golden lotus can be planted.\" Biographers have attributed the source of the quote to the 16th-century novel \"Journey to the West\" written by Wu Cheng'en.\nEight years after the death of Plath, Al Alvarez wrote that Plath's suicide was not intentional and was \"a cry for help which fatally misfired\". This prompted an angry response from Hughes who demanded that this claim be withdrawn from wider publication. In a BBC interview in March 2000, Alvarez spoke about his failure to recognize Plath's depression, saying he regretted his inability to offer her emotional support.\nPlath's daughter Frieda Hughes is a writer and artist. On March 16, 2009, Plath's son Nicholas Hughes, who was a fisheries biologist, died by suicide at his home in Fairbanks, Alaska, following a history of depression.\nWorks.\nPlath wrote poetry from the age of 8, her first poem appearing in the \"Boston Herald\". By the time she arrived at Smith College, she had written over 50 short stories, and her work had been published in numerous magazines. At Smith, she majored in English literature and won all the major prizes in writing and scholarship, including literary prizes for her poetry. Additionally, she received a summer editor position at the young women's magazine \"Mademoiselle\". On her graduation in 1955, she won the Glascock Prize for her poem \"Two Lovers and a Beachcomber by the Real Sea\". Later, at Cambridge, she wrote for the university publication \"Varsity\".\nAlvarez clearly views Plath as part of a generation that helped establish a new artistic myth. In contrast to the Eliot generation, which championed the impersonality of art and the \"extinction of personality\" in creative expression, Plath and her contemporaries fused their inner lives with their artistic output. As Alvarez puts it, this is a form of art in which \"the barriers between the artist\u2019s work and his life are forever shifting and crumbling.\u201d\n\"The Colossus\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nNights, I squat in the cornucopia\nOf your left ear, out of the wind,\nCounting the red stars and those of plum-color.\nThe sun rises under the pillar of your tongue.\nMy hours are married to shadow.\nNo longer do I listen for the scrape of a keel\nOn the blank stones of the landing.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nfrom \"The Colossus\", &lt;br&gt;\"The Colossus and Other Poems, 1960\"\nBy the time Heinemann published her first collection, \"The Colossus and Other Poems\" in the UK in late 1960, Plath had been short-listed several times in the Yale Younger Poets book competition and had her work printed in \"Harper's\", \"The Spectator\" and \"The Times Literary Supplement\". All the poems in \"The Colossus\" had been printed in major U.S. and British journals, and she had a contract with \"The New Yorker\". It was, however, her 1965 collection \"Ariel\", published posthumously, on which Plath's reputation essentially rests. \"Often, her work is singled out for the intense coupling of its violent or disturbed imagery and its playful use of alliteration and rhyme.\"\n\"The Colossus\" received largely positive UK reviews, highlighting Plath's voice as new and strong, individual and American in tone. Peter Dickinson at \"Punch\" called the collection \"a real find\" and \"exhilarating to read\", full of \"clean, easy verse\". Bernard Bergonzi at the \"Manchester Guardian\" wrote the book was an \"outstanding technical accomplishment\" with a \"virtuoso quality\". From the point of publication, she became a presence on the poetry scene. The book was published in America in 1962 to less-glowing reviews. While her craft was generally praised, her writing was viewed by some critics at the time as more derivative of other poets.\n\"The Bell Jar\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI saw my life branching out before me like the green fig tree in the story. From the tip of every branch, like a fat purple fig, a wonderful future beckoned and winked [...] as I sat there, unable to decide [which fig], the figs began to wrinkle and go black, and, one by one, they plopped to the ground at my feet.\n The Bell Jar\n, 1963\nPlath\u2019s semi-autobiographical novel\u2014her mother had tried to block its publication\u2014was published under a pseudonym in the UK in 1963, under her real name in 1966, and in the US in 1971. Describing the compilation of the book to her mother, she wrote, \"What I've done is to throw together events from my own life, fictionalizing to add color\u2014it's a pot boiler really, but I think it will show how isolated a person feels when he is suffering a breakdown... I've tried to picture my world and the people in it as seen through the distorting lens of a bell jar\". She described her novel as \"an autobiographical apprentice work which I had to write in order to free myself from the past\". Plath dated a Yale senior named Dick Norton during her junior year. Norton, upon whom the character of Buddy in \"The Bell Jar\" is based, contracted tuberculosis and was treated at the Ray Brook Sanatorium. While visiting Norton, Plath broke her leg skiing, an incident that was fictionalized in the novel. Plath also used the novel to highlight the issue of women in the workforce during the 1950s. She strongly believed in women's abilities to be writers and editors while society forced them to fulfill secretarial roles: Now with me, writing is the first delight in life. I want time and money to write, both very necessary. I will not sacrifice my time to learn shorthand because I do not want any of the jobs which shorthand would open up, although those jobs are no doubt very interesting for girls who want them. I do not want the rigid hours of a magazine or publishing job. I do not want to type other people's letters and read their manuscripts. I want to type my own and write my own. So secretarial training is out for me. That I know. (Sylvia Plath's letter to her mother, 10 Feb 1955)\n\"Double Exposure\".\nIn 1963, after \"The Bell Jar\" was published, Plath began working on another literary work, titled \"Double Exposure\", which was never published. According to Ted Hughes in 1979, Plath left behind a typescript of \"some 130 pages\", but in 1995 he spoke of just \"sixty, seventy pages\". His sister, Olwyn Hughes, wrote in 2003 that the typescript may have consisted of the first two chapters, and did not exceed sixty pages.\n\"Ariel\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;And I\nAm the arrow,\nThe dew that flies\nSuicidal, at one with the drive\nInto the red\nEye, the cauldron of morning.&lt;/poem&gt;\nfrom the poem \"Ariel\", October 12, 1962\nPlath's second volume of poems titled \"Ariel\" was published by Faber &amp; Faber in 1965, two years after her death. Ted Hughes made substantial changes to the manuscript she left on her desk on the night of her death. He rearranged the intended order of the poems, dropping some pieces, and adding others. The publication precipitated Plath's rise to fame. The poems in \"Ariel\" mark a departure from her earlier work into a more personal arena of poetry. Robert Lowell's poetry may have played a part in this shift as she cited Lowell's 1959 book \"Life Studies\" as a significant influence, in an interview just before her death. The impact of \"Ariel\" was dramatic, with its dark and potentially autobiographical descriptions of mental illness in poems such as \"Tulips\", \"Daddy\" and \"Lady Lazarus\". Plath's work is often held within the genre of confessional poetry and the style of her work compared to other contemporaries, such as Lowell and W.D. Snodgrass. Plath's close friend Al Alvarez, who wrote about her extensively, said of her later work: \"Plath's case is complicated by the fact that, in her mature work, she deliberately used the details of her everyday life as raw material for her art. A casual visitor or unexpected telephone call, a cut, a bruise, a kitchen bowl, a candlestick\u2014everything became usable, charged with meaning, transformed. Her poems are full of references and images that seem impenetrable at this distance, but which could mostly be explained in footnotes by a scholar with full access to the details of her life.\" Many of Plath's later poems deal with what one critic calls the \"domestic surreal\" in which Plath takes everyday elements of life and twists the images, giving them an almost nightmarish quality. Plath's poem \"Morning Song\" from \"Ariel\" is regarded as one of her finest poems on \"freedom of expression\" of an artist. \nPlath's fellow confessional poet and friend Anne Sexton commented: \"Sylvia and I would talk at length about our first suicide, in detail and in depth\u2014between the free potato chips. Suicide is, after all, the opposite of the poem. Sylvia and I often talked opposites. We talked death with burned-up intensity, both of us drawn to it like moths to an electric lightbulb, sucking on it. She told the story of her first suicide in sweet and loving detail, and her description in \"The Bell Jar\" is just that same story.\" The confessional interpretation of Plath's work has led to some dismissing certain aspects of her work as an exposition of sentimentalist melodrama; in 2010, for example, Theodore Dalrymple asserted that Plath had been the \"patron saint of self-dramatisation\" and of self-pity. Revisionist critics such as Tracy Brain have, however, argued against a tightly autobiographical interpretation of Plath's material. On January 16, 2004, \"The Independent\" published an article that ranked \"Ariel\" as the 3rd best book of modern poetry among 'The 10 Best Modern Poetry Books.' The same year, Faber published \"Ariel: The Restored Edition\", with a foreword by Frieda Hughes. The new edition for the first time restored the selection and arrangement of the poems as Plath had left them.\nOther works.\nIn 1971, the volumes \"Winter Trees\" and \"Crossing the Water\" were published in the UK, including nine previously unseen poems from the original manuscript of \"Ariel\". Writing in \"New Statesman\", fellow poet Peter Porter wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Crossing the Water\" is full of perfectly realised works. Its most striking impression is of a front-rank artist in the process of discovering her true power. Such is Plath's control that the book possesses a singularity and certainty which should make it as celebrated as \"The Colossus\" or \"Ariel\".\nIn 1977, \"Johnny Panic and the Bible of Dreams\", a collection of short stories, other prose writings and diary excerpts was published by Faber &amp; Faber.&lt;br&gt;\nIn 2024, Faber published a new volume titled \"The Collected Prose of Sylvia Plath\", edited by Peter K. Steinberg, which contains nearly 217, mostly previously unpublished works written by Plath, such as fiction, non-fiction, texts from the Smith College Press Board, book reviews and story fragments, and provides a better awareness and understanding of Plath's efforts in the various genres represented.\nThe \"Collected Poems\", published in 1981, edited and introduced by Ted Hughes, contained poetry written from 1956 until her death. Plath posthumously was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Poetry. In 2006, Anna Journey, then a graduate student at Virginia Commonwealth University, discovered a previously unpublished sonnet written by Plath titled \"Ennui\". The poem, composed during Plath's early years at Smith College, was published in the online journal \"Blackbird\".\nLetters and journals.\nHeavily abridged versions of Plath's letters to her family, mainly to her mother and brother, were published in 1975, edited and selected by her mother Aurelia Plath. The collection \"\" came out partly in response to the strong public reaction to the publication of \"The Bell Jar\" in America.\nIn 2017 and 2018, two new volumes of letters, \"The Letters of Sylvia Plath Volume I: 1940-1956\" and \"The Letters of Sylvia Plath Volume II: 1956-1963\", edited by Peter K. Steinberg and Karen V. Kukil, were published by Faber. With more than 2.500 pages, both volumes contain complete and unabridged letters to her family, friends, mentors and teachers, ex-boyfriends and to Ted Hughes. \nPlath started writing in her diary on January 1, 1944, at the age of 11 and continued until her death by suicide in February 1963. Her early diaries remain unpublished and are currently at Indiana University Bloomington. Her adult diaries, starting from her first year at Smith College in 1950, were published in 1982 as \"The Journals of Sylvia Plath\", edited by Frances McCullough, with Ted Hughes as consulting editor. In 1982, when Smith College acquired Plath's remaining journals, Hughes sealed two of them until February 11, 2013, the 50th anniversary of Plath's death.\nDuring the last years of his life, Hughes began working on a fuller publication of Plath's journals. In 1998, shortly before his death, he unsealed the two journals, and passed the project onto his children by Plath, Frieda and Nicholas, who passed it on to Karen V. Kukil, who finished her editing in December 1999. In 2000 Anchor Books published \"The Unabridged Journals of Sylvia Plath\". More than half of the new volume contained newly released material; the American author Joyce Carol Oates hailed the publication as a \"genuine literary event\". Hughes faced criticism for his role in handling the journals: He claims to have destroyed Plath's last journal, which contained entries from the winter of 1962 up to her death. In the foreword of the 1982 version, he writes \"I destroyed [the last of her journals] because I did not want her children to have to read it (in those days I regarded forgetfulness as an essential part of survival).\"\nHughes controversies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nAnd here you come, with a cup of tea\nWreathed in steam.\nThe blood jet is poetry,\nThere is no stopping it.\nYou hand me two children, two roses.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nfrom \"Kindness\", written February 1, 1963. \"Ariel\"\nAs Hughes and Plath were legally married at the time of her death, Hughes inherited the Plath estate, including all her written work. He has been condemned repeatedly for burning Plath's last journal, saying he \"did not want her children to have to read it\". Hughes lost another journal and an unfinished novel, and instructed that a collection of Plath's papers and journals should not be released until 2013. He has been accused of attempting to control the estate for his own ends, although royalties from Plath's poetry were placed into a trust account for their two children, Frieda and Nicholas.\nPlath's gravestone has been repeatedly vandalized by those aggrieved that \"Hughes\" is written on the stone; they have attempted to chisel it off, leaving only the name \"Sylvia Plath\". Plath and Hughes's daughter Frieda has condemned the defacement. When Hughes's mistress Assia Wevill died by suicide and killed their four-year-old daughter Shura in 1969, this practice intensified, as Wevill's death led to claims that Hughes had been abusive to both Plath and Wevill. After each defacement, Hughes had the damaged stone removed, sometimes leaving the site unmarked during repair. Outraged mourners accused Hughes in the media of dishonoring Plath's name by removing the stone.\nRadical feminist poet Robin Morgan published the poem \"Arraignment\", in which she openly accused Hughes of the battery and murder of Plath. Her book \"Monster\" (1972) \"included a piece in which a gang of Plath aficionados are imagined castrating Hughes, stuffing his penis into his mouth and then blowing out his brains\". Hughes threatened to sue Morgan. The book was withdrawn by the publisher Random House, but it remained in circulation among feminists. Other feminists threatened to kill Hughes in Plath's name and pursue a conviction for murder. Plath's poem \"The Jailor\", in which the speaker condemns her husband's brutality, was included in Morgan's 1970 anthology \".\"\nIn 1989, with Hughes under public attack, a battle raged in the letters pages of \"The Guardian\" and \"The Independent\". In \"The Guardian\" on April 20, 1989, Hughes wrote the article \"The Place Where Sylvia Plath Should Rest in Peace\": \"In the years soon after [Plath's] death, when scholars approached me, I tried to take their apparently serious concern for the truth about Sylvia Plath seriously. But I learned my lesson early...If I tried too hard to tell them exactly how something happened, in the hope of correcting some fantasy, I was quite likely to be accused of trying to suppress Free Speech. In general, my refusal to have anything to do with the Plath Fantasia has been regarded as an attempt to suppress Free Speech...The Fantasia about Sylvia Plath is more needed than the facts. Where that leaves respect for the truth of her life (and of mine), or for her memory, or for the literary tradition, I do not know.\"\nStill the subject of speculation and opprobrium in 1998, Hughes published \"Birthday Letters\" that year, his own collection of 88 poems about his relationship with Plath. Hughes had published very little about his experience of the marriage and Plath's suicide, and the book caused a sensation, being taken as his first explicit disclosure, and it topped bestseller charts. It was not known at the volume's release that Hughes had terminal cancer and would die later that year. The book won the Forward Poetry Prize, the T. S. Eliot Prize for Poetry, and the Whitbread Poetry Prize. The poems, written after Plath's death, in some cases long after, try to find a reason why Plath killed herself.\nIn October 2015, the BBC Two documentary \"Ted Hughes: Stronger Than Death\" examined Hughes's life and work; it included audio recordings of Plath reciting her own poetry. Their daughter Frieda spoke for the first time about her mother and father.\nThemes and legacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nLove set you going like a fat gold watch.\nThe midwife slapped your footsoles, and your bald cry\nTook its place among the elements.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nfrom \"Morning Song\", \"Ariel\", 1965\nSylvia Plath's early poems exhibit what became her typical imagery, using personal and nature-based depictions featuring, for example, the moon, blood, hospitals, fetuses, and skulls. They were mostly imitation exercises of poets she admired such as Dylan Thomas, W. B. Yeats and Marianne Moore. Late in 1959, when she and Hughes were at the Yaddo writers' colony in New York State, she wrote the seven-part \"Poem for a Birthday\", echoing Theodore Roethke's \"Lost Son\" sequence, though its theme is her own traumatic breakdown and suicide attempt at 21. After 1960 her work moved into a more surreal landscape darkened by a sense of imprisonment and looming death, overshadowed by her father. \"The Colossus\" is filled with themes of death, redemption and resurrection. After Hughes left, Plath produced, in less than two months, the 40 poems of rage, despair, love, and vengeance on which her reputation mostly rests.\nPlath's landscape poetry, which she wrote throughout her life, has been described as \"a rich and important area of her work that is often overlooked...some of the best of which was written about the Yorkshire moors\". Her September 1961 poem \"Wuthering Heights\" takes its title from the novel by Emily Bront\u00eb, but its content and style is Plath's own particular vision of the Pennine landscape.\nIt was the posthumous publication of \"Ariel\" in 1965 that precipitated Plath's rise to fame and helped establish her reputation as one of the 20th century's best poets. As soon as it was published, critics began to see the collection as the charting of Plath's increasing desperation or death wish. Her dramatic death became her most famous aspect and remains so. \"Time\" and \"Life\" both reviewed the slim volume of \"Ariel\" in the wake of her death. The critic at \"Time\" said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[W]ithin a week of her death, intellectual London was hunched over copies of a strange and terrible poem she had written during her last sick slide toward suicide. \"Daddy\" was its title; its subject was her morbid love-hatred of her father; its style was as brutal as a truncheon. What is more, \"Daddy\" was merely the first jet of flame from a literary dragon who in the last months of her life breathed a burning river of bale across the literary landscape... In her most ferocious poems, \"Daddy\" and \"Lady Lazarus\", fear, hate, love, death and the poet's own identity become fused at black heat with the figure of her father, and through him, with the guilt of the German exterminators and the suffering of their Jewish victims. They are poems, as Robert Lowell says in his preface to \"Ariel\", that \"play Russian roulette with six cartridges in the cylinder.\"On January 16, 2004, \"The Independent\" in London published an article which ranked \"Ariel\" as the third best book of modern poetry among its Ten Best Modern Poetry Books.\nSome in the feminist movement saw Plath as speaking for their experience, as a \"symbol of blighted female genius\". Writer Honor Moore describes \"Ariel\" as marking the beginning of a movement, Plath suddenly visible as \"a woman on paper\", certain and audacious. Moore says: \"When Sylvia Plath's \"Ariel\" was published in the United States in 1966, American women noticed. Not only women who ordinarily read poems, but housewives and mothers whose ambitions had awakened ... Here was a woman, superbly trained in her craft, whose final poems uncompromisingly charted female rage, ambivalence, and grief, in a voice with which many women identified.\"\nSmith College, Plath's alma mater, holds her literary papers in the Smith College Library.\nThe United States Postal Service introduced a postage stamp featuring Plath in 2012. An English Heritage plaque records Plath's residence at 3 Chalcot Square, in London.\nIn 2013 a previously unseen draft of her poem \"Sheep in Fog\", written two weeks before her death, revealed her disturbed state of mind.\nIn 2018, \"The New York Times\" published an obituary for Plath as part of the Overlooked history project.\nPortrayals in media.\nPlath's voice is heard in a BBC documentary about her life, recorded in London in late 1962. Of the BBC recording Elizabeth Hardwick wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI have never before learned anything from a poetic reading, unless the clothes, the beard, the girls, the poor or good condition of the poet can be considered a kind of knowledge. But I was taken aback by Sylvia Plath's reading. It was not anything like I could have imagined. Not a trace of the modest, retreating, humorous Worcester, Massachusetts, of Elizabeth Bishop; nothing of the swallowed plain Pennsylvania of Marianne Moore. Instead these bitter poems\u2014\"Daddy\", \"Lady Lazarus\", \"The Applicant\", \"Fever 103\u00b0\"\u2014were beautifully read, projected in full-throated, plump, diction-perfect, Englishy, mesmerizing cadences, all round and rapid, and paced and spaced. Poor recessive Massachusetts had been erased. \"I have done it again!\" Clearly, perfectly, staring you down. She seemed to be standing at a banquet like Timon, crying, \"Uncover, dogs, and lap!\"\n\"Letters Home\" is a 1986 experimental telefilm directed by Chantal Akerman in which Plath's letters to and from her mother are recited by Delphine Seyrig and Coralie Seyrig, with the latter taking on the role of Plath. It is an adaptation of Rose Leiman Goldemberg\u2019s off-Broadway play.\nGwyneth Paltrow portrayed Plath in the biopic \"Sylvia\" (2003). Elizabeth Sigmund, who was friends with both Plath and Hughes, criticized the movie for depicting Sylvia as \"a permanent depressive and a possessive person\", but she conceded that \"the film has an atmosphere towards the end of her life which is heartbreaking in its accuracy\". Frieda Hughes, who was only two years old when she lost her mother, was angered by the making of entertainment featuring her parents' troubled marriage and her mother's death. She accused the \"peanut crunching\" public of wanting to be titillated by her family's tragedies. In 2003, Frieda reacted to the situation in the poem \"My Mother\", first published in \"Tatler\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nNow they want to make a film\nFor anyone lacking the ability\nTo imagine the body, head in oven,\nOrphaning children\n ... they think\nI should give them my mother's words\nTo fill the mouth of their monster,\nTheir Sylvia Suicide Doll\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "28701", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28701", "title": "Shania Twain", "text": "Canadian singer (born 1965)\nEilleen Regina \"Shania\" Twain ( ; born August 28, 1965) is a Canadian singer and songwriter. She has sold over 100 million records, making her one of the best-selling music artists of all time and the best-selling female artist in country music history. She received several titles including the \"Queen of Country Pop\". \"Billboard\" named her as the leader of the 1990s country-pop crossover stars.\nTwain grew up in Timmins, Ontario, and from a young age she pursued singing and songwriting before signing with Mercury Nashville Records in the early 1990s. Her self-titled debut studio album was a commercial failure upon release in 1993. After collaborating with producer and husband-to-be Robert John \"Mutt\" Lange, she rose to fame with her second studio album, \"The Woman in Me\" (1995), which brought her widespread success. It sold over 20 million copies worldwide, spawned eight singles, including \"Any Man of Mine\" and earned her a Grammy Award. Twain's third studio album, \"Come On Over\" (1997), has sold over 40 million copies worldwide, making it the best-selling studio album by a female solo artist, the best-selling country album, best-selling album by a Canadian, and one of the best-selling albums of all time. \"Come On Over\" produced twelve singles, including \"You're Still the One\", \"From This Moment On\", \"That Don't Impress Me Much\" and \"Man! I Feel Like a Woman!\" and earned her four Grammy Awards. Her fourth studio album, \"Up!\" (2002), spawned eight singles, including \"I'm Gonna Getcha Good!\", \"Ka-Ching!\" and \"Forever and for Always\".\nIn 2004, after releasing her \"Greatest Hits\" album, which produced three singles including \"Party for Two\", Twain entered a hiatus, revealing years later that diagnoses with Lyme disease and dysphonia led to a severely weakened singing voice. She chronicled her vocal rehabilitation on the OWN miniseries \"Why Not? with Shania Twain\", released her first single in six years in 2011, \"Today Is Your Day\", and published an autobiography, \"From This Moment On\". Twain returned to performing the following year with an exclusive concert residency at The Colosseum at Caesars Palace, \"\", which ran until 2014. In 2015, she launched the North American Rock This Country Tour, which was billed as her farewell tour. Twain released her first studio album in 15 years in 2017, \"Now\", and embarked on the Now Tour in 2018. In 2019, she started her second Las Vegas residency, \"Let's Go!\" at the Zappos Theater. Her sixth studio album \"Queen of Me\" was released in 2023, and she embarked on the Queen of Me Tour in the same year.\nTwain has received five Grammy Awards, two World Music Awards, 39 BMI Songwriter Awards, inductions to Canada's Walk of Fame and the Hollywood Walk of Fame, as well as the Canadian Music Hall of Fame and Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame. According to the RIAA, she is the only female artist in history to have three (consecutive) albums certified Diamond by the RIAA and is the seventh best-selling female artist in the United States. Altogether Twain is ranked as the 10th best-selling artist of the Nielsen SoundScan era. \"Billboard\" listed her as the 13th Greatest Music Video Female Solo Artist of all time (42nd overall). According to \"Billboard\" Boxscore, she is the highest-grossing female country touring artist with $421.1 million gross from her concert tours.\nEarly life.\nTwain was born Eilleen Regina Edwards in Windsor, Ontario, on August 28, 1965, to Sharon (n\u00e9e Morrison) of Irish descent and Clarence Edwards. She has two sisters, Jill and Carrie Ann. Her parents divorced when she was two and her mother moved to Timmins, Ontario, with her daughters. Sharon married Jerry Twain, an Ojibwa from the nearby Mattagami First Nation, and they had a son, Mark. Jerry adopted the girls and legally changed their surname to Twain. When Mark was a toddler, Jerry and Sharon adopted Jerry's baby nephew Darryl when his mother died. Because of Twain's connection to Jerry, the media have incorrectly reported that she is of Ojibwe descent. When questioned as to why she chose not to publicly acknowledge Edwards as her biological father for years she said: My father [Jerry Twain] went out of his way to raise three daughters that weren't even his. For me to acknowledge another man as my father, a man who was never there for me as a father, who wasn't the one who struggled every day to put food on our table, would have hurt him terribly. We were a family. Step-father, step-brothers, we never used that vocabulary in our home. To have referred to him as my step-father would have been the worst slap across the face to him. She holds a status card and is on the official band membership list of the Temagami First Nation. In 1991, Twain was offered a recording contract in Nashville and applied for immigration status into the United States. At that time, by virtue of her adoptive father Jerry Twain being a full-blooded Ojibwe and the rights guaranteed to indigenous Americans in the Jay Treaty (1795), she became legally registered as having 50 percent indigenous American blood.\nTwain has said that as a child she was told by her mother that her biological father was part Cree; his family denies having Cree ancestry but affirmed hearing Twain's mother make this claim. Her confirmed ancestry includes Irish and French roots. Through a maternal great-grandmother, she is a descendant of French carpenter Zacharie Cloutier. Her Irish maternal grandmother, Eileen Pearce, emigrated from Newbridge, County Kildare.\nShe has said she had a difficult childhood. Her parents earned little money, and food was often scarce in their household. She did not confide her situation to school authorities, fearing they might break up the family. Her mother and adoptive father's marriage was stormy at times, and from a young age she witnessed violence between them. Her mother struggled with bouts of depression. She eventually convinced her mother to take her and the children and run away to a homeless shelter in Toronto; however Sharon returned to Jerry with the children in 1981.\nIn Timmins, Shania started singing at bars at the age of eight to try to help pay her family's bills; she often earned CA$ between midnight and 1 a.m. performing for remaining customers after the bar had finished serving alcohol. Although she expressed a dislike for singing in those bars, she believes that this was her own kind of performing-arts school on the road. She has said of the ordeal, \"My deepest passion was music and it helped. There were moments when I thought, 'I hate this.' I hated going into bars and being with drunks. But I loved the music and so I survived.\" She said that the art of creating, of actually writing songs, \"was very different from performing them and became progressively important\".\nAt 13, Twain was invited to perform on the CBC's \"Tommy Hunter Show\". While attending Timmins High and Vocational School, she was the singer for a local band called Longshot, which covered Top 40 music. In the early 1980s she worked with her father's reforestation business in northern Ontario, which employed about 75 Ojibwe and Cree workers. Although the work was demanding and the pay low, she said, \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I loved the feeling of being stranded. I'm not afraid of being in my own environment, being physical, working hard. I was very strong, I walked miles and miles every day and carried heavy loads of trees. You can't shampoo, use soap or deodorant, or makeup, nothing with any scent; you have to bathe and rinse your clothes in the lake. It was a very rugged existence, but I was very creative and I would sit alone in the forest with my dog and a guitar and would just write songs.\nCareer.\n1983\u20131992: Beginnings.\nTwain graduated from Timmins High in June 1983 eager to expand her musical horizons. After Longshot's demise she was approached by a cover band led by Diane Chase called Flirt and toured Ontario with them. She took singing lessons from Toronto-based coach Ian Garrett, often cleaning his house as payment. In the autumn of 1984 her talents were noticed by Toronto DJ Stan Campbell who wrote about her in a \"Country Music News\" article: \"Eilleen possesses a powerful voice with an impressive range. She has the necessary drive, ambition and positive attitude to achieve her goals\". Campbell was making an album by Canadian musician (and present-day CKTB radio personality) Tim Denis at the time and she was featured on the backing vocals of the song \"Heavy on the Sunshine\". Country singer Mary Bailey saw her perform in Sudbury, Ontario, saying \"I saw this little girl up on stage with a guitar and it absolutely blew me away. She performed Willie Nelson's \"Blue Eyes Crying in the Rain\" and Hank Williams' \"I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry\". Her voice reminded me of Tanya Tucker, it had strength and character, a lot of feeling. She's a star, she deserves an opportunity.\" Bailey later said \"She sang a few songs that she had written, and I thought to myself, this kid is like nineteen years old, where does she get this? This is from a person who's lived sixty years\". On November 1, 1987, her mother and adoptive father died in a car accident approximately north of Wawa, Ontario. She moved back to Timmins to take care of her younger siblings and took them all to Huntsville, Ontario, where she supported them by earning money performing at the nearby Deerhurst Resort.\n1993\u20131994: \"Shania Twain\".\nSeveral years later, when Twain's siblings moved out on their own, she assembled a demo tape of her songs and her Huntsville manager set up a showcase for her to present her material to record executives. She caught the attention of a few labels, including Mercury Nashville Records, who signed her within a few months. During this time, she changed her name to Shania, which was rumoured to be an Ojibwa word which means \"on my way\". However, her biographer, Robin Eggar, writes: \"There is a continuing confusion about what 'Shania' means and if indeed it is an Ojibwe word or phrase at all. There is no mispronounced or misheard phrase in either Ojibwe or Cree that comes close to meaning 'on my way.' Yet the legend of her name continues to be repeated in the media to this day.\" Eggar was mistaken about there being no Ojibwe phrase that \"comes close\", as \"Ani aya'aa\", pronounced \"Ah-nih Eye-uh-ah\", means \"someone on the way\" in Ojibwe. It is therefore possible that someone with an imperfect knowledge of the Ojibwe language created Shania with the incorrect idea it would mean \"she's on the way\".\nHer self-titled debut album was released on April 20, 1993, in North America and garnered her audiences outside Canada. Shortly before its release, she sang backing vocals for other Mercury artists, including on Jeff Chance's album \"Walk Softly on the Bridges\" (1992) and Sammy Kershaw's album \"Haunted Heart\" (1993). \"Shania Twain\" reached No. 67 on the US Country Albums Chart and gained positive reviews from critics. The album failed to sell significant copies upon release, but her future success generated enough interest for the album to be certified platinum in 1999 by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), denoting sales of over 1 million copies. The album yielded two minor hit singles in the United States with \"What Made You Say That\" and \"Dance with the One That Brought You\". The third and final single, \"You Lay a Whole Lot of Love on Me\", failed to chart. All three singles had accompanying music videos. The album was more successful in Europe, where she won Country Music Television Europe's \"Rising Video Star of the Year\" award. In her 2011 autobiography \"From This Moment On\" she expressed displeasure with her debut studio album, revealing that she had very little creative control and was frustrated with being unable to showcase her songwriting abilities. She did, however, co-write one song, \"God Ain't Gonna Getcha for That\", for the album.\n1995\u20131996: \"The Woman in Me\" and commercial success.\nWhen rock producer Robert John \"Mutt\" Lange heard Twain's original songs and singing from her debut album, he offered to produce and write songs with her. After many telephone conversations, they met at Nashville's Fan Fair in June 1993. Twain and Lange became very close within weeks, culminating in their wedding on December 28, 1993. They co-wrote every song apart from one that featured on her second studio album, \"The Woman in Me\". \"The Woman in Me\" was released on February 7, 1995. Of the twelve tracks on the album, eight were released as singles. The album's first single, \"Whose Bed Have Your Boots Been Under?\" went to No. 11 on the \"Billboard\" Country Chart. This was followed by her first Country Top 10 and No.1 hit single, \"Any Man of Mine\", which also cracked the Top 40 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. She had further hits from the album, including the title track which peaked at No.14 and three additional No.1 hits: \"(If You're Not in It for Love) I'm Outta Here!\", \"You Win My Love\", and \"No One Needs to Know\", which was selected for the original soundtrack for the 1996 film \"Twister\", a first for Twain. Plus minor country hit \"Home Ain't Where His Heart Is (Anymore)\" and a re-recorded gospel version of the album track \"God Bless the Child\" with new lyrics. Meanwhile, in Australia, five of these singles: \"The Woman in Me\", \"I'm Outta Here!\", \"You Win My Love\", \"No One Needs to Know\" and \"God Bless the Child\", were remixed for the Australian pop market, with \"I'm Outta Here!\" becoming her breakthrough hit there, reaching No.5 on the ARIA charts.\nAs of 2007 the album had sold more than 12\u00a0million copies in the United States, being certified Diamond by the RIAA. The album was a quick breakthrough and because of this she performed selected international venues and television shows including two CMA Fan Fair performances with Nashville guitarists Randy Thomas (co-writer of the song \"Butterfly Kisses\"), and Dan Schafer. Mercury Nashville's promotion of the album was based largely upon a series of music videos, which every single from the album had. During this period she made television appearances on shows such as two performances on the \"Late Show with David Letterman\", Blockbuster Music Awards, Billboard Music Awards and the American Music Awards. \"The Woman in Me\" won the Grammy Award for Best Country Album as well as the Academy of Country Music award for Album of the Year; the latter group also awarded her Best New Female Vocalist.\n1997\u20132001: \"Come On Over\", international breakthrough, and Limelight Sessions.\nIn 1997 Twain released her follow-up album, \"Come On Over\". It established her as a successful crossover singer. Of the sixteen tracks on the album, twelve were released as singles. Following the release of lead singles \"Love Gets Me Every Time\" and \"Don't Be Stupid (You Know I Love You)\", which allowed her to make more appearances in the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, the album started selling. With the release of third single, \"You're Still the One\", sales skyrocketed. \"From This Moment On\", \"When\", \"Honey, I'm Home\", \"That Don't Impress Me Much\", \"Man! I Feel Like a Woman!\", \"You've Got a Way\", the title track, \"Rock This Country!\", and \"I'm Holdin' On to Love (To Save My Life)\" are the other nine songs that eventually saw release as singles. With the exception of \"I'm Holdin' On to Love\", all of the singles had accompanying music videos. \"From This Moment On\" is a duet with singer Bryan White and there was a re-recorded solo pop version, which was used for its music video.\nThe album peaked at No.\u00a02 on the \"Billboard\" 200 and stayed on the charts for the next two years, going on to sell 40\u00a0million copies worldwide, making it the biggest-selling album of all time by a female musician. She continued to break international boundaries for country music and female crossover artists. It is also the ninth highest-selling album by any type of artist in the US and the top selling country album in history. Songs from the album won four Grammy Awards during this time, including Best Country Song and Best Female Country Performance (for \"You're Still the One\" and \"Man! I Feel Like a Woman!\") for her. Lange won Grammys for \"You're Still the One\" and \"Come On Over\".\nIn 1998 following the pop release of \"You're Still the One\", the \"Come On Over\" album was released in a remixed format for the European market as a pop album with less country instrumentation, and gave her the big breakthrough in Europe she and Lange were looking for. \"Come On Over\" went to No. 1 on the UK album charts for 11 weeks. It became the biggest selling album of the year in the UK and a bestseller in other big European markets as well, selling more than one million copies in Germany and nearly 4\u00a0million in the UK alone. Although \"You're Still The One\" and the pop version of \"From This Moment On\" cracked the Top 10 of the UK charts and \"When\" had success in the Top 20, the songs that drew European attention to the album were the pop remixed singles of \"That Don't Impress Me Much\", which reached number 3 in the UK and cracked the Top 10 in Germany, and \"Man! I Feel Like a Woman!\", which peaked at number 3 in both the UK and France. Additionally, \"You've Got a Way\" was remixed specifically for inclusion on the soundtrack for the film \"Notting Hill\". Subsequently, a reissue of the international version of the album was released worldwide, including the US and Europe, containing three of these new remixes. Additionally, the album set the record for the longest ever stay in the Top 20 of the \"Billboard\" 200, remaining there for 99 weeks. \"Billboard\" magazine declared Shania Twain the most played adult contemporary artist on US radio in 1999.\nIn 1998, she launched her first major concert tour, aided by her manager Jon Landau, a veteran of many large-scale tours with Bruce Springsteen. The Come On Over Tour shows were a success, winning the \"Country Tour of the Year\" in 1998 and 1999 by Pollstar Concert Industry Awards. In 2000, she was initially scheduled to release a Christmas album, but plans to release one were cancelled later in the year. As of 2004, \"Come on Over\" has sold over 20 million copies in the United States, being certified Double Diamond by the RIAA.\n2002\u20132004: \"Up!\".\nAfter a change in management \u2013 QPrime replaced Landau\u00a0\u2013 and a two-year break, along with the birth of their son, Eja (pronounced \"Asia\") D'Angelo, Twain and Lange returned to the studio. \"Up!\" was released on November 19, 2002. On January 26, 2003, she performed in the Super Bowl XXXVII halftime show. About a year later she kicked off the Up! Tour in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada on September 25, 2003. \"Up!\" was released with three different discs \u2013 country/acoustic (green CD), pop/rock (red CD), and world/dance (blue CD). \"Up!\" was given four out of five stars by \"Rolling Stone\" magazine, and debuted at No.1 on the \"Billboard\" albums chart, selling 874,000 in the first week alone. It remained at the top of the charts for five weeks. Her crossover appeal in the country, pop and dance genres, led \"Up!\" to reach 1 in Germany, 2 in Australia and the Top Five in the UK and France. In Germany, \"Up!\" was certified 4\u00d7 platinum and stayed in the Top 100 for a year and a half. The international music disc was remixed with Indian-style orchestral and percussion parts recorded in Mumbai, India. The new versions were produced by Simon and Diamond Duggal, brothers from Birmingham, England. They were originally invited to contribute parts to the pop version of \"I'm Gonna Getcha Good!\" which retained the Indian influence.\nHer popularity in UK was reflected by numerous appearances on the long-running music show \"Top of the Pops\", performing singles from \"Come On Over\" from 1999. In 2002 an entire special show was dedicated to her on sister show \"TOTP2\", in which she herself introduced some past performances of her greatest hits and singles from \"Up!\". In November 2004 she appeared on the annual BBC charity telethon \"Children in Need\". During the show, she performed \"Up!\", and took part in a magic act in which she was sawn in half by magician Scott Penrose in an illusion called Clearly Impossible.\nEight of the tracks were released as singles in various markets. The first single from the album, \"I'm Gonna Getcha Good!\" became a top 10 country hit in the US, after debuting at No.\u00a024 after only five days of airplay; but only made the Top 40 on the pop charts. The pop version hit 4 in the UK. In Australia, Germany and France, the song reached the Top 15 in each case. The follow-up single was the title track, which reached the Top 15 in the US country charts but only reached 63 on the pop charts. The second European single, and third single overall, became the mid-tempo song \"Ka-Ching!\" (which was never released as a single in North America) with lyrics where she was criticizing unchecked consumerism. The song eventually became another hit in the European markets, reaching 1 in Germany and Austria and other European countries, the UK Top 10 and the Top 15 in France.\nThe fourth single from the album was the most successful in the US, the romantic ballad \"Forever and for Always\". It was released in April 2003 and peaked at 4 on the country chart, 1 on the Adult Contemporary chart and 20 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. \"Forever and For Always\" reached the Top 10 in the UK and Germany. The other four singles from the album were \"Thank You Baby! (For Makin' Someday Come So Soon)\", \"She's Not Just a Pretty Face\", \"When You Kiss Me\" and \"It Only Hurts When I'm Breathing\". All eight singles had accompanying music videos. The title track \"Up!\", and \"When You Kiss Me\" saw release in limited edition to European countries, such as Germany, in early 2004. By January 2008, \"Up!\" had sold 5.5\u00a0million copies in the US and was certified as 11\u00d7 platinum (Diamond) by the RIAA. This made her the only female artist in history to have three consecutive albums certified Diamond by the RIAA.\n2004\u20132010: \"Greatest Hits\" and delay of new album.\nIn 2004 Twain released the \"Greatest Hits\" album, with three new tracks. As of 2012 it had sold over 4.15\u00a0million copies in the US. The first single, the multi-format duet \"Party for Two\", made the country top ten with Billy Currington, while the pop version with Sugar Ray lead singer Mark McGrath made top ten in the United Kingdom and Germany. The follow-up singles, \"Don't!\" and \"I Ain't No Quitter\" did not fare as well. The former made Top 20 on Adult Contemporary, while the latter did not gain enough airplay to reach the Country Top 40. In August 2005 she released the single \"Shoes\" from the \"Desperate Housewives\" soundtrack. In late 2006 Twain and Anne Murray recorded a duet version of Murray's hit \"You Needed Me\" for her 2007 album, \"\". This was her final recording with husband Lange as producer; on May 15, 2008, it was announced that she and Lange were separating. Their divorce was finalized in 2010. In June 2009 she explained the delays in the release of her next album, noting she had gone through personal pains and was focusing on raising her son Eja. In August 2009, at a conference in Timmins, Ontario, a spokesman for her label said a new record from Twain was still \"nowhere in sight\".\n2011\u20132015: Return to music, residency, and tour.\nIn May 2011 Twain confirmed in an interview that she would release her first new single in six years, \"Today Is Your Day\", after the finale of \"Why Not? with Shania Twain\". She previewed the song in the first episode of the series. She worked with music producers David Foster and Nathan Chapman on the song. She published her autobiography with Atria Books, \"From This Moment On\". The last episode of \"Why Not?\" features her and Lionel Richie recording \"Endless Love\" which would be the first single from his 2012 album \"Tuskegee\". \"Today Is Your Day\" was officially released to iTunes and country radio on June 12, 2011. In addition to \"Today Is Your Day\", she collaborated with Michael Bubl\u00e9 on his 2011 album \"Christmas\" (also produced by David Foster). She recorded \"White Christmas\" with Bubl\u00e9, which was the first single from the album. On June 8, 2011, at a press conference at the Country Music Hall of Fame in Nashville, she announced that she would headline Caesars Palace in Las Vegas for two years. Her show, titled \"\", ran from December 1, 2012, to December 13, 2014.\nIn July 2013 she announced on Facebook that she was working on her album over the summer during a break from \"Still the One\". In October 2013 she sat down with Robin Roberts from \"Good Morning America\" as a featured artist on the Countdown to the CMA Awards. In the interview she said that a new album was coming, but she said that she was still in the process of finding the right producer.\nOutside of her show at Caesars Palace, she performed two concerts at the Calgary Stampede in Calgary, Alberta, on July 9 and 10, 2014. In a series of interviews leading up to her Calgary Stampede shows she said she hoped to tour in 2015 and that it would lead to the release of a new album. Alongside her Calgary Stampede shows, she also headlined a show on Labour Day weekend at Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada.\nOn March 4, 2015, she announced on \"Good Morning America\" she would be going on tour for the first time in eleven years, and would begin June 5 in Seattle, Washington, and end on October 11 in Toronto, Ontario. She also announced this would be her last tour before her fifth studio album, which she intends to release while she is 50. In an interview on Global Television Network's \"The Morning Show\" on March 6 she confirmed that she is not retiring from her music career after the tour. In an interview with Radio.com published on March 5 she stated that she has found several producers for her upcoming album, describing it as \"soul music\".\nOn August 24, 2015, she stated \"First, I have to finish my new album this winter. Six tracks are already completed. I've written 38 songs in total, and now the process is underway to narrow that down to another six or eight to finish recording\". That same month, it was announced by several sources, that even though her current Rock This Country Tour is her final time touring, she is possibly planning on extending the tour overseas because the Rock This Country tour was only based in the United States and Canada. She also mentioned possibly returning to Las Vegas with a new residency show for possibly late 2016 or 2017. The new show would end up featuring music from her long-awaited new album as well as her hits.\n2016\u20132021: \"Now\", second Las Vegas residency.\nIn October 2016 Twain confirmed to \"Rolling Stone\" that she had new music coming \"really soon.\" In December 2016 in an interview with \"Billboard\", she spoke about her forthcoming album, describing the finished product as \"kind of schizophrenic musically\" maintaining \"She's the glue\". In February 2017 she again spoke to \"Rolling Stone\" about the album; select song titles were confirmed as she detailed that she had not only hoped to release a single in March, but that she planned to release the album in May. In April 2017 \"Billboard\" announced that her new single, \"Life's About to Get Good\", would premiere in June, with the album projected for release in September. Twain headlined the 2017 Stagecoach Festival in Indio, California, where she previewed her new music for the first time. She performed on the \"Today Show\"'s \"Summer Concert Series\" on June 16, 2017. Her fifth studio album, \"Now\", was released on September 29, 2017, and would debut at No. 1 on the \"Billboard\" 200, becoming her second album to do so. In June 2017 she announced on ET Canada that she would tour with \"Now\". She announced the Now Tour on her website on August 17, 2017. The album's second single, \"Swingin' With My Eyes Closed\", was released on August 18, 2017. She has also internationally released two other promotional singles off of \"Now\", including \"Poor Me\" and \"We've Got Something They Don't\". In June 2019 she announced her second Las Vegas residency, \"Let's Go!\", which opened on December 6, 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic caused the postponement and cancellation of many dates. The residency ended on September 10, 2022.\n2022\u2013present: \"Not Just a Girl\", \"Queen of Me\", and third Las Vegas residency.\nIn July 2022, a Netflix documentary spanning Twain's career, entitled \"Not Just A Girl\", was released. It was shortlisted for the Rose d'Or 2022 Awards in the Art category. The documentary released simultaneously with a companion compilation album, \"Not Just a Girl (The Highlights)\", featuring seventeen previously released songs plus the new title track.\nOn September 23, 2022, Twain signed with Republic Nashville and released \"Waking Up Dreaming\" as the lead single from her sixth then-upcoming studio album, \"Queen of Me\". On January 5, 2023, she released the second single off the album, \"Giddy Up!\". \"Queen of Me\" was released on February 3, 2023. It was her first album release under her new label. The album debuted at number 10 on the US \"Billboard\" 200, earning 38,000 equivalent album units, with 34,000 of those being album sales, becoming her sixth top-ten album in the country. She joined Madonna as the only women with newly-charting \"Billboard\" 200 top 10s in the 1990s, 2000s, '10s and '20s (Madonna's streak also includes the '80s). The album debuted on the \"Billboard\" Top Country Albums chart at No. 2, earning her her seventh top-five entry on the chart. In Canada, \"Queen of Me\" debuted at number two on the Canadian Album Chart, becoming her sixth top-ten album on the chart and seventh overall in the country. In the United Kingdom, \"Queen of Me\" debuted atop the UK Albums Chart, becoming her third number one album in the country, after \"Come On Over\" (1998) and \"Now\" (2017).\nOn October 22, 2022, Twain announced Queen of Me Tour across North America and Europe to promote the album. It was her first tour in nearly five years, comprising 76 dates. She featured on the single \"Unhealthy\", which was released on May 18, 2023, the title track from Anne-Marie's third studio album. The song peaked at number 18 on the UK Singles Chart and became Twain's first top-20 in the region since \"Party for Two\" in December 2004. On August 15, 2023, she announced her third Las Vegas residency, Shania Twain: Come On Over \u2013 The Las Vegas Residency \u2013 All The Hits! at Bakkt Theater (now PH Live), scheduled to run from May to December 2024. In March 2024, to commemorate the 65th anniversary of International Women's Day, Twain was one of a number of female celebrities had their likeness turned into Barbie dolls. In June 2024, she performed in the traditional Sunday Legends slot at the Glastonbury Festival. On September 2, 2024, she announced she would be extending her Las Vegas residency, Shania Twain: Come On Over \u2013 The Las Vegas Residency \u2013 All The Hits! at PH Live at Planet Hollywood Las Vegas with nine final shows taking place in January and February 2025.\nIn May 2025, Twain announced a limited tour of summer concerts across the United States and Canada from July to August. This includes festivals, like the Calgary Stampede, Cavendish Beach Music Festival, and the Ottawa Bluesfest, as well as standalone performances.\nTV and film career.\nTwain's mainstream pop acceptance was further helped by her appearance in the 1998 first edition of the \"VH1 Divas\" concert where she sang alongside Mariah Carey, Celine Dion, Gloria Estefan, Carole King and Aretha Franklin, and also by VH1's 1999 heavily aired \"Behind the Music\", which concentrated on the tragic aspects of her early life as well as her physical attractiveness and Nashville's early resistance to her bare-midriff music videos. After \"Divas\", she sang background vocals with Lange for Dion's songs, \"If Walls Could Talk\" and \"Goodbye's (The Saddest Word)\".\nShe appeared as herself in the 2004 feature film \"I Heart Huckabees\". On November 12, 2008, she made her first television appearance since her split from Lange, where she appeared as a surprise presenter at the 42nd CMA Awards. In 2009 she served as a guest judge on \"American Idol\", for the show's August 30 and 31 episodes, and in April 2010 she announced plans for her own TV show, titled \"Why Not? with Shania Twain\". The show debuted on May 8, 2011, on OWN. She returned to \"American Idol\" as a guest mentor for a week where the top 6 contestants showcased her songs. After the conclusion of the ninth season she was very close to becoming a judge but ultimately it was Jennifer Lopez who got the job.\nShe guest starred as herself on the Comedy Central series \"Broad City\", in a September 2017 episode titled \"Twaining Day\", and appeared as a guest judge in the 25th season of \"Dancing with the Stars\" during the show's \"Movie Night\" on October 23, 2017, and performed her song \"Soldier\". She also appeared as a guest judge on episode five of the 10th Season of \"Rupaul's Drag Race\" in 2018.\nShe competed against singer Meghan Trainor in an episode of TBS's \"Drop the Mic\" which aired in January 2018. She was guest of honour for a \"Lip Sync Battle\" episode on Paramount Network pitting Derek Hough against Nicole Scherzinger that was dedicated to her and her music. The tribute episode aired June 21, 2018. In November 2018 she appeared in the reality talent show \"Real Country\", as an executive producer and co-presenter with Jake Owen and Travis Tritt. In 2019 she appeared in the film \"Trading Paint\", co-starring alongside John Travolta. In 2020 she played the role of the mother of singer Jeremy Camp in the biographical film \"I Still Believe\". In 2023, she appeared on the panel for the second series of ITV's \"Starstruck\", a revived and reformatted version of \"Stars in Their Eyes\", replacing Sheridan Smith. In 2023 she appeared in season four, episode seven of the reality series The Kardashians. In 2024 she appeared on the first episode of the Netflix series \"A Man in Full\", a six-episode limited television series adaptation of the novel with Regina King as director and executive producer and David E. Kelley as showrunner. The miniseries was released on May 2, 2024. She guest starred in an episode of the ABC medical drama, \"Doctor Odyssey\" which aired on October 3, 2024. She appeared in Andrea Bocelli: 30 The Celebration Concert Film, which released in theaters on November 8, 2024. Shania guest starred in 'A Nonsense Christmas with \"Sabrina Carpenter\"' on December 6, 2024, as part of the \"Netflix\" special, Shania played Mrs Claus in a skit and performed \"Santa Baby\" with Sabrina Carpenter. In 2025, she became a judge on the fifth season of \"Canada's Got Talent\".\nArtistry.\nTwain possesses a contralto vocal range. In 1996, \"Newsweek\" defended her from detractors who attributed her refusal to tour at the time to her inability to replicate her studio singing live, describing it as \"a warm, languid alto sweetened with a wisp of bedroom allure\". Admitting that her singing voice is not as strong as it was prior to her Lyme disease diagnosis, she had to learn how to navigate her new voice in order to continue performing. Prior to her diagnosis, several physicians with whom she consulted throughout the years primarily attribute the loss of her voice to emotional stress, from which she has since recovered after experimenting with various relaxation techniques and devoting a lot of time to vocal warmups. In 2018 she underwent laryngoplasty to have Gore-Tex stabilizers implanted in her throat to reduce the workload on her vocal muscles.\nShe did little writing on her self-titled debut album, but Lange noticed Twain \"had a distinctive voice as a songwriter\" he felt had been overlooked by other collaborators. Describing Twain and Lange as a \"versatile\" songwriting duo, Bob Paxman of Sounds Like Nashville observed that their songs explore several themes such as feminism and romantic longing, while \"Maclean\"'s journalist Brian D. Johnson said her songs \"range from domestic-bliss ballads to sassy rockers that taunt and tease.\" Alanna Nash of AARP observed that Twain crafted \"The Woman in Me\" around \"hooky melodies and clever wordplay\" from her point of view. During the 1990s record executives feared her lyrics were too \"male-threatening\"; both \"The Woman in Me\" and \"Come On Over\" contain feminist and anti-infidelity themes. Although she has become synonymous with singing songs about female empowerment that are \"full of attitude\", her catalogue also consists of love songs. She believes female singers are often misunderstood for expressing \"feminist views\" or standing up for themselves, about which she often sings, explaining, \"that doesn't mean that we don't love the men in our lives, and that we don't need the men in our lives.\" She tends to isolate herself when writing songs to avoid distractions, believing she is most productive in this manner. She claims to adapt melancholy experiences into happy songs. \"Now\" was the first album she wrote without Lange's involvement, identifying the procedure as a very important songwriting experience because \"I needed to do it alone, to start ideas and finish them without relying on anybody else's opinion and direction.\" Drawing from raw feelings of pain, she also used the album to process the demise of their relationship.\nHer primary musical genre is considered to be country pop, with AllMusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine declaring that she \"Skillfully fus[ed] mainstream, AOR rock production with country-pop\". \"Up\" is considered to be her most straightforward pop album to-date. She maintains that she did not dress provocatively for fame, attention or \"shock value\" but simply because she enjoys her midriff, claiming to have no regrets about her past outfits. She defends contemporary pop stars who dress provocatively, explaining, \"I don't think it's too sexy now ...The boundaries are really up to the individual. And then it's up to the viewer whether they like it or not.\" She cites Karen Carpenter, Dolly Parton, Mickey Guyton, Taylor Swift, The Chicks, Wynonna Judd, and Kelsea Ballerini as some of the female country artists who inspire her. She has also expressed admiration for country singers Loretta Lynn, Patsy Cline, Tammy Wynette, Reba McEntire and LeAnn Rimes.\nPublic image and reception.\nDespite her success, Twain has been a divisive figure within country music among purists who initially did not take kindly to her \"genre-blending\". According to biographer Stephen Thomas Erlewine, most critics accused her of \"diluting country with bland, anthemic hard rock techniques and shamelessly selling her records with sexy videos.\" Some country music critics dismissed her music as not being country enough, which some fans theorize resulted in her breakthrough album \"The Woman in Me\" being snubbed at the 1995 Country Music Awards, despite its widespread success. Similar to Garth Brooks before her, she was initially branded an interloper whose modern production, presentation and songwriting \"disrupt[ed] the genre's status quo\". During the 1990s she often received backlash for her unconventionally liberated appearance as a country music singer. Despite the breakthrough success of \"The Woman in Me\", early detractors did not take her seriously as an artist, with several music journalists questioning her lyrics, the \"manufactured\" production of her albums, and her singing ability. Such critics concurred that she had little to offer apart from her sex appeal and music videos, often focusing on her physical appearance instead of her music. Early in her career she found herself at odds with the conservative opinions of the country music industry at the time due to her assertive personality and proclivity for wearing revealing outfits that exposed her midriff. She was constantly deprecated for baring her midriff to the point where critics nicknamed it \"The most famous midriff in Nashville\", while CMT banned the music video for her debut single \"What Made You Say That\". \"The Independent\"'s Roisin O'Connor believes \"Nashville hadn't seen anything like Twain [before] \u2013 a leopard print-loving, midriff-exposing artist determined to be an international star.\" According to Kristin M. Hall of the Associated Press, since Twain had not yet begun touring, she used music videos to broaden her audience. Similarly, Erlewine considers her to be \"the first country artist to fully exploit MTV's style\" by cultivating \"a sexy, video-oriented image ... that appealed\" to both country and pop audiences, largely without touring.\nHer record label cautioned her that both men and women would dislike her independence and sexual expressiveness, respectively, but she did not believe them. Record executives warned her that women would feel threatened by her \"dressing too sexy\". Refusing \"to conform to a single archetype of femininity\", she recalled that she used music to communicate with like-minded women by alternating between heartbroken, comedic, vengeful, empowered, self-deprecating and lustful personas \"all on the same record.\" Country rock musician Steve Earle famously labelled her \"the world's highest-paid lap-dancer.\" Despite these criticisms her music has largely been embraced by fans. In a 2015 profile on Twain, \"Maclean's\" Sonya Bell theorized that Twain's early critics would be shocked by her continued success, while \"American Songwriter\"'s Joe Vitagliano considers her a testament that \"critics and the 'industry' aren't quite the 'be-all, end-all' that they think they are\". Sarah Koo of \"Entertainment Tonight Canada\" wrote that, in hindsight, Twain's image throughout the 1990s seems tame in comparison to the revealing outfits of artists who have since succeeded her.\nAt one point she was considered to be among the biggest music stars in the world. Journalist Brian D. Johnson wrote that, despite her girl next door image, Twain \"has the sort of star power that people expect from royalty\", which he attributes to her Cinderella-esque life story. \"The Guardian\"'s Simon Hattenstone described her as \"sexy, empowering and funny. This was a woman who knew what she wanted \u2013 men, action, dancing, control.\" Calling her equally country, pop and rock star, Hattenstone went on to write that Twain is \"fancied by the straight boys, admired by the straight girls, adored by gay men as a camp icon and loved by lesbians who read what they wanted into Man! I Feel Like a Woman!.\" Claiming her stint hosting the 2003 Juno Awards was noticeably void of diva behaviour despite persistent rumours of outrageous antics and demands at the time, Brad Wheeler of \"The Globe and Mail\" described her as \"an international icon and Canada's sweetheart\", a sentiment with which Juno Awards producer John Brunton agreed. Instead Twain relied on her own security, band, production team and assistants.\nLegacy.\nBBC Online described her as \"the real Queen of Pop\", citing her influence on subsequent successful female artists such as Meghan Trainor, Britney Spears, Taylor Swift and Haim. As one of country music's first crossover stars, the website claims her success as a country-pop crossover artist demonstrates that \"she was doing the Taylor Swift thing before Taylor Swift even arrived.\" Justin Chandler of CBC credited her with making \"country-pop crossover its own genre\" and \"paving the way for artists sitting atop those same charts every year since.\" Her record-breaking album \"The Woman In Me\" is credited as the one that permanently changed country music as a whole.\nTwain's success in the music industry has earned her the honorific nickname the \"Queen of Country Pop\". By 1998 \"Maclean's\" had named her \"the reigning queen of country music\". \"American Songwriter\" contributor Joe Vitagliano named her one of the greatest artists of our time. \"The New York Times\" music critic Jon Caramanica named her \"Country's Crossover Queen\", writing that during her prime she \"was both a pop centrist and a country rebel, and many of the aesthetic moves she pioneered ended up, following a period of some resistance, as central to the sound of Nashville.\" In a ranking of Twain's best songs, \"Rolling Stone\" stated that her catalogue of music \"ha[s] come to define an era in country music and paved the way for other genre-bending artists that followed.\" According to Kristin M. Hall of the Associated Press Twain's global success \"changed country music for years to come.\" Nash credits her work on \"Come On Over\" with helping to redefine the future of country music. NPR's Jewly Hight wrote that, despite initial derision, Twain eventually \"redefin[ed] what country superstardom looked, sounded and behaved like\", ultimately influencing a generation of country artists \"in making flashier music videos, beefing up their backbeats and staging shows with the energy and theatricality of arena rock.\"\nInfluence on other artists.\nTaylor Swift credits Twain for her own pop crossover. Swift has cited her as one of her most prominent musical influences. Carrie Underwood states that Twain \"paved the way for a lot of us.\" Underwood believes all similar artists were influenced by Twain, whether or not they realize it. She has been cited as a major influence among Canadian country music artists such as Tenille Arts, Jess Moskaluke, Dean Brody, Lindi Ortega and Brett Kissel. Rapper Post Malone and singer Rihanna have cited her as an inspiration, with the former calling her his childhood crush. She covered Malone's song \"Rockstar\" live during the American Music Awards. She has expressed interest in collaborating with Malone, claiming to have written a song for the two of them in 2019. Singer-songwriter and actor Harry Styles has mentioned her as his biggest influence both \"musically and in fashion\". Her bold fashion statements also inspired multiple artists. Harry Styles revealed in an interview with \"Entertainment Tonight\" that in \"I think, both music and fashion,\" his \"main influence was probably Shania Twain.\" Halsey cited her as one of the artists she was inspired by in her music video \"You Should Be Sad\".\nEndorsements.\nIn January 2005, Twain joined Scentstories by Febreze to create a limited edition scent disc with the proceeds going to Feeding America, formerly America's Second Harvest. In late 2005 she partnered with Coty to produce her namesake fragrance \"Shania\" by Stetson. A second fragrance was released in September 2007 called \"Shania Starlight\". On January 1, 2010, she carried the Olympic Torch through her hometown as part of the 2010 Winter Olympics torch relay.\nPersonal life.\nTwain met producer Robert John \"Mutt\" Lange after he heard her original songs and singing from her debut album; he offered to produce and write songs with her. Having spoken on the phone for many months, they met at Nashville's Fan Fair in June 1993 and became close. They were married on December 28, 1993, and had a son, Eja (pronounced \"Asia\"), on August 12, 2001. On May 15, 2008, it was announced that they were separating after Lange had an affair with Twain's best friend, Marie-Anne Thi\u00e9baud. Their divorce was finalized on June 9, 2010. On December 20, 2010, it was reported that Twain was engaged to Swiss Nestl\u00e9 executive Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Thi\u00e9baud, Marie-Anne's former husband. They were married on January 1, 2011, in Rinc\u00f3n, Puerto Rico.\nShe is a vegetarian and a devotee of Sant Mat, an Eastern spiritual philosophy. In 2010 she created Shania Kids Can, a charity designed to address the needs of neglected children who are frequently overlooked by social assistance programs. Her autobiography, \"From This Moment On\", was published on March 27, 2011. She is a long-time resident of Corseaux, Switzerland, where her son was born, and she also owns properties in Las Vegas and the Bahamas.\nAwards and honours.\nIn addition to her various awards for her singles and albums, Twain has received a number of personal honours:\nTours.\nCo-headlining tours\nHeadlining tours\nResidencies\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28702", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28702", "title": "Session Description Protocol", "text": "Protocol for exchanging parameters of multimedia communication sessions\nThe Session Description Protocol (SDP) is a format for describing multimedia communication sessions for the purposes of announcement and invitation. Its predominant use is in support of streaming media applications, such as voice over IP (VoIP) and video conferencing. SDP does not deliver any media streams itself but is used between endpoints for negotiation of network metrics, media types, and other associated properties. The set of properties and parameters is called a \"session profile\".\nSDP is extensible for the support of new media types and formats. SDP was originally a component of the Session Announcement Protocol (SAP), but found other uses in conjunction with the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP), the Real-time Streaming Protocol (RTSP), Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), and as a standalone protocol for describing multicast sessions.\nThe IETF published the original specification as a Proposed Standard in April 1998 (RFC 2327). Revised specifications were released in 2006 (RFC 4566), and in 2021 (RFC 8866). \nSession description.\nThe Session Description Protocol describes a session as a group of fields in a text-based format, one field per line. The form of each field is as follows.\nWhere codice_1 is a single case-sensitive character and codice_2 is structured text in a format that depends on the character. Values are typically UTF-8 encoded. Whitespace is not allowed immediately to either side of the equal sign.\nSession descriptions consist of three sections: session, timing, and media descriptions. Each description may contain multiple timing and media descriptions. Names are only unique within the associated syntactic construct.\nFields must appear in the order shown; optional fields are marked with an asterisk:\n v= (protocol version number, currently only 0)\n o= (originator and session identifier : username, id, version number, network address)\n s= (session name : mandatory with at least one UTF-8-encoded character)\n i=* (session title or short information)\n u=* (URI of description)\n e=* (zero or more email address with optional name of contacts)\n p=* (zero or more phone number with optional name of contacts)\n c=* (connection information\u2014not required if included in all media)\n b=* (zero or more bandwidth information lines)\n \"One or more time descriptions (\"t=\" and \"r=\" lines; see below)\"\n z=* (time zone adjustments)\n k=* (encryption key)\n a=* (zero or more session attribute lines)\n \"Zero or more Media descriptions (each one starting by an \"m=\" line; see below)\"\n t= (time the session is active)\n r=* (zero or more repeat times)\n m= (media name and transport address)\n i=* (media title or information field)\n c=* (connection information \u2014 optional if included at session level)\n b=* (zero or more bandwidth information lines)\n k=* (encryption key)\n a=* (zero or more media attribute lines \u2014 overriding the Session attribute lines)\nBelow is a sample session description from RFC 4566. This session is originated by the user \"jdoe\", at IPv4 address 10.47.16.5. Its name is \"SDP Seminar\" and extended session information (\"A Seminar on the session description protocol\") is included along with a link for additional information and an email address to contact the responsible party, Jane Doe. This session is specified to last for two hours using NTP timestamps, with a connection address (which indicates the address clients must connect to or \u2014 when a multicast address is provided, as it is here \u2014 subscribe to) specified as IPv4 224.2.17.12 with a TTL of 127. Recipients of this session description are instructed to only receive media. Two media descriptions are provided, both using RTP Audio Video Profile. The first is an audio stream on port 49170 using RTP/AVP payload type 0 (defined by RFC 3551 as PCMU), and the second is a video stream on port 51372 using RTP/AVP payload type 99 (defined as \"dynamic\"). Finally, an attribute is included which maps RTP/AVP payload type 99 to format h263-1998 with a 90\u00a0kHz clock rate. RTCP ports for the audio and video streams of 49171 and 51373, respectively, are implied.\n v=0\n o=jdoe 2890844526 2890842807 IN IP4 10.47.16.5\n s=SDP Seminar\n i=A Seminar on the session description protocol\n u=http://www.example.com/seminars/sdp.pdf\n e=j.doe@example.com (Jane Doe)\n c=IN IP4 224.2.17.12/127\n t=2873397496 2873404696\n a=recvonly\n m=audio 49170 RTP/AVP 0\n m=video 51372 RTP/AVP 99\n a=rtpmap:99 h263-1998/90000\nThe SDP specification is purely a format for session description. It is intended to be distributed over different transport protocols as necessary, including SAP, SIP, and RTSP. SDP could even be transmitted by email or as an HTTP payload.\nAttributes.\nSDP uses attributes to extend the core protocol. Attributes can appear within the Session or Media sections and are scoped accordingly as \"session-level\" or \"media-level\". New attributes are added to the standard occasionally through registration with IANA.\nAttributes are either properties or values:\nTwo of these attributes are specially defined:\nIn both cases, text fields intended to be displayed to a user are interpreted as opaque strings, but rendered to the user or application with the values indicated in the last occurrence of the fields \"charset\" and \"sdplang\" in the current media section, or otherwise their last value in the session section.\nThe parameters \"v\", \"s\", and \"o\" are mandatory, must not be empty, and should be UTF-8-encoded. They are used as identifiers and are not intended to be displayed to users.\nA few other attributes are also present in the example, either as a session-level attribute (such as the attribute in property form \"a=recvonly\"), or as a media-level attribute (such as the attribute in value form \"a=rtpmap:99 h263-1998/90000\" for the video in the example).\nTime formats and repetitions.\nAbsolute times are represented in Network Time Protocol (NTP) format (the number of seconds since 1900). If the stop time is 0 then the session is \"unbounded\". If the start time is also zero then the session is considered \"permanent\". Unbounded and permanent sessions are discouraged but not prohibited.\nIntervals can be represented with NTP times or in typed time: a value and time units (days: \"d\", hours: \"h\", minutes: \"m\" and seconds: \"s\") sequence.\nThus an hour meeting from 10 am UTC on 1 August 2010, with a single repeat time a week later at the same time can be represented as:\n t= \n r=604800 3600 0\nOr using typed time:\n t= \n r=7d 1h 0\nWhen repeat times are specified, the start time of each repetition may need to be adjusted to compensate for daylight saving time changes so that it will occur at the same local time in a specific time zone throughout the period between the start time and the stop time.\nInstead of specifying this time zone and having to support a database of time zones for knowing when and where daylight adjustments will be needed, the repeat times are assumed to be all defined within the same time zone, and SDP supports the indication of NTP absolute times when a daylight offset (expressed in seconds or using a type time) will need to be applied to the repeated start time or end time falling at or after each daylight adjustment. All these offsets are relative to the start time, they are not cumulative. NTP supports this with field \"z\", which indicates a series of pairs whose first item is the NTP absolute time when a daylight adjustment will occur, and the second item indicates the offset to apply relative to the absolute times computed with the field \"r\".\nFor example, if a daylight adjustment will subtract 1 hour on 31 October 2010 at 3\u00a0am UTC (i.e. 60 days minus 7 hours after the start time on Sunday 1 August 2010 at 10am UTC), and this will be the only daylight adjustment to apply in the scheduled period which would occur between 1 August 2010 up to the 28 November 2010 at 10\u00a0am UTC (the stop time of the repeated 1-hour session which is repeated each week at the same local time, which occurs 88 days later), this can be specified as:\n t= \n r=7d 1h 0\n z= -1h\nIf the weekly 1-hour session was repeated every Sunday for one full year, i.e. from Sunday 1 August 2010 3 am UTC to Sunday 26 June 2011 4 am UTC (stop time of the last repeat, i.e. 360 days plus 1 hour later, or 31107600 seconds later), so that it would include the transition back to Summer time on Sunday 27 March 2011 at 2\u00a0am (1 hour is added again to local time so that the second daylight transition would occur 209 days after the first start time):\n t= \n r=7d 1h 0\n z= -1h 0\nAs SDP announcements for repeated sessions should not be made to cover very long periods exceeding a few years, the number of daylight adjustments to include in the z= parameter should remain small.\nSessions may be repeated irregularly over a week but scheduled the same way for all weeks in the period, by adding more tuples in the \"r\" parameter. For example, to schedule the same event also on Saturday (at the same time of the day) you would use:\n t= \n r=7d 1h 0 6d\n z= -1h 0\nThe SDP protocol does not support repeating sessions monthly and yearly schedules with such simple repeat times, because they are irregularly spaced in time; instead, additional \"t\"/\"r\" tuples may be supplied for each month or year.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28703", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28703", "title": "Session Announcement Protocol", "text": "The Session Announcement Protocol (SAP) is an experimental protocol for advertising multicast session information. SAP typically uses Session Description Protocol (SDP) as the format for Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) session descriptions. Announcement data is sent using IP multicast and the User Datagram Protocol (UDP).\nUnder SAP, senders periodically transmit SDP descriptions to a well-known multicast address and port number (9875). A listening application constructs a guide of all advertised multicast sessions.\nSAP was published by the IETF as RFC 2974.\nAnnouncement interval.\nThe announcement interval is cooperatively modulated such that all SAP announcements in the multicast delivery scope, by default, consume 4000 bits per second. Regardless, the maximum announce interval is 300 seconds (5 minutes). Announcements automatically expire after 10 times the announcement interval or one hour, whichever is greater. Announcements may also be explicitly withdrawn by the original issuer.\nAuthentication, encryption and compression.\nSAP features separate methods for authenticating and encrypting announcements. Use of encryption is not recommended. Authentication prevents unauthorized modification and other DoS attacks. Authentication is optional. Two authentication schemes are supported:\nThe message body may optionally be compressed using the zlib format as defined in RFC 1950.\nApplications and implementations.\nVLC media player monitors SAP announcements and presents the user a list of available streams.\nSAP is one of the optional discovery and connection management techniques described in the AES67 audio-over-Ethernet interoperability standard.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28704", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28704", "title": "Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language", "text": "XML-based markup language for multimedia presentations\nSynchronized Multimedia Integration Language (SMIL ()) is a World Wide Web Consortium recommended Extensible Markup Language (XML) markup language to describe multimedia presentations. It defines markup for timing, layout, animations, visual transitions, and media embedding, among other things. SMIL allows presenting media items such as text, images, video, audio, links to other SMIL presentations, and files from multiple web servers. SMIL markup is written in XML, and has similarities to HTML.\nMembers of the World Wide Web Consortium (also known as the \"W3C\") created SMIL for streaming media presentations, and published SMIL 1.0 in June 1998. Many of these W3C members helped author several versions of SMIL specifications between 1996 (when the first multimedia workshops were hosted by the W3C) and 2008 (when SMIL 3.0 was published). SMIL is an XML-based application, and is a part of many Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) applications. SMIL can be combined with other XML-based specifications such as with SVG (as has been done with SVG animation) and with XHTML (as done with HTML+TIME). \nVersion history.\nAs of 2008[ [update]], the W3C Recommendation for SMIL is \"SMIL 3.0\".\nSMIL 1.0.\nSMIL 1.0 became a W3C Recommendation on 15 June 1998.\nSMIL 2.0.\n\"SMIL 2.0\" became a W3C Recommendation on 9 August 2001. SMIL 2.0 introduced a modular language structure that facilitated integration of SMIL semantics into other XML-based languages. Basic animation and timing modules were integrated into Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) and the SMIL modules formed a basis for Timed-Text. The modular structure made it possible to define the standard SMIL language profile and the XHTML+SMIL language profile with common syntax and standard semantics.\nSMIL 2.1.\n\"SMIL 2.1\" became a W3C Recommendation on 13 December 2005. SMIL 2.1 includes a small number of extensions based on practical experience gathered using SMIL in the Multimedia Messaging System on mobile phones.\nSMIL 3.0.\n\"SMIL 3.0\" became a W3C Recommendation in December 2008. It was first submitted as a W3C Working draft on December 21, 2006. The last draft revision was released on October 6, 2008.\nAuthoring tools.\nAuthoring and rendering tools for smilText and SMIL 3.0 PanZoom functionality:\nDemos\nSMIL documents.\nA SMIL document is similar in structure to an HTML document in that they are typically divided between an optional codice_1 section and a required codice_2 section. The codice_1 section contains layout and metadata information. The codice_2 section contains the timing information, and is generally composed of combinations of three main tags\u2014sequential (\"codice_5\", simple playlists), parallel (\"codice_6\", multi-zone/multi-layer playback) and exclusive (\"codice_7\", event-triggered interrupts). SMIL refers to media objects by URLs, allowing them to be shared between presentations and stored on different servers for load balancing. The language can also associate different media objects with different bandwidth requirements.\nFor playback scheduling, SMIL supports ISO-8601 codice_8 date/time specification to define begin/end events for playlists.\nSMIL files take either a codice_9 or codice_10 file extension. However, SAMI files and Macintosh self mounting images also use codice_9, which creates some ambiguity at first glance. As a result, SMIL files commonly use the codice_10 file extension to avoid confusion.\nCombination with other XML-based standards.\nSMIL was created during a time when structured data using XML was very popular and during a time when Internet Explorer was very popular. Thus \"combining\" SMIL with other markup languages was considered one of the best current practices of the day.\nSMIL+SVG.\nSMIL is one of three means by which SVG animation can be achieved (the others being JavaScript and CSS animations).\nSMIL+RSS or other web syndication methods.\nWhile RSS and Atom are web syndication methods, with the former being more popular as a syndication method for podcasts, SMIL is potentially useful as a script or playlist that can tie sequential pieces of multimedia together and can then be syndicated through RSS or Atom. In addition, the combination of multimedia-laden .smil files with RSS or Atom syndication would be useful for accessibility to audio-enabled podcasts by the deaf through Timed Text closed captions, and can also turn multimedia into hypermedia that can be hyperlinked to other linkable audio and video multimedia.\nSMIL+VoiceXML and SMIL+MusicXML.\nVoiceXML can be combined with SMIL to provide a sequential reading of several pre-provided pages or slides in a voice browser, while combining SMIL with MusicXML would allow for the creation of infinitely-recombinable sequences of music sheets. Combining SMIL+VoiceXML or SMIL+MusicXML with RSS or Atom could be useful in the creation of an audible pseudo-podcast with embedded hyperlinks, while combining SMIL+SVG with VoiceXML and/or MusicXML would be useful in the creation of an automatically audio-enabled vector graphics animation with embedded hyperlinks.\nSMIL+TEI.\nSMIL is anticipated for use within Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) documents.\nStatus of SMIL.\nSMIL is being implemented on handheld and mobile devices and has also spawned the Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) which is a video and picture equivalent of Short Message Service (SMS).\nSMIL is also one of the underlying technologies used for \"Advanced Content\" in the (discontinued) HD DVD format for adding interactive content (menus etc.).\nThe field of Digital Signage is embracing SMIL as a means of controlling dynamic advertising in public areas.\nSMIL players.\nSoftware.\nMost commonly used web browsers have native support for SMIL, but it has not been implemented in Microsoft browsers. It was to be deprecated in Google Chrome, but it has now been decided to suspend that intent until alternatives are sufficiently developed. Other software that implement SMIL playback include:\nHardware.\nMedia player boxes based on dedicated 1080p decoder chips such as the Sigma Designs 8634 processor are getting SMIL players embedded in them.\nEmbedding SMIL files into XHTML web pages.\nA SMIL file must be embedded, then opened using a plug-in such as Apple's QuickTime or Microsoft's Windows Media Player, to be viewed by a browser that doesn't support SMIL.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28706", "revid": "24565488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28706", "title": "SECAM", "text": "French analog color television system\nSECAM, also written S\u00c9CAM (,\"Syst\u00e8me \u00c9lectronique Couleur Avec M\u00e9moire\", French for \"electronic colour system with memory\"), is an analogue colour television system that was used in France, Russia, and some other countries or territories of Europe and Africa. It was one of three major analog colour television standards, the others being PAL and NTSC. Like PAL, a SECAM picture is also made up of 625 interlaced lines and is displayed at a rate of 25 frames per second (except SECAM-M). However, due to the way SECAM processes colour information, it is not compatible with the PAL video format standard. SECAM video is composite video; the luminance (luma, monochrome image) and chrominance (chroma, color applied to the monochrome image) are transmitted together as one signal.\nAll the countries using SECAM have either converted to Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB), the new pan-European standard for digital television, or are currently in the process of conversion. SECAM remained a major standard into the 2000s.\nHistory.\nInvention.\nDevelopment of SECAM predates PAL, and began in 1956 by a team led by Henri de France working at \"Compagnie Fran\u00e7aise de T\u00e9l\u00e9vision\" (later bought by Thomson, now Technicolor). NTSC was considered undesirable in Europe because of its tint problem, requiring an additional control, which SECAM (and PAL) solved.\nSome have argued that the primary motivation for the development of SECAM in France was to protect French television equipment manufacturers. However, incompatibility had started with the earlier unusual decision to adopt positive video modulation for 819-line French broadcast signals (only the UK's 405-line was similar; widely adopted 525- and 625-line systems used negative video).\nThe first proposed system was called SECAM I in 1961, followed by other studies to improve compatibility and image quality, but it was too soon for a wide introduction. A version of SECAM for the French 819-line television standard was devised and tested, but never introduced.\nFollowing a pan-European agreement to introduce colour TV only on 625-line broadcasts, France had to switch to that system, which happened in 1963 with the introduction of \"la deuxi\u00e8me cha\u00eene ORTF\" France 2, the second national TV network.\nFurther improvements during 1963 and 1964 to the standard were called SECAM II and SECAM III, with the latter being presented at the 1965 CCIR General Assembly in Vienna, and adopted by France and the Soviet Union.\nSoviet technicians were involved in a separate development of the standard, creating an incompatible variant called NIIR or SECAM IV, which was not deployed. The team was working in Moscow's Telecentrum. The NIIR designation comes from the name of the \"Nautchno-Issledovatelskiy Institut Radio\" (\"NIIR\", \"rus.\" \u041d\u0430\u0443\u0447\u043d\u043e-\u0418\u0441\u0441\u043b\u0435\u0434\u043e\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0435\u043b\u044c\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u0418\u043d\u0441\u0442\u0438\u0442\u0443\u0442 \u0420\u0430\u0434\u0438\u043e), a Soviet research institute involved in the studies. Two standards were developed: \"Non-linear NIIR\", in which a process analogous to gamma correction is used, and \"Linear NIIR\" or \"SECAM IV\" that omits this process. SECAM IV was proposed by France and USSR at the 1966 Oslo CCIR conference and demonstrated in London.\nFurther improvements were SECAM III A, followed by SECAM III B, the system adopted for general use in 1967.\nImplementation.\nTested until 1963 on the second French national network \"la deuxi\u00e8me cha\u00eene ORTF\", the SECAM standard was adopted in France and launched on 1 October 1967, now called France 2. A group of four suited men\u2014a presenter (Georges Gorse, Minister of Information) and three contributors to the system's development\u2014were shown standing in a studio. Following a count from 10, at 2:15\u00a0pm the black-and-white image switched to colour; the presenter then declared \"Et voici la couleur !\" (fr: And here is color!) In the same year of 1967, CLT of Lebanon became the third television station in the world, after France 2 in France and the Soviet Central Television in the Soviet Union, to broadcast in color utilizing the French SECAM technology.\nThe first color television sets cost 5000 French new francs (the change to new franc occurred in 1960; see francs for more details). At that time a pocket book costed roughly 1 NF.\nColour TV was not very popular initially; only about 1500 people watched the inaugural program in color. A year later in 1968, only 200,000 sets had been sold of an expected million. This pattern was similar to the earlier slow build-up of colour television popularity in the US.\nIn March 1969, East Germany decided to adopt SECAM III B. The adoption of SECAM in Eastern Europe has been attributed to Cold War political machinations. According to this explanation, East German political authorities were well aware of West German television's popularity and adopted SECAM rather than the PAL encoding used in West Germany. This did not hinder mutual reception in black and white, because the underlying TV standards remained essentially the same in both parts of Germany. However, East Germans responded by buying PAL decoders for their SECAM sets. Eventually, the government in East Berlin stopped paying attention to so-called \"Republikflucht via Fernsehen\", or \"defection via television\". Later East German\u2013produced TV sets, such as the , even included a dual-standard PAL/SECAM decoder as an option.\nAnother explanation for the Eastern European adoption of SECAM, led by the Soviet Union, is that the Russians had extremely long distribution lines between broadcasting stations and transmitters. Long co-axial cables or microwave links can cause amplitude and phase variations, which do not affect SECAM signals.\nOther countries, notably the United Kingdom and Italy, briefly experimented with SECAM before opting for PAL. SECAM was adopted by former French and Belgian colonies in Africa, as well as Greece, Cyprus, and Eastern Bloc countries (except for Romania), and some Middle Eastern countries.\nEuropean efforts during the 1980\u201390s toward the creation of a unified analogue standard, resulting in the MAC standards, still used the sequential color transmission idea of SECAM, with only one of time-compressed U and V components being transmitted on a given line. The D2-MAC standard enjoyed some short real market deployment, particularly in northern European countries. To some extent, this idea is still present in 4:2:0 digital sampling format, which is used by most digital video media available to the public. In this case, however, color resolution is halved in both horizontal and vertical directions thus yielding a more symmetrical behavior.\nDecline.\nWith the fall of communism and following a period when multi-standard TV sets became common in the early 2000s, many Central and Eastern European countries decided to switch to the West German-developed PAL system. Yet SECAM remained in use in Russia, Belarus, and the French-speaking African countries. In the late 2000s, SECAM started a process of being phased out and replaced by DVB.\nUnlike some other manufacturers, the company where SECAM was invented, Technicolor (known as Thomson until 2010), still sold television sets worldwide under different brands until the company sold its Trademark Licensing operations in 2022; this may be due in part to the legacy of SECAM. Thomson bought the company that developed PAL, Telefunken, and even co-owned the RCA brand \u2013 RCA being the creator of NTSC. Thomson also co-authored the ATSC standards which are used for American high-definition television.\nDesign.\nJust as with the other color standards adopted for broadcast usage over the world, SECAM is a standard that permits existing monochrome television receivers predating its introduction to continue to be operated as monochrome televisions. Because of this compatibility requirement, color standards added a second signal to the basic monochrome signal, which carries the color information. The black-and-white information is called the luminance or formula_1 for short, and the color information is called chrominance or formula_2 for short. Monochrome television receivers only display luminance, while color receivers process both signals. The YDbDr color space is used to encode the mentioned formula_1 (luminance) and formula_4 (red and blue color difference signals that make up chrominance) components.\nAdditionally, for compatibility, it is required to use no more bandwidth than the monochrome signal alone; the color signal has to be somehow inserted into the monochrome signal, without disturbing it. This insertion is possible because the bandwidth of the monochrome TV signal is generally not fully utilized; the high-frequency portions of the signal, corresponding to fine details in the image, were often not recorded by contemporary video equipment, or not visible on consumer televisions anyway, especially after transmission. This section of the spectrum was thus used to carry color information, at the cost of reducing the possible resolution.\nEuropean monochrome standards were not compatible when SECAM was first being considered. France had introduced an 819-line system that used 14\u00a0MHz of bandwidth (System E), much more than the 5\u00a0MHz standard used in the UK (System A) or the 6\u00a0MHz in the US (System M). The closest thing to a standard in Europe at the time was the 8\u00a0MHz 625-line system (System D), which had originated Germany and the Soviet Union and quickly became one of the most used systems. An effort to harmonize European broadcasts on the 625-line system started in the 1950s and was first implemented in Ireland in 1962 (System I).\nSECAM thus had the added issue of having to be compatible both with their existing 819-line system as well as their future broadcasts on the 625-line system. As the latter used much less bandwidth, it was this standard that defined the amount of color information that could be carried. In the 8\u00a0MHz standard, the signal is split into two parts, the video signal, and the audio signal, each with its own carrier frequency. For any given channel, one carrier is located 1.25\u00a0MHz above the channel's listed frequency and indicates the location of the luminance portion of the signal. A second carrier is located 6\u00a0MHz above the luma carrier, indicating the center of the audio signal.\nTo add color to the signal, SECAM adds another carrier located 4.4336...\u00a0MHz above the luma carrier. The chroma signal is centered on this carrier, overlapping the upper part of the luma frequency range. Because the information of most scan lines differ little from their immediate neighbors, both luma and chroma signals are close to being periodic on the horizontal scan frequency, and thus their power spectra tends to be concentrated on multiples of such frequency. The specific color carrier frequency of SECAM results from carefully choosing it so that the higher-powered harmonics of the modulated chroma and luma signals are apart from each other and from the sound carrier, thereby minimizing crosstalk between the three signals.\nThe color space perceived by humans is three-dimensional because of the nature of their retinas, which include specific detectors for red, green and blue light. So in addition to luminance, which is already carried by the existing monochrome signal, color requires sending two additional signals. The human retina is more sensitive to green light than to red (3:1) or blue (9:1) light. Because of this, the red (formula_5) and blue (formula_6) signals are usually chosen to be sent along luma but with comparably less resolution, to be able to save bandwidth while impacting the perceived image quality the least. (Also, the green signal is on average more closely correlated to luma, making them a poor choice of signal to send separately). To minimize crosstalk with luma and increase compatibility with existing monochrome TV sets, the formula_5 and formula_6 signals are usually sent as differences from luma (formula_1): formula_10 and formula_11. This way, for an image that contains little color, its color difference signals tend to zero and its color-encoded signal converges to its equivalent monochrome signal.\nColorimetry.\nSECAM colourimetry was similar to PAL, as defined by the ITU on REC-BT.470. Yet the same document indicates that for existing (at the time of revision, 1998) SECAM sets, the following parameters (similar to the original 1953 color NTSC specification) could be allowed:\nThe assumed display gamma was also defined as 2.8.\nLuma (formula_12) is derived from red, green, and blue (formula_13) gamma pre-corrected primary signals:\nformula_15 and formula_16 are red and blue color difference signals, used to calculate chrominance:\nComparison to PAL and NTSC.\nSECAM differs significantly from the other colour systems by the way the colour difference signals are carried. In NTSC and PAL, each line carries colour difference signals encoded using quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM). To demodulate such a signal, knowledge of the phase of the carrier signal is needed. This information is sent along the video signal at the start of every scan line in the form of a short burst of the colour carrier itself, called a \"colourburst\". A phase error during QAM demodulation produces crosstalk between the colour difference signals. On NTSC this creates Hue and Saturation errors, manually corrected for with a \"tint\" control on the receiving TV set; while PAL only suffers from Saturation errors. SECAM is free of this problem.\nSECAM uses frequency modulation (FM) to encode chrominance information on the colour carrier, which does not require knowledge of the carrier phase to demodulate. However, the simple FM scheme used allows the transmission of only one signal, not the two required for colour. To address this, SECAM broadcasts formula_10 and formula_11 separately on alternating scan lines. To produce full color, the colour information on one scan line is briefly stored in an analogue delay line adjusted so the signal exits the delay at the precise start of the next line. This allows the television to combine the formula_10 signal transmitted on one line with the formula_11 on the next and thereby produce a full colour gamut on every line. Because SECAM transmits only one chrominance component at a time, it is free of the colour artifacts (\"dot crawl\") present in NTSC and PAL that result from the combined transmission of colour difference signals.\nThis means that the vertical colour resolution of a field is halved compared to NTSC. However, the colour signals of all colour TV systems of the time were encoded in a narrower band than their luma signals, so color information had lower horizontal resolution compared to luma in all systems. This matches the human retina, which has higher luminance resolution than color resolution. On SECAM, the loss of vertical colour resolution makes the colour resolution closer to uniform in both axes and has little visual effect. The idea of reducing the vertical colour resolution comes from Henri de France, who observed that colour information is approximately identical for two successive lines. Because the colour information was designed to be a cheap, backward-compatible addition to the monochrome signal, the color signal has a lower bandwidth than the luminance signal, and hence lower horizontal resolution. Fortunately, the human visual system is similar in design: it perceives changes in luminance at a higher resolution than changes in chrominance, so this asymmetry has minimal visual impact. It was therefore also logical to reduce the vertical colour resolution. A similar paradox applies to the vertical resolution in television in general: reducing the bandwidth of the video signal will preserve the vertical resolution, even if the image loses sharpness and is smudged in the horizontal direction. Hence, video could be sharper vertically than horizontally. Additionally, transmitting an image with too much vertical detail will cause annoying flicker on interlaced television screens, as small details will only appear on a single line (in one of the two interlaced fields), and hence be refreshed at half the frequency. (This is a consequence of interlaced scanning that is obviated by progressive scan.) Computer-generated text and inserts have to be carefully low-pass filtered to prevent this.\nThe colour difference signals in SECAM are calculated in the YDbDr color space, which is a scaled version of the YUV color space. This encoding is better suited to the transmission of only one signal at a time. FM modulation of the colour information allows SECAM to be completely free of the dot crawl problem commonly encountered with the other analog standards. SECAM transmissions are more robust over longer distances than NTSC or PAL. However, owing to their FM nature, the colour signal remains present, although at reduced amplitude, even in monochrome portions of the image, thus being subject to stronger cross colour even though colour crawl of the PAL type does not exist. Though most of the pattern is removed from PAL and NTSC-encoded signals with a comb filter (designed to segregate the two signals where the luma spectrum may overlap into the spectral space used by the chroma) by modern displays, some can still be left in certain parts of the picture. Such parts are usually sharp edges on the picture, sudden colour or brightness changes along the picture or certain repeating patterns, such as a checker board on clothing. FM SECAM is a continuous spectrum, so unlike PAL and NTSC even a perfect digital comb filter could not entirely separate SECAM luminance and colour signals.\nDisadvantages.\nUnlike PAL or NTSC, analog SECAM programming cannot easily be edited in its native analog form. Because it uses frequency modulation, SECAM is not linear with respect to the input image (this is also what protects it against signal distortion), so electrically mixing two (synchronized) SECAM signals does not yield a valid SECAM signal, unlike with analog PAL or NTSC. For this reason, to mix two SECAM signals, they must be demodulated, the demodulated signals mixed, and are remodulated again. Hence, post-production is often done in PAL, or in component formats, with the result encoded or transcoded into SECAM at the point of transmission. Reducing the costs of running television stations is one reason for some countries' switchovers to PAL.\nMost TVs currently sold in SECAM countries support both SECAM and PAL, and more recently composite video NTSC as well (though not usually broadcast NTSC, that is, they cannot accept a broadcast signal from an antenna). Although the older analog camcorders (VHS, VHS-C) were produced in SECAM versions, none of the 8 mm or Hi-band models (S-VHS, S-VHS-C, and Hi-8) recorded it directly. Camcorders and VCRs of these standards sold in SECAM countries are internally PAL. The result could be converted back to SECAM in some models; most people buying such expensive equipment would have a multistandard TV set and as such would not need a conversion. Digital camcorders or DVD players (with the exception of some early models) do not accept or output a SECAM analog signal. However, this is of dwindling importance: since 1980 most European domestic video equipment uses French-originated SCART connectors, allowing the transmission of RGB signals between devices. This eliminates the legacy of PAL, SECAM, and NTSC color sub carrier standards.\nIn general, modern professional equipment is now all-digital, and uses component-based digital interconnects such as CCIR 601 to eliminate the need for any analog processing prior to the final modulation of the analog signal for broadcast. However, large installed bases of analog professional equipment still exist, particularly in third world countries.\nVarieties.\nBroadcast systems L, B/G, D/K, H, K, M.\nThere are six varieties of SECAM, according to each of the broadcast system it was used with:\nMESECAM (home recording).\nMESECAM is a method of recording SECAM color signals onto VHS or Betamax video tape. It should not be mistaken for a broadcast standard.\n\"Native\" SECAM recording (marketing term: \"SECAM-West\") was devised for machines sold for the French (and adjacent countries) market. At a later stage, countries where both PAL and SECAM signals were available developed a cheap method of converting PAL video machines to record SECAM signals, using only the PAL recording circuitry. Although being a workaround, MESECAM is much more widespread than \"native\" SECAM. It has been the only method of recording SECAM signals to VHS in almost all countries that used SECAM, including the Middle East and all countries in Eastern Europe.\nA tape produced by this method is not compatible with \"native\" SECAM tapes as produced by VCRs in the French market. It will play in black and white only, the color is lost. Most VHS machines advertised as \"SECAM capable\" outside France can be expected to be of the MESECAM variety only.\nTechnical details.\nOn VHS tapes, the luminance signal is recorded FM-encoded (on VHS with reduced bandwidth, on S-VHS with full bandwidth) but the PAL or NTSC chrominance signal is too sensitive to small changes in frequency caused by inevitable small variations in tape speed to be recorded directly. Instead, it is first shifted down to the lower frequency of 630\u00a0kHz, and the complex nature of the PAL or NTSC sub-carrier means that the down conversion must be done via heterodyning to ensure that information is not lost.\nThe SECAM sub-carriers, which consist of two simple FM signals at 4.41\u00a0MHz and 4.25\u00a0MHz, do not need this (actually simple) processing. The VHS specification for \"native\" SECAM recording specifies that they be divided by 4 on recording to give sub carriers of approximately 1.1\u00a0MHz and 1.06\u00a0MHz, and multiplied by 4 on playback. A true dual-standard PAL and SECAM video recorder therefore requires two color processing circuits, adding to complexity and expense. Since some countries in the Middle East use PAL and others use SECAM, the region has adopted a shortcut, and uses the PAL mixer-downconverter approach for both PAL and SECAM, simplifying VCR design.\nMany PAL VHS recorders have had their analog tuner modified in French-speaking western Switzerland (Switzerland used the PAL-B/G standard while the bordering France used SECAM-L). The original tuner in those PAL recorders allows only PAL-B/G reception. The Swiss importers added a circuit with a specific IC for the French SECAM-L standard, making the tuner multi-standard and allowing the VCR to record SECAM broadcasts in MESECAM. A stamp mentioning \"PAL+SECAM\" was added to these machines.\nVideo recorders like Panasonic NV-W1E (AG-W1-P for professional), AG-W3, NV-J700AM, Aiwa HV-MX100, HV-MX1U, Samsung SV-4000W and SV-7000W feature a digital standard conversion circuitry.\nAdoption.\nA legacy list of SECAM users in 1998 is available on \"Recommendation ITU-R BT.470-6 - Conventional Television Systems, Appendix 1 to Annex 1\", and the list before many OIRT countries migrated to PAL can be found at \"CCIR Report 624-3 Characteristics of television systems, Annex I\".\nBelow is an updated list of nations that currently authorize the use of the SECAM standard for television broadcasting. It is subject to ongoing changes as nations move to PAL and DVB-T. These migrations are listed separately.\nMigration to other standards.\nPAL.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCzech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, and the Baltic countries also changed their underlying sound carrier standard on the UHF band from D/K to B/G which is used in most of Western Europe, to facilitate use of imported broadcast equipment, while leaving the D/K standard on VHF. This required viewers to purchase multistandard receivers though. The other countries mentioned kept their existing standards (B/G in the cases of East Germany and Greece, D/K for the rest).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28708", "revid": "1722754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28708", "title": "Sleet", "text": "Sleet is a regionally variant term for some meteorological phenomena:\nPlaces.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28710", "revid": "44557434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28710", "title": "Smelt (fish)", "text": "Family of fishes\nSmelts are a family of small fish, the Osmeridae, found in the North Atlantic and North Pacific oceans, as well as rivers, streams and lakes in Europe, North America and Northeast Asia. They are also known as freshwater smelts or typical smelts to distinguish them from the related Argentinidae (herring smelts or argentines), Bathylagidae (deep-sea smelts), and Retropinnidae (Australian and New Zealand smelts).\nSome smelt species are common in the North American Great Lakes, and in the lakes and seas of the northern part of Europe, where they run in large schools along the saltwater coastline during spring migration to their spawning streams. In some western parts of the United States, smelt populations have greatly declined in recent decades, leading to their protection under the Endangered Species Act. The Delta smelt (\"Hypomesus transpacificus\") found in the Sacramento Delta of California, and the eulachon (\"Thaleichthys pacificus\") found in the Northeast Pacific and adjacent rivers, are both protected from harvest.\nSome species of smelts are among the few fish that sportsmen have been allowed to net, using hand-held dip nets, either along the coastline or in streams. Some sportsmen also ice fish for smelt. They are often fried and eaten whole.\nThe earliest known fossil smelt is \"Enoplophthalmus\" from the Early Oligocene of Europe; \"Speirsaenigma\" from the Paleocene of Canada may be an even earlier representative, although some authors instead consider it a relative of the ayu.\nDescription.\nIn size, most species rarely exceed , although some grow larger. Some females of European smelt can reach in length.\nLike salmon, many species are anadromous, living most of their lives in the sea, but traveling into fresh water to breed. However, a few exceptions, such as the surf smelt, spend their entire lives at sea.\nSmelt dipping.\nIn the Canadian provinces and U.S. states around the Great Lakes, \"smelt dipping\" is a common group sport in the early spring and when stream waters reach around . Fish are spotted using a flashlight or headlamp and scooped out of the water using a dip net made of nylon or metal mesh. The smelt are cleaned by removing the head and the entrails. Fins, scales, and bones of all but the largest of smelts are cooked without removal.\nOn the Maine coast, smelts were also a sign of spring, with the run of these small fish up tiny tidal estuaries. Many of these streams were narrow enough for a person to straddle and get a good catch of smelts by dipping a bucket.\nCulinary use.\nNorth America.\nSmelts are an important winter catch in the saltwater mouths of rivers in New England and the Maritime Provinces of Canada. Fishermen would historically go to customary locations over the ice using horses and sleighs. Smelt taken out of the cold saltwater were preferred to those taken in warm water. The fish did not command a high price on the market, but provided a source of supplemental income due to their abundance. The smelts were \"flash frozen\" simply by leaving them on the ice and then sold to fish buyers who came down the rivers.\nIn the present day, smelts are fished commercially using nets at sea, and for recreation by hand-netting, spearing or angling them through holes in river ice. They are often the target fish of small 'fishing shack' villages that spring up along frozen rivers. Typical ways of preparing them include pan-frying in flour and butter, deep-frying in batter and cooking them, directly out of the water, over small stoves in the shacks.\nIn January 2025, the smelt gained notoriety after being mentioned by president-elect Donald Trump in a critique of Gavin Newsom, the governor of California during the 2025 California wildfires. In his January 8, 2025 Truth Social post, Trump referred to the smelt as \"an essentially worthless fish,\" and he stated that Newsom blocked the provision of water for drinking purposes and firefighters in order to protect local smelt populations, which ultimately led to raging wildfires and extensive property damage.\nCanada.\nIndigenous peoples in Canada native to the Great Lakes regions (Lake Huron, Lake Ontario, and Lake Superior), as well as nearby Lake Erie (which still is well known for its smelts today), were both familiar and partially dependent upon smelts as a dietary source of protein and omega fats that didn't require a large effort or hunting party to obtain. Smelts are one of the best choices of freshwater and saltwater fish to eat, as one of the types of edible fish with the lowest amount of mercury.\nSmelts can be found in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, as well as in some freshwater lakes across Canada. Smelts were eaten by many different native peoples who had access to them. One popular way that First Nations of the Pacific coast made dried smelts more appealing was to serve it with oil. Eulachon, a type of smelt, contains so much oil during spawning that, once dried, it can literally be burned like a candle; hence its common nickname of the \"candlefish\".\nToday, there are numerous recipes and methods of preparing and cooking smelts. A popular First Nations recipe calls for the removal of all the fishes' bones, uses canola or peanut oil for frying, and has a breaded-like coating mixed with lemon juice and grated parmesan cheese (with a few other basic ingredients) to coat the smelts prior to frying them.\nEast Asia.\nSmelt is popular in Japan, as the species \"Sprinchus lanceolatus\", and is generally served grilled, called \"shishamo\", especially when full of eggs.\nSmelt roe, specifically from capelin, called masago in Japanese, is yellow to orange in color and is often used in sushi.\nSmelt is also served in Chinese \"dim sum\" restaurants where it is deep fried with the heads and tails attached, identified as \"du\u014d ch\u016bn y\u00fa\" () or \"du\u014d lu\u01cen y\u00fa\" (), \"many egg fish\" or which loosely translates as \"fish with many eggs\".\nSmelt is one of the prime fish species eaten in Tamil Nadu as Nethili fry, Nethili karuvadu (dried fish), coastal Karnataka, especially in Mangalore and Udupi regions, usually fried with heads and tailed removed or in curries. They are called 'Bolingei' (\u0cac\u0cca\u0cb3\u0c82\u0c9c\u0cc6) in Kannada and Tulu and 'MotiyaLe' in Konkani.\nFestivals.\nIn the city of Inje, South Korea (Gangwon Province), an Ice Fishing Festival is held annually from 30 January to 2 February on Soyang Lake, coinciding with the smelt's yearly run into fresh water to spawn. They are locally known as \"bing-eo\" (\ube59\uc5b4) and typically eaten alive or deep-fried.\nIn Finland, the province of Paltamo has yearly \"Norssikarnevaali\" festivals in the middle of May.\nFor some Italians, especially from the region of Calabria, fried smelts are a traditional part of the Christmas Eve dinner consisting of multiple courses of fish.\nIn 1956, the Chamber of Commerce in Kelso, Washington, declared Kelso, located on the Cowlitz River, as the \"Smelt Capital of the World\". They erected billboards proclaiming this, and held festivals for the annual smelt runs until the runs dried up.\nThe village of Lewiston, New York, on the lower portion of the Niagara River, celebrates an annual two-day smelt festival the first weekend in May. During the festival, approximately of smelt are battered and fried at the Lewiston Waterfront. The smelt samples are free during the festival and donations are welcome, as they help support programs supported by the Niagara River Anglers. The festival has a motto, which is a play on words: \"Lewiston never smelt so good.\"\nLithuania celebrates an annual weekend smelt festival in Palanga \"Palangos Stinta\" early every January.\nThe American Legion Post 82, in Port Washington, Wisconsin, has been hosting its annual Smelt Fry since 1951. Located on the Western shore of Lake Michigan, north of Milwaukee, Port Washington has a long history as a fishing community with commercial and sports ventures. The Legion's Smelt Fry happens every year in mid to late April. In mid-July, the quaint town hosts their Fish Day event, billed as \"The world's largest, one-day, outdoor fish fry!\"\nAt the time of the smelt's spring run in the Neva River at the head of the Gulf of Finland on the Baltic Sea in Saint Petersburg, a Smelt Festival (\"Prazdnik koryushki\") is celebrated.\nThe Magic Smelt Puppet Troupe of Duluth, Minnesota has held an annual \"Run, Smelt, Run!\" puppet-based second line parade, smelt fry, and dance party since 2012. The troupe occasionally hosts other performances throughout the year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28711", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28711", "title": "Smackhead", "text": ""}
{"id": "28714", "revid": "4490355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28714", "title": "Stethoscope", "text": "Medical device for auscultation\nThe stethoscope, from Ancient Greek \u03c3\u03c4\u1fc6\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2 (\"st\u00eathos\"), meaning \"breast\", and \u03c3\u03ba\u03bf\u03c0\u03ad\u03c9 (\"skop\u00e9\u014d\"), meaning \"to look\", is a medical device for auscultation, or listening to internal sounds of an animal or human body. It typically has a small disc-shaped resonator that is placed against the naked skin, with either one or two tubes connected to two earpieces. A stethoscope can be used to listen to the sounds made by the heart, lungs or intestines, as well as blood flow in arteries and veins. In combination with a manual sphygmomanometer, it is commonly used when measuring blood pressure. It was invented in 1816 by Ren\u00e9 Laennec and the binaural version by Arthur Leared in 1851.\nA stethoscope that intensifies auscultatory sounds is called a phonendoscope.\nHistory.\nThe stethoscope was invented in France in 1816 by Ren\u00e9 Laennec at the Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital in Paris. It consisted of a wooden tube and was monaural. Laennec invented the stethoscope because he was not comfortable placing his ear directly onto a woman's chest in order to listen to her heart. He observed that a rolled piece of paper, placed between the individual's chest and his ear, could amplify heart sounds without requiring physical contact. Laennec's device was similar to the common ear trumpet, a historical form of hearing aid; indeed, his invention was almost indistinguishable in structure and function from the trumpet, which was commonly called a \"microphone\". Laennec called his device the \"stethoscope\" (\"stetho-\" + \"-scope\", \"chest scope\"), and he called its use \"mediate auscultation\", because it was auscultation with a tool intermediate between the individual's body and the physician's ear. (Today the word \"auscultation\" denotes all such listening, mediate or not.) The first flexible stethoscope of any sort may have been a binaural instrument with articulated joints not very clearly described in 1829. In 1840, Golding Bird described a stethoscope he had been using with a flexible tube. Bird was the first to publish a description of such a stethoscope, but he noted in his paper the prior existence of an earlier design (which he thought was of little utility) which he described as the snake ear trumpet. Bird's stethoscope had a single earpiece.\nBinaural devices.\nIn 1851, Irish physician Arthur Leared invented a binaural stethoscope. The following year, George Philip Cammann, a physician practicing in New York City, perfected for commercial production the design of a stethoscope that featured a plug for each ear. Although improvements have been made, his design has remained essentially unchanged ever since. Cammann also wrote a major treatise on diagnosis by auscultation, which the refined binaural stethoscope made possible. By 1873, there were descriptions of a differential stethoscope that could connect to slightly different locations to create a slight stereo effect, though this did not become a standard tool in clinical practice.\nSomerville Scott Alison described his invention of the stethophone at the Royal Society in 1858; the stethophone had two separate bells, allowing the user to hear and compare sounds derived from two discrete locations. This was used to do definitive studies on binaural hearing and auditory processing that advanced knowledge of sound localization and eventually led to an understanding of binaural fusion.\nThe medical historian Jacalyn Duffin has argued that the invention of the stethoscope marked a major step in the redefinition of disease from being a bundle of symptoms, to the current sense of a disease as a problem with an anatomical system even if there are no observable symptoms. This re-conceptualization occurred in part, Duffin argues, because prior to stethoscopes, there were no non-lethal instruments for exploring internal anatomy.\nRappaport and Sprague designed a new stethoscope in the 1940s, which became the standard by which other stethoscopes are measured, consisting of two sides, one of which is used for the respiratory system, the other for the cardiovascular system. The Rappaport-Sprague model stethoscope was heavy and short () with an antiquated appearance recognizable by their two large independent latex rubber tubes connecting an exposed leaf-spring-joined pair of opposing F-shaped chrome-plated brass binaural ear tubes with a dual-head chest piece.\nSeveral other minor refinements were made to stethoscopes until, in the early 1960s, David Littmann, a Harvard Medical School professor, created a new stethoscope that was lighter than previous models and had improved acoustics. In the late 1970s, 3M-Littmann introduced the tunable diaphragm: a very hard (G-10) glass-epoxy resin diaphragm member with an overmolded silicone flexible acoustic surround which permitted increased excursion of the diaphragm member in a Z-axis with respect to the plane of the sound collecting area. The left shift to a lower resonant frequency increases the volume of some low frequency sounds due to the longer waves propagated by the increased excursion of the hard diaphragm member suspended in the concentric accountic surround. Conversely, restricting excursion of the diaphragm by pressing the stethoscope diaphragm surface firmly against the anatomical area overlying the physiological sounds of interest, the acoustic surround could also be used to dampen excursion of the diaphragm in response to \"z\"-axis pressure against a concentric fret. This raises the frequency bias by shortening the wavelength to auscultate a higher range of physiological sounds.\nIn 1999, Richard Deslauriers patented the first external noise reducing stethoscope, the DRG Puretone. It featured two parallel lumens containing two steel coils which dissipated infiltrating noise as inaudible heat energy. The steel coil \"insulation\" added .30\u00a0lb to each stethoscope. \nCurrent practice.\nStethoscopes are a symbol of healthcare professionals. Healthcare providers are often seen or depicted wearing a stethoscope around the neck. A 2012 research paper claimed that the stethoscope, when compared to other medical equipment, had the highest positive impact on the perceived trustworthiness of the practitioner seen with it.\nPrevailing opinions on the utility of the stethoscope in current clinical practice vary depending on the medical specialty. Studies have shown that auscultation skill (i.e., the ability to make a diagnosis based on what is heard through a stethoscope) has been in decline for some time, such that some medical educators are working to re-establish it.\nIn general practice, traditional blood pressure measurement using a mechanical sphygmomanometer with inflatable cuff and stethoscope is gradually being replaced with automated blood pressure monitors.\nTypes.\nAcoustic.\nAcoustic stethoscopes operate on the transmission of sound from the chest piece, via air-filled hollow tubes, to the listener's ears. The chestpiece usually consists of two sides that can be placed against the patient for sensing sound: a diaphragm (plastic disc) or bell (hollow cup). If the diaphragm is placed on the patient, body sounds vibrate the diaphragm, creating acoustic pressure waves which travel up the tubing to the listener's ears. If the bell is placed on the patient, the vibrations of the skin directly produce acoustic pressure waves traveling up to the listener's ears. The bell transmits low frequency sounds, while the diaphragm transmits higher frequency sounds. To deliver the acoustic energy primarily to either the bell or diaphragm, the tube connecting into the chamber between bell and diaphragm is open on only one side and can rotate. The opening is visible when connected into the bell. Rotating the tube 180 degrees in the head connects it to the diaphragm. This two-sided stethoscope was invented by Rappaport and Sprague in the early part of the 20th century.\nElectronic.\nAn electronic stethoscope (or stethophone) overcomes the low sound levels by electronically amplifying body sounds. However, amplification of stethoscope contact artifacts, and component cutoffs (frequency response thresholds of electronic stethoscope microphones, pre-amps, amps, and speakers) limit electronically amplified stethoscopes' overall utility by amplifying mid-range sounds, while simultaneously attenuating high- and low- frequency range sounds. Currently, a number of companies offer electronic stethoscopes. Electronic stethoscopes require conversion of acoustic sound waves to electrical signals which can then be amplified and processed for optimal listening. Unlike acoustic stethoscopes, which are all based on the same physics, transducers in electronic stethoscopes vary widely. The simplest and least effective method of sound detection is achieved by placing a microphone in the chestpiece. This method suffers from ambient noise interference and has fallen out of favor. Another method, used in Welch-Allyn's Meditron stethoscope, comprises placement of a piezoelectric crystal at the head of a metal shaft, the bottom of the shaft making contact with a diaphragm. 3M also uses a piezo-electric crystal placed within foam behind a thick rubber-like diaphragm. The Thinklabs' Rhythm 32 uses an electromagnetic diaphragm with a conductive inner surface to form a capacitive sensor. This diaphragm responds to sound waves, with changes in an electric field replacing changes in air pressure. The Eko Core enables wireless transmission of heart sounds to a smartphone or tablet. The Eko Duo can take electrocardiograms as well as echocardiograms. This enables clinicians to screen for conditions such as heart failure, which would not be possible with a traditional stethoscope. \nBecause the sounds are transmitted electronically, an electronic stethoscope can be a wireless device, can be a recording device, and can provide noise reduction, signal enhancement, and both visual and audio output. Around 2001, Stethographics introduced PC-based software which enabled a phonocardiograph, graphic representation of cardiologic and pulmonologic sounds to be generated, and interpreted according to related algorithms. All of these features are helpful for purposes of telemedicine (remote diagnosis) and teaching.\nElectronic stethoscopes are also used with computer-aided auscultation programs to analyze the recorded heart sounds pathological or innocent heart murmurs.\nRecording.\nSome electronic stethoscopes feature direct audio output that can be used with an external recording device, such as a laptop or MP3 recorder. The same connection can be used to listen to the previously recorded auscultation through the stethoscope headphones, allowing for more detailed study for general research as well as evaluation and consultation regarding a particular patient's condition and telemedicine, or remote diagnosis.\nThere are some smartphone apps that can use the phone as a stethoscope. At least one uses the phone's own microphone to amplify sound, produce a visualization, and e-mail the results. These apps may be used for training purposes or as novelties, but have not yet gained acceptance for professional medical use.\nThe first stethoscope that could work with a smartphone application was introduced in 2015 \nFetal.\nA \"fetal stethoscope\" or \"fetoscope\" is an acoustic stethoscope shaped like a listening trumpet. It is placed against the abdomen of a pregnant woman to listen to the heart sounds of the fetus. The fetal stethoscope is also known as a Pinard horn after French obstetrician Adolphe Pinard (1844\u20131934).\nDoppler.\nA Doppler stethoscope is an electronic device that measures the Doppler effect of ultrasound waves reflected from organs within the body. Motion is detected by the change in frequency, due to the Doppler effect, of the reflected waves. Hence the Doppler stethoscope is particularly suited to deal with moving objects such as a beating heart.\nIt was recently demonstrated that continuous Doppler enables the auscultation of valvular movements and blood flow sounds that are undetected during cardiac examination with a stethoscope in adults. The Doppler auscultation presented a sensitivity of 84% for the detection of aortic regurgitations while classic stethoscope auscultation presented a sensitivity of 58%. Moreover, Doppler auscultation was superior in the detection of impaired ventricular relaxation. Since the physics of Doppler auscultation and classic auscultation are different, it has been suggested that both methods could complement each other.\nA military noise-immune Doppler based stethoscope has recently been developed for auscultation of patients in loud sound environments (up to 110\u00a0dB).\n3D-printed.\nA 3D-printed stethoscope is an open-source medical device meant for auscultation and manufactured via means of 3D printing. The 3D stethoscope was developed by Dr. Tarek Loubani and a team of medical and technology specialists. The 3D-stethoscope was developed as part of the Glia project, and its design is open source from the outset. The stethoscope gained widespread media coverage in Summer 2015.\nThe need for a 3D-stethoscope was borne out of a lack of stethoscopes and other vital medical equipment because of the blockade of the Gaza Strip, where Loubani, a Palestinian-Canadian, worked as an emergency physician during the 2012 conflict in Gaza. The 1960s-era \"Littmann Cardiology 3\" stethoscope became the basis for the 3D-printed stethoscope developed by Loubani.\nEsophageal.\nPrior to the 1960s, the esophageal stethoscope was a part of the routine intraoperative monitoring.\nEarpieces.\nStethoscopes usually have rubber earpieces, which aid comfort and create a seal with the ear, improving the acoustic function of the device. Stethoscopes can be modified by replacing the standard earpieces with moulded versions, which improve comfort and transmission of sound. Moulded earpieces can be cast by an audiologist or made by the stethoscope user from a kit.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28715", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28715", "title": "System of a Down", "text": "Armenian-American metal band\nSystem of a Down is an Armenian-American heavy metal band formed in Glendale, California, in 1994. Since 1997, the band has consisted of founding members Serj Tankian (lead vocals, keyboards), Daron Malakian (guitar, vocals), and Shavo Odadjian (bass, backing vocals); along with John Dolmayan (drums), who replaced original drummer Andy Khachaturian.\nThe band achieved commercial success with the release of five studio albums, three of which debuted at number one on the US \"Billboard\" 200. System of a Down has been nominated for four Grammy Awards, and their song \"B.Y.O.B.\" won a Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock Performance in 2006. Known for their politically charged lyrics, many of their songs address social and political issues, such as the anti-war message in \"B.Y.O.B.\" and criticism of the prison industrial complex and the war on drugs in \"Prison Song.\" The band went on hiatus in 2006 and reunited in 2010. Other than two new songs in 2020 (\"Protect the Land\" and \"Genocidal Humanoidz\"), System of a Down has not released any new material since the \"Mezmerize\" and \"Hypnotize\" albums in 2005. The band has sold over 12 million records worldwide, while two of their singles, \"Aerials\" and \"Hypnotize\", reached number one on \"Billboard\"'s Alternative Songs chart.\nAll members of System of a Down are of Armenian descent, either born to Armenian immigrants or immigrants themselves.\nHistory.\nSoil (1992\u20131994).\nSerj Tankian and Daron Malakian attended Rose and Alex Pilibos Armenian School as children. Due to their eight-year age difference, they did not meet until 1992 while working on separate projects at the same recording studio. They formed a band named Soil with Tankian on vocals and keyboards, Malakian on vocals and guitar, Dave Hakopyan (who later played in the band The Apex Theory/Mt. Helium) on bass and Domingo \"Dingo\" Laranio on drums. The band hired Shavo Odadjian (another Rose and Alex Pilibos alumnus) as manager, although he eventually joined Soil on second guitar. In 1994, after only one live show at the Roxy and one jam session recording, Hakopyan and Laranio left the band.\nDemo tapes and signing (1994\u20131997).\nAfter Soil split up, Tankian, Odadjian, and Malakian formed a new band, System of a Down. The group took its name from a poem that Malakian had written titled \"Victims of a Down\". The word \"victims\" was changed to \"system\" because Odadjian believed that it would appeal to a much wider audience and also because the group wanted their records to be alphabetically shelved closer to their musical heroes, Slayer. Odadjian switched from guitar to bass and passed on his managerial duties to Velvet Hammer Music and Management Group and its founder David \"Beno\" Benveniste. The band recruited drummer Ontronik \"Andy\" Khachaturian, an old school friend of Malakian and Odadjian who had played with Malakian in a band called Snowblind during their teens.\nIn early 1995, System of a Down performed under the name Soil at the Cafe Club Fais Do-Do, a nightclub in Los Angeles. Shortly after the event, System of a Down made what is known as \"Untitled 1995 Demo Tape\", which was not commercially released, but eventually appeared on file-sharing networks around the time of the band's success with \"Toxicity\" about six years later. \"Demo Tape 2\" was released in 1996. At the beginning of 1997, System of a Down recorded their final publicly released demo tape, \"Demo Tape 3\". In mid-1997, drummer Khachaturian left the band because of a hand injury (he subsequently co-founded The Apex Theory, which included former Soil bassist Dave Hakopyan). Khachaturian was replaced by John Dolmayan.\nThe band's first official and professionally recorded song was on a collection called \"Hay Enk\" (\"We're Armenian\" in English), an Armenian genocide recognition compilation in 1997. After playing at notable Hollywood clubs such as the Whisky a Go Go and Viper Room, the band caught attention of producer Rick Rubin, who asked them to keep in touch. Showing great interest, the group recorded \"Demo Tape 4\" near the end of 1997, specifically to be sent to record companies. Rubin signed the group to his American/Columbia Records, with the band celebrating the signing with a performance at The Roxy Theatre with Human Waste Project on September 12, 1997. Afterward, System began laying down tracks that would eventually be released on their debut album with engineer Sylvia Massy. \"I loved them,\" Rubin recalled. \"They were my favorite band, but I didn't think anyone was going to like them apart from a small, likeminded group of people like me who were crazy. No one was waiting for an Armenian heavy metal band. It had to be so good that it transcended all of that.\"\nIn 1997, the group won the Best Signed Band Award from the Rock City Awards.\nSelf-titled album (1998\u20132000).\nIn June 1998, System of a Down released their debut album, \"System of a Down\". They enjoyed moderate success as their first singles \"Sugar\" and \"Spiders\" became radio favorites and the music videos for both songs were frequently aired on MTV. After the release of the album, the band toured extensively, opening for Slayer on the Diabolus in Musica tour, behind Clutch, before making their way to the second stage of Ozzfest. Following Ozzfest, they toured with Fear Factory and Incubus before headlining the Sno-Core Tour with Puya, Mr. Bungle, The Cat and Incubus providing support.\nIn November 1998, System of a Down appeared on \"South Parks ' album, providing the music for the song \"Will They Die 4 You?\" Near the end of the song, Tankian can be heard saying, \"Why must we kill our own kind?\" a line that would later be used in the song \"Boom!\" Although System of a Down is credited on the album, \"South Park\" character Chef does not introduce them as he does most of the other artists featured on the record.\n\"Toxicity\" and \"Steal This Album!\" (2001\u20132003).\nOn September 3, 2001, System of a Down planned to launch their second album at a free concert in Hollywood as a \"thank you\" to fans. To a parking lot built for 3,500 people, about 10,000 more came, prompting the fire marshal to cancel without notice at the last minute. Fans waited for more than an hour for the group to appear, but when a banner hanging at the back of the stage that read \"System of a Down\" was removed by security, the audience rushed the stage, destroying all the band's touring gear (approximately $30,000 worth of equipment) and began to riot, throwing rocks at police, breaking windows, and knocking over portable toilets. The riot lasted six hours, during which six arrests were made. The band's manager, David \"Beno\" Benveniste, later said that the riot could have been avoided if the group had been permitted to perform or had they been allowed to make a statement at the concert regarding the cancellation. System of a Down's scheduled in-store performance the next day was cancelled to prevent a similar riot.\nThe group's big break arrived when their second album, \"Toxicity\", debuted at No. 1 on the American and Canadian charts. The album has eventually achieved 3x multi-platinum certification in the United States. It was still on top in America during the week of the 9/11 attacks and the political environment caused by the attacks added to the controversy surrounding the album's hit single \"Chop Suey!\"; the song was taken off the radio as it contained politically sensitive lyrics according to the 2001 Clear Channel memorandum at the time such as \"I don't think you trust in my self-righteous suicide\". Regardless, the video gained constant play on MTV as did the album's second single, \"Toxicity\". Even with the controversy surrounding \"Chop Suey!\" (which earned a Grammy nomination), System of a Down still received constant airplay in the United States throughout late 2001 and 2002 with \"Toxicity\" and \"Aerials\". In May 2006, VH1 listed \"Toxicity\" in the number 14 slot in the \"40 Greatest Metal Songs\".\nIn 2001, the band went on tour with Slipknot throughout the United States. Following a performance in Grand Rapids, Michigan, Odadjian was allegedly harassed, ethnically intimidated, and was physically assaulted by security guards backstage, who then dragged him out of the venue. Odadjian received medical attention from police and later filed a suit against the security company. Despite the incident, the tour was a success and System of a Down and Slipknot went on the Pledge of Allegiance Tour together with Rammstein in 2001.\nIn late 2001, unreleased tracks from the \"Toxicity\" sessions made their way onto the Internet. This collection of tracks was dubbed \"Toxicity II\" by fans. The group released a statement that the tracks were unfinished material and subsequently released the final versions of the songs as their third album, \"Steal This Album!\", which was released in November 2002. \"Steal This Album!\" resembled a burnable CD that was marked with a felt-tip marker. About 50,000 special copies of the album with different CD designs were also released, each designed by a different member of the band. The name of the album is a reference to Abbie Hoffman's counter-culture book, \"Steal This Book\", as well as a message to those who leaked the songs onto the Internet. The song \"Innervision\" was released as a promo single and received constant airplay on alternative radio. A video for \"Boom!\" was filmed with director Michael Moore as a protest against the War in Iraq.\n\"Mezmerize\", \"Hypnotize\", band hiatus and side projects (2004\u20132008).\nIn 2004, the group recorded the follow-up to \"Steal This Album!\" a double album, which they released in separate installments six months apart. The releases notably included album cover artwork by Malakian's father, Vartan Malakian, and were designed to connect the two separate album covers. The first album, \"Mezmerize,\" was released on May 17, 2005, to favorable reviews by critics. It debuted at No. 1 in the United States, Canada, Australia and all around the world, making it System of a Down's second No. 1 album. First-week sales exceeded 800,000 copies worldwide. The lead single \"B.Y.O.B.\", which questions the integrity of military recruiting in America, worked its way up the Billboard Modern Rock and Mainstream Rock charts, and would go on to win the 2006 Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock Performance. \"Question!\" was released as the next single, with Shavo Odadjian co-directing the music video. Following the album's release, the band toured extensively throughout the United States and Canada with The Mars Volta and Bad Acid Trip supporting.\nThe second part of the double album, \"Hypnotize,\" was released on November 22, 2005. Like \"Mezmerize\", it debuted at No. 1 in the US. With this release, System of a Down joined The Beatles and rappers 2Pac and DMX as the fourth artist ever to have two studio albums debut at No. 1 in the same year. \"Hypnotize\" was released as the lead single and was followed by \"Lonely Day\" and \"Vicinity of Obscenity\", all three of which were also released as EPs, including several B-sides from 1999 to 2000, such as a collaboration with the Wu-Tang Clan, titled \"Shame\". \"Kill Rock 'N Roll\" was released as the final promotional single.\nWhereas on System of a Down's previous albums, most of the lyrics were written and sung by Tankian and the music was co-written by Tankian and Malakian (and sometimes Odadjian), much of the music and lyrics on \"Mezmerize\"/\"Hypnotize\" were written by Malakian, who also took on a much more dominant role as vocalist on both albums, often leaving Tankian providing keyboards and backing vocals.\nSystem of a Down's song \"Lonely Day\" was nominated for Best Hard Rock Performance in the 49th Grammy Awards in 2007 but lost to \"Woman\" by Wolfmother.\nA biography of the band entitled \"System of a Down: Right Here in Hollywood\", written by Ben Myers, was published in May 2006, later being published in the U.S. in 2007 through The Disinformation Company. Additionally in 2006, concert footage and interviews with the band concerning the importance of helping create awareness and recognition of the Armenian genocide were featured in the film \"Screamers,\" directed by Carla Garapedian. An interview with Tankian's grandfather, a survivor of the genocide, was also included in the film as well as Tankian's and Dolmayan's meeting with then-Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert during which the two musicians campaigned for the United States government's official recognition of the genocide. Footage of Tankian and Dolmayan marching with protesters outside the Turkish embassy in Washington, D.C., was also used in \"Screamers\".\nIn May 2006, the band announced they were going on hiatus. Malakian confirmed the break would probably last a few years, which Odadjian specified as a minimum of three years in an interview with \"Guitar\" magazine. He told MTV, \"We're not breaking up. If that was the case, we wouldn't be doing this Ozzfest. We're going to take a very long break after Ozzfest and do our own things. We've done System for over ten years, and I think it's healthy to take some rest.\" System of a Down's final performance before their separation took place on August 13, 2006, in West Palm Beach, Florida. \"Tonight will be the last show we play for a long time together,\" Malakian told the crowd during Sunday's last performance. \"We'll be back. We just don't know when.\"\nThe band members continued with their own projects; Malakian formed a band called Scars on Broadway, which was joined by Dolmayan. After one self-titled album, the project became dormant and Dolmayan left the band. It released the long-awaited sophomore album in 2018, titled \"Dictator\", under the name \"Daron Malakian and Scars on Broadway\". Dolmayan, alongside working with Scars on Broadway, formed his own band, Indicator. Dolmayan has also opened Torpedo Comics, an online comic bookstore. Odadjian pursued his project with RZA of Wu-Tang Clan, a hip-hop group named AcHoZeN, worked on his urSESSION website/record label and performed as a member of funk legend George Clinton's backing band. Meanwhile, Tankian opted for a solo career and released his debut solo album \"Elect the Dead\" in the autumn of 2007. He has continued releasing solo albums, recording them almost entirely by himself even after System of a Down had begun to reunite for tours.\nReunion and touring (2010\u20132020).\nOn November 29, 2010, following several weeks of Internet rumors, System of a Down officially announced that they would be reuniting for a string of large European festival dates in June 2011. Among the announced tour dates included UK's Download Festival, Switzerland's Greenfield Festival, Germany's Rock am Ring/Rock im Park, Sweden's Metaltown, Austria's Nova Rock Festival and Finland's Provinssirock. The reunion tour commenced on May 10, 2011, in Edmonton, Alberta. System's first tour through Mexico and South America began on September 28, 2011, in Mexico City, ending in Santiago, Chile on October 7, 2011. From late February to early March 2012, they headlined five dates at Soundwave festival. The band have continued playing around the world. On August 11 and 12, 2012, they played the Heavy MTL and Heavy T.O. music festivals in Montreal and Toronto respectively. In August 2013, System of a Down played at the UK's Reading and Leeds Festivals, among other festivals and venues that year.\nSystem of a Down played their only 2013 U.S. performance at the Hollywood Bowl on July 29; tickets sold out hours after going on sale on March 22. On November 23, 2014, System of a Down announced the Wake Up The Souls Tour to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the Armenian genocide. The tour included a free concert in Republic Square in Yerevan, Armenia, on April 23, 2015, their first show in the country.\nIn a November 2016 interview with \"Kerrang!\", drummer John Dolmayan revealed that System of a Down was working on more than a dozen songs for their follow-up to the \"Mezmerize\" and \"Hypnotize\" albums. Although he stated that the band does not know when the album will be released, he added that, \"I want everyone on board and feeling good about it. That's what we're trying to accomplish right now. There's a tremendous amount of pressure on us, though, because it's been 11 years\u2014at least 12 by the time it comes out.\"\nIn a video Q&amp;A session with fans on July 2, 2017, Shavo Odadjian was asked about the status of the next album and he responded, \"I'm waiting for a new album too. It's not happening. I don't know. I don't know when it's gonna be. Not right now.\" In a December 2017 interview with \"Rolling Stone\", Serj Tankian said that System of a Down wrote some new material but was uncertain of what to do with it. He then said that he doesn't want to commit to a new album due to the lack of committing to longform touring.\nMalakian singled Tankian out as the reason no new album had yet been released. Tankian detailed his view of the band's past and present conflicts and their overall situation, saying, \"As we couldn't see eye to eye on all these points we decided to put aside the idea of a record altogether for the time being.\" Dolmayan blamed all of the members due to the personal and creative differences that have been preventing them from recording a new studio album. Tankian also expressed uncertainty on whether the new album would be made or not but did not rule out the possibility. He went on to describe how he imagined the album sounding: \"It's gotta be organic, it's gotta feel right in every way.\"\nOdadjian said that the band has material written from \"like the last 10, 12 years\", but expressed uncertainty on if it would form into a System of a Down album or not. He also said that Malakian and Tankian have visual differences on what the album should sound like, and that the band's inner tension had been building far longer than fans would be aware, despite having love and respect for one another nonetheless. He would later say that there was no extant conflict between the members, expressing confidence that System of a Down would eventually record a new album and claimed that they have material written that would be their best to date. Tankian denied any talk of the band recording a new album.\nMalakian explained that there was a mixture between the matter of different creative perspectives for the band's hesitation to record a new studio album and the lack of desire to tour. He did not dismiss a possible new album in the more distant future. He felt that the fans don't care that the band wasn't making an album, \"but I think a lot of the fans just want an album.\" He expressed hopes that the members would get together and record new music but was content with the direction of his band Scars on Broadway, noting the members' good friendship, \"But at the same time, I don't see that happening anytime soon that we're all going to get together and make a new System of a Down album.\" Malakian said that Tankian and the rest of the band members have been unable to come to an agreement over how to go about making new music, but insisted that there was no negativity between them.\nDespite System of a Down's ability to perform live, Odadjian expressed disappointment at their inability to record new music, explaining that there has been new material written by the other members in the form of a possible new album. Without Tankian's presence, no recordings had been made. He questioned why the band still has not made an album, citing creative differences as the problem. With the lack of commitment to record new music, Tankian was open to releasing a collection of previously unreleased System of a Down songs from past recording sessions if his bandmates agreed.\nDolmayan had started in 2014 a Kickstarter to fund a cover project, titled \"These Grey Men\", alongside friend James Hazley. In 2020, he released the first single, a cover of Radiohead's \"Street Spirit\", on January 23. Avenged Sevenfold singer M. Shadows contributes vocals to the track; Tom Morello contributes the guitar solo at the song's close. The second single features Tankian in a cover of David Bowie's \"Starman\". The album, titled \"These Grey Men\", was released on February 28, 2020. It consists of covers/reimaginations of other songs by artists such as Radiohead, AFI, Madonna, and Talking Heads, among others.\nWith the differences concerning the band members, Dolmayan became uncertain in wanting to make new music anymore. Although he did not want to put Tankian and Malakian at fault for the band's inability to record a new album, he said, \"It takes four people to make this band, and it takes four people to unmake it. I think that we're all to blame. I could just blame Daron and Serj, because, quite frankly, they're the primary songwriters, so it's easy to blame them. But it's not just their fault. A lot of it is their fault, but it's not just their fault.\" In an interview, Dolmayan exclaimed that putting the band on hiatus was a grave mistake: \"I never wanted System to take a hiatus. I think it was a disastrous move for us because we never reached our peak.\" Dolmayan believed that the band could have risen through the charts if they had just kept going. On December 17, 2020, Serj Tankian announced in a \"Rolling Stone\" interview that he would release an EP by the name of \"Elasticity\" under his own name. Tankian had planned to release the EP in October. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, he released it in February 2021 instead. In the interview, he explained that the EP contains songs he had written for System of a Down that the band ultimately opted not to record.\nArtsakh benefit singles and possible sixth studio album (2020\u2013present).\nOn November 5, 2020, in response to the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War, System of a Down released their first songs in 15 years, \"Protect the Land\" and \"Genocidal Humanoidz\", both of which \"speak of a dire and serious war being perpetrated upon our cultural homelands of Artsakh and Armenia.\" Music videos were made for both singles, and \"Protect the Land\" marks the band's first music video in 14 years, since \"Lonely Day\". Proceeds from the songs were to help Armenia Fund and for humanitarian needs of displaced families from the war.\nAs for a possible new album, Dolmayan told \"Rolling Stone\", \"If it was up to me, we'd have a new album every three years. But things aren't up to me. I'm at the mercy of my team, and although I fought for it for many years with band members, I've accepted that it is what it is. We do have five albums and [now] two songs. We've accomplished a lot in our careers. If it ends at that, so be it.\" In the same interview, Malakian claimed that \"Protect the Land\" and \"Genocidal Humanoidz\" were originally going to be released under his own band Scars on Broadway. As the conflict came to fruition, System of a Down came back to release them instead. Malakian also said he does not see the band making new music anytime soon, saying that the singles were a \"one-off kind of thing\". Shavo Odadjian spoke with \"Wall of Sound\" in a follow-up interview discussing the conception of the songs, stating, \"It was amazing... Even though we have had our differences, when we're in there it's just like brothers making music together, like it all started.\" When asked if the two songs had inspired a new era of creativity for System of a Down, Tankian said to Triple J in December 2020, \"I don't know, because right now we're focused on what's going on in Armenia. There's a huge humanitarian catastrophe. We're still focused on raising funds, raising awareness about this. Time will tell whether this leads to something else or not.\"\nIn January 2023, Dolmayan claimed that Tankian \"hasn't really wanted to be in a band for a long time [...] and quite frankly, we probably should have parted ways around 2006. We tried to get together multiple times to make an album, but there were certain rules set in place that made it difficult to do so and maintain the integrity of what System of a Down stood for.\" Despite the major setback, he said the chemistry to play live together as a band is still great. On May 14 of the same year, System of a Down hosted their only live performance of 2023 as co-headliners of the Sick New World festival in Las Vegas.\nIn 2024, the band performed two gigs: in the former case, they made their second headline appearance in a row at Sick New World on April 27; in the latter one, they co-headlined (together with Deftones) a standalone concert at the Golden Gate Park in San Francisco, making it the first-ever ticketed concert to take place at the venue.\nIn May 2024, Tankian revealed in his memoir, \"Down with the System,\" that back when System of a Down was on hiatus in 2005, he offered to step down and suggested the band find a new vocalist due to his back injury and disinterest in touring. Although the band did audition an unnamed singer without Tankian's knowledge, they discarded the idea and continued onward with their original vocalist. In 2025, though, the band launched a tour called \"Wake Up!\", with dates in Latin America for the first time in ten years and a few US and Canada shows. They later announced a European Tour for 2026 along two Sick New World shows.\nIn February 2025, Malakian gave his thoughts about making a new System of a Down album.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I'm proud of the records. I don't live with any regret of anything like that, but it would have been nice to see where the band would have evolved if we kept putting music out. If we put out an album now, it's just so far away from [\"Hypnotize\" and \"Mezmerize\"], it doesn't continue the story to me. There was a time that [making a new System Of A Down record] might have been something I wanted. I'm not sure how much I want that anymore \u2014 I'm sure people won't be too happy to hear that from me. I'm not at the same place I was maybe 10 years ago.\"\u2014\u200a\nArtistry.\nLyrical themes.\nSystem of a Down's lyrics are often oblique or dadaist and have discussed topics such as drug abuse, politics and suicide. \"Prison Song\" criticizes the war on drugs whereas \"Rolling Stone\" describes \"Roulette\" as a \"scared, wounded love letter\". \"Boom!\", among the band's most straightforward and unambiguous songs, lambasts globalization and spending on bombs and armament. Commenting on the track \"I-E-A-I-A-I-O\", drummer John Dolmayan said it was inspired by an encounter he had with \"Knight Rider\"'s actor David Hasselhoff in a liquor store in Los Angeles when he was around 12. On \"Mezmerize\", \"Cigaro\" makes explicit references to phallic imagery and bureaucracy while \"Violent Pornography\" harshly views television and degradation of women. System of a Down's discontent toward the controversial Iraq War arises in \"B.Y.O.B.\", which is a double entendre reference to beer and bombs, containing the forthright lyric \"Why don't presidents fight the war? Why do they always send the poor?\", \"Old School Hollywood\" describes a celebrity baseball game. On their album \"Hypnotize\", \"Tentative\" describes war, \"Hypnotize\" refers to the Tiananmen Square events, and \"Lonely Day\" describes angst. The album title \"Steal This Album!\" is a play on the book \"Steal This Book\" by left-wing political activist Abbie Hoffman. System of a Down's firm commitment for the Armenian genocide to be recognized appears in two songs: \"P.L.U.C.K.\" and \"Holy Mountains\", which rank among the band's most political songs. It is widely accepted that System of a Down is a left wing band, as seen in their lyric choices.\nMusic.\nStephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic stated \"Like many late-'90s metal bands System of a Down struck a balance between '80s underground thrash metal and metallic early-'90s alternative rockers like Jane's Addiction\". System of a Down's music is influenced by elements of numerous styles, including alternative rock, art rock, classic rock, gothic rock, hip hop, jazz, various genres of metal including thrash metal and even Norwegian black metal, and Middle Eastern music. System of a Down's music has variously been termed alternative metal, nu metal, hard rock, progressive metal, heavy metal, thrash metal, art rock, and avant-garde metal.\nMalakian has stated that \"We don't belong to any one scene\" and that \"I don't like the nu-metal drop-A 7-string guitar sound; it is not my thing, at least not yet.\" In interview with Mike Lancaster, he also said, \"People always seem to feel the need to put us into a category, but we just don't fit into any category.\" According to Tankian, \"As far as arrangement and everything, [our music] is pretty much pop. To me, System of a Down isn't a progressive band. [...] But it's not a typical pop project, obviously. We definitely pay attention to the music to make sure that it's not something someone's heard before.\" Malakian once described their music \"as if Slayer and the Beatles had a baby.\"\nThe band has used a wide range of instruments, such as electric mandolins, baritone electric guitars, acoustic guitars, ouds, sitars, and twelve string guitars. According to Malakian, he would often write songs in E\u266d tuning, which would later be changed to drop C tuning in order to be performed by the band. Malakian states that \"For me, the drop-C tuning is right down the center. It has enough of the clarity and the crisp sound\u2014most of our riffy stuff is done on the top two strings, anyway\u2014but it's also thicker and ballsier.\"\nInfluences and comparison to other artists.\nSystem of a Down's influences include Middle Eastern music, Rush, Ozzy Osbourne, Black Sabbath, Led Zeppelin, Def Leppard, Scorpions, Morbid Angel, Death, Obituary, Eazy-E, N.W.A, Run-DMC, Umm Kulthum, Abdel Halim Hafez, The Kinks, the Bee Gees, Grateful Dead, The Beatles, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Dead Kennedys, Bauhaus, Depeche Mode, New Order, Radiohead, Metallica, Miles Davis, Alice in Chains, Iron Maiden, Bad Brains, Slayer, Van Halen, and Kiss. One reviewer claimed that their music encompasses different sounds, from sounding like \"Fugazi playing Rush\" to sometimes \"tread[ing] close to Frank Zappa territory.\" Malakian has stated that \"I'm a fan of music. I'm not necessarily a fan of any one band.\" Dolmayan stated \"I don't think we sound like anybody else. I consider us System of a Down.\" Odadjian stated \"You can compare us to whoever you want. I don't care. Comparisons and labels have no effect on this band. Fact is fact: We are who we are and they are who they are.\"\nLegacy and influence.\nSweden's former Prime Minister, Magdalena Andersson has stated that she is a fan of the band. In a 2012 interview with \"The Village Voice\", singer Morrissey stated that \"Lonely Day\" was the last song he absolutely loved. Rapper RZA, member of Wu-Tang Clan, selected \"Mezmerize\" as one of his favorite rock albums. \nIn 2002, Jack Black performed a cover of \"Chop Suey!\" on Channel [V] Australia. In an interview with \"Stereogum\", Tankian commented on various covers of \"Chop Suey!\", stating: \"One of my favorite ones is Jack Black's, when he just kind of makes shit up, and he's so great.\" In 2020, British music magazine \"Kerrang!\" ranked \"Chop Suey!\" as the band's greatest song. \nIn 2021, \"Kerrang!\" listed ten bands that, in their view, would not exist without System of a Down: Frank Carter and the Rattlesnakes, Maximum the Hormone, Portrayal of Guilt, Beartooth, Bad Acid Trip, AC\u00d7DC, American Standards, Avenged Sevenfold, Tesseract, and Viza.\nBand members.\nCurrent\nFormer\nTimeline\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28716", "revid": "50177707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28716", "title": "Smelting", "text": "Use of heat and a reducing agent to extract metal from ore\nSmelting is a process of applying heat and a chemical reducing agent to an ore to extract a desired base metal product. It is a form of extractive metallurgy that is used to obtain many metals such as iron, copper, silver, tin, lead, and zinc. Smelting uses heat and a chemical reducing agent to decompose the ore, driving off other elements as gases or slag and leaving the metal behind. The reducing agent is commonly a fossil-fuel source of carbon, such as carbon monoxide from incomplete combustion of coke\u2014or, in earlier times, of charcoal. The oxygen in the ore binds to carbon at high temperatures, as the chemical potential energy of the bonds in carbon dioxide (CO2) is lower than that of the bonds in the ore.\nSulfide ores such as those commonly used to obtain copper, zinc, or lead, are roasted before smelting in order to convert the sulfides to oxides, which are more readily reduced to the metal. Roasting heats the ore in the presence of oxygen from air, oxidizing the ore and liberating the sulfur as sulfur dioxide gas.\nSmelting most prominently takes place in a blast furnace to produce pig iron, which is converted into steel. Plants for the electrolytic reduction of aluminium are referred to as aluminium smelters.\nSmelters can be classified into two types depending on their business model; custom smelters and integrated smelters. A custom smelter is a smelter that treats ore on behalf of customers or buys ore for treatment. Custom smelters obtain ore concentrates from mines of different ownership. Integrated smelters depend directly on a specific mining operation and tend to be located next to a mine.\nProcess.\nSmelting involves more than just melting the metal out of its ore. Most ores are the chemical compound of the metal and other elements, such as oxygen (as an oxide), sulfur (as a sulfide), or carbon and oxygen together (as a carbonate). To extract the metal, workers must make these compounds undergo a chemical reaction. Smelting, therefore, consists of using suitable reducing substances that combine with those oxidizing elements to free the metal.\nRoasting.\nIn the case of sulfides and carbonates, a process called \"roasting\" removes the unwanted carbon or sulfur, leaving an oxide, which is more suitable for reduction to metal. Roasting is usually carried out in an oxidizing environment. A few practical examples:\nFor sulfide ores, roasting results in replacement of sulfide, partly or completely, by oxide. For molybdenum disulfide, the main ore of Mo, roasting proceeds as follows:\nReduction.\nReduction is the final, high-temperature step in smelting, in which the oxide becomes the elemental metal. A reducing environment (often provided by carbon monoxide, made by incomplete combustion in an air-starved furnace) pulls the final oxygen atoms from the raw metal. The carbon source acts as a chemical reactant to remove oxygen from the ore, yielding the purified metal element as a product. The carbon source is oxidized in two stages. First, carbon (C) combusts with oxygen (O2) in the air to produce carbon monoxide (CO). Second, the carbon monoxide reacts with the ore (e.g. Fe2O3) and removes one of its oxygen atoms, releasing carbon dioxide (CO2). After successive interactions with carbon monoxide, all of the oxygen in the ore will be removed, leaving the raw metal element (e.g. Fe). As most ores are impure, it is often necessary to use flux, such as limestone (or dolomite), to remove the accompanying rock gangue as slag. This calcination reaction emits carbon dioxide.\nThe required temperature varies both in absolute terms and in terms of the melting point of the base metal. Examples:\nFluxes.\nFluxes are materials added to the ore during smelting to catalyze the desired reactions and to chemically bind to unwanted impurities or reaction products. Calcium carbonate or calcium oxide in the form of lime are often used for this purpose, since they react with sulfur, phosphorus, and silicon impurities to allow them to be readily separated and discarded, in the form of slag. Fluxes may also serve to control the viscosity and neutralize unwanted acids.\nFlux and slag can provide a secondary service after the reduction step is complete; they provide a molten cover on the purified metal, preventing contact with oxygen while still hot enough to readily oxidize. This prevents impurities from forming in the metal.\nSulfide ores.\nThe ores of base metals are often sulfides. In recent centuries, reverberatory furnaces have been used to keep the charge being smelted separately from the fuel. Traditionally, they were used for the first step of smelting: forming two liquids, one an oxide slag containing most of the impurities, and the other a sulfide matte containing the valuable metal sulfide and some impurities. Such \"reverb\" furnaces are today about 40\u00a0meters long, 3\u00a0meters high, and 10\u00a0meters wide. Fuel is burned at one end to melt the dry sulfide concentrates (usually after partial roasting) which are fed through openings in the roof of the furnace. The slag floats over the heavier matte and is removed and discarded or recycled. The sulfide matte is then sent to the converter. The precise details of the process vary from one furnace to another depending on the mineralogy of the ore body.\nWhile reverberatory furnaces produced slags containing very little copper, they were relatively energy inefficient and off-gassed a low concentration of sulfur dioxide that was difficult to capture; a new generation of copper smelting technologies has supplanted them. More recent furnaces exploit bath smelting, top-jetting lance smelting, flash smelting, and blast furnaces. Some examples of bath smelters include the Noranda furnace, the Isasmelt furnace, the Teniente reactor, the Vunyukov smelter, and the SKS technology. Top-jetting lance smelters include the Mitsubishi smelting reactor. Flash smelters account for over 50% of the world's copper smelters. There are many more varieties of smelting processes, including the Kivset, Ausmelt, Tamano, EAF, and BF.\nHistory.\nOf the seven metals known in antiquity, only gold regularly occurs in nature as a native metal. The others \u2013 copper, lead, silver, tin, iron, and mercury \u2013 occur primarily as minerals, although native copper is occasionally found in commercially significant quantities. These minerals are primarily carbonates, sulfides, or oxides of the metal, mixed with other components such as silica and alumina. Roasting the carbonate and sulfide minerals in the air converts them to oxides. The oxides, in turn, are smelted into the metal. Carbon monoxide was (and is) the reducing agent of choice for smelting. It is easily produced during the heating process, and as a gas comes into intimate contact with the ore.\nIn the Old World, humans learned to smelt metals in prehistoric times, more than 8000 years ago. The discovery and use of the \"useful\" metals \u2013 copper and bronze at first, then iron a few millennia later \u2013 had an enormous impact on human society. The impact was so pervasive that scholars traditionally divide ancient history into Stone Age, Bronze Age, and Iron Age.\nIn the Americas, pre-Inca civilizations of the central Andes in Peru had mastered the smelting of copper and silver at least six centuries before the first Europeans arrived in the 16th century, while never mastering the smelting of metals such as iron for use with weapon craft.\nCopper and bronze.\nCopper was the first metal to be smelted. How the discovery came about is debated. Campfires are about 200\u00a0\u00b0C short of the temperature needed, so some propose that the first smelting of copper may have occurred in pottery kilns. (The development of copper smelting in the Andes, which is believed to have occurred independently of the Old World, may have occurred in the same way.)\nThe earliest current evidence of copper smelting, dating from between 5500\u00a0BC and 5000\u00a0BC, has been found in Plo\u010dnik and Belovode, Serbia. A mace head found in Turkey and dated to 5000\u00a0BC, once thought to be the oldest evidence, now appears to be hammered, native copper.\nCopper\u2013tin bronzes, harder, and more durable, were developed around 3500\u00a0BC, also in Asia Minor.\nAt present-day the direct product of copper smelters is anode copper which has a purity ranging from 98.5 to 99.8%. Anode copper can then be electrorefined to produce cathode copper with a purity of 99.99%.\nTin and lead.\nThe earliest known cast lead beads were thought to be in the \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck site in Anatolia (Turkey), and dated from about 6500\u00a0BC. However, recent research has discovered that this was not lead, but rather cerussite and galena, minerals rich in, but distinct from, lead.\nSince the discovery happened several millennia before the invention of writing, there is no written record of how it was made. However, tin and lead can be smelted by placing the ores in a wood fire, leaving the possibility that the discovery may have occurred by accident. Recent scholarship however has called this find into question.\nLead is a common metal, but its discovery had relatively little impact in the ancient world. It is too soft to use for structural elements or weapons, though its high density relative to other metals makes it ideal for sling projectiles. However, since it was easy to cast and shape, workers in the classical world of Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome used it extensively to pipe and store water. They also used it as a mortar in stone buildings.\nTin was much less common than lead, is only marginally harder, and had even less impact by itself.\nEarly iron smelting.\nThe earliest evidence for iron-making is a small number of iron fragments with the appropriate amounts of carbon admixture found in the Proto-Hittite layers at Kaman-Kaleh\u00f6y\u00fck and dated to 2200\u20132000\u00a0BC. Souckova-Siegolov\u00e1 (2001) shows that iron implements were made in Central Anatolia in very limited quantities around 1800 BC and were in general use by elites, though not by commoners, during the New Hittite Empire (~1400\u20131200 BC).\nArchaeologists have found indications of iron working in Ancient Egypt, somewhere between the Third Intermediate Period and 23rd Dynasty (ca. 1100\u2013750\u00a0BC). Significantly though, they have found no evidence of iron ore smelting in any (pre-modern) period. In addition, very early instances of carbon steel were in production around 2000 years ago (around the first-century.) in northwest Tanzania, based on complex preheating principles. These discoveries are significant for the history of metallurgy.\nMost early processes in Europe and Africa involved smelting iron ore in a bloomery, where the temperature is kept low enough so that the iron does not melt. This produces a spongy mass of iron called a bloom, which then must be consolidated with a hammer to produce wrought iron. Some of the earliest evidence to date for the bloomery smelting of iron is found at Tell Hammeh, Jordan, radiocarbon-dated to c.\u2009930 BC.\nLater iron smelting.\nFrom the medieval period, an indirect process began to replace the direct reduction in bloomeries. This used a blast furnace to make pig iron, which then had to undergo a further process to make forgeable bar iron. Processes for the second stage include fining in a finery forge. In the 13th century during the High Middle Ages the blast furnace was introduced by China, which had been using it since as early as 200 b.c during the Qin dynasty. https:// Puddling was also introduced in the Industrial Revolution.\nBoth processes are now obsolete, and wrought iron is now rarely made. Instead, mild steel is produced from a Bessemer converter or by other means including smelting reduction processes such as the Corex Process.\nEnvironmental and occupational health impacts.\nSmelting has serious effects on the environment, producing wastewater and slag and releasing such toxic metals as copper, silver, iron, cobalt, and selenium into the atmosphere. Smelters also release gaseous sulfur dioxide, contributing to acid rain, which acidifies soil and water.\nThe smelter in Flin Flon, Canada was one of the largest point sources of mercury in North America in the 20th century. Even after smelter releases were drastically reduced, landscape re-emission continued to be a major regional source of mercury. Lakes will likely receive mercury contamination from the smelter for decades, from both re-emissions returning as rainwater and leaching of metals from the soil.\nAir pollution.\nAir pollutants generated by aluminium smelters include carbonyl sulfide, hydrogen fluoride, polycyclic compounds, lead, nickel, manganese, polychlorinated biphenyls, and mercury. Copper smelter emissions include arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, lead, manganese, and nickel. Lead smelters typically emit arsenic, antimony, cadmium, and various lead compounds.\nWastewater.\nWastewater pollutants discharged by iron and steel mills includes gasification products such as benzene, naphthalene, anthracene, cyanide, ammonia, phenols, and cresols, together with a range of more complex organic compounds known collectively as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). Treatment technologies include recycling of wastewater; settling basins, clarifiers and filtration systems for solids removal; oil skimmers and filtration; chemical precipitation and filtration for dissolved metals; carbon adsorption and biological oxidation for organic pollutants; and evaporation.\nPollutants generated by other types of smelters varies with the base metal ore. For example, aluminum smelters typically generate fluoride, benzo(a)pyrene, antimony, and nickel, as well as aluminum. Copper smelters typically discharge cadmium, lead, zinc, arsenic, and nickel, in addition to copper. Lead smelters may discharge antimony, asbestos, cadmium, copper, and zinc, in addition to lead.\nHealth impacts.\nLabourers working in the smelting industry have reported respiratory illnesses inhibiting their ability to perform the physical tasks demanded by their jobs.\nRegulations.\nIn the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency has published pollution control regulations for smelters.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28718", "revid": "29421082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28718", "title": "Scud", "text": ""}
{"id": "28720", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28720", "title": "Schiphol", "text": ""}
{"id": "28721", "revid": "44641411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28721", "title": "Amsterdam Airport Schiphol", "text": "Major airport in the Netherlands\nAmsterdam Airport Schiphol (), known informally as Schiphol Airport (, ), is the main international airport of the Netherlands, and is one of the major hubs for the SkyTeam airline alliance. It is located southwest of Amsterdam, in the municipality of Haarlemmermeer in the province of North Holland. It was the world's fifth busiest airport by international passenger traffic in 2024. With almost 72 million passengers in 2019, it is the third-busiest airport in Europe in terms of passenger volume and the busiest in Europe in terms of aircraft movements. With an annual cargo tonnage of 1.74 million, it is the 4th busiest in Europe. AMS covers a total area of of land. The airport is built on the single-terminal concept: one large terminal split into three departure halls.\nSchiphol is the principal hub for KLM and its regional affiliate KLM Cityhopper as well as for Martinair. The airport also serves as an operating base for Corendon Dutch Airlines, easyJet, Transavia, TUI fly Netherlands, and Vueling. \nSchiphol opened on 16 September 1916 as a military airbase. The end of the First World War also saw the beginning of civilian use of Schiphol Airport and the airport eventually lost its military role completely. By 1940, Schiphol had four asphalt runways at 45-degree angles. The airport was captured by the German military that same year and renamed \"Fliegerhorst Schiphol\". The airport was destroyed through bombing but at the end of the war, the airfield was soon rebuilt. In 1949, it was decided that Schiphol was to become the primary airport of the Netherlands. Schiphol Airport was voted the Best Airport in Western Europe in 2020.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Sciphol\" appears in an official document from 1447. According to the airport's media department, the name of Schiphol might have several origins, all contested:\nDescription.\nSchiphol Airport ranked as Europe's third busiest and the world's eleventh busiest by total passenger traffic in 2017 (12th in 2016, 14th in 2015, 2014 and 2013 and 16th in 2012). It also ranks as the world's fifth busiest by international passenger traffic and the world's sixteenth busiest for cargo tonnage. A record 71,706,999 passengers passed through the airport in 2019. Schiphol's main competitors in terms of passenger traffic and cargo throughput are London Heathrow, Frankfurt, Madrid, Paris\u2013Charles de Gaulle and Istanbul.\nIn 2019, 70.5% of passengers using the airport flew to and from Europe, 10.6% to and from North America and 10.1% to and from Asia; cargo volume was mainly between Schiphol and Asia (46.3%) and North America (17.6%). In 2019, 102 carriers provided a total of 332 destinations on a regular basis. As of 2024, Amsterdam Airport Schiphol handled over 66.8 million passengers annually, reinforcing its status as one of Europe's largest aviation hubs.\nThe airport is built as one large terminal (a single-terminal concept), split into three departure halls, which connect again once airside. The most recent of these was completed in 1994 and expanded in 2007 with a new section, called Terminal\u00a04, although it is not considered a separate building. A new pier is to be opened in 2019 with a terminal extension planned to be operational by 2023. Plans for further terminal and gate expansion exist, including the construction of a separate new terminal between the Zwanenburgbaan and Polderbaan runways that would end the one-terminal concept.\nBecause of intense traffic and high landing fees (due to the limit of 500,000 flights a year), some low-cost carriers decided to move their flights to smaller airports, such as Rotterdam The Hague Airport and Eindhoven Airport. Many low-cost carriers, such as EasyJet and Ryanair, however, continue to operate at Schiphol, using the low-cost H\u00a0pier. In 2015, Lelystad Airport was allowed to expand, aimed at accommodating some of the low-cost and leisure flights currently operating out of Schiphol, eventually taking up to 45,000 flights a year.\nTo combat complaints from the community in Schiphol, Amsterdam Airport is advocating the prohibition of private jets, with the aim of minimizing noise and environmental pollution. The airport also intends to restrict takeoffs between midnight and 6 a.m. and landings between midnight and 5 a.m.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nBefore 1852, the entire polder of Haarlemmermeer in which the airport lies was a large lake with some shallow areas. There are multiple stories of how the place got its name. The most popular story is that in the shallow waters, sudden violent storms could claim many ships. Winds were particularly strong in the Schiphol area since the prevailing wind direction is from the southwest, and Schiphol lies in the northeastern corner of the lake. In English, translates to 'ship hole', a reference to many ships supposedly lost in the lake. When the lake was reclaimed, however, no shipwrecks were found. Another possible origin of the name is the word . A is a ditch or small canal in which ships would be towed from one lake to another. A third explanation would be that the name is derived from the words . This is a low-lying area of land () from where wood would be obtained to build ships.\nAfter the lake was dredged in the mid-1800s, a fortification named Fort Schiphol was built in the area which was part of the Stelling van Amsterdam defence works.\nSchiphol opened on 16 September 1916 as a military airbase, with a few barracks and a field serving as platform and runways. When civil aircraft started to use the field (17 December 1920), it was often called . The Fokker aircraft manufacturer started a factory near Schiphol airport in 1919. The end of the First World War also saw the beginning of civilian use of Schiphol Airport and the airport eventually lost its military role completely.\nBy 1940, Schiphol had four asphalt runways at 45-degree angles, all or less. One was extended to become today's runway 04/22; two others crossed that runway at . The airport was captured by the German military that same year and renamed . A large number of anti-aircraft defences were installed in the vicinity of the airport and fake decoy airfields were constructed in the vicinity near Bennebroek, Vijfhuizen, and Vogelenzang to try to confuse Allied bombers. A railway connection was also built. Despite these defences, the airfield was still bombed intensively; an exceptionally heavy attack on 13 December 1943 caused so much damage that it rendered the airfield unusable as an active base. After that, it served only as an emergency landing field, until the Germans themselves destroyed the remnants of the airfield at the start of Operation Market Garden. At the end of the war, the airfield was quickly restored: the first aircraft, a Douglas DC-3, landed on 8 July 1945.\nA new terminal building was completed in 1949 and it was decided that Schiphol was to become the primary airport of the Netherlands. The expansion came at the cost of a small town called Rijk, which was demolished to make room for the growing airport. The name of this town is remembered in the name of the present Schiphol-Rijk industrial estate. In 1967, Schiphol expanded even further with a new terminal area at its current location. Most of the 1967 terminal is still in use today (Departure Halls 1 and 2), as are parts of the original piers (now called C, D, and E). Dutch designer Benno Wissing created signage for Schiphol Airport, well known for its clear writing and thorough colour-coding; to avoid confusion, he prohibited any other signage in the shades of yellow and green used. The new terminal building replaced the older facilities once located on what is now the east side of the airport. The A-pier (now C-pier) of the airport was modified in 1970 to allow Boeing 747 aircraft to use the boarding gates. A new pier (D, now called F) opened in 1977, dedicated to handling wide-body aircraft. The first railway station at the airport followed in 1978.\nDevelopment since the 1990s.\nThe construction of a new air traffic control tower was completed in 1991 as the existing tower could no longer oversee all of the airport as it was further expanded. Departure Hall 3 was added to the terminal in 1993, as was another pier, G-pier. New wayfinding signage was designed that year as well by Paul Mijksenaar. A sixth runway was completed at quite some distance west of the rest of airport in 2003 and was nicknamed the Polderbaan, with the connecting taxiway bridge crossing the A5 motorway. The distance of this runway means that taxiing to and from this runway can take between 10 and 20 minutes. It also required the construction of an additional air traffic control tower as the primary tower is too far away to oversee this part of the airfield.\nOn 25 February 2005, a diamond robbery occurred at Schiphol's cargo terminal. The robbers used a stolen KLM van to gain airside access. The estimated value of the stones was around 75\u00a0million euros, making it one of the largest diamond robberies ever.\nLater in 2005, a fire broke out at the airport's detention centre, killing 11 people and injuring 15. The complex was holding 350 people at the time of the incident. Results from the investigation almost one year later showed that fire safety precautions were not in force. A national outrage resulted in the resignation of Justice Minister Piet Hein Donner (CDA) and Mayor Hartog of Haarlemmermeer. Spatial Planning Minister Sybilla Dekker (VVD) resigned as well because she bore responsibility for safety failings cited in the report.\nIn the summer of 2022, the airport suffered the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on commercial air transport. It experienced extraordinarily long delays and a large number of cancelled flights, which led to a recession of air traffic and subsequently to a shortage of security staff and a walkout of baggage handlers. Queues for security check-in were reported to last for 5 hours, and many passengers missed their flights. The CEO of Schiphol Group, Dick Benschop, was forced to resign.\nIn 2024, Schiphol experienced substantial growth, with an 8% increase in passenger traffic and an 8.2% rise in cargo volume compared to 2023. This surge prompted Schiphol Group to announce a \u20ac6 billion infrastructure investment plan covering the 2024\u20132029 period. Key projects include the renovation of Pier C, an overhaul of the baggage handling system, enhancements to climate-control systems, and the construction of additional aircraft stands and taxiways. The airport is also developing a new Pier A, scheduled to open in 2027.\nInfrastructure.\nTerminal.\nSchiphol uses a one-terminal concept, where all facilities are located under a single roof, radiating from the central plaza, Schiphol Plaza. The terminal is divided into three sections or halls designated 1, 2 and 3. The piers and concourses of each hall are connected so that it is possible, on both sides of security or border inspection, to walk between piers and halls, although border control separates Schengen from non-Schengen areas. The exception to this is the low-cost pier M: once airside (past security), passengers cannot access any other areas.\nSchiphol Airport has approximately 223 boarding gates including eighteen double jetway gates used for widebody aircraft. The airport adopted a distinctive design, with the second jetway extending over the aircraft wing hanging from a steel cantilever structure. Gradual refurbishments have seen these jetways replaced with a more conventional layout with the last two taken out of use in November 2024. Three gates have been modified to accommodate the Airbus A380. Emirates was the first airline to fly the A380 to Schiphol in August 2012, deploying the aircraft on its double daily Dubai\u2013Amsterdam service. China Southern Airlines also used the A380 on its Beijing\u2013Amsterdam route before removing the type from service at the end of 2022, leaving Emirates as the sole A380 operator at Schiphol Airport as of 2023.\nSchiphol has large shopping areas, primarily on the ground floor, as a source of revenue and as an additional attraction for passengers. Schiphol Plaza not only connects the three terminal halls but also houses other facilities. This is a large pre-security shopping centre and the Schiphol Airport railway station. These facilities are also attracting general visitors.\nThe 1st floor hosts the luggage check-in lines, many of them automated, as well as various duty-free refund booths. Available seating is limited on this floor.\nNotable public artworks in the airport include the Schiphol clock by Maarten Baas, in which a man behind a translucent screen appears to paint the minutes of an analog clock by hand.\nDeparture Hall 1.\nDeparture Hall 1 consists of Piers B and C, both of which are dedicated Schengen areas and share D-pier with Departure Hall 2. Pier B has 14 gates and Pier C has 21 gates.\nDeparture Hall 2.\nDeparture Hall 2 consists of Piers D and E.\nPier D is the largest pier and has two levels. The lower floor houses non-Schengen flights and the upper floor is used for Schengen flights. By using stairs, the same jetways are used to access the aircraft. Schengen gates are numbered beginning with D-59; non-Schengen gates are numbered from D-1 to D-57.\nPier E is a dedicated non-Schengen area and has fourteen gates. It is typically home to SkyTeam hub airlines Delta Air Lines and KLM, along with other members, such as China Airlines and China Southern Airlines. Other Middle Eastern and Asian airlines such as Air Astana, EVA Air, Etihad Airways and Iran Air also typically operate out of Pier E.\nDeparture Hall 3.\nDeparture Hall 3 consists of three piers: F, G, and H/M. Pier F has eight gates and is typically dominated by SkyTeam members such as primary airline KLM, Kenya Airways, China Airlines, China Southern Airlines, and other members. Pier G has thirteen gates. Piers F and G are non-Schengen areas.\nPiers H and M are physically one concourse consisting of seven shared gates and are home to low-cost airlines. Operating completely separately, H handles non-Schengen flights while M is dedicated to flights within the Schengen area.\nA380.\nGates G9, E18 and E24 (E24 refurbished in 2019) are equipped to handle daily Airbus A380 service by Emirates. China Southern Airlines also operated the type before withdrawing it from service at the end of 2022, leaving Emirates as the only A380 operator at Schiphol as of 2023.\nGeneral aviation terminal.\nA new general aviation terminal was opened in 2011 on the east side of the airport, operated as the \"KLM Jet Center\". The new terminal building has a floorspace of ; for the actual terminal and lounges, for office space and for parking.\nThe centre and its activities were sold to the Swiss company Jet Aviation in October 2018 and was rebranded as Jet Aviation Amsterdam.\nOther facilities.\nThe Rijksmuseum operates an annex at the airport, offering a small overview of both classical and contemporary art. Admission to the exhibits is free, but requires a plane ticket as it is situated in the passenger transit zone.\nIn the summer of 2010, Schiphol Airport Library opened alongside the museum, providing passengers access to a collection of 1,200 books (translated into 29 languages) by Dutch authors on subjects relating to the country's history and culture. The library offers e-books and music by Dutch artists and composers that can be downloaded free of charge to a laptop or mobile device.\nFor aviation enthusiasts, Amsterdam Airport Schiphol has a large rooftop viewing area, called the Panoramaterras. It is not accessible to connecting passengers unless they first exit the airport. Enthusiasts and the public can enter, free of charge, from the airport's landside. Since June 2011, it is the location for a KLM Cityhopper Fokker 100, modified to be a viewing exhibit. Besides the Panoramaterras, Schiphol has other spotting sites, especially along the newest Polderbaan runway and at the McDonald's restaurant at the north side of the airport.\nSchiphol has its own mortuary, where the dead can be handled and kept before departure or after arrival.\nBetween October 2006 and 2019, people could also hold a wedding ceremony at Schiphol.\nSchiphol also has a new state-of-the-art cube-shaped Hilton Amsterdam Airport Schiphol with 433 rooms, rounded corners and diamond-shaped windows. The spacious atrium has a ceiling made of glass and is in the heart of the building. A covered walkway connects the hotel directly to the terminal. The hotel was completed in 2015.\nIn line with its sustainability objectives, Schiphol introduced a new fleet of 52 electric shuttle buses in 2024 to reduce emissions and improve passenger transport on the apron. Additionally, a 5,000 square meter expansion of Lounge 1 was completed in November 2024, offering travelers an upgraded space incorporating natural elements and improved amenities.https://\nFuture expansions.\nPier A.\nIn 2012, Schiphol Group announced an expansion of Schiphol, featuring a new pier. Pier A will be part of Departure Hall 1, which already has Pier B (14 gates) and Pier C (21 gates). The new Pier A will have five narrow-body gates and will initially have three wide-body gates, with two more planned for a later phase. The new Pier A is under construction to the southwest of Pier B, in an area formerly used as a freight platform. Pier A is planned to be mainly used for flights within Europe. The expansions were originally supposed to cost about 500\u00a0million Euro.\nThe first construction activities were originally expected to start in 2017 with an estimated opening in 2019. However, the construction of the new pier has been delayed several times and due to a conflict between the airport and the construction consortium, the construction was halted in November 2021. Schiphol was disappointed in the construction speed and the rising of the total cost, although insiders announced that a design flaw was made and the entire construction needed to be reinforced. A new tendering procedure was started to find a new constructor in 2022, once found a new completion date will be announced.\nFourth terminal hall.\nTo handle future growth in passengers, Schiphol will further expand by building a fourth terminal hall with facilities for both departures and arrivals. From this new building, direct access will be made to Schiphol Plaza, continuing the one-terminal concept. When finished in 2023, Schiphol will be able to handle over 70\u00a0million passengers. Due to rapid growth of Schengen passengers during 2016, Schiphol was however forced to rapidly build a temporary departure hall which opened in March 2017. Due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic the construction of the fourth terminal hall has been postponed for at least two years.\nUniform platform.\nThe airport has expanded the number of uniform platforms, and places to stow airplanes, in recent years in two phases. A third phase is planned to expand the number of wide-body platforms to a total of twelve, with planned completion in the period 2022\u20132026.\nPublic transportation.\nSchiphol, together with the public transport authority Amsterdam, is going to transform its train- and bus station. The train station will be getting more entrances and the bus station will be completely renewed with a planned opening date in 2025. A connection to the Amsterdam Metro network has been a subject of discussion and speculation since at least the 1990s. In preparation for this, a piece of land has been acquired from Chipshol. As of 2022[ [update]], the project had not moved past the proposal stage.\nAirlines.\nSchiphol's growth is hampered by slot restrictions from the government. For reasons of safety and noise reduction, Schiphol was allowed to have no more than 500,000 aircraft movements until the end of 2020. A proposal to increase the limit to 540,000 movements from 2021 onwards was postponed until a new government was formed after the elections in March 2021. As Schiphol nearly approached the limit of 500,000 in the last few years, the slot restrictions have hindered airlines to settle at Schiphol. Among airlines that have expressed interest in flying at Schiphol are Atlantic Airways, Cyprus Airways, Somon Air and SpiceJet.\nTower.\nThe Schiphol air traffic control tower, with a height of , was the tallest in the world when constructed in 1991. Schiphol is geographically one of the world's lowest major commercial airports. The entire airport is below sea level. The lowest point sits at below sea level: below the Dutch Normaal Amsterdams Peil (NAP). The runways are around below NAP. It is one of only eleven airports worldwide below sea level, the fifth lowest with scheduled flights, and the third lowest with international flights.\nRunways.\nSchiphol has six runways, one of which is used mainly by general aviation. The airport covers a total area of of land.\nAirlines and destinations.\nPassenger.\nThe following airlines operate regular scheduled and charter flights to and from Amsterdam:\nOther users.\nOther regular users of Schiphol are the Netherlands Coastguard whose aircraft are operated by the Royal Netherlands Air Force, the Dienst Luchtvaart Politie and the Dutch Dakota Association.\nOperational peaks.\nTypical peak moments at Schiphol Airport are between 09:00 and 11:00, and between 13:00 and 15:00 for departures, with up to 58 departures between 14:00 and 15:00 on a typical weekday (a departure nearly every minute). The peak moment for arrivals is between 08:00 and 09:00 (with up to 52 arrivals on a weekday).\nOther facilities.\nThe TransPort Building on the Schiphol Airport property houses the head offices of Martinair and transavia. Construction of the building, which has of rentable space, began on 17 March 2009. Schiphol Group and the architect firm Paul de Ruiter designed the building, while construction firm De Vries &amp; Verburg constructed the building.\nThe World Trade Center Schiphol Airport houses the head office of SkyTeam, local offices of China Southern Airlines and Iran Air.\nThe head office of Schiphol Group, the airport's operator, is located on the airport property.\nThe original control tower of Schiphol Airport, which the airport authorities had moved slightly from its original location, now houses a restaurant.\nThe area Schiphol-Rijk includes the head office of TUI fly Netherlands.\nAt one time, KLM had its head office briefly on the grounds of Schiphol Airport. Its current head office in nearby Amstelveen had a scheduled completion at the end of 1970. Previously Martinair had its head office in the Schiphol Center () at Schiphol Airport. Formerly, the head office of Transavia was in the Building Triport III at Schiphol Airport. NLM Cityhopper and later KLM Cityhopper previously had their head offices in Schiphol Airport building 70.\nThe Convair Building, with its development beginning after a parcel was earmarked for its development in 1999, houses various KLM offices, including KLM Recruitment Services and the head office of KLM Cityhopper.\nNippon Cargo Airlines has its Europe regional headquarters at Schiphol. The National Aerospace Museum Aviodome\u2013Schiphol was previously located at Schiphol.\nThere used to be an aviation museum, but in 2003, it moved to Lelystad Airport and was renamed the \"Aviodrome.\"\nIn early 2025, Schiphol secured a \u20ac400 million loan from the European Investment Bank to support its infrastructure and sustainability initiatives, marking one of the largest financial investments in the airport\u2019s recent history.\nGround transport.\nRail.\nThe (NS), the national Dutch train operator, has a major passenger railway station directly underneath the passenger terminal complex that offers transportation 24 hours a day into the four major cities Amsterdam, Utrecht, The Hague and Rotterdam. There are efficient and often direct services to many other cities in the country. There are intercity connections to Almere, Lelystad, Amsterdam Centraal, Utrecht Centraal, both The Hague Centraal and The Hague HS, Rotterdam Centraal, Eindhoven Centraal, 's-Hertogenbosch, Leeuwarden, Groningen, Amersfoort Centraal, Apeldoorn, Deventer, Enschede, Arnhem Centraal, Nijmegen and Venlo. Schiphol is also a stop for the Eurostar international high-speed train (formerly known as Thalys), connecting the airport directly to Antwerp, Brussels and Paris Gare du Nord, as well as to Bourg St Maurice (winter) and Marseille (summer). The Intercity-Brussel (also named the \"Beneluxtrein\") to Antwerp and Brussels stops at the airport.\nBus.\nAmsterdam Airport Schiphol is also easily accessible by bus, as many services call or terminate at the bus station located in front of the terminal building.\nEVA Air provides private bus services from Schiphol to Belgium for its Belgium-based customers. The service goes to Saint-Gilles, Brussels (near the Brussels-South (Midi) railway station) and Berchem, Antwerp (near Antwerp-Berchem bus station). The service is operated by Reizen Lauwers NV on behalf of EVA Air.\nKLM also runs bus services from Schiphol to Maastricht railway station via Eindhoven Airport and Maastricht Airport\nRoad.\nSchiphol Airport can easily be reached by car via the A4 and A9 motorways.\nWhile most roads leading to the airport are forbidden for bicycles, it is possible to reach the airport by bicycle via bicycle paths.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited reference.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
