{"id": "23678", "revid": "50671937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23678", "title": "Panspermia", "text": "Hypothesis on the interstellar spreading of primordial life\nPanspermia (from grc \" \"\u03c0\u1fb6\u03bd\" (pan)\"\u00a0'all' and \" \"\u03c3\u03c0\u03ad\u03c1\u03bc\u03b1\" (sperma)\"\u00a0'seed') is the hypothesis that life exists throughout the universe, distributed by cosmic dust, meteoroids, asteroids, comets, and planetoids, as well as by spacecraft carrying unintended contamination by microorganisms, known as directed panspermia. The theory argues that life did not originate on Earth, but instead evolved somewhere else and seeded life as we know it.\nPanspermia comes in many forms, such as radiopanspermia, lithopanspermia, and directed panspermia. Regardless of its form, the theories generally propose that microbes able to survive in outer space (such as certain types of bacteria or plant spores) can become trapped in debris ejected into space after collisions between planets and small Solar System bodies that harbor life. This debris containing the lifeforms is then transported by meteors between bodies in a planetary system, or even across planetary systems within a galaxy. In this way, panspermia studies concentrate not on how life began but on methods that may distribute it within the Universe. This point is often used as a criticism of the theory.\nPanspermia is a fringe theory with little support amongst mainstream scientists. Critics argue that it does not answer the question of the origin of life but merely places it on another celestial body. It is further criticized because it cannot be tested experimentally. Historically, disputes over the merit of this theory centered on whether life is ubiquitous or emergent throughout the Universe. The theory maintains support today, with some work being done to develop mathematical treatments of how life might migrate naturally throughout the Universe. Its long history lends itself to extensive speculation and hoaxes that have arisen from meteoritic events.\nIn contrast, pseudo-panspermia is the well-supported hypothesis that many of the small organic molecules used for life originated in space, and were distributed to planetary surfaces.\nHistory.\nPanspermia has a history dating back to the 5th century BCE and the natural philosopher Anaxagoras. Classicists came to agree that Anaxagoras maintained the Universe (or Cosmos) was full of life, and that life on Earth started from the fall of these extra-terrestrial seeds. Panspermia as it is known today, however, is not identical to this original theory. The name, as applied to this theory, was only first coined in 1908 by Svante Arrhenius, a Swedish scientist. Prior to this, since around the 1860s, many prominent scientists were becoming interested in the theory. More recent advocates include Sir Fred Hoyle, and Chandra Wickramasinghe.\nIn the 1860s, there were three scientific developments that began to bring the focus of the scientific community to the problem of the origin of life. Firstly, the Kant-Laplace Nebular theory of solar system and planetary formation was gaining favor, and implied that when the Earth first formed, the surface conditions would have been inhospitable to life as we know it. This meant that life could not have evolved parallel with the Earth, and must have evolved at a later date, without biological precursors. Secondly, Charles Darwin's famous theory of evolution implied some elusive origin, because in order for something to evolve, it must start somewhere. In his \"Origin of Species\", Darwin was unable or unwilling to touch on this issue. Third and finally, Louis Pasteur and John Tyndall experimentally disproved the (now superseded) theory of spontaneous generation, which suggested that life was \"constantly\" evolving from non-living matter and did not have a common ancestor, as suggested by Darwin's theory of evolution.\nAltogether, these three developments in science presented the wider scientific community with a seemingly paradoxical situation regarding the origin of life: life must have evolved from non-biological precursors after the Earth was formed, and yet spontaneous generation as a theory had been experimentally disproved. From here, is where the study of the origin of life branched. Those who accepted Pasteur's rejection of spontaneous generation began to develop the theory that under (unknown) conditions on a primitive Earth, life must have gradually evolved from organic material. This theory became known as abiogenesis, and is the currently accepted one. On the other side of this are those scientists of the time who rejected Pasteur's results and instead supported the idea that life on Earth came from existing life. This necessarily requires that life has always existed somewhere on some planet, and that it has a mechanism of transferring between planets. Thus, the modern treatment of panspermia began in earnest.\nLord Kelvin, in a presentation to The British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1871, proposed the idea that similarly to how seeds can be transferred through the air by winds, so can life be brought to Earth by the infall of a life-bearing meteorite. He further proposed the idea that life can only come from life, and that this principle is invariant under philosophical uniformitarianism, similar to how matter can neither be created nor destroyed. This argument was heavily criticized because of its boldness, and additionally due to technical objections from the wider community. In particular, Johann Zollner from Germany argued against Kelvin by saying that organisms carried in meteorites to Earth would not survive the descent through the atmosphere due to friction heating.\nThe arguments went back and forth until Svante Arrhenius gave the theory its modern treatment and designation. Arrhenius argued against abiogenesis on the basis that it had no experimental foundation at the time, and believed that life had always existed somewhere in the Universe. He focused his efforts of developing the mechanism(s) by which this pervasive life may be transferred through the Universe. At this time, it was recently discovered that solar radiation can exert pressure, and thus force, on matter. Arrhenius thus concluded that it is possible that very small organisms such as bacterial spores could be moved around due to this radiation pressure.\nAt this point, panspermia as a theory now had a potentially viable transport mechanism, as well as a vehicle for carrying life from planet to planet. The theory still faced criticism mostly due to doubts about how long spores would actually survive under the conditions of their transport from one planet, through space, to another. Despite all the emphasis placed on trying to establish the scientific legitimacy of this theory, it still lacked testability; that was and still is a serious problem the theory has yet to overcome.\nSupport for the theory persisted, however, with Fred Hoyle and Chandra Wickramasinghe using two reasons for why an extra-terrestrial origin of life might be preferred. First is that required conditions for the origin of life may have been more favorable somewhere other than Earth, and second that life on Earth exhibits properties that are not accounted for by assuming an endogenic origin. Hoyle studied spectra of interstellar dust, and came to the conclusion that space contained large amounts of organics, which he suggested were the building blocks of the more complex chemical structures. Critically, Hoyle argued that this chemical evolution was unlikely to have taken place on a prebiotic Earth, and instead the most likely candidate is a comet. Furthermore, Hoyle and Wickramasinghe concluded that the evolution of life requires a large increase in genetic information and diversity, which might have resulted from the influx of viral material from space via comets. Hoyle reported (in a lecture at Oxford on January 16, 1978) a pattern of coincidence between the arrival of major epidemics and the occasions of close encounters with comets, which lead Hoyle to suggest that the epidemics were a direct result of material raining down from these comets. This claim in particular garnered criticism from biologists.\nSince the 1970s, a new era of planetary exploration meant that data could be used to test panspermia and potentially transform it from conjecture to a testable theory. Though it has yet to be tested, panspermia is still explored today in some mathematical treatments, and as its long history suggests, the appeal of the theory has stood the test of time.\nOverview.\nCore requirements.\nPanspermia requires:\nThe creation and distribution of organic molecules from space is now uncontroversial; it is known as pseudo-panspermia. The jump from organic materials to life originating from space, however, is hypothetical and currently untestable.\nTransport vessels.\nBacterial spores and plant seeds are two common proposed vessels for panspermia. According to the theory, they could be encased in a meteorite and transported to another planet from their origin, subsequently descend through the atmosphere and populate the surface with life (see lithopanspermia below). This naturally requires that these spores and seeds have formed somewhere else, maybe even in space in the case of how panspermia deals with bacteria. Understanding of planetary formation theory and meteorites has led to the idea that some rocky bodies originating from undifferentiated parent bodies could be able to generate local conditions conducive to life. Hypothetically, internal heating from radiogenic isotopes could melt ice to provide water as well as energy. In fact, some meteorites have been found to show signs of aqueous alteration which may indicate that this process has taken place. Given that there are such large numbers of these bodies found within the Solar System, an argument can be made that they each provide a potential site for life to develop. A collision occurring in the asteroid belt could alter the orbit of one such site, and eventually deliver it to Earth.\nPlant seeds can be an alternative transport vessel. Some plants produce seeds that are resistant to the conditions of space, which have been shown to lie dormant in extreme cold, vacuum, and resist short wavelength UV radiation. They are not typically proposed to have originated in space, but on another planet. Theoretically, even if a plant is partially damaged during its travel in space, the pieces could still seed life in a sterile environment. Sterility of the environment is relevant because it is unclear if the novel plant could out-compete existing life forms. This idea is based on previous evidence showing that cellular reconstruction can occur from cytoplasms released from damaged algae. Furthermore, plant cells contain obligate endosymbionts, which could be released into a new environment.\nThough both plant seeds and bacterial spores have been proposed as potentially viable vehicles, their ability to not only survive in space for the required time, but also survive atmospheric entry is debated.\nSpace probes may be a viable transport mechanism for interplanetary cross-pollination within the Solar System. Space agencies have implemented planetary protection procedures to reduce the risk of planetary contamination, but microorganisms such as \"Tersicoccus phoenicis\" may be resistant to spacecraft assembly cleaning.\nVarieties of panspermia theory.\nPanspermia is generally subdivided into two classes: either transfer occurs between planets of the same system (interplanetary) or between stellar systems (interstellar). Further classifications are based on different proposed transport mechanisms, as follows.\nRadiopanspermia.\nIn 1903, Svante Arrhenius proposed radiopanspermia, the theory that singular microscopic forms of life can be propagated in space, driven by the radiation pressure from stars. This is the mechanism by which light can exert a force on matter. Arrhenius argued that particles at a critical size below 1.5 \u03bcm would be propelled at high speed by radiation pressure of a star. However, because its effectiveness decreases with increasing size of the particle, this mechanism holds for very tiny particles only, such as single bacterial spores.\nCounterarguments.\nThe main criticism of radiopanspermia came from Iosif Shklovsky and Carl Sagan, who cited evidence for the lethal action of space radiation (UV and X-rays) in the cosmos. If enough of these microorganisms are ejected into space, some may rain down on a planet in a new star system after 106 years wandering interstellar space. There would be enormous death rates of the organisms due to radiation and the generally hostile conditions of space, but nonetheless this theory is considered potentially viable by some.\nData gathered by the orbital experiments ERA, BIOPAN, EXOSTACK and EXPOSE showed that isolated spores, including those of \"B. subtilis\", were rapidly killed if exposed to the full space environment for merely a few seconds, but if shielded against solar UV, the spores were capable of surviving in space for up to six years while embedded in clay or meteorite powder (artificial meteorites). Spores would therefore need to be heavily protected against UV radiation: exposure of unprotected DNA to solar UV and cosmic ionizing radiation would break it up into its constituent bases. Rocks at least 1 meter in diameter are required to effectively shield resistant microorganisms, such as bacterial spores against galactic cosmic radiation. Additionally, exposing DNA to the ultrahigh vacuum of space alone is sufficient to cause DNA damage, so the transport of unprotected DNA or RNA during interplanetary flights powered solely by light pressure is extremely unlikely.\nThe feasibility of other means of transport for the more massive shielded spores into the outer Solar System\u2014for example, through gravitational capture by comets\u2014is unknown. There is little evidence in full support of the radiopanspermia hypothesis.\nLithopanspermia.\nThis transport mechanism generally arose following the growth of planetary science with the discovery of exoplanets and the sudden availability of data. Lithopanspermia is the proposed transfer of organisms in rocks from one planet to another through planetary objects such as in comets or asteroids; it remains speculative. A variant would be for organisms to travel between star systems on nomadic exoplanets or exomoons.\nAlthough there is no concrete evidence that lithopanspermia has occurred in the Solar System, the various stages have become amenable to experimental testing.\nLithopanspermia, described by the mechanism above, can be either interplanetary or interstellar. It is possible to quantify panspermia models and treat them as viable mathematical theories. For example, a recent study of planets of the Trappist-1 planetary system presents a model for estimating the probability of interplanetary panspermia, similar to studies in the past done about Earth-Mars panspermia. This study found that lithopanspermia is 'orders of magnitude more likely to occur' in the Trappist-1 system as opposed to the Earth-to-Mars scenario. According to their analysis, the increase in probability of lithopanspermia is linked to an increased probability of abiogenesis amongst the Trappist-1 planets. In a way, these modern treatments attempt to keep panspermia as a contributing factor to abiogenesis, as opposed to a theory that directly opposes it. In line with this, it is suggested that if biosignatures could be detected on two (or more) adjacent planets, that would provide evidence that panspermia is a potentially required mechanism for abiogenesis. As of yet, no such discovery has been made.\nLithopanspermia has also been hypothesized to operate between stellar systems. One mathematical analysis, estimating the total number of rocky or icy objects that could potentially be captured by planetary systems within the Milky Way, has concluded that lithopanspermia is not necessarily bound to a single stellar system. This not only requires these objects have life in the first place, but also that it survives the journey. Thus intragalactic lithopanspermia is heavily dependent on the survival lifetime of organisms, as well as the velocity of the transporter. Again, there is no evidence that such a process has, or can occur.\nCounterarguments.\nThe complex nature of the requirements for lithopanspermia, as well as evidence against the longevity of bacteria being able to survive under these conditions, makes lithopanspermia a difficult theory to support. That being said, impact events did occur often in the early solar system and still occur today, such as within the asteroid belt.\nDirected panspermia.\nFirst proposed in 1972 by Nobel prize winner Francis Crick along with Leslie Orgel, directed panspermia is the theory that life was deliberately brought to Earth by a higher intelligent being from another planet. In light of the evidence at the time that it seems unlikely for an organism to have been delivered to Earth via radiopanspermia or lithopanspermia, Crick and Orgel proposed this as an alternative theory, though it is worth noting that Orgel was less serious about the claim. They do acknowledge that the scientific evidence is lacking, but discuss what kinds of evidence would be needed to support the theory. In a similar vein, Thomas Gold suggested that life on Earth might have originated accidentally from a pile of 'Cosmic Garbage' dumped on Earth long ago by extraterrestrial beings. These theories are often considered more science fiction, however, Crick and Orgel use the principle of cosmic reversibility to argue for it.\nThis principle is based on the fact that if our species is capable of infecting a sterile planet, then what is preventing another technological society from having done that to Earth in the past? They concluded that it would be possible to deliberately infect another planet in the foreseeable future. As far as evidence goes, Crick and Orgel argued that given the universality of the genetic code, it follows that an infective theory for life is viable.\nDirected panspermia could, in theory, be demonstrated by finding a distinctive 'signature' message had been deliberately implanted into either the genome or the genetic code of the first microorganisms by our hypothetical progenitor, some 4 billion years ago. However, there is no known mechanism that could prevent mutation and natural selection from removing such a message over long periods of time.\nCounterarguments.\nIn 1972, both abiogenesis and panspermia were seen as viable theories by different experts. Given this, Crick and Orgel argued that experimental evidence required to validate one theory over the other was lacking. That being said, evidence strongly in favor of abiogenesis over panspermia exists today, whereas evidence for panspermia, particularly directed panspermia, is decidedly lacking.\nOrigination and distribution of organic molecules: Pseudo-panspermia.\nPseudo-panspermia is the well-supported hypothesis that many of the small organic molecules used for life originated in space, and were distributed to planetary surfaces. Life then emerged on Earth, and perhaps on other planets, by the processes of abiogenesis. Evidence for pseudo-panspermia includes the discovery of organic compounds such as sugars, amino acids, and nucleobases in meteorites and other extraterrestrial bodies, and the formation of similar compounds in the laboratory under outer space conditions. A prebiotic polyester system has been explored as an example.\nHoaxes and speculations.\nOrgueil meteorite.\nOn May 14, 1864, twenty fragments from a meteorite crashed into the French city of Orgueil. A separate fragment of the Orgueil meteorite (kept in a sealed glass jar since its discovery) was found in 1965 to have a seed capsule embedded in it, while the original glassy layer on the outside remained undisturbed. Despite great initial excitement, the seed was found to be that of a European Juncaceae or rush plant that had been glued into the fragment and camouflaged using coal dust. The outer \"fusion layer\" was in fact glue. While the perpetrator of this hoax is unknown, it is thought that they sought to influence the 19th-century debate on spontaneous generation\u2014rather than panspermia\u2014by demonstrating the transformation of inorganic to biological matter.\nOumuamua.\nIn 2017, the Pan-STARRS telescope in Hawaii detected a reddish object with significant, periodic fluctiations in albedo, strongly suggestive of a slender, rotating object. Analysis of its orbit provided evidence that it was an interstellar object, originating from outside the Solar System, accelerating away from the Sun with the absence of the visible outgassing that usually explains the acceleration of asteroids. Astronomer Avi Loeb argues that there are no satisfying natural explanations for this acceleration, and proposes that Oumuamua may be a solar sail, which would be partial evidence for the feasibility of directed panspermia. This claim has been considered unlikely by other authors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23680", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23680", "title": "There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom", "text": "1959 lecture by Richard Feynman\n\"There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom: An Invitation to Enter a New Field of Physics\" was a lecture given by physicist Richard Feynman at the annual American Physical Society meeting at Caltech on December 29, 1959. Feynman considered the possibility of direct manipulation of individual atoms as a more robust form of synthetic chemistry than those used at the time. Versions of the talk were reprinted in a few popular magazines, but it went largely unnoticed until the 1980s.\nThe title references the popular quote \"There is always room at the top.\" attributed to Daniel Webster (who is thought to have said this phrase in response to warnings against becoming a lawyer, which was seen as an oversaturated field in the 19th century).\nConception.\nFeynman considered some ramifications of a general ability to manipulate matter on an atomic scale. He was particularly interested in the possibilities of denser computer circuitry and microscopes that could see things much smaller than is possible with scanning electron microscopes. These ideas were later realized by the use of the scanning tunneling microscope, the atomic force microscope and other examples of scanning probe microscopy and storage systems such as Millipede.\nFeynman also suggested that it should be possible, in principle, to make nanoscale machines that \"arrange the atoms the way we want\" and do chemical synthesis by mechanical manipulation.\nHe also presented the possibility of \"swallowing the doctor\", an idea that he credited in the essay to his friend and graduate student Albert Hibbs. This concept involved building a tiny, swallowable surgical robot.\nAs a thought experiment, he proposed developing a set of one-quarter-scale manipulator hands controlled by the hands of a human operator, to build one-quarter scale machine tools analogous to those found in any machine shop. This set of small tools would then be used by the small hands to build and operate ten sets of one-sixteenth-scale hands and tools, and so forth, culminating in perhaps a billion tiny factories to achieve massively parallel operations. He uses the analogy of a pantograph as a way of scaling down items. This idea was anticipated in part, down to the microscale, by science fiction author Robert A. Heinlein in his 1942 story \"Waldo\".\nAs the sizes got smaller, one would have to redesign tools because the relative strength of various forces would change. Gravity would become less important, and Van der Waals forces such as surface tension would become more important. Feynman mentioned these scaling issues during his talk. Nobody has yet attempted to implement this thought experiment; some types of biological enzymes and enzyme complexes (especially ribosomes) function chemically in a way close to Feynman's vision. Feynman also mentioned in his lecture that it might be better eventually to use glass or plastic because their greater uniformity would avoid problems in the very small scale (metals and crystals are separated into domains where the lattice structure prevails). This could be a good reason to make machines and electronics out of glass and plastic. At present, there are electronic components made of both materials. In glass, there are optical fiber cables that carry and amplify light. In plastic, field effect transistors are being made with polymers, such as polythiophene that becomes an electrical conductor when oxidized.\nChallenges.\nAt the meeting Feynman concluded his talk with two challenges, and offered a prize of $1000 for the first to solve each one. The first challenge involved the construction of a tiny motor, which, to Feynman's surprise, was achieved by November 1960 by Caltech graduate William McLellan, a meticulous craftsman, using conventional tools. The motor met the conditions, but did not advance the field. The second challenge involved the possibility of scaling down letters small enough so as to be able to fit the entire \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" on the head of a pin, by writing the information from a book page on a surface 1/25,000 smaller in linear scale. In 1985, Tom Newman, a Stanford graduate student, successfully reduced the first paragraph of \"A Tale of Two Cities\" by 1/25,000, and collected the second Feynman prize. Newman's thesis adviser, R. Fabian Pease, had read the paper in 1966, but it was another graduate student in the lab, Ken Polasko, who had recently read it who suggested attempting the challenge. Newman was looking for an arbitrary random pattern to demonstrate their technology. Newman said, \"Text was ideal because it has so many different shapes.\"\nReception.\n\"The New Scientist\" reported \"the scientific audience was captivated.\" Feynman had \"spun the idea off the top of his mind\" without even \"notes from beforehand\". There were no copies of the speech available. A \"foresighted admirer\" brought a tape recorder and an edited transcript, without Feynman's jokes, was made for publication by Caltech. In February 1960, Caltech's \"Engineering and Science\" published the speech. In addition to excerpts in \"The New Scientist\", versions were printed in \"The Saturday Review\" and \"Popular Science\". Newspapers announced the winning of the first challenge. The lecture was included as the final chapter in the 1961 book, \"Miniaturization\".\nImpact.\nK. Eric Drexler later took the Feynman concept of a billion tiny factories and added the idea that they could make more copies of themselves, via computer control instead of control by a human operator, in his 1986 book \"Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology\".\nAfter Feynman's death, scholars studying the historical development of nanotechnology have concluded that his role in catalyzing nanotechnology research was not highly rated by many people active in the nascent field in the 1980s and 1990s. Chris Toumey, a cultural anthropologist at the University of South Carolina, has reconstructed the history of the publication and republication of Feynman's talk, along with the record of citations to \"Plenty of Room\" in the scientific literature.\nIn Toumey's 2008 article \"Reading Feynman into Nanotechnology\", he found 11 versions of the publication of \"Plenty of Room\", plus two instances of a closely related talk by Feynman, \"Infinitesimal Machinery\", which Feynman called \"Plenty of Room, Revisited\" (published under the name \"Infinitesimal Machinery\"). Also in Toumey's references are videotapes of that second talk. The journal \"Nature Nanotechnology\" dedicated an issue in 2009 to the subject.\nToumey found that the published versions of Feynman's talk had a negligible influence in the twenty years after it was first published, as measured by citations in the scientific literature, and not much more influence in the decade after the scanning tunneling microscope was invented in 1981. Interest in \"Plenty of Room\" in the scientific literature greatly increased in the early 1990s. This is probably because the term \"nanotechnology\" gained serious attention just before that time, following its use by Drexler in his 1986 book, \"Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology\", which cited Feynman, and in a cover article headlined \"Nanotechnology\", published later that year in a mass-circulation science-oriented magazine, \"OMNI\". The journal \"Nanotechnology\" was launched in 1989; the famous Eigler-Schweizer experiment, precisely manipulating 35 xenon atoms, was published in \"Nature\" in April 1990; and \"Science\" had a special issue on nanotechnology in November 1991. These and other developments hint that the retroactive rediscovery of \"Plenty of Room\" gave nanotechnology a packaged history that provided an early date of December 1959, plus a connection to Richard Feynman.\nToumey's analysis also includes comments from scientists in nanotechnology who say that \"Plenty of Room\" did not influence their early work, and most of them had not read it until a later date.\nFeynman's stature as a Nobel laureate and an important figure in 20th-century science helped advocates of nanotechnology. It provided a valuable intellectual link to the past. More concretely, his stature and concept of atomically precise fabrication played a role in securing funding for nanotechnology research, illustrated by President Clinton's January 2000 speech calling for a federal program:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My budget supports a major new National Nanotechnology Initiative, worth $500 million. Caltech is no stranger to the idea of nanotechnology, the ability to manipulate matter at the atomic and molecular level. Over 40 years ago, Caltech's own Richard Feynman asked, \"What would happen if we could arrange the atoms one by one the way we want them?\"\nThe version of the Nanotechnology Research and Development Act that the House passed in May 2003 called for a study of the technical feasibility of molecular manufacturing, but this study was removed to safeguard funding of less controversial research before it was passed by the Senate and signed into law by President George W. Bush on December 3, 2003.\nIn 2016, a group of researchers of TU Delft and INL reported the storage of a paragraph of Feynman's talk using binary code where every bit was made with a single atomic vacancy. Using a scanning tunnelling microscope to manipulate thousands of atoms, the researchers crafted the text:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But I am not afraid to consider the final question as to whether, ultimately \u2013 in the great future \u2013 we can arrange the atoms the way we want; the very atoms, all the way down! What would happen if we could arrange the atoms one by one the way we want them (within reason, of course; you can't put them so that they are chemically unstable, for example).\nUp to now, we have been content to dig in the ground to find minerals. We heat them and we do things on a large scale with them, and we hope to get a pure substance with just so much impurity, and so on. But we must always accept some atomic arrangement that nature gives us. We haven't got anything, say, with a \"checkerboard\" arrangement, with the impurity atoms precisely arranged 1,000 angstroms apart, or in some other particular pattern.\nThis text uses exactly 1 kibibyte, i.e., 8192 bits, made with 1 atom vacancy each, constituting thereby the first atomic kibibyte, with a storage density 500 times larger than the state of the art approaches. The text required to \"arrange the atoms the way we want\", in a checkerboard pattern. This self-referential tribute to Feynman's vision was covered both by scientific journals and mainstream media.\nEditions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23681", "revid": "50344519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23681", "title": "Philately", "text": "Study of stamps and postal history and other related items\nPhilately (; ) is the study of postage stamps and postal history. It also refers to the collection and appreciation of stamps and other philatelic products. While closely associated with stamp collecting and the study of postage, it is possible to be a philatelist without owning any stamps. For instance, the stamps being studied may be very rare or reside only in museums.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"philately\" is the English transliteration of the French \"philat\u00e9lie\", coined by Georges Herpin in 1864. Herpin stated that stamps had been collected and studied for the previous six or seven years and a better name was required for the new hobby than \"timbromanie\" (roughly \"stamp mania\"), which was disliked. The alternative terms \"timbromania\", \"timbrophily\", and \"timbrology\" gradually fell out of use as \"philately\" gained acceptance during the 1860s. Herpin took the Greek root word \u03c6\u03b9\u03bb(\u03bf)- \"phil(o)-\", meaning \"an attraction or affinity for something\", and \u1f00\u03c4\u03ad\u03bb\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1 \"ateleia\", meaning \"exempt from duties and taxes\", to form the neologism \"philat\u00e9lie\".\nHistory.\nNineteenth century.\nAs a collection field, philately appeared after the introduction of the postage stamps in 1840, but did not gain large attraction until the mid-1850s. In the U.S., early collectors of stamps were known as \"stamp gatherers\". The United States Post Office Department re-issued stamps in 1875 due to public demand for 'old stamps', including those from before the American Civil War. Some authors believe that the first philatelist appeared on the day of the release of the world's first postage stamp, dated to May 6th, 1840, when the Liverson, Denby and Lavie London law office sent a letter to Scotland franked with ten uncut Penny Blacks, stamped with the postmark \"LS.6MY6. 1840.\" In 1992, at an auction in Z\u00fcrich, this envelope was sold for 690,000 francs.\nAlready in 1846, cases of collecting stamps in large numbers were known in England. However, without reason for collection, stamps at this time were used for pasting wallpaper. The first philatelist is considered to be a postmaster going by the name Mansen, who lived in Paris, and in 1855 had sold his collection, which contained almost all the postage stamps issued by that time. The stamp merchant and second-hand book dealer Edard de Laplante bought it, recognizing the definitive collector's worth of the postage stamp. Due to the boom in popularity and news of this transaction, stamp merchants like Laplante began to emerge.\nTowards the end of the 19th century, stamp collecting reached hundreds of thousands of people of all classes. Some countries had collections of postage stamps \u2013 for example, England, Germany, France, Bavaria, and Bulgaria. In countries which held national collections, museums dedicated to the nation's history with philately were founded, and the first such appeared in Germany, France, and Bulgaria. Allegedly, the first of these museums housed the collection of the British Museum, curated by MP Thomas Tapling and bequeathed to the Museum in 1891. The Museum f\u00fcr Kommunikation Berlin also had an extensive collection of stamps. The largest private collection of the time belonged to Philipp von Ferrary in Paris.\nAs the number of postage stamp issues increased every year, collection became progressively difficult. Therefore, from the early 1880s, \"collector experts\" appeared, specializing their collection to only one part of the world, a group of nations, or even only one.\nTwentieth century.\nPhilately as one of the most popular types of collecting continued to develop in the 20th century. Along with the \"Scott\", \"Stanley Gibbons\", and \"Yvert et Tellier\" catalogs, the \"Zumstein\" (first published in Switzerland, 1909), and the \"Michel\" (first published in Germany, 1910) catalogs began publication.\nIn 1934, the idea to celebrate an annual Postage Stamp Day was suggested by Hans von Rudolphi, a German philatelist. The idea was adopted rapidly in Germany, and gained later adoption in other countries. Stamp Day is a memorial day established by the postal administration of a country and annually celebrated, which is designed to attract public attention to, popularize the use of, and expand the reach of postal correspondence, and contribute to the development of philately. In 1968, Cuba dedicated a postage stamp for Stamp Day with an image of G. Sciltian's \"El filatelista\".\nIn 1926, the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Philat\u00e9lie (FIP) was founded, where international philatelic exhibitions have been regularly organized since 1929. The first World Philatelic Exhibition in Prague was held between August and September 1962; in 1976, the FIP brought together national societies from 57 countries, which held over 100 exhibitions, and in 1987, over 60 countries entered the FIP.\nSince the middle of the 20th century, philately has become the most widespread field of amateur collecting, which was facilitated by:\nPhilately magazines, at this time, were published as far east as Poland, and as far west as North America. In Canada, https:// was established in 1976 as an off-shoot to https://, which was launched about a decade earlier.\nPhilately was largely advanced by the USSR and nations within its sphere of influence, and the United States, France, the UK, and Austria. The British Library Philatelic Collections and the postal museums in Stockholm, Paris, and Bern had unique national philately collections at that time, and among the famous private collections are those of the Royal Philatelic Collection, F. Ferrari (Austria), M. Burrus (Switzerland), A. Lichtenstein, A. Hind, J. Boker (U.S.), and H. Kanai (Japan).\nIn the mid-1970s, national philately organizations and associations existed in most countries, and 150\u2013200 million people were involved in philately.\nTwenty-first century.\nFrom 28 August to 1 September 2004, the World Stamp Championship was held for the first time in the history of world philately in Singapore.\nTypes.\nTraditional philately is the study of the technical aspects of stamp production and stamp identification, including:\nDiversification.\nExpanding range of activity: \nTools.\nPhilately uses several tools, including stamp tongs (a specialized form of tweezers) to safely handle the stamps, a strong magnifying glass and a perforation gauge (odontometer) to measure the perforation gauge of the stamp.\nThe identification of watermarks is equally important and may be done with the naked eye by turning the stamp over or holding it up to the light. If this fails then \"watermark fluid\" may be used, which \"wets\" the stamp to reveal the mark.\nOther common tools include stamp catalogs, stamp stock books and stamp hinges.\nOrganizations.\nPhilatelic organizations sprang up soon after people started collecting and studying stamps. They include local, national and international clubs and societies where collectors come together to share the various aspects of their hobby.\nThe world's oldest philatelic society is the Royal Philatelic Society London, which was founded on 10 April 1869, as the Philatelic Society. In North America, the major national societies include the American Philatelic Society; the Royal Philatelic Society of Canada; and the Mexico-Elmhurst Philatelic Society, International.\nLocal clubs and societies have been established in many cities of the world. The International Philatelic Federation was formed in 1926 which is originally based in Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland but is now known to be the world federation for philately.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23682", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23682", "title": "Puget Sound", "text": "Sound in Washington, United States\nPuget Sound ( ; ) is a complex estuarine system of interconnected marine waterways and basins located on the northwest coast of the U.S. state of Washington. As a part of the Salish Sea, the sound has one major and two minor connections to the Strait of Juan de Fuca, which in turn connects to the open Pacific Ocean. The major connection is Admiralty Inlet; the minor connections are Deception Pass and the Swinomish Channel.\nPuget Sound extends approximately from Deception Pass in the north to Olympia in the south. Its average depth is and its maximum depth, off Jefferson Point between Indianola and Kingston, is . The depth of the main basin, between the southern tip of Whidbey Island and Tacoma, is approximately .\nIn 2009, the term Salish Sea was established by the United States Board on Geographic Names as the collective waters of Puget Sound, the Strait of Juan de Fuca, and the Strait of Georgia. Sometimes the terms \"Puget Sound\" and \"Puget Sound and adjacent waters\" are used for not only Puget Sound proper but also for waters to the north, such as Bellingham Bay and the San Juan Islands region.\nThe term \"Puget Sound\" is used not just for the body of water but also the Puget Sound region centered on the sound. Major cities on the sound include Seattle, Tacoma, Olympia, and Everett. Puget Sound is also the second-largest estuary in the United States, after Chesapeake Bay in Maryland and Virginia.\nNames.\nIn 1792, George Vancouver gave the name \"Puget's Sound\" to the waters south of the Tacoma Narrows, in honor of Peter Puget, a Huguenot lieutenant accompanying him on the Vancouver Expedition. This name later came to be used for the waters north of Tacoma Narrows as well.\nAn alternative term for Puget Sound, used by a number of Native Americans and environmental groups, is Whulge (or Whulj), an anglicization of the Lushootseed name for Puget Sound, , which literally means \"sea, salt water, ocean, or sound\". The name for the Lushootseed language, , is derived from the root word , an alternative name for Puget Sound.\nDefinitions.\nThe USGS defines Puget Sound as all the waters south of three entrances from the Strait of Juan de Fuca. The main entrance at Admiralty Inlet is defined as a line between Point Wilson on the Olympic Peninsula, and Point Partridge on Whidbey Island. The second entrance is at Deception Pass along a line from West Point on Whidbey Island, to Deception Island, then to Rosario Head on Fidalgo Island. The third entrance is at the south end of the Swinomish Channel, which connects Skagit Bay and Padilla Bay. Under this definition, Puget Sound includes the waters of Hood Canal, Admiralty Inlet, Possession Sound, Saratoga Passage, and others. It does not include Bellingham Bay, Padilla Bay, the waters of the San Juan Islands or anything farther north.\nAnother definition, given by NOAA, subdivides Puget Sound into five basins or regions. Four of these (including South Puget Sound) correspond to areas within the USGS definition, but the fifth, called \"Northern Puget Sound\" includes a large additional region. It is defined as bounded to the north by the international boundary with Canada, and to the west by a line running north from the mouth of the Sekiu River on the Olympic Peninsula. Under this definition, significant parts of the Strait of Juan de Fuca and the Strait of Georgia are included in Puget Sound, with the international boundary marking an abrupt and hydrologically arbitrary limit.\nAccording to Arthur Kruckeberg, the term \"Puget Sound\" is sometimes used for waters north of Admiralty Inlet and Deception Pass, especially for areas along the north coast of Washington and the San Juan Islands, essentially equivalent to NOAA's \"Northern Puget Sound\" subdivision described above. Kruckeberg uses the term \"Puget Sound and adjacent waters\". Kruckeberg's 1991 text, however, does not reflect the 2009 decision of the United States Board on Geographic Names to use the term Salish Sea to refer to the greater maritime environment.\nGeology.\nContinental ice sheets have repeatedly advanced and retreated from the Puget Sound region. The most recent glacial period, called the Fraser Glaciation, had three phases, or stades. During the third, or Vashon Glaciation, a lobe of the Cordilleran Ice Sheet, called the Puget Lobe, spread south about 15,000 years ago, covering the Puget Sound region with an ice sheet about thick near Seattle, and nearly at the present Canada-U.S. border. Since each new advance and retreat of ice erodes away much of the evidence of previous ice ages, the most recent Vashon phase has left the clearest imprint on the land. At its maximum extent the Vashon ice sheet extended south of Olympia to near Tenino, and covered the lowlands between the Olympic and Cascade mountain ranges. About 14,000 years ago the ice began to retreat. By 11,000 years ago it survived only north of the Canada\u2013US border.\nThe melting retreat of the Vashon Glaciation eroded the land, creating a drumlin field of hundreds of aligned drumlin hills. Lake Washington and Lake Sammamish (which are ribbon lakes), Hood Canal, and the main Puget Sound basin were altered by glacial forces. These glacial forces are not specifically \"carving\", as in cutting into the landscape via the mechanics of ice/glaciers, but rather eroding the landscape from melt water of the Vashon Glacier creating the drumlin field. As the ice retreated, vast amounts of glacial till were deposited throughout the Puget Sound region. The soils of the region, less than ten thousand years old, are still characterized as immature.\nAs the Vashon glacier receded a series of proglacial lakes formed, filling the main trough of Puget Sound and inundating the southern lowlands. Glacial Lake Russell was the first such large recessional lake. From the vicinity of Seattle in the north the lake extended south to the Black Hills, where it drained south into the Chehalis River. Sediments from Lake Russell form the blue-gray clay identified as the Lawton Clay. The second major recessional lake was Glacial Lake Bretz. It also drained to the Chehalis River until the Chimacum Valley, in the northeast Olympic Peninsula, melted, allowing the lake's water to rapidly drain north into the marine waters of the Strait of Juan de Fuca, which was rising as the ice sheet retreated.\nAs icebergs calved off the toe of the glacier, their embedded gravels and boulders were deposited in the chaotic mix of unsorted till geologists call \"glaciomarine drift.\" Many beaches about the Sound display glacial erratics, rendered more prominent than those in coastal woodland solely by their exposed position; submerged glacial erratics sometimes cause hazards to navigation. The sheer weight of glacial-age ice depressed the landforms, which experienced post-glacial rebound after the ice sheets had retreated. Because the rate of rebound was not synchronous with the post-ice age rise in sea levels, the bed of what is now Puget Sound filled alternately with fresh and with sea water. The upper level of the lake-sediment Lawton Clay now lies about above sea level.\nThe Puget Sound system consists of four deep basins connected by shallower sills. The four basins are Hood Canal, west of the Kitsap Peninsula, Whidbey Basin, east of Whidbey Island, South Sound, south of the Tacoma Narrows, and the Main Basin, which is further subdivided into Admiralty Inlet and the Central Basin. Puget Sound's sills, a kind of submarine terminal moraine, separate the basins from one another, and Puget Sound from the Strait of Juan de Fuca. Three sills are particularly significant\u2014the one at Admiralty Inlet which checks the flow of water between the Strait of Juan de Fuca and Puget Sound, the one at the entrance to Hood Canal (about below the surface), and the one at the Tacoma Narrows (about ). Other sills that present less of a barrier include the ones at Blake Island, Agate Pass, Rich Passage, and Hammersley Inlet.\nThe depth of the basins is a result of the Sound being part of the Cascadia subduction zone, where the terranes accreted at the edge of the Juan de Fuca Plate are being subducted under the North American Plate. There has not been a major subduction zone earthquake here since the magnitude nine Cascadia earthquake; according to Japanese records, it occurred on January 26, 1700. Lesser Puget Sound earthquakes with shallow epicenters, caused by the fracturing of stressed oceanic rocks as they are subducted, still cause great damage. The Seattle Fault cuts across Puget Sound, crossing the southern tip of Bainbridge Island and under Elliott Bay. To the south, the existence of a second fault, the Tacoma Fault, has buckled the intervening strata in the Seattle Uplift.\nTypical Puget Sound profiles of dense glacial till overlying permeable glacial outwash of gravels above an impermeable bed of silty clay may become unstable after periods of unusually wet weather and slump in landslides.\nHydrology.\nThe United States Geological Survey (USGS) defines Puget Sound as a bay with numerous channels and branches; more specifically, it is a fjord system of flooded glacial valleys. Puget Sound is part of a larger physiographic structure termed the Puget Trough, which is a physiographic section of the larger Pacific Border province, which in turn is part of the larger Pacific Mountain System.\nPuget Sound is a large salt water estuary, or system of many estuaries, fed by highly seasonal freshwater from the Olympic and Cascade Mountain watersheds. The mean annual river discharge into Puget Sound is , with a monthly average maximum of about and minimum of about . Puget Sound's shoreline is long, encompassing a water area of and a total volume of at mean high water. The average volume of water flowing in and out of Puget Sound during each tide is . The maximum tidal currents, in the range of 9 to 10 knots, occurs at Deception Pass. Water flow through Deception Pass is approximately equal to 2% of the total tidal exchange between Puget Sound and the Strait of Juan de Fuca.\nThe size of Puget Sound's watershed is . \"Northern Puget Sound\" is frequently considered part of the Puget Sound watershed, which enlarges its size to . The USGS uses the name \"Puget Sound\" for its hydrologic unit subregion 1711, which includes areas draining to Puget Sound proper as well as the Strait of Juan de Fuca, the Strait of Georgia, and the Fraser River. Significant rivers that drain to \"Northern Puget Sound\" include the Nooksack, Dungeness, and Elwha Rivers. The Nooksack empties into Bellingham Bay, the Dungeness and Elwha into the Strait of Juan de Fuca. The Chilliwack River flows north to the Fraser River in Canada.\nTides in Puget Sound are of the mixed type with two high and two low tides each tidal day. These are called Higher High Water (HHW), Lower Low Water (LLW), Lower High Water (LHW), and Higher Low Water (HLW). The configuration of basins, sills, and interconnections cause the tidal range to increase within Puget Sound. The difference in height between the Higher High Water and the Lower Low Water averages about at Port Townsend on Admiralty Inlet, but increases to about at Olympia, the southern end of Puget Sound.\nPuget Sound is generally accepted as the start of the Inside Passage.\nFlora and fauna.\nImportant marine flora of Puget Sound include eelgrass (\"Zostera marina\") and various kelp, important kelps include canopy forming bull kelp (\"Nereocystis luetkeana\"). and edible kelps like kombu (\"Saccharina latissima)\nAmong the marine mammals species found in Puget Sound are harbor seals (\"Phoca vitulina\"). Orca (\"Orcinus orca\"), or \"killer whales\" are famous throughout the Sound, and are a large tourist attraction. Although orca are sometimes seen in Puget Sound proper they are far more prevalent around the San Juan Islands north of Puget Sound.\nMany fish species occur in Puget Sound. The various salmonid species, including salmon, trout, and char are particularly well-known and studied. Salmonid species of Puget Sound include chinook salmon (\"Oncorhynchus tshawytscha\"), chum salmon (\"O. keta\"), coho salmon (\"O. kisutch\"), pink salmon (\"O. gorbuscha\"), sockeye salmon (\"O. nerka\"), sea-run coastal cutthroat trout (\"O. clarki clarki\"), steelhead (\"O. mykiss irideus\"), sea-run bull trout (\"Salvelinus confluentus\"), and Dolly Varden trout (\"Salvelinus malma malma\").\nCommon forage fishes found in Puget Sound include Pacific herring (\"Clupea pallasii\"), surf smelt (\"Hypomesus pretiosus\"), and Pacific sand lance (\"Ammodytes hexapterus\"). Important benthopelagic fish of Puget Sound include North Pacific hake (\"Merluccius productus\"), Pacific cod (\"Gadus macrocephalus\"), walleye/Alaska pollock (\"Theragra chalcogramma\"), and the spiny dogfish (\"Squalus acanthias\"). Lots of other notable groundfish exist in Puget Sound, such the lingcod (\"Ophiodon elongatus\") and other greenlings, cabezon (\"Scorpaenichthys marmoratus\") and other sculpins\",\" and the Pacific halibut (\"Hippoglossus stenolepis\") along with other flatfish such as the California halibut (\"Paralichthys californicus\",) soles, and sanddabs.\nThere are about 28 species of Sebastidae (rockfish), of many types, found in Puget Sound. Among those of special interest are copper rockfish (\"Sebastes caurinus\"), quillback rockfish (\"S. maliger\"), black rockfish (\"S. melanops\"), yelloweye rockfish (\"S. ruberrimus\"), bocaccio rockfish (\"S. paucispinis\"), canary rockfish (\"S. pinniger\"), and Puget Sound rockfish (\"S. emphaeus\"). Interestingly, hybridization has occurred between some of these rockfish, in the case of between the quillback, copper, and brown (\"S.\" \"auriculatus.\") Some rockfish, like the bocaccio and vermillion (\"S. miniatus,\") have a distinct population segment in the sound, which are at risk of overfishing.\nMany other fish species occur in Puget Sound, such as sturgeons, lampreys, and various cartilaginous like fish sharks, chimeras, rays, and skates.\nPuget Sound is home to numerous species of marine invertebrates, including sponges, sea anemones, chitons, clams, sea snails, limpets, crabs, barnacles, starfish, sea urchins, and sand dollars. Dungeness crabs (\"Metacarcinus magister\") occur throughout Washington waters, including Puget Sound. Many bivalves occur in Puget Sound, such as Pacific oysters (\"Crassostrea gigas\") and geoduck clams (\"Panopea generosa\"). The Olympia oyster (\"Ostrea lurida\"), once common in Puget Sound, was depleted by human activities during the 20th century. There are ongoing efforts to restore Olympia oysters in Puget Sound.\nIn 1967, an initial scuba survey estimated that were \"about 110 million pounds of geoducks\" (pronounced \"gooey ducks\") situated in Puget Sound's sediments. Also known as \"king clam,\" geoducks are considered to be a delicacy in Asian countries.\nThere are many seabird species in Puget Sound. Among these are grebes such as the western grebe (\"Aechmophorus occidentalis\"); loons such as the common loon (\"Gavia immer\"); auks such as the pigeon guillemot (\"Cepphus columba\"), rhinoceros auklet (\"Cerorhinca monocerata\"), common murre (\"Uria aalge\"), and marbled murrelet (\"Brachyramphus marmoratus\"); the brant goose (\"Branta bernicla\"); sea ducks such as the long-tailed duck (\"Clangula hyemalis\"), harlequin duck (\"Histrionicus histrionicus\"), and surf scoter (\"Melanitta perspicillata\"); and cormorants such as the double-crested cormorant (\"Phalacrocorax auritus\"). Puget Sound is home to a non-migratory and marine-oriented subspecies of great blue herons (\"Ardea herodias fannini\"). Bald eagles (\"Haliaeetus leucocephalus\") occur in relative high densities in the Puget Sound region.\nHistory.\nPuget Sound has been home to many Indigenous peoples, such as the Lushootseed-speaking peoples, as well as the Twana, Chimakum, and Klallam, for millennia. The earliest known presence of Indigenous inhabitants in the Puget Sound region is between 14,000 BCE to 6,000 BCE.\nDispatched in an attempt to locate the fabled Northwest Passage, British Royal Navy captain George Vancouver anchored on May 19, 1792, on the shores of Seattle, explored Puget Sound, and claimed it for Great Britain on June 4 the same year, naming it for one of his officers, Lieutenant Peter Puget. He further named the entire region; \"New Georgia\", after King George III.\nAfter 1818 Britain and the United States, which both claimed the Oregon Country, agreed to \"joint occupancy\", deferring resolution of the Oregon boundary dispute. The Puget Sound Agricultural Company was formed \nby HBC to encourage settlement. Pursuant to the 1846 Oregon Treaty; Puget Sound which was part of the disputed region became US territory.\nAmerican maritime fur traders visited Puget Sound in the early 19th century.\nAn Hudson's Bay Company expedition led by James McMillan in late 1824 was first non-Indigenous group to enter Puget Sound since George Vancouver in 1792. The expedition went on to reach the Fraser River, first again to reach the lower Fraser since Fraser himself in 1808.\nThe first non-Indigenous settlement in the Puget Sound area was Fort Nisqually, a fur trade post of the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) built in 1833. Fort Nisqually was part of the HBC's Columbia District, headquartered at Fort Vancouver. In 1838, the HBC's subsidy operation, the Puget Sound Agricultural Company was established in part to procure resources and trade, as well as to further establish British claim to the region. Missionaries J.P. Richmond and W.H. Wilson were attending Fort Nisqually for two years by 1840. British ships, such as the \"Beaver\", exported foodstuffs and provisions from Fort Nisqually, and would eventually export Puget Sound lumber, an industry that would soon outpace the dominant fur trading market and drive the early Puget Sound economy.\nThe first organized American expedition took place under the helm of Commander Charles Wilkes, whose exploring party sailed up Puget Sound in 1841. The first permanent American settlement on Puget Sound was Tumwater, founded in 1845 by Americans who had come via the Oregon Trail. The decision to settle north of the Columbia River was made in part because one of the settlers, George Washington Bush, was considered black and the Provisional Government of Oregon banned the residency of mulattoes but did not actively enforce the restriction north of the river.\nIn 1853 Washington Territory was formed from part of Oregon Territory. In 1888 the Northern Pacific railroad line reached Puget Sound, linking the region to eastern states. Washington State was admitted to the union in 1889 as part of the Enabling Act, and the regions borders have since remained unchanged.\nTransportation.\nThe Washington State Ferries (WSF) are a state-run ferry system that connects the larger the Washington mainland, and the Olympic and Kitsap Peninsulas. Its vessels carry both passengers and vehicular traffic. The system averaged 24.3 million passengers in the 2010s and 17.2 in 2022 with the COVID-19 pandemic. It is the largest ferry operator in the United States.\nEnvironmental issues.\nOver the past 30 years, as the region's human population has increased, there has been a correlating decrease in various plant and animal species which inhabit Puget Sound. The decline has been seen in numerous populations including forage fish, salmonids, bottom fish, marine birds, harbor porpoise, and orcas. The decline is attributed to various issues, including human population growth, pollution, and climate change. Because of this population decline, there have been changes to the fishery practices, and an increase in petitioning to add species to the Endangered Species Act. There has also been an increase in recovery and management plans for many different area species.\nThe causes of these environmental issues are toxic contamination, eutrophication (low oxygen due to excess nutrients), and near shore habitat changes. The Washington Department of Fisheries began an artificial reef construction program in 1975 to create habitats in Puget Sound for declining fish populations, particularly rockfish and lingcod. Some reefs used disposed vehicle tires, tied together with polypropylene rope, until they were phased out in 1982 in favor of less-expensive scrap concrete. The degraded rope allowed disposed tires to create obstructions that damage habitats and harm Puget Sound wildlife; the state government began removing the tire piles in late 2024 at Tolmie State Park. An estimated 100,000 tires remain in Puget Sound at 14 identified sites.\nOn May 22, 1978, a valve was mistakenly opened aboard the submarine USS \"Puffer\", releasing up to 500 US gallons (1,900 L; 420 imp gal) of radioactive water into Puget Sound, during an overhaul in drydock at Bremerton Naval Shipyard.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23687", "revid": "1578", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23687", "title": "Pneumatic pistol", "text": ""}
{"id": "23688", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23688", "title": "Perjury", "text": "Falsifying an oath or affirmation\nPerjury (also known as forswearing) is the intentional act of swearing a false oath or falsifying an affirmation to tell the truth, whether spoken or in writing, concerning matters material to an official proceeding. \nLike most other crimes in the common law system, to be convicted of perjury one must have had the \"intention\" (\"mens rea\") to commit the act and have \"actually committed\" the act (\"actus reus\"). Further, statements that \"are facts\" cannot be considered perjury, even if they might arguably constitute an omission, and it is not perjury to lie about matters that are immaterial to the legal proceeding. Statements that entail an \"interpretation\" of fact are not perjury because people often draw inaccurate conclusions unwittingly or make honest mistakes without the intent to deceive. Individuals may have honest but mistaken beliefs about certain facts or their recollection may be inaccurate, or may have a different perception of what is the accurate way to state the truth. In some jurisdictions, no crime has occurred when a false statement is (intentionally or unintentionally) made while under oath or subject to penalty. Instead, criminal culpability attaches only at the instant the declarant falsely asserts the truth of statements (made or to be made) that are material to the outcome of the proceeding. It is not perjury, for example, to lie about one's age except if age is a fact material to influencing the legal result, such as eligibility for old age retirement benefits or whether a person was of an age to have legal capacity.\nPerjury is considered a serious offence, as it can be used to usurp the power of the courts, resulting in miscarriages of justice. In Canada, those who commit perjury are guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years. Perjury is a statutory offence in England and Wales. A person convicted of perjury is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years, or to a fine, or to both. In the United States, the general perjury statute under federal law classifies perjury as a felony and provides for a prison sentence of up to five years. The California Penal Code allows for perjury to be a capital offense in cases causing wrongful execution. Perjury which caused the wrongful execution of another or in the pursuit of causing the wrongful execution of another is respectively construed as murder or attempted murder, and is normally itself punishable by execution in countries that retain the death penalty. Perjury is considered a felony in most U.S. states. However, prosecutions for perjury are rare.\nThe rules for perjury also apply when a person has made a statement \"under penalty of perjury\" even if the person has not been sworn or affirmed as a witness before an appropriate official. An example is the US income tax return, which, by law, must be signed as true and correct under penalty of perjury (see 26\u00a0U.S.C.\u00a0https://). Federal tax law provides criminal penalties of up to three years in prison for violation of the tax return perjury statute (see 26 U.S.C.\u00a0https://).\nIn the United States, Kenya, Scotland and several other English-speaking Commonwealth nations, subornation of perjury, which is attempting to induce another person to commit perjury, is itself a crime.\nPerjury law by jurisdiction.\nAustralia.\nPerjury is punishable by imprisonment in various states and territories of Australia. In several jurisdictions, longer prison sentences are possible if perjury was committed with the intent of convicting or acquitting a person charged with a serious offence.\nCanada.\nThe offence of perjury is codified by section 132 of the Criminal Code. It is defined by section 131, which provides:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(1) Subject to subsection (3), every one commits perjury who, with intent to mislead, makes before a person who is authorized by law to permit it to be made before him a false statement under oath or solemn affirmation, by affidavit, solemn declaration or deposition or orally, knowing that the statement is false.\n(1.1) Subject to subsection (3), every person who gives evidence under subsection 46(2) of the Canada Evidence Act, or gives evidence or a statement pursuant to an order made under section 22.2 of the Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters Act, commits perjury who, with intent to mislead, makes a false statement knowing that it is false, whether or not the false statement was made under oath or solemn affirmation in accordance with subsection (1), so long as the false statement was made in accordance with any formalities required by the law of the place outside Canada in which the person is virtually present or heard.\n(2) Subsection (1) applies, whether or not a statement referred to in that subsection is made in a judicial proceeding.\n(3) Subsections (1) and (1.1) do not apply to a statement referred to in either of those subsections that is made by a person who is not specially permitted, authorized or required by law to make that statement.\nAs to corroboration, see section 133.\nEveryone who commits perjury is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.\nEuropean Union.\nA person who, before the Court of Justice of the European Union, swears anything which they know to be false or do not believe to be true are, whatever their nationality, guilty of perjury. Proceedings for this offence may be taken in any place in the State and the offence may for all incidental purposes be treated as having been committed in that place.\nIndia.\n\"The offence of perjury finds its place in law by virtue of Section 191 to Section 203 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 ('IPC'). Unlike many other countries, the offence of perjury is muted on account of Section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (\"Cr.P.C\"). Section 195(1)(b)(i) of the Cr.P.C. restricts any court to take cognisance of an offence of perjury unless the same is by way of a complaint in writing by the court before which the offence is committed or by a superior court.\"\nNew Zealand.\nPunishment for perjury is defined under Section 109 of the Crimes Act 1961. A person who commits perjury may be imprisoned for up to 7 years. If a person commits perjury to procure the conviction of someone charged with an offence that carries a maximum sentence of not less than 3 years' imprisonment, the perjurer may be imprisoned for up to 14 years.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland and Wales.\nPerjury is a statutory offence in England and Wales. It is created by section 1(1) of the Perjury Act 1911. Section 1 of that Act reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe words omitted from section 1(1) were repealed by section 1(2) of the Criminal Justice Act 1948. Section 1(1) of that Act also abolished penal servitude; such sentences are construed as sentences of imprisonment instead.\nA person guilty of an offence under section 11(1) of the European Communities Act 1972 (i.e. perjury before the Court of Justice of the European Union) could be proceeded against and punished in England and Wales as for an offence under section 1(1). Section 1(4) had effect in relation to proceedings in the Court of Justice of the European Union as it has effect in relation to a judicial proceeding in a tribunal of a foreign state. Due to Brexit, the United Kingdom is no longer subject to that court's jurisdiction and the 1972 Act has been repealed in its entirety.\nSection 1(4) applies in relation to proceedings before a relevant convention court under the European Patent Convention as it applies to a judicial proceeding in a tribunal of a foreign state.\nA statement made on oath by a witness outside the United Kingdom and given in evidence through a live television link by virtue of section 32 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 must be treated for the purposes of section 1 as having been made in the proceedings in which it is given in evidence.\nSection 1 applies in relation to a person acting as an intermediary as it applies in relation to a person lawfully sworn as an interpreter in a judicial proceeding; and for this purpose, where a person acts as an intermediary in any proceeding which is not a judicial proceeding for the purposes of section 1, that proceeding must be taken to be part of the judicial proceeding in which the witness's evidence is given.\nWhere any statement made by a person on oath in any proceeding which is not a judicial proceeding for the purposes of section 1 is received in evidence in pursuance of a special measures direction, that proceeding must be taken for the purposes of section 1 to be part of the judicial proceeding in which the statement is so received in evidence.\n\"Judicial proceeding\".\nThe definition in section 1(2) is not \"comprehensive\".\nThe book \"Archbold\" says that it appears to be immaterial whether the court before which the statement is made has jurisdiction in the particular cause in which the statement is made, because there is no express requirement in the Act that the court be one of \"competent jurisdiction\" and because the definition in section 1(2) does not appear to require this by implication either.\n\"Actus reus\".\nThe \"actus reus\" of perjury might be considered to be the making of a statement, whether true or false, on oath in a judicial proceeding, where the person knows the statement to be false or believes it to be false.\nPerjury is a conduct crime.\nMode of trial.\nPerjury is triable only on indictment.\nSentence.\nA person convicted of perjury is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years, or to a fine, or to both.\nThe following cases are relevant:\nSee also the Crown Prosecution Service sentencing manual.\nHistory.\nIn Anglo-Saxon legal procedure, the offence of perjury could only be committed by both jurors and by compurgators. With time witnesses began to appear in court they were not so treated despite the fact that their functions were akin to that of modern witnesses. This was due to the fact that their role were not yet differentiated from those of the juror and so evidence or perjury by witnesses was not made a crime. Even in the 14th century, when witnesses started appearing before the jury to testify, perjury by them was not made a punishable offence. The maxim then was that every witness's evidence on oath was true. Perjury by witnesses began to be punished before the end of the 15th century by the Star Chamber.\nThe immunity enjoyed by witnesses began also to be whittled down or interfered with by the Parliament in England in 1540 with subornation of perjury and, in 1562, with perjury proper. The punishment for the offence then was in the nature of monetary penalty, recoverable in a civil action and not by penal sanction. In 1613, the Star Chamber declared perjury by a witness to be a punishable offence at common law.\nPrior to the 1911 Act, perjury was governed by section 3 of the Maintenance and Embracery Act 1540, 32 Hen. 8 c. 9 (\"An Act for the Punyshement of suche persones as shall procure or comit any wyllful Perjurye\"; repealed 1967), and the Perjury Act 1728 (2 Geo. 2 c. 25).\nMateriality.\nThe requirement that the statement be material can be traced back to and has been credited to Edward Coke, who said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For if it be not material, then though it be false, yet it is no perjury, because it concerneth not the point in suit, and therefore in effect it is extra-judicial. Also this act giveth remedy to the party grieved, and if the deposition be not material, he cannot be grieved thereby.\nNorthern Ireland.\nPerjury is a statutory offence in Northern Ireland. It is created by http:// of the Perjury (Northern Ireland) Order 1979 (S.I. 1979/1714 (N.I. 19)). This replaces the Perjury Act (Northern Ireland) 1946 (c. 13) (N.I.).\nUnited States.\nPerjury operates in American law as an inherited principle of the common law of England, which defined the act as the \"willful and corrupt giving, upon a lawful oath, or in any form allowed by law to be substituted for an oath, in a judicial proceeding or course of justice, of a false testimony material to the issue or matter of inquiry\".\nWilliam Blackstone touched on the subject in his \"Commentaries on the Laws of England\", establishing perjury as \"a crime committed when a lawful oath is administered, in some judicial proceeding, to a person who swears willfully, absolutely, and falsely, in a matter material to the issue or point in question\". The punishment for perjury under the common law has varied from death to banishment and has included such grotesque penalties as severing the tongue of the perjurer. The definitional structure of perjury provides an important framework for legal proceedings, as the component parts of this definition have permeated jurisdictional lines, finding a home in American legal constructs. As such, the main tenets of perjury, including mens rea, a lawful oath, occurring during a judicial proceeding, a false testimony have remained necessary pieces of perjury's definition in the United States.\nStatutory definitions.\nPerjury's current position in the American legal system takes the form of state and federal statutes. Most notably, the United States Code prohibits perjury, which is defined in two senses for federal purposes as someone who:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(1) Having taken an oath before a competent tribunal, officer, or person, in any case in which a law of the United States authorizes an oath to be administered, that he will testify, declare, depose, or certify truly, or that any written testimony, declaration, deposition, or certificate by him subscribed, is true, willfully and contrary to such oath states or subscribes any material matter which he does not believe to be true; or\n(2) in any declaration, certificate, verification, or statement under penalty of perjury as permitted under section 1746 of title 28, United States Code, willfully subscribes as true any material matter which he does not believe to be true\nThe above statute provides for a fine and/or up to five years in prison as punishment. Within federal jurisdiction, statements made in two broad categories of judicial proceedings may qualify as perjurious: 1) Federal official proceedings, and 2) Federal Court or Grand Jury proceedings. A third type of perjury entails the procurement of perjurious statements from another person. More generally, the statement must occur in the \"course of justice\", but this definition leaves room open for interpretation.\nOne particularly precarious aspect of the phrasing is that it entails knowledge of the accused person's perception of the truthful nature of events and not necessarily the actual truth of those events. It is important to note the distinction here, between giving a false statement under oath and merely misstating a fact accidentally, but the distinction can be especially difficult to discern in court of law.\nPrecedents.\nThe development of perjury law in the United States centers on \"United States v. Dunnigan\", a seminal case that set out the parameters of perjury within United States law. The court uses the Dunnigan-based legal standard to determine if an accused person: \"testifying under oath or affirmation violates this section if she gives false testimony concerning a material matter with the willful intent to provide false testimony, rather than as a result of confusion, mistake, or faulty memory.\" However, a defendant shown to be willfully ignorant may in fact be eligible for perjury prosecution.\n\"Dunnigan\" distinction manifests its importance with regard to the relation between two component parts of perjury's definition: in willfully giving a false statement, a person must understand that she is giving a false statement to be considered a perjurer under the \"Dunnigan\" framework. Deliberation on the part of the defendant is required for a statement to constitute perjury. Jurisprudential developments in the American law of perjury have revolved around the facilitation of \"perjury prosecutions and thereby enhance the reliability of testimony before federal courts and grand juries\".\nWith that goal in mind, Congress has sometimes expanded the grounds on which an individual may be prosecuted for perjury, with section 1623 of the United States Code recognizing the utterance of two mutually incompatible statements as grounds for perjury indictment even if neither can unequivocally be proven false. However, the two statements must be so mutually incompatible that at least one must necessarily be false; it is irrelevant whether the false statement can be specifically identified from among the two. It thus falls on the government to show that a defendant (a) knowingly made a (b) false (c) material statement (d) under oath (e) in a legal proceeding. The proceedings can be ancillary to normal court proceedings, and thus, even such menial interactions as bail hearings can qualify as protected proceedings under this statute.\nWilfulness is an element of the offense. The mere existence of two mutually-exclusive factual statements is not sufficient to prove perjury; the prosecutor nonetheless has the duty to plead and prove that the statement was willfully made. Mere contradiction will not sustain the charge; there must be strong corroborative evidence of the contradiction.\nOne significant legal distinction lies in the specific realm of knowledge necessarily possessed by a defendant for her statements to be properly called perjury. Though the defendant must knowingly render a false statement in a legal proceeding or under federal jurisdiction, the defendant need not know that they are speaking under such conditions for the statement to constitute perjury. All tenets of perjury qualification persist: the \"knowingly\" aspect of telling the false statement simply does not apply to the defendant's knowledge about the person whose deception is intended.\nMateriality.\nThe evolution of United States perjury law has experienced the most debate with regards to the materiality requirement. Fundamentally, statements that are literally true cannot provide the basis for a perjury charge (as they do not meet the falsehood requirement) just as answers to truly ambiguous statements cannot constitute perjury. However, such fundamental truths of perjury law become muddled when discerning the materiality of a given statement and the way in which it was material to the given case. In \"United States v. Brown\", the court defined material statements as those with \"a natural tendency to influence, or is capable of influencing, the decision of the decision-making body to be addressed\", such as a jury or grand jury.\nWhile courts have specifically made clear certain instances that have succeeded or failed to meet the nebulous threshold for materiality, the topic remains unresolved in large part, except in certain legal areas where intent manifests itself in an abundantly clear fashion, such as with the so-called perjury trap, a specific situation in which a prosecutor calls a person to testify before a grand jury with the intent of drawing a perjurious statement from the person being questioned.\nDefense of recantation.\nDespite a tendency of US perjury law toward broad prosecutory power under perjury statutes, American perjury law has afforded potential defendants a new form of defense not found in the English common law. This defense requires that an individual admit to making a perjurious statement during that same proceeding and recanting the statement. Though this defensive loophole slightly narrows the types of cases which may be prosecuted for perjury, the effect of this statutory defense is to promote a truthful retelling of facts by witnesses, thus helping to ensure the reliability of American court proceedings just as broadened perjury statutes aimed to do.\nSubornation of perjury.\nSubornation of perjury stands as a subset of US perjury laws and prohibits an individual from inducing another to commit perjury. Subornation of perjury entails equivalent possible punishments as perjury on the federal level. The crime requires an extra level of satisfactory proof, as prosecutors must show not only that perjury occurred but also that the defendant positively induced said perjury. Furthermore, the inducing defendant must know that the suborned statement is a false, perjurious statement.\nAllegations of perjury.\nNotable people who have been accused of perjury include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23689", "revid": "49829305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23689", "title": "Phoenix", "text": "Phoenix most often refers to:\nPhoenix may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBusiness.\nIn business, generally:\nSpecific businesses named \"Phoenix\" include:\nSee also.\nOther related terms.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23690", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23690", "title": "Phosphate", "text": "Anion, salt, functional group or ester derived from a phosphoric acid\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nIn chemistry, a phosphate is an anion, salt, functional group or ester derived from a phosphoric acid. It most commonly means orthophosphate, a derivative of orthophosphoric acid, phosphoric acid .\nThe phosphate or orthophosphate ion is derived from phosphoric acid by the removal of three protons . Removal of one proton gives the dihydrogen phosphate ion while removal of two protons gives the hydrogen phosphate ion . These names are also used for salts of those anions, such as ammonium dihydrogen phosphate and trisodium phosphate.\nIn organic chemistry, phosphate or orthophosphate is an organophosphate, an ester of orthophosphoric acid of the form where one or more hydrogen atoms are replaced by organic groups. An example is trimethyl phosphate, . The term also refers to the trivalent functional group in such esters. Phosphates may contain sulfur in place of one or more oxygen atoms (thiophosphates and organothiophosphates).\nOrthophosphates are especially important among the various phosphates because of their key roles in biochemistry, biogeochemistry, and ecology, and their economic importance for agriculture and industry. The addition and removal of phosphate groups (phosphorylation and dephosphorylation) are key steps in cell metabolism.\nOrthophosphates can condense to form pyrophosphates.\nChemical properties.\nThe phosphate ion has a molar mass of 94.97\u00a0g/mol, and consists of a central phosphorus atom surrounded by four oxygen atoms in a tetrahedral arrangement. It is the conjugate base of the hydrogen phosphate ion , which in turn is the conjugate base of the dihydrogen phosphate ion , which in turn is the conjugate base of orthophosphoric acid, .\nMany phosphates are soluble in water at standard temperature and pressure. The sodium, potassium, rubidium, caesium, and ammonium phosphates are all water-soluble. Most other phosphates are only slightly soluble or are insoluble in water. As a rule, the hydrogen and dihydrogen phosphates are slightly more soluble than the corresponding phosphates.\nEquilibria in solution.\nIn water solution, orthophosphoric acid and its three derived anions coexist according to the dissociation and recombination equilibria below\nValues are at 25\u00b0C and 0 ionic strength.\nThe p\"K\"\"a\" values are the pH values where the concentration of each species is equal to that of its conjugate bases. At pH 1 or lower, the phosphoric acid is practically undissociated. Around pH 4.7 (mid-way between the first two p\"K\"\"a\" values) the dihydrogen phosphate ion, , is practically the only species present. Around pH 9.8 (mid-way between the second and third p\"K\"\"a\" values) the monohydrogen phosphate ion, , is the only species present. At pH 13 or higher, the acid is completely dissociated as the phosphate ion, .\nThis means that salts of the mono- and di-phosphate ions can be selectively crystallised from aqueous solution by setting the pH value to either 4.7 or 9.8.\nIn effect, , and behave as separate weak acids because the successive p\"K\"\"a\" differ by more than 4.\nPhosphate can form many polymeric ions such as pyrophosphate, , and triphosphate, . The various metaphosphate ions (which are usually long linear polymers) have an empirical formula of and are found in many compounds.\nBiochemistry of phosphates.\nIn biological systems, phosphorus can be found as free phosphate anions in solution (inorganic phosphate) or bound to organic molecules as various organophosphates.\nInorganic phosphate is generally denoted Pi and at physiological (homeostatic) pH primarily consists of a mixture of and ions. At a neutral pH, as in the cytosol (pH = 7.0), the concentrations of the orthophosphoric acid and its three anions have the ratios\nformula_1\nThus, only the and ions are present in significant amounts in the cytosol (62% , 38% ). In extracellular fluid (pH = 7.4), this proportion is inverted (61% , 39% ).\nInorganic phosphate can also be present as pyrophosphate anions , which give orthophosphate by hydrolysis:\nOrganic phosphates are commonly found in the form of esters as nucleotides (e.g. AMP, ADP, and ATP) and in DNA and RNA. Free orthophosphate anions can be released by the hydrolysis of the phosphoanhydride bonds in ATP or ADP. These phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions are the immediate storage and source of energy for many metabolic processes. ATP and ADP are often referred to as high-energy phosphates, as are the phosphagens in muscle tissue. Similar reactions exist for the other nucleoside diphosphates and triphosphates.\nBones and teeth.\nAn important occurrence of phosphates in biological systems is as the structural material of bone and teeth. These structures are made of crystalline calcium phosphate in the form of hydroxyapatite. The hard dense enamel of mammalian teeth may contain fluoroapatite, a hydroxy calcium phosphate where some of the hydroxyl groups have been replaced by fluoride ions.\nMedical and biological research uses.\nPhosphates are medicinal salts of phosphorus. Some phosphates, which help cure many urinary tract infections, are used to make urine more acidic. To avoid the development of calcium stones in the urinary tract, some phosphates are used. For patients who are unable to get enough phosphorus in their daily diet, phosphates are used as dietary supplements, usually because of certain disorders or diseases. Injectable phosphates can only be handled by qualified health care providers.\nPlant metabolism.\nPlants take up phosphorus through several pathways: the arbuscular mycorrhizal pathway and the direct uptake pathway.\nAdverse health effects.\nHyperphosphatemia, or a high blood level of phosphates, is associated with elevated mortality in the general population. The most common cause of hyperphosphatemia in people, dogs, and cats is kidney failure. In cases of hyperphosphatemia, limiting consumption of phosphate-rich foods, such as some meats and dairy items and foods with a high phosphate-to-protein ratio, such as soft drinks, fast food, processed foods, condiments, and other products containing phosphate-salt additives is advised. \nPhosphates induce vascular calcification, and a high concentration of phosphates in blood was found to be a predictor of cardiovascular events.\nProduction.\nGeological occurrence.\nPhosphates are the naturally occurring form of the element phosphorus, found in many phosphate minerals. In mineralogy and geology, phosphate refers to a rock or ore containing phosphate ions. Inorganic phosphates are mined to obtain phosphorus for use in agriculture and industry.\nThe largest global producer and exporter of phosphates is Morocco. Within North America, the largest deposits lie in the Bone Valley region of central Florida, the Soda Springs region of southeastern Idaho, and the coast of North Carolina. Smaller deposits are located in Montana, Tennessee, Georgia, and South Carolina. The small island nation of Nauru and its neighbor Banaba Island, which used to have massive phosphate deposits of the best quality, have been mined excessively. Rock phosphate can also be found in Egypt, Israel, Palestine, Western Sahara, Navassa Island, Tunisia, Togo, and Jordan, countries that have large phosphate-mining industries.\nPhosphorite mines are primarily found in:\nIn 2007, at the current rate of consumption, the supply of phosphorus was estimated to run out in 345 years. However, some scientists thought that a \"peak phosphorus\" would occur in 30 years and Dana Cordell from Institute for Sustainable Futures said that at \"current rates, reserves will be depleted in the next 50 to 100 years\". Reserves refer to the amount assumed recoverable at current market prices. In 2012 the USGS estimated world reserves at 71 billion tons, while 0.19 billion tons were mined globally in 2011. Phosphorus comprises 0.1% by mass of the average rock (while, for perspective, its typical concentration in vegetation is 0.03% to 0.2%), and consequently there are quadrillions of tons of phosphorus in Earth's 3\u00d71019-ton crust, albeit at predominantly lower concentration than the deposits counted as reserves, which are inventoried and cheaper to extract. If it is assumed that the phosphate minerals in phosphate rock are mainly hydroxyapatite and fluoroapatite, phosphate minerals contain roughly 18.5% phosphorus by weight. If phosphate rock contains around 20% of these minerals, the average phosphate rock has roughly 3.7% phosphorus by weight.\nSome phosphate rock deposits, such as Mulberry in Florida, are notable for their inclusion of significant quantities of radioactive uranium isotopes. This is a concern because radioactivity can be released into surface waters from application of the resulting phosphate fertilizer.\nIn December 2012, Cominco Resources announced an updated JORC compliant resource of their Hinda project in Congo-Brazzaville of 531 million tons, making it the largest measured and indicated phosphate deposit in the world.\nAround 2018, Norway discovered phosphate deposits almost equal to those in the rest of Earth combined.\nIn July 2022 China announced quotas on phosphate exportation.\nThe largest importers in millions of metric tons of phosphate are Brazil 3.2, India 2.9 and the USA 1.6.\nMining.\nThe three principal phosphate producer countries (China, Morocco and the United States) account for about 70% of world production.\nEcology.\nIn ecological terms, because of its important role in biological systems, phosphate is a highly sought after resource. Once used, it is often a limiting nutrient in environments, and its availability may govern the rate of growth of organisms. This is generally true of freshwater environments, whereas nitrogen is more often the limiting nutrient in marine (seawater) environments. Addition of high levels of phosphate to environments and to micro-environments in which it is typically rare can have significant ecological consequences. For example, blooms in the populations of some organisms at the expense of others, and the collapse of populations deprived of resources such as oxygen (see eutrophication) can occur. In the context of pollution, phosphates are one component of total dissolved solids, a major indicator of water quality, but not all phosphorus is in a molecular form that algae can break down and consume.\nCalcium hydroxyapatite and calcite precipitates can be found around bacteria in alluvial topsoil. As clay minerals promote biomineralization, the presence of bacteria and clay minerals resulted in calcium hydroxyapatite and calcite precipitates.\nPhosphate deposits can contain significant amounts of naturally occurring heavy metals. Mining operations processing phosphate rock can leave tailings piles containing elevated levels of cadmium, lead, nickel, copper, chromium, and uranium. Unless carefully managed, these waste products can leach heavy metals into groundwater or nearby estuaries. Uptake of these substances by plants and marine life can lead to concentration of toxic heavy metals in food products.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23692", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23692", "title": "Prime number theorem", "text": "Characterization of how many integers are prime\nIn mathematics, the prime number theorem (PNT) describes the asymptotic distribution of prime numbers among the positive integers. It formalizes the intuitive idea that primes become less common as they become larger by precisely quantifying the rate at which this occurs. The theorem was proved independently by Jacques Hadamard and Charles Jean de la Vall\u00e9e Poussin in 1896 using ideas introduced by Bernhard Riemann (in particular, the Riemann zeta function).\nThe first such distribution found is \"\u03c0\"(\"N\") ~, where \"\u03c0\"(\"N\") is the prime-counting function (the number of primes less than or equal to \"N\") and log(\"N\") is the natural logarithm of N. This means that for large enough N, the probability that a random integer not greater than N is prime is very close to 1 / log(\"N\"). In other words, the average gap between consecutive prime numbers among the first N integers is roughly log(\"N\"). Consequently, a random integer with at most 2\"n\" digits (for large enough n) is about half as likely to be prime as a random integer with at most n digits. For example, among the positive integers of at most 1000 digits, about one in 2300 is prime (log(101000) \u2248 2302.6), whereas among positive integers of at most 2000 digits, about one in 4600 is prime (log(102000) \u2248 4605.2).\nStatement.\nLet \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") be the prime-counting function defined to be the number of primes less than or equal to x, for any real number\u00a0x. For example, \"\u03c0\"(10) \n 4 because there are four prime numbers (2, 3, 5 and 7) less than or equal to 10. The prime number theorem then states that \"x\" / log \"x\" is a good approximation to \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") (where log here means the natural logarithm), in the sense that the limit of the \"quotient\" of the two functions \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") and \"x\" / log \"x\" as x increases without bound is 1:\n formula_1\nknown as the asymptotic law of distribution of prime numbers. Using asymptotic notation this result can be restated as\n formula_2\nThis notation (and the theorem) does \"not\" say anything about the limit of the \"difference\" of the two functions as x increases without bound. Instead, the theorem states that \"x\" / log \"x\" approximates \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") in the sense that the relative error of this approximation approaches 0 as x increases without bound.\nThe prime number theorem is equivalent to the statement that the nth prime number pn satisfies\n formula_3\nthe asymptotic notation meaning, again, that the relative error of this approximation approaches 0 as n increases without bound. For example, the th prime number is , and ()log() rounds to , a relative error of about 6.4%.\nOn the other hand, the following asymptotic relations are logically equivalent:\n formula_4\nAs outlined below, the prime number theorem is also equivalent to\n formula_5\nwhere \u03d1 and \u03c8 are the first and the second Chebyshev functions respectively, and to\n formula_692\u201394\nwhere formula_7 is the Mertens function.\nHistory of the proof of the asymptotic law of prime numbers.\nBased on the tables by Anton Felkel and Jurij Vega, Adrien-Marie Legendre conjectured in 1797 or 1798 that \"\u03c0\"(\"a\") is approximated by the function where A and B are unspecified constants. In the second edition of his book on number theory (1808) he then made a more precise conjecture, with and Carl Friedrich Gauss considered the same question at age 15 or 16 \"in the year 1792 or 1793\", according to his own recollection in 1849. In 1838 Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet came up with his own approximating function, the logarithmic integral li(\"x\") (under the slightly different form of a series, which he communicated to Gauss). Both Legendre's and Dirichlet's formulas imply the same conjectured asymptotic equivalence of \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") and stated above, although it turned out that Dirichlet's approximation is considerably better if one considers the differences instead of quotients.\nIn two papers from 1848 and 1850, the Russian mathematician Pafnuty Chebyshev attempted to prove the asymptotic law of distribution of prime numbers. His work is notable for the use of the zeta function \"\u03b6\"(\"s\"), for real values of the argument \"s\", as in works of Leonhard Euler, as early as 1737. Chebyshev's papers predated Riemann's celebrated memoir of 1859, and he succeeded in proving a slightly weaker form of the asymptotic law, namely, that if the limit as x goes to infinity of \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") / (\"x\" / log(\"x\")) exists at all, then it is necessarily equal to one. He was able to prove unconditionally that this ratio is bounded above and below by 0.92129 and 1.10555, for all sufficiently large x. Although Chebyshev's paper did not prove the Prime Number Theorem, his estimates for \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") were strong enough for him to prove Bertrand's postulate that there exists a prime number between \"n\" and 2\"n\" for any integer \"n\" \u2265 2.\nAn important paper concerning the distribution of prime numbers was Riemann's 1859 memoir \"On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude\", the only paper he ever wrote on the subject. Riemann introduced new ideas into the subject, chiefly that the distribution of prime numbers is intimately connected with the zeros of the analytically extended Riemann zeta function of a complex variable. In particular, it is in this paper that the idea to apply methods of complex analysis to the study of the real function \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") originates. Extending Riemann's ideas, two proofs of the asymptotic law of the distribution of prime numbers were found independently by Jacques Hadamard and Charles Jean de la Vall\u00e9e Poussin and appeared in the same year (1896). Both proofs used methods from complex analysis, establishing as a main step of the proof that the Riemann zeta function \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") is nonzero for all complex values of the variable s that have the form with \nDuring the 20th century, the theorem of Hadamard and de la Vall\u00e9e Poussin also became known as the Prime Number Theorem. Several different proofs of it were found, including the \"elementary\" proofs of Atle Selberg (1949) and Paul Erd\u0151s (1949). Hadamard's and de la Vall\u00e9e Poussin's original proofs are long and elaborate; later proofs introduced various simplifications through the use of Tauberian theorems but remained difficult to digest. A short proof was discovered in 1980 by the American mathematician Donald J. Newman. Newman's proof is arguably the simplest known proof of the theorem, although it is not \"elementary\" since it uses Cauchy's integral theorem from complex analysis.\nProof sketch.\nHere is a sketch of the proof referred to in one of Terence Tao's lectures. Like most proofs of the PNT, it starts out by reformulating the problem in terms of a less intuitive, but better-behaved, prime-counting function. The idea is to count the primes (or a related set such as the set of prime powers) with \"weights\" to arrive at a function with smoother asymptotic behavior. The most common such generalized counting function is the Chebyshev function \"\u03c8\"(\"x\"), defined by\n formula_8 \nThis is sometimes written as\n formula_9\nwhere \"\u039b\"(\"n\") is the von Mangoldt function, namely\n formula_10\nIt is now relatively easy to check that the PNT is equivalent to the claim that\n formula_11\nIndeed, this follows from the easy estimates\n formula_12\nand (using big O notation) for any \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0,\n formula_13\nThe next step is to find a useful representation for \"\u03c8\"(\"x\"). Let \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") be the Riemann zeta function. It can be shown that \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") is related to the von Mangoldt function \"\u039b\"(\"n\"), and hence to \"\u03c8\"(\"x\"), via the relation\n formula_14\nA delicate analysis of this equation and related properties of the zeta function, using the Mellin transform and Perron's formula, shows that for non-integer x the equation\n formula_15\nholds, where the sum is over all zeros (trivial and nontrivial) of the zeta function. This striking formula is one of the so-called explicit formulas of number theory, and is already suggestive of the result we wish to prove, since the term x (claimed to be the correct asymptotic order of \"\u03c8\"(\"x\")) appears on the right-hand side, followed by (presumably) lower-order asymptotic terms.\nThe next step in the proof involves a study of the zeros of the zeta function. The trivial zeros \u22122, \u22124, \u22126, \u22128, ... can be handled separately:\n formula_16\nwhich vanishes for large x. The nontrivial zeros, namely those on the critical strip 0 \u2264 Re(\"s\") \u2264 1, can potentially be of an asymptotic order comparable to the main term x if Re(\"\u03c1\") \n 1, so we need to show that all zeros have real part strictly less than 1.\nNon-vanishing on Re(\"s\") = 1.\nTo do this, we take for granted that \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") is meromorphic in the half-plane Re(\"s\") &gt; 0, and is analytic there except for a simple pole at \"s\" \n 1, and that there is a product formula\n formula_17\nfor Re(\"s\") &gt; 1. This product formula follows from the existence of unique prime factorization of integers, and shows that \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") is never zero in this region, so that its logarithm is defined there and\n formula_18\nWrite \"s\" \n \"x\" + \"iy\" ; then\n formula_19\nNow observe the identity\n formula_20\nso that\n formula_21\nfor all \"x\" &gt; 1. Suppose now that \"\u03b6\"(1 + \"iy\") \n 0. Certainly y is not zero, since \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") has a simple pole at \"s\" \n 1. Suppose that \"x\" &gt; 1 and let x tend to 1 from above. Since formula_22 has a simple pole at \"s\" \n 1 and \"\u03b6\"(\"x\" + 2\"iy\") stays analytic, the left hand side in the previous inequality tends to 0, a contradiction.\nFinally, we can conclude that the PNT is heuristically true. To rigorously complete the proof there are still serious technicalities to overcome, due to the fact that the summation over zeta zeros in the explicit formula for \"\u03c8\"(\"x\") does not converge absolutely but only conditionally and in a \"principal value\" sense. There are several ways around this problem but many of them require rather delicate complex-analytic estimates. Edwards's book provides the details. Another method is to use Ikehara's Tauberian theorem, though this theorem is itself quite hard to prove. D.J. Newman observed that the full strength of Ikehara's theorem is not needed for the prime number theorem, and one can get away with a special case that is much easier to prove.\nNewman's proof of the prime number theorem.\nD.J. Newman gives a quick proof of the prime number theorem (PNT). The proof is \"non-elementary\" by virtue of relying on complex analysis, but uses only elementary techniques from a first course in the subject: Cauchy's integral formula, Cauchy's integral theorem and estimates of complex integrals. Here is a brief sketch of this proof. See for the complete details.\nThe proof uses the same preliminaries as in the previous section except instead of the function formula_23 the Chebyshev function formula_24 is used, which is obtained by dropping some of the terms from the series for formula_25 Similar to the argument in the previous proof based on Tao's lecture, we can show that and for any Thus, the PNT is equivalent to formula_26\nLikewise instead of formula_27 the function formula_28 is used, which is obtained by dropping some terms in the series for formula_29 The functions formula_30 and formula_31 differ by a function holomorphic on formula_32 Since, as was shown in the previous section, formula_33 has no zeroes on the line formula_34 and formula_35 has no singularities on formula_32\nOne further piece of information needed in Newman's proof, and which is the key to the estimates in his simple method, is that formula_37 is bounded. This is proved using an ingenious and easy method due to Chebyshev.\nIntegration by parts shows how formula_38 and formula_30 are related: For formula_40\n formula_41\nNewman's method proves the PNT by showing the integral \n formula_42\nconverges, and therefore the integrand goes to zero as formula_43 which is the PNT. In general, the convergence of the improper integral does not imply that the integrand goes to zero at infinity, since it may oscillate, but since formula_44 is increasing, it is easy to show in this case.\nTo show the convergence of formula_45 for formula_46 let \n formula_47 and formula_48 where formula_49\nthen\n formula_50\nwhich is equal to a function holomorphic on the line formula_51\nThe convergence of the integral formula_45 and thus the PNT, is proved by showing that formula_53 This involves change of order of limits since it can be written formula_54 and therefore classified as a Tauberian theorem.\nThe difference formula_55 is expressed using Cauchy's integral formula and then shown to be small for large formula_56 by estimating the integrand: Fix formula_57 and formula_58 so that formula_59 is holomorphic in the region where formula_60 and formula_61 and let formula_62 be the boundary of that region. Since 0 is in the interior of the region, Cauchy's integral formula gives \n formula_63\nwhere formula_64 is the factor introduced by Newman, which does not change the integral since formula_65 is entire and formula_66\nTo estimate the integral, break the contour formula_62 into two parts, formula_68 where formula_69 and formula_70 Then \n formula_71\nwhere formula_72 Note that formula_73 and hence formula_74 are bounded; so let formula_75 be some upper bound: formula_76\nThis bound, combined with the estimate formula_77 for formula_78 together give that the absolute value of the first integral must be formula_79 The integrand over formula_80 in the second integral is entire, so by Cauchy's integral theorem, the contour formula_80 can be modified to a semicircle of radius formula_82 in the left half-plane without changing the integral, and the same argument as for the first integral gives the absolute value of the second integral must be formula_79 Finally, letting formula_84 the third integral goes to zero since formula_85 and hence formula_65 goes to zero on the contour. Combining the two estimates and the limit get\n formula_87\nThis holds for any formula_82 so formula_89 and the PNT follows.\nPrime-counting function in terms of the logarithmic integral.\nIn a handwritten note on a reprint of his 1838 paper \"\", which he mailed to Gauss, Dirichlet conjectured (under a slightly different form appealing to a series rather than an integral) that an even better approximation to \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") is given by the offset logarithmic integral function Li(\"x\"), defined by\n formula_90\nIndeed, this integral is strongly suggestive of the notion that the \"density\" of primes around t should be 1 / log \"t\". This function is related to the logarithm by the asymptotic expansion\n formula_91\nSo, the prime number theorem can also be written as \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") ~ Li(\"x\"). In fact, in another paper in 1899 de la Vall\u00e9e Poussin proved that\n formula_92\nfor some positive constant a, where \"O\"(...) is the big O notation. This has been improved to\n formula_93 where formula_94.\nIn 2016, Timothy Trudgian proved an explicit upper bound for the difference between formula_95 and formula_96:\n formula_97\nfor formula_98.\nThe connection between the Riemann zeta function and \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") is one reason the Riemann hypothesis has considerable importance in number theory: if established, it would yield a far better estimate of the error involved in the prime number theorem than is available today. More specifically, Helge von Koch showed in 1901 that if the Riemann hypothesis is true, the error term in the above relation can be improved to\n formula_99\n(this last estimate is in fact equivalent to the Riemann hypothesis). The constant involved in the big O notation was estimated in 1976 by Lowell Schoenfeld, assuming the Riemann hypothesis:\n formula_100\nfor all \"x\" \u2265 2657. He also derived a similar bound for the Chebyshev prime-counting function \u03c8:\n formula_101\nfor all \"x\" \u2265 73.2\u00a0. This latter bound has been shown to express a variance to mean power law (when regarded as a random function over the integers) and \u00a0noise and to also correspond to the Tweedie compound Poisson distribution. (The Tweedie distributions represent a family of scale invariant distributions that serve as foci of convergence for a generalization of the central limit theorem.) A lower bound is also derived by J. E. Littlewood, assuming the Riemann hypothesis:\n formula_102\nThe logarithmic integral li(\"x\") is larger than \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") for \"small\" values of x. This is because it is (in some sense) counting not primes, but prime powers, where a power pn of a prime p is counted as of a prime. This suggests that li(\"x\") should usually be larger than \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") by roughly formula_103 and in particular should always be larger than \"\u03c0\"(\"x\"). However, in 1914, Littlewood proved that formula_104 changes sign infinitely often. The first value of x where \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") exceeds li(\"x\") is probably around \"x\" ~ 10316; see the article on Skewes' number for more details. (On the other hand, the offset logarithmic integral Li(\"x\") is smaller than \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") already for \"x\" \n 2; indeed, Li(2) \n 0, while \"\u03c0\"(2) \n 1.)\nElementary proofs.\nIn the first half of the twentieth century, some mathematicians (notably G. H. Hardy) believed that there exists a hierarchy of proof methods in mathematics depending on what sorts of numbers (integers, reals, complex) a proof requires, and that the prime number theorem (PNT) is a \"deep\" theorem by virtue of requiring complex analysis. This belief was somewhat shaken by a proof of the PNT based on Wiener's tauberian theorem, though Wiener's proof ultimately relies on properties of the Riemann zeta function on the line formula_105, where complex analysis must be used.\nIn March 1948, Atle Selberg established, by \"elementary\" means, the asymptotic formula\n formula_106\nwhere\n formula_107\nfor primes p. By July of that year, Selberg and Paul Erd\u0151s had each obtained elementary proofs of the PNT, both using Selberg's asymptotic formula as a starting point. These proofs effectively laid to rest the notion that the PNT was \"deep\" in that sense, and showed that technically \"elementary\" methods were more powerful than had been believed to be the case. On the history of the elementary proofs of the PNT, including the Erd\u0151s\u2013Selberg priority dispute, see an article by Dorian Goldfeld.\nThere is some debate about the significance of Erd\u0151s and Selberg's result. There is no rigorous and widely accepted definition of the notion of elementary proof in number theory, so it is not clear exactly in what sense their proof is \"elementary\". Although it does not use complex analysis, it is in fact much more technical than the standard proof of PNT. One possible definition of an \"elementary\" proof is \"one that can be carried out in first-order Peano arithmetic.\" There are number-theoretic statements (for example, the Paris\u2013Harrington theorem) provable using second order but not first-order methods, but such theorems are rare to date. Erd\u0151s and Selberg's proof can certainly be formalized in Peano arithmetic, and in 1994, Charalambos Cornaros and Costas Dimitracopoulos proved that their proof can be formalized in a very weak fragment of PA, namely \"I\"\u03940 + exp. However, this does not address the question of whether or not the standard proof of PNT can be formalized in PA.\nA more recent \"elementary\" proof of the prime number theorem uses ergodic theory, due to Florian Richter. The prime number theorem is obtained there in an equivalent form that the Ces\u00e0ro sum of the values of the Liouville function is zero. The Liouville function is formula_108 where formula_109 is the number of prime factors, with multiplicity, of the integer formula_110. Bergelson and Richter (2022) then obtain this form of the prime number theorem from an ergodic theorem which they prove:\n Let formula_111 be a compact metric space, formula_112 a continuous self-map of formula_111, and formula_114 a formula_112-invariant Borel probability measure for which formula_112 is uniquely ergodic. Then, for every formula_117,\nformula_118\nThis ergodic theorem can also be used to give \"soft\" proofs of results related to the prime number theorem, such as the Pillai\u2013Selberg theorem and Erd\u0151s\u2013Delange theorem.\nComputer verifications.\nIn 2005, Avigad \"et al.\" employed the Isabelle theorem prover to devise a computer-verified variant of the Erd\u0151s\u2013Selberg proof of the PNT. This was the first machine-verified proof of the PNT. Avigad chose to formalize the Erd\u0151s\u2013Selberg proof rather than an analytic one because while Isabelle's library at the time could implement the notions of limit, derivative, and transcendental function, it had almost no theory of integration to speak of.\nIn 2009, John Harrison employed HOL Light to formalize a proof employing complex analysis. By developing the necessary analytic machinery, including the Cauchy integral formula, Harrison was able to formalize \"a direct, modern and elegant proof instead of the more involved 'elementary' Erd\u0151s\u2013Selberg argument\".\nPrime number theorem for arithmetic progressions.\nLet \"\u03c0\"\"d\",\"a\"(\"x\") denote the number of primes in the arithmetic progression \"a\", \"a\" + \"d\", \"a\" + 2\"d\", \"a\" + 3\"d\", ... that are less than x. Dirichlet and Legendre conjectured, and de la Vall\u00e9e Poussin proved, that if a and d are coprime, then\n formula_119\nwhere \u03c6 is Euler's totient function. In other words, the primes are distributed evenly among the residue classes [\"a\"] modulo d with gcd(\"a\", \"d\") \n 1\u00a0. This is stronger than Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions (which only states that there is an infinity of primes in each class) and can be proved using similar methods used by Newman for his proof of the prime number theorem.\nThe Siegel\u2013Walfisz theorem gives a good estimate for the distribution of primes in residue classes.\nBennett \"et al.\"\nproved the following estimate that has explicit constants A and B (Theorem 1.3):\nLet d formula_120 be an integer and let a be an integer that is coprime to d. Then there are positive constants A and B such that\n formula_121\nwhere\n formula_122 \nand\n formula_123\nPrime number race.\nAlthough we have in particular\n formula_124\nempirically the primes congruent to 3 are more numerous and are nearly always ahead in this \"prime number race\"; the first reversal occurs at \"x\" \n 26861. However Littlewood showed in 1914 that there are infinitely many sign changes for the function\n formula_125\nso the lead in the race switches back and forth infinitely many times. The phenomenon that \"\u03c0\"4,3(\"x\") is ahead most of the time is called Chebyshev's bias. The prime number race generalizes to other moduli and is the subject of much research; P\u00e1l Tur\u00e1n asked whether it is always the case that \"\u03c0\"\"c\",\"a\"(\"x\") and \"\u03c0\"\"c\",\"b\"(\"x\") change places when a and b are coprime to c. Granville and Martin give a thorough exposition and survey.\nAnother example is the distribution of the last digit of prime numbers. Except for 2 and 5, all prime numbers end in 1, 3, 7, or 9. Dirichlet's theorem states that asymptotically, 25% of all primes end in each of these four digits. However, empirical evidence shows that, for a given limit, there tend to be slightly more primes that end in 3 or 7 than end in 1 or 9 (a generation of the Chebyshev's bias). This follows that 1 and 9 are quadratic residues modulo 10, and 3 and 7 are quadratic nonresidues modulo 10.\nNon-asymptotic bounds on the prime-counting function.\nThe prime number theorem is an \"asymptotic\" result. It gives an ineffective bound on \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") as a direct consequence of the definition of the limit: for all \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0, there is an S such that for all \"x\" &gt; \"S\",\n formula_126\nHowever, better bounds on \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") are known, for instance Pierre Dusart's\n formula_127\nThe first inequality holds for all \"x\" \u2265 599 and the second one for \"x\" \u2265 355991.\nThe proof by de la Vall\u00e9e Poussin implies the following bound: For every \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0, there is an S such that for all \"x\" &gt; \"S\",\n formula_128\nThe value \"\u03b5\" \n 3 gives a weak but sometimes useful bound for \"x\" \u2265 55:\n formula_129\nIn Pierre Dusart's thesis there are stronger versions of this type of inequality that are valid for larger x. Later in 2010, Dusart proved:\n formula_130\nNote that the first of these obsoletes the \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0 condition on the lower bound.\nApproximations for the \"n\"th prime number.\nAs a consequence of the prime number theorem, one gets an asymptotic expression for the nth prime number, denoted by \"p\"\"n\":\n formula_131\nA better approximation is by Ces\u00e0ro (1894):\n formula_132\n formula_133\nAgain considering the th prime number , assuming the trailing error term is zero gives an estimate of ; the first 5 digits match and relative error is about 0.46 parts per million.\nCipolla (1902) showed that these are the leading terms of an infinite series which may be truncated at arbitrary degree, with\n formula_134\nwhere each \"Pi\" is a degree-i monic polynomial. (\"P\"1(\"y\") = \"y\" \u2212 2, \"P\"2(\"y\") = \"y\"2 \u2212 6\"y\" + 11, \"P\"3(\"y\") = \"y\"3 \u2212 \"y\"2 + 42\"y\" +, and so on.)\nRosser's theorem states that \n formula_135 \nDusart (1999). found tighter bounds using the form of the Ces\u00e0ro/Cipolla approximations but varying the lowest-order constant term. \"Bk\"(\"x\"; \"C\") is the same function as above, but with the lowest-order constant term replaced by a parameter C:\n formula_136\nThe upper bounds can be extended to smaller n by loosening the parameter. For example, \"pn\" &lt; \"n B\"1(log \"n\"; 0.5) for all \"n\" &amp;geq; 20.\nAxler (2019) extended this to higher order, showing:\n formula_137\nAgain, the bound on n may be decreased by loosening the parameter. For example, \"pn\" &lt; \"n B\"2(log \"n\"; 0) for n &amp;geq; 3468.\nTable of \"\u03c0\"(\"x\"), \"x\" / log \"x\", and li(\"x\").\nThe table compares exact values of \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") to the two approximations \"x\" / log \"x\" and li(\"x\"). The approximation difference columns are rounded to the nearest integer, but the \"% error\" columns are computed based on the unrounded approximations. The last column, \"x\" / \"\u03c0\"(\"x\"), is the average prime gap below\u00a0x.\nThe value for \"\u03c0\"(1024) was originally computed assuming the Riemann hypothesis; it has since been verified unconditionally.\nAnalogue for irreducible polynomials over a finite field.\nThere is an analogue of the prime number theorem that describes the \"distribution\" of irreducible polynomials over a finite field; the form it takes is strikingly similar to the case of the classical prime number theorem.\nTo state it precisely, let \"F\" \n GF(\"q\") be the finite field with q elements, for some fixed q, and let Nn be the number of monic \"irreducible\" polynomials over F whose degree is equal to n. That is, we are looking at polynomials with coefficients chosen from F, which cannot be written as products of polynomials of smaller degree. In this setting, these polynomials play the role of the prime numbers, since all other monic polynomials are built up of products of them. One can then prove that\n formula_138\nIf we make the substitution \"x\" \n \"q\"\"n\", then the right hand side is just\n formula_139\nwhich makes the analogy clearer. Since there are precisely \"q\"\"n\" monic polynomials of degree n (including the reducible ones), this can be rephrased as follows: if a monic polynomial of degree n is selected randomly, then the probability of it being irreducible is about\u00a0.\nOne can even prove an analogue of the Riemann hypothesis, namely that\n formula_140\nThe proofs of these statements are far simpler than in the classical case. It involves a short, combinatorial argument, summarised as follows: every element of the degree n extension of F is a root of some irreducible polynomial whose degree d divides n; by counting these roots in two different ways one establishes that\n formula_141\nwhere the sum is over all divisors d of n. M\u00f6bius inversion then yields\n formula_142\nwhere \"\u03bc\"(\"k\") is the M\u00f6bius function. (This formula was known to Gauss.) The main term occurs for \"d\" \n \"n\", and it is not difficult to bound the remaining terms. The \"Riemann hypothesis\" statement depends on the fact that the largest proper divisor of n can be no larger than .\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23693", "revid": "10643005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23693", "title": "Conflict of laws", "text": "Law for cases in multiple jurisdictions\nConflict of laws (also called private international law) is the set of rules or laws a jurisdiction applies to a case, transaction, or other occurrence that has connections to more than one jurisdiction. This body of law deals with three broad topics: \"jurisdiction\", rules regarding when it is appropriate for a court to hear such a case; \"foreign judgments\", dealing with the rules by which a court in one jurisdiction mandates compliance with a ruling of a court in another jurisdiction; and \"choice of law\", which addresses the question of which substantive laws will be applied in such a case. These issues can arise in any private law context, but they are especially prevalent in contract law and tort law.\nScope and terminology.\nThe term \"conflict of laws\" is primarily used in the United States and Canada, though it has also come into use in the United Kingdom. Elsewhere, the term \"private international law\" is commonly used, for example in Switzerland, the Federal Act on Private International Law (PILA) regulates which law should be applied when a dispute has connections with more than one jurisdiction. Some scholars from countries that use \"conflict of laws\" consider the term \"private international law\" confusing because this body of law does not consist of laws that apply internationally, but rather is solely composed of domestic laws; the calculus only includes international law when the nation has treaty obligations (and even then, only to the extent that domestic law renders the treaty obligations enforceable). The term \"private international law\" comes from the private law/public law dichotomy in civil law systems. In this form of legal system, the term \"private international law\" does not imply an agreed upon international legal corpus, but rather refers to those portions of domestic private law that apply to international issues.\nImportantly, while conflict of laws generally deals with disputes of an international nature, the applicable law itself is domestic law. This is because, unlike public international law (better known simply as \"international law\"), conflict of laws does not regulate the relation between countries but rather how individual countries regulate internally the affairs of individuals with connections to more than one jurisdiction. To be sure, as in other contexts, domestic law can be affected by international treaties to which a country is party.\nMoreover, in federal states where substantial lawmaking occurs at the subnational level, notably in the United States, issues within conflict of laws often arise in wholly domestic contexts, relating to the laws of different states (or provinces, etc.) rather than of foreign countries.\nHistory.\nWestern legal systems first recognized a core underpinning of conflict of laws\u2014namely, that \"foreign law, in appropriate instances, should be applied to foreign cases\"\u2014in the twelfth century. Prior to that, the prevailing system was that of \"personal law\", in which the laws applicable to each individual were dictated by the group to which he or she belonged. Initially, the mode of this body of law was simply to determine which jurisdiction's law would be most fair to apply; over time, however, the law came to favor more well-defined rules. These rules were systematically summarized by law professor Bartolus de Saxoferrato in the middle of the fourteenth century, a work that came to be cited repeatedly for the next several centuries.\nLater, in the seventeenth century, several Dutch legal scholars, including Christian Rodenburg, Paulus Voet, Johannes Voet, and Ulrik Huber, further expounded the jurisprudence of conflict of laws. Their key conceptual contributions were twofold: First, nations are wholly sovereign within their borders and therefore cannot be compelled to enforce foreign law in their own courts. Second, in order for international conflicts of law to work rationally, nations must exercise comity in enforcing others' laws, because it is in their mutual interest to do so.Scholars began to consider ways to resolve the question of how and when formally equal sovereign States ought to recognize each other's authority. The doctrine of comity was introduced as one of the means to answer these questions. Comity has undergone various changes since its creation. However, it still refers to the idea that every State is sovereign; often, the most just exercise of one State's authority is by recognizing the authority of another through the recognition and enforcement of another state's laws and judgments. Many states continue to recognize the principle of comity as the underpinning of private international law such as in Canada. In some countries, such as the United States of America and Australia, the principle of comity is written into the State's constitution.\nIn the United States, salient issues in the field of conflict of laws date back at least to the framing of the Constitution. There was concern, for example, about what body of law the newly created federal courts would apply when handling cases between parties from different states (a type of case specifically assigned to the federal courts). Within the first two decades following ratification of the Constitution, over one hundred cases dealt with these issues, though the term \"conflict of laws\" was not yet used. The Constitution created a \"plurilegal federal union\" in which conflicts are inherently abundant, and as a result, American judges encounter conflicts cases far more often\u2014about 5,000 per year as of the mid-2010s\u2014and have accumulated far more experience in resolving them than anywhere else in the world. \nAlongside domestic developments relating to conflict of laws, the nineteenth century also saw the beginnings of substantial international collaboration in the field. The first international meeting on the topic took place in Lima in 1887 and 1888; delegates from five South American countries attended, but failed to produce an enforceable agreement. The first major multilateral agreements on the topic of conflict of laws arose from the First South American Congress of Private International Law, which was held in Montevideo from August 1888 to February 1889. The seven South American nations represented at the Montevideo conference agreed on eight treaties, which broadly adopted the ideas of Friedrich Carl von Savigny, determining applicable law on the basis of four types of factual relations (domicile, location of object, location of transaction, location of court).\nSoon after, European nations gathered for a conference in The Hague organized by Tobias Asser in 1893. This was followed by successive conferences in 1894, 1900, and 1904. Like their counterparts in Montevideo, these conferences produced several multilateral agreements on various topics within conflict of laws. Thereafter, the pace of these meetings slowed, with the next conventions occurring in 1925 and 1928. The seventh meeting at The Hague occurred in 1951, at which point the sixteen involved states established a permanent institution for international collaboration on conflict-of-laws issues. The organization is known today as the Hague Conference on Private International Law (HCCH). As of \u00a02020[ [update]], HCCH includes eighty-six member states.\nAs attention to the field became more widespread in the second half of the twentieth century, the European Union began to take action to harmonize conflict of laws jurisprudence across its member states. The first of these was the Brussels Convention agreed in 1968, which addressed questions of jurisdiction for cross-border cases. This was followed in 1980 by the Rome Convention, which addressed choice-of-law rules for contract disputes within EU member states. In 2009 and 2010, respectively, the EU enacted the Rome II Regulation to address choice-of-law in tort cases and the Rome III Regulation to address choice-of-law in divorce matters.\nJurisdiction.\nOne of the key questions addressed within conflict of laws is the determination of when the legislature of a given jurisdiction may legislate, or the court of a given jurisdiction can properly adjudicate, regarding a matter that has extra-jurisdictional dimensions. This is known as \"jurisdiction\" (sometimes subdivided into \"adjudicative jurisdiction\", the authority to hear a certain case, and \"prescriptive jurisdiction\", the authority of a legislature to pass laws covering certain conduct). Like all aspects of conflict of laws, this question is in the first instance resolved by domestic law, which may or may not incorporate relevant international treaties or other supranational legal concepts. That said, relative to the other two main subtopics of conflicts of law (enforcement of judgements, and choice of law, which are both discussed below), the theory regarding jurisdiction has developed consistent international norms. This is perhaps because, unlike the other subtopics, jurisdiction relates to the particularly thorny question of when it is appropriate for a country to exercise its coercive power at all, rather that merely how it should do so.\nThere are five bases of jurisdiction generally recognized in international law. These are not mutually exclusive; an individual or an occurrence may be subject to simultaneous jurisdiction in more than one place. They are as follows:\nCountries have also developed bodies of law for adjudicating jurisdiction disputes between subnational entities. For example, in the United States, the minimum contacts rule derived from the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution regulates the extent to which one state can exercise jurisdiction over people domiciled in other states, or occurrences that took place in other states.\nChoice of law.\nCourts faced with a choice of law issue have a two-stage process:\nContracts.\nMany contracts and other forms of legally binding agreement include a jurisdiction or arbitration clause specifying the parties' choice of venue for any litigation (called a forum selection clause). In the EU, this is governed by the Rome I Regulation. Choice of law clauses may specify which laws the court or tribunal should apply to each aspect of the dispute. This matches the substantive policy of freedom of contract and will be determined by the law of the state where the choice of law clause confers its competence. Oxford Professor Adrian Briggs suggests that this is doctrinally problematic as it is emblematic of 'pulling oneself up by the bootstraps'.\nJudges have accepted that the principle of party autonomy allows the parties to select the law most appropriate to their transaction. This judicial acceptance of subjective intent excludes the traditional reliance on objective connecting factors; it also harms consumers as vendors often impose one-sided contractual terms selecting a venue far from the buyer's home or workplace. Contractual clauses relating to consumers, employees, and insurance beneficiaries are regulated under additional terms set out in Rome I, which may modify the contractual terms imposed by vendors.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23696", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23696", "title": "Timeline of programming languages", "text": "This is a record of notable programming languages, by decade.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23697", "revid": "48734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23697", "title": "Photons", "text": ""}
{"id": "23698", "revid": "32955798", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23698", "title": "International Fixed Calendar", "text": "13-month calendar where every date is fixed to a day of the week\nThe International Fixed Calendar (also known as the Cotsworth plan, the Cotsworth calendar, the Eastman plan or the Yearal) was a proposed reform of the Gregorian calendar designed by Moses B. Cotsworth, first presented in 1902. The International Fixed Calendar divides the year into 13 months of 28 days each. A type of perennial calendar, every date is fixed to the same weekday every year. Though it was never officially adopted at the country level, the entrepreneur George Eastman instituted its use at the Eastman Kodak Company in 1928, where it was used until 1989. While it is sometimes described as \"the\" 13-month calendar or \"the\" equal-month calendar, various alternative calendar designs share these features.\nRules.\nThe calendar year has 13 months with 28 days each, divided into exactly 4 weeks (13 \u00d7 28 = 364). An extra day added as a holiday at the end of the year (after December 28, i.e. equal to December 31 Gregorian), sometimes called \"Year Day\", does not belong to any week and brings the total to 365 days. Each year coincides with the corresponding Gregorian year, so January 1 in the Cotsworth calendar always falls on Gregorian January 1. Twelve months are named and ordered the same as those of the Gregorian calendar, except that the extra month is inserted between June and July, and called \"Sol\". Situated in mid-summer (from the point of view of its Northern Hemisphere authors) and including the mid-year \"solstice\", the name of the new month was chosen in homage to the sun.\nLeap years in the International Fixed Calendar contain 366 days, and its occurrence follows the Gregorian rule. There is a leap year in every year whose number is divisible by 4, but not if the year number is divisible by 100, unless it is also divisible by 400. So although the year 2000 was a leap year, the years 1700, 1800, and 1900 were common years. The International Fixed Calendar inserts the extra day in leap years as June 29 - between Saturday June 28 and Sunday Sol 1.\nEach month begins on a Sunday, and ends on a Saturday; consequently, every year begins on Sunday. Neither Year Day nor Leap Day are considered to be part of any week; they are preceded by a Saturday and are followed by a Sunday, making a long weekend. \nAs a result, a particular day usually has a different day of the week in the IFC than in all traditional calendars that contain a seven-day week. The IFC is, however, almost compatible with the World Calendar in this regard, because it also starts Sunday and has the extra day at the end of the year and the leap day in the middle, except IFC leaps on Gregorian June 17 and TWC leaps two weeks later on July 1. Since this break of the ancient week cycle has been a major concern raised against its adoption, various leap week calendars have been proposed as a solution.\nThe date for , using this calendar is 2025.\nThe following table shows how the 13 months and extra days of the International Fixed Calendar occur in relation to the dates of the Gregorian calendar:\nHistory.\nLunisolar calendars, with fixed weekdays, existed in many ancient cultures, with certain holidays always falling on the same dates of the month and days of the week.\nThe idea of a 13-month perennial calendar has been around since at least the middle of the 18th century. Versions of the idea differ mainly on how the months are named, and the treatment of the extra day in leap year.\nThe \"Georgian calendar\" was proposed in 1745 by Reverend Hugh Jones, an American colonist from Maryland writing under the pen name Hirossa Ap-Iccim. The author named the plan, and the thirteenth month, after King George II of Great Britain. The 365th day each year was to be set aside as Christmas. The treatment of leap year varied from the Gregorian rule, however, and the year would begin closer to the winter solstice. In a later version of the plan, published in 1753, the 13 months were all renamed for Christian saints.\nIn 1849 the French philosopher Auguste Comte (1798\u20131857) proposed the 13-month \"Positivist Calendar\", naming the months: Moses, Homer, Aristotle, Archimedes, Caesar, St Paul, Charlemagne, Dante, Gutenberg, Shakespeare, Descartes, Frederic and Bichat. The days of the year were likewise dedicated to \"saints\" in the Positivist Religion of Humanity. Positivist weeks, months, and years begin with Monday instead of Sunday. Comte also reset the year number, beginning the era of his calendar (year 1) with the Gregorian year 1789. For the extra days of the year not belonging to any week or month, Comte followed the pattern of Ap-Iccim (Jones), ending each year with a festival on the 365th day, followed by a subsequent feast day occurring only in leap years.\nWhether Moses Cotsworth was familiar with the 13-month plans that preceded his International Fixed Calendar is not known. He did follow Ap-Iccim (Jones) in designating the 365th day of the year as Christmas. His suggestion was that this last day of the year should be designated a Sunday, and hence, because the following day would be New Year's Day and a Sunday also, he called it a Double Sunday. Since Cotsworth's goal was a simplified, more \"rational\" calendar for business and industry, he would carry over all the features of the Gregorian calendar consistent with this goal, including the traditional month names, the week beginning on Sunday (still traditionally used in US, but uncommon in Europe and in the ISO week standard, starting their weeks on Monday), and the Gregorian leap-year rule.\nTo promote Cotsworth's calendar reform the International Fixed Calendar League was founded in 1923, just after the plan was selected by the League of Nations as the best of 130 calendar proposals put forward. Sir Sandford Fleming, the inventor and driving force behind worldwide adoption of standard time, became the first president of the IFCL. The League opened offices in London and later in Rochester, New York. George Eastman, of the Eastman Kodak Company, became a fervent supporter of the IFC, and instituted its use at Kodak. Some organized opposition to the proposed reform came from rabbi Joseph Hertz, who objected to the way that the Jewish Sabbath would move throughout the week. Sol Bloom criticised the scheme in the House of Representatives. The International Fixed Calendar League ceased operations shortly after the calendar plan failed to win final approval of the League of Nations in 1937.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23703", "revid": "29539620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23703", "title": "Potential energy", "text": "Energy held by an object because of its position relative to other objects\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn physics, potential energy is the energy of an object or system due to the body's position relative to other objects, or the configuration of its particles. The energy is equal to the work done against any restoring forces, such as gravity or those in a spring.\nThe term \"potential energy\" was introduced by the 19th-century Scottish engineer and physicist William Rankine, although it has links to the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle's concept of \"potentiality\".\nCommon types of potential energy include gravitational potential energy, the elastic potential energy of a deformed spring, and the electric potential energy of an electric charge and an electric field. The unit for energy in the International System of Units (SI) is the joule (symbol J).\nPotential energy is associated with forces that act on a body in a way that the total work done by these forces on the body depends only on the initial and final positions of the body in space. These forces, whose total work is path independent, are called \"conservative forces\". If the force acting on a body varies over space, then one has a \"force field\"; such a field is described by vectors at every point in space, which is, in turn, called a \"vector field\". A conservative vector field can be simply expressed as the gradient of a certain scalar function, called a \"scalar potential\". The potential energy is related to, and can be obtained from, this potential function.\nOverview.\nThere are various types of potential energy, each associated with a particular type of force. For example, the work of an elastic force is called elastic potential energy; work of the gravitational force is called gravitational potential energy; work of the Coulomb force is called electric potential energy; work of the nuclear force acting on the baryon charge is called nuclear potential energy; work of intermolecular forces is called intermolecular potential energy. Chemical potential energy, such as the energy stored in fossil fuels, is the work of the Coulomb force during rearrangement of configurations of electrons and nuclei in atoms and molecules. Thermal energy usually has two components: the kinetic energy of random motions of particles and the potential energy of their configuration.\nForces derivable from a potential are also called conservative forces. The work done by a conservative force is\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the change in the potential energy associated with the force. The negative sign provides the convention that work done against a force field increases potential energy, while work done by the force field decreases potential energy. Common notations for potential energy are \"PE\", \"U\", \"V\", and \"E\"p.\nPotential energy is the energy by virtue of an object's position relative to other objects. Potential energy is often associated with restoring forces such as a spring or the force of gravity. The action of stretching a spring or lifting a mass is performed by an external force that works against the force field of the potential. This work is stored in the force field, which is said to be stored as potential energy. If the external force is removed the force field acts on the body to perform the work as it moves the body back to the initial position, reducing the stretch of the spring or causing a body to fall.\nConsider a ball whose mass is \"m\" dropped from height \"h\". The acceleration \"g\" of free fall is approximately constant, so the weight force of the ball \"mg\" is constant. The product of force and displacement gives the work done, which is equal to the gravitational potential energy, thus\nformula_3\nThe more formal definition is that potential energy is the energy difference between the energy of an object in a given position and its energy at a reference position.\nHistory.\nFrom around 1840 scientists sought to define and understand energy and work.\nThe term \"potential energy\" was coined by William Rankine a Scottish engineer and physicist in 1853 as part of a specific effort to develop terminology. He chose the term as part of the pair \"actual\" vs \"potential\" going back to work by Aristotle. In his 1867 discussion of the same topic Rankine describes potential energy as 'energy of configuration' in contrast to actual energy as 'energy of activity'. Also in 1867, William Thomson introduced \"kinetic energy\" as the opposite of \"potential energy\", asserting that all actual energy took the form of \"mv\"2. Once this hypothesis became widely accepted, the term \"actual energy\" gradually faded.\nWork and potential energy.\nPotential energy is closely linked with forces. If the work done by a force on a body that moves from \"A\" to \"B\" does not depend on the path between these points (if the work is done by a conservative force), then the work of this force measured from \"A\" assigns a scalar value to every other point in space and defines a scalar potential field. In this case, the force can be defined as the negative of the vector gradient of the potential field.\nIf the work for an applied force is independent of the path, then the work done by the force is evaluated from the start to the end of the trajectory of the point of application. This means that there is a function \"U\"(x), called a \"potential\", that can be evaluated at the two points xA and xB to obtain the work over any trajectory between these two points. It is tradition to define this function with a negative sign so that positive work is a reduction in the potential, that is \nformula_4\nwhere \"C\" is the trajectory taken from A to B. Because the work done is independent of the path taken, then this expression is true for any trajectory, \"C\", from A to B.\nThe function \"U\"(x) is called the potential energy associated with the applied force. Examples of forces that have potential energies are gravity and spring forces.\nDerivable from a potential.\nIn this section the relationship between work and potential energy is presented in more detail. The line integral that defines work along curve \"C\" takes a special form if the force F is related to a scalar field \"U\"\u2032(x) so that\nformula_5\nThis means that the units of \"U\"\u2032 must be this case, work along the curve is given by\nformula_6\nwhich can be evaluated using the gradient theorem to obtain\nformula_7\nThis shows that when forces are derivable from a scalar field, the work of those forces along a curve \"C\" is computed by evaluating the scalar field at the start point A and the end point B of the curve. This means the work integral does not depend on the path between A and B and is said to be independent of the path.\nPotential energy \"U\" = \u2212\"U\"\u2032(x) is traditionally defined as the negative of this scalar field so that work by the force field decreases potential energy, that is\nformula_8\nIn this case, the application of the del operator to the work function yields,\nformula_9\nand the force F is said to be \"derivable from a potential\". This also necessarily implies that F must be a conservative vector field. The potential \"U\" defines a force F at every point x in space, so the set of forces is called a force field.\nComputing potential energy.\nGiven a force field F(x), evaluation of the work integral using the gradient theorem can be used to find the scalar function associated with potential energy. This is done by introducing a parameterized curve \"\u03b3\"(\"t\") = r(\"t\") from \"\u03b3\"(\"a\") = \"A\" to \"\u03b3\"(\"b\") = \"B\", and computing,\nformula_10\nFor the force field F, let v = \"d\"r/\"dt\", then the gradient theorem yields,\nformula_11\nThe power applied to a body by a force field is obtained from the gradient of the work, or potential, in the direction of the velocity v of the point of application, that is\nformula_12\nExamples of work that can be computed from potential functions are gravity and spring forces.\nPotential energy for near-Earth gravity.\nFor small height changes, gravitational potential energy can be computed using\nformula_13\nwhere \"m\" is the mass in kilograms, \"g\" is the local gravitational field (9.8 metres per second squared on Earth), \"h\" is the height above a reference level in metres, and \"U\" is the energy in joules.\nIn classical physics, gravity exerts a constant downward force F = (0, 0, \"F\"z) on the center of mass of a body moving near the surface of the Earth. The work of gravity on a body moving along a trajectory r(\"t\") = (\"x\"(\"t\"), \"y\"(\"t\"), \"z\"(\"t\")), such as the track of a roller coaster is calculated using its velocity, v = (\"v\"x, \"v\"y, \"v\"z), to obtain\nformula_14\nwhere the integral of the vertical component of velocity is the vertical distance. The work of gravity depends only on the vertical movement of the curve r(\"t\").\nPotential energy for a linear spring.\nA horizontal spring exerts a force F = (\u2212\"kx\", 0, 0) that is proportional to its deformation in the axial or \"x\"-direction. The work of this spring on a body moving along the space curve s(\"t\") = (\"x\"(\"t\"), \"y\"(\"t\"), \"z\"(\"t\")), is calculated using its velocity, v = (\"v\"x, \"v\"y, \"v\"z), to obtain\nformula_15\nFor convenience, consider contact with the spring occurs at \"t\" = 0, then the integral of the product of the distance \"x\" and the \"x\"-velocity, \"xv\"x, is \"x\"2/2.\nThe function \nformula_16\nis called the potential energy of a linear spring.\nElastic potential energy is the potential energy of an elastic object (for example a bow or a catapult) that is deformed under tension or compression (or stressed in formal terminology). It arises as a consequence of a force that tries to restore the object to its original shape, which is most often the electromagnetic force between the atoms and molecules that constitute the object. If the stretch is released, the energy is transformed into kinetic energy.\nPotential energy for gravitational forces between two bodies.\nThe gravitational potential function, also known as gravitational potential energy, is:\nformula_17\nThe negative sign follows the convention that work is gained from a loss of potential energy.\nDerivation.\nThe gravitational force between two bodies of mass \"M\" and \"m\" separated by a distance \"r\" is given by Newton's law of universal gravitation\nformula_18\nwhere formula_19 is a vector of length 1 pointing from \"M\" to \"m\" and \"G\" is the gravitational constant.\nLet the mass \"m\" move at the velocity v then the work of gravity on this mass as it moves from position r(\"t\"1) to r(\"t\"2) is given by\nformula_20\nThe position and velocity of the mass \"m\" are given by\nformula_21\nwhere er and et are the radial and tangential unit vectors directed relative to the vector from \"M\" to \"m\". Use this to simplify the formula for work of gravity to,\nformula_22\nThis calculation uses the fact that\nformula_23\nPotential energy for electrostatic forces between two bodies.\nThe electrostatic force exerted by a charge \"Q\" on another charge \"q\" separated by a distance \"r\" is given by Coulomb's law\nformula_24\nwhere formula_19 is a vector of length 1 pointing from \"Q\" to \"q\" and \"\u03b5\"0 is the vacuum permittivity.\nThe work \"W\" required to move \"q\" from \"A\" to any point \"B\" in the electrostatic force field is given by the potential function\nformula_26\nReference level.\nThe potential energy is a function of the state a system is in, and is defined relative to that for a particular state. This reference state is not always a real state; it may also be a limit, such as with the distances between all bodies tending to infinity, provided that the energy involved in tending to that limit is finite, such as in the case of inverse-square law forces. Any arbitrary reference state could be used; therefore it can be chosen based on convenience.\nTypically the potential energy of a system depends on the \"relative\" positions of its components only, so the reference state can also be expressed in terms of relative positions.\nGravitational potential energy.\nGravitational energy is the potential energy associated with gravitational force, as work is required to elevate objects against Earth's gravity. The potential energy due to elevated positions is called gravitational potential energy, and is evidenced by water in an elevated reservoir or kept behind a dam. If an object falls from one point to another point inside a gravitational field, the force of gravity will do positive work on the object, and the gravitational potential energy will decrease by the same amount.\nConsider a book placed on top of a table. As the book is raised from the floor to the table, some external force works against the gravitational force. If the book falls back to the floor, the \"falling\" energy the book receives is provided by the gravitational force. Thus, if the book falls off the table, this potential energy goes to accelerate the mass of the book and is converted into kinetic energy. When the book hits the floor this kinetic energy is converted into heat, deformation, and sound by the impact.\nThe factors that affect an object's gravitational potential energy are its height relative to some reference point, its mass, and the strength of the gravitational field it is in. Thus, a book lying on a table has less gravitational potential energy than the same book on top of a taller cupboard and less gravitational potential energy than a heavier book lying on the same table. An object at a certain height above the Moon's surface has less gravitational potential energy than at the same height above the Earth's surface because the Moon's gravity is weaker. \"Height\" in the common sense of the term cannot be used for gravitational potential energy calculations when gravity is not assumed to be a constant. The following sections provide more detail.\nLocal approximation.\nThe strength of a gravitational field varies with location. However, when the change of distance is small in relation to the distances from the center of the source of the gravitational field, this variation in field strength is negligible and we can assume that the force of gravity on a particular object is constant. Near the surface of the Earth, for example, we assume that the acceleration due to gravity is a constant \"g\" = 9.8 m/s2 (standard gravity). In this case, a simple expression for gravitational potential energy can be derived using the \"W\" = \"Fd\" equation for work, and the equation\nformula_27\nThe amount of gravitational potential energy held by an elevated object is equal to the work done against gravity in lifting it. The work done equals the force required to move it upward multiplied with the vertical distance it is moved (remember \"W\" = \"Fd\"). The upward force required while moving at a constant velocity is equal to the weight, \"mg\", of an object, so the work done in lifting it through a height h is the product \"mgh\". Thus, when accounting only for mass, gravity, and altitude, the equation is:\nformula_28\nwhere \"U\" is the potential energy of the object relative to its being on the Earth's surface, \"m\" is the mass of the object, \"g\" is the acceleration due to gravity, and \"h\" is the altitude of the object.\nHence, the potential difference is\nformula_29\nGeneral formula.\nHowever, over large variations in distance, the approximation that \"g\" is constant is no longer valid, and we have to use calculus and the general mathematical definition of work to determine gravitational potential energy. For the computation of the potential energy, we can integrate the gravitational force, whose magnitude is given by Newton's law of gravitation, with respect to the distance \"r\" between the two bodies. Using that definition, the gravitational potential energy of a system of masses \"m\"1 and \"M\"2 at a distance \"r\" using the Newtonian constant of gravitation \"G\" is\nformula_30\nwhere \"K\" is an arbitrary constant dependent on the choice of datum from which potential is measured. Choosing the convention that \"K\" = 0 (i.e. in relation to a point at infinity) makes calculations simpler, albeit at the cost of making \"U\" negative; for why this is physically reasonable, see below.\nGiven this formula for \"U\", the total potential energy of a system of n bodies is found by summing, for all formula_31 pairs of two bodies, the potential energy of the system of those two bodies.\nConsidering the system of bodies as the combined set of small particles the bodies consist of, and applying the previous on the particle level we get the negative gravitational binding energy. This potential energy is more strongly negative than the total potential energy of the system of bodies as such since it also includes the negative gravitational binding energy of each body. The potential energy of the system of bodies as such is the negative of the energy needed to separate the bodies from each other to infinity, while the gravitational binding energy is the energy needed to separate all particles from each other to infinity.\nformula_32\ntherefore,\nformula_33\nNegative gravitational energy.\nAs with all potential energies, only differences in gravitational potential energy matter for most physical purposes, and the choice of zero point is arbitrary. Given that there is no reasonable criterion for preferring one particular finite \"r\" over another, there seem to be only two reasonable choices for the distance at which \"U\" becomes zero: formula_34 and formula_35. The choice of formula_36 at infinity may seem peculiar, and the consequence that gravitational energy is always negative may seem counterintuitive, but this choice allows gravitational potential energy values to be finite, albeit negative.\nThe singularity at formula_34 in the formula for gravitational potential energy means that the only other apparently reasonable alternative choice of convention, with formula_36 for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, would result in potential energy being positive, but infinitely large for all nonzero values of \"r\", and would make calculations involving sums or differences of potential energies beyond what is possible with the real number system. Since physicists abhor infinities in their calculations, and \"r\" is always non-zero in practice, the choice of formula_36 at infinity is by far the more preferable choice, even if the idea of negative energy in a gravity well appears to be peculiar at first.\nThe negative value for gravitational energy also has deeper implications that make it seem more reasonable in cosmological calculations where the total energy of the universe can meaningfully be considered; see inflation theory for more on this.\nUses.\nGravitational potential energy has a number of practical uses, notably the generation of pumped-storage hydroelectricity. For example, in Dinorwig, Wales, there are two lakes, one at a higher elevation than the other. At times when surplus electricity is not required (and so is comparatively cheap), water is pumped up to the higher lake, thus converting the electrical energy (running the pump) to gravitational potential energy. At times of peak demand for electricity, the water flows back down through electrical generator turbines, converting the potential energy into kinetic energy and then back into electricity. The process is not completely efficient and some of the original energy from the surplus electricity is in fact lost to friction.\nGravitational potential energy is also used to power clocks in which falling weights operate the mechanism. It is also used by counterweights for lifting up an elevator, crane, or sash window.\nRoller coasters are an entertaining way to utilize potential energy \u2013 chains are used to move a car up an incline (building up gravitational potential energy), to then have that energy converted into kinetic energy as it falls.\nAnother practical use is utilizing gravitational potential energy to descend (perhaps coast) downhill in transportation such as the descent of an automobile, truck, railroad train, bicycle, airplane, or fluid in a pipeline. In some cases the kinetic energy obtained from the potential energy of descent may be used to start ascending the next grade such as what happens when a road is undulating and has frequent dips. The commercialization of stored energy (in the form of rail cars raised to higher elevations) that is then converted to electrical energy when needed by an electrical grid, is being undertaken in the United States in a system called Advanced Rail Energy Storage (ARES).\nChemical potential energy.\nChemical potential energy is a form of potential energy related to the structural arrangement of atoms or molecules. This arrangement may be the result of chemical bonds within a molecule or otherwise. Chemical energy of a chemical substance can be transformed to other forms of energy by a chemical reaction. As an example, when a fuel is burned the chemical energy is converted to heat, same is the case with digestion of food metabolized in a biological organism. Green plants transform solar energy to chemical energy through the process known as photosynthesis, and electrical energy can be converted to chemical energy through electrochemical reactions.\nThe similar term chemical potential is used to indicate the potential of a substance to undergo a change of configuration, be it in the form of a chemical reaction, spatial transport, particle exchange with a reservoir, etc.\nElectric potential energy.\nAn object can have potential energy by virtue of its electric charge and several forces related to their presence. There are two main types of this kind of potential energy: electrostatic potential energy, electrodynamic potential energy (also sometimes called magnetic potential energy).\nElectrostatic potential energy.\nElectrostatic potential energy between two bodies in space is obtained from the force exerted by a charge \"Q\" on another charge \"q\", which is given by\nformula_40\nwhere formula_19 is a vector of length 1 pointing from \"Q\" to \"q\" and \"\u03b5\"0 is the vacuum permittivity.\nIf the electric charge of an object can be assumed to be at rest, then it has potential energy due to its position relative to other charged objects. The electrostatic potential energy is the energy of an electrically charged particle (at rest) in an electric field. It is defined as the work that must be done to move it from an infinite distance away to its present location, adjusted for non-electrical forces on the object. This energy will generally be non-zero if there is another electrically charged object nearby.\nThe work \"W\" required to move \"q\" from \"A\" to any point \"B\" in the electrostatic force field is given by\nformula_42\ntypically given in J for Joules. A related quantity called \"electric potential\" (commonly denoted with a \"V\" for voltage) is equal to the electric potential energy per unit charge.\nMagnetic potential energy.\nThe energy of a magnetic moment formula_43 in an externally produced magnetic B-field B has potential energy\nformula_44\nThe magnetization M in a field is\nformula_45\nwhere the integral can be over all space or, equivalently, where M is nonzero.\nMagnetic potential energy is the form of energy related not only to the distance between magnetic materials, but also to the orientation, or alignment, of those materials within the field. For example, the needle of a compass has the lowest magnetic potential energy when it is aligned with the north and south poles of the Earth's magnetic field. If the needle is moved by an outside force, torque is exerted on the magnetic dipole of the needle by the Earth's magnetic field, causing it to move back into alignment. The magnetic potential energy of the needle is highest when its field is in the same direction as the Earth's magnetic field. Two magnets will have potential energy in relation to each other and the distance between them, but this also depends on their orientation. If the opposite poles are held apart, the potential energy will be higher the further they are apart and lower the closer they are. Conversely, like poles will have the highest potential energy when forced together, and the lowest when they spring apart.\nNuclear potential energy.\nNuclear potential energy is the potential energy of the particles inside an atomic nucleus. The nuclear particles are bound together by the strong nuclear force. Their rest mass provides the potential energy for certain kinds of radioactive decay, such as beta decay.\nNuclear particles like protons and neutrons are not destroyed in fission and fusion processes, but collections of them can have less mass than if they were individually free, in which case this mass difference can be liberated as heat and radiation in nuclear reactions. The process of hydrogen fusion occurring in the Sun is an example of this form of energy release \u2013 600 million tonnes of hydrogen nuclei are fused into helium nuclei, with a loss of about 4 million tonnes of mass per second. This energy, now in the form of kinetic energy and gamma rays, keeps the solar core hot even as electromagnetic radiation carries electromagnetic energy into space.\nForces and potential energy.\nPotential energy is closely linked with forces. If the work done by a force on a body that moves from \"A\" to \"B\" does not depend on the path between these points, then the work of this force measured from \"A\" assigns a scalar value to every other point in space and defines a scalar potential field. In this case, the force can be defined as the negative of the vector gradient of the potential field.\nFor example, gravity is a conservative force. The associated potential is the gravitational potential, often denoted by formula_46 or formula_47, corresponding to the energy per unit mass as a function of position. The gravitational potential energy of two particles of mass \"M\" and \"m\" separated by a distance \"r\" is\nformula_48\nThe gravitational potential (specific energy) of the two bodies is\nformula_49\nwhere formula_50 is the reduced mass.\nThe work done against gravity by moving an infinitesimal mass from point A with formula_51 to point B with formula_52 is formula_53 and the work done going back the other way is formula_54 so that the total work done in moving from A to B and returning to A is\nformula_55\nIf the potential is redefined at A to be formula_56 and the potential at B to be formula_57, where formula_58 is a constant (i.e. formula_58 can be any number, positive or negative, but it must be the same at A as it is at B) then the work done going from A to B is\nformula_60\nas before.\nIn practical terms, this means that one can set the zero of formula_61 and formula_46 anywhere one likes. One may set it to be zero at the surface of the Earth, or may find it more convenient to set zero at infinity (as in the expressions given earlier in this section).\nA conservative force can be expressed in the language of differential geometry as a closed form. As Euclidean space is contractible, its de Rham cohomology vanishes, so every closed form is also an exact form, and can be expressed as the gradient of a scalar field. This gives a mathematical justification of the fact that all conservative forces are gradients of a potential field.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23704", "revid": "62026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23704", "title": "Pyramid", "text": "Structure shaped as a geometric pyramid\nA pyramid (from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'pyramid', from the Egyptian , the vertical height of the structure.) is a structure whose visible surfaces are triangular in broad outline and converge toward the top, making the appearance roughly a pyramid in the geometric sense. The base of a pyramid can be of any polygon shape, such as triangular or quadrilateral, and its surface-lines either filled or stepped.\nA pyramid has the majority of its mass closer to the ground with less mass towards the pyramidion at the apex. This is due to the gradual decrease in the cross-sectional area along the vertical axis with increasing elevation. This offers a weight distribution that allowed early civilizations to create monumental structures.Ancient civilizations in many parts of the world pioneered the building of pyramids. The largest pyramid by volume is the Mesoamerican Great Pyramid of Cholula, in the Mexican state of Puebla. For millennia, the largest structures on Earth were pyramids\u2014first the Red Pyramid in the Dashur Necropolis and then the Great Pyramid of Khufu, both in Egypt\u2014the latter is the only extant example of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World.\nAncient monuments.\nWest Asia.\nMesopotamia.\nThe Mesopotamians built the earliest pyramidal structures, called \"ziggurats\". In ancient times, these were brightly painted in gold/bronze. They were constructed of sun-dried mud-brick, and little remains of them. Ziggurats were built by the Sumerians, Babylonians, Elamites, Akkadians, and Assyrians. Each ziggurat was part of a temple complex that included other buildings. The ziggurat's precursors were raised platforms that date from the Ubaid period of the fourth millennium BC.\nThe earliest ziggurats began near the end of the Early Dynastic Period. The original pyramidal structure, the anu ziggurat, dates to around 4000 BC. The White Temple was built on top of it circa 3500 BC. \nBuilt in receding tiers upon a rectangular, oval, or square platform, the ziggurat was a pyramidal structure with a flat top. Sun-baked bricks made up the core of the ziggurat with facings of fired bricks on the outside. The facings were often glazed in different colors and may have had astrological significance. Kings sometimes had their names engraved on them. The number of tiers ranged from two to seven. It is assumed that they had shrines at the top, but no archaeological evidence supports this and the only textual evidence is from Herodotus. Access to the shrine would have been by a series of ramps on one side of the ziggurat or by a spiral ramp from base to summit.\nAfrica.\nEgypt.\nThe most famous African pyramids are in Egypt\u2014huge structures built of bricks or stones, primarily limestone, some of which are among the world's largest constructions. They are shaped in reference to the sun's rays. Most had a smoothed white limestone surface. Many of the facing stones have fallen or were removed and used for construction in Cairo. The capstone was usually made of limestone, granite or basalt and some were plated with electrum.\nAncient Egyptians built pyramids from 2700 BC until around 1700 BC. The first pyramid was erected during the Third Dynasty by the Pharaoh Djoser and his architect Imhotep. This step pyramid consisted of six stacked mastabas. Early kings such as Snefru built pyramids, with subsequent kings adding to the number until the end of the Middle Kingdom. The age of the pyramids reached its zenith at Giza in 2575\u20132150 BC. The last king to build royal pyramids was Ahmose, with later kings hiding their tombs in the hills, such as those in the Valley of the Kings in Luxor's West Bank. In Medinat Habu and Deir el-Medina, smaller pyramids were built by individuals. Smaller pyramids with steeper sides were built by the Nubians who ruled Egypt in the Late Period.\nThe Great Pyramid of Giza is the largest in Egypt and one of the largest in the world. At it was the tallest structure in the world until the Lincoln Cathedral was finished in 1311 AD. Its base covers an area of around . The Great Pyramid is the only extant one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World.\nAncient Egyptian pyramids were, in most cases, placed west of the river Nile because the divine pharaoh's soul was meant to join with the sun during its descent before continuing with the sun in its eternal round. As of 2008, some 135 pyramids had been discovered in Egypt, most located near Cairo.\nSudan.\nWhile African pyramids are commonly associated with Egypt, Sudan has 220 extant pyramids, the most in the world. Nubian pyramids were constructed (roughly 240 of them) at three sites in Sudan to serve as tombs for the kings and queens of Napata and Mero\u00eb. The pyramids of Kush, also known as Nubian Pyramids, have different characteristics than those of Egypt. The Nubian pyramids had steeper sides than the Egyptian ones. Pyramids were built in Sudan as late as 200 AD.\nSahel.\nThe Tomb of Askia, in Gao, Mali, is believed to be the burial place of Askia Mohammad I, one of the Songhai Empire's most prolific emperors. It was built at the end of the fifteenth century and is designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nUNESCO describes the tomb as an example of the monumental mud-building traditions of the West African Sahel. The complex includes the pyramidal tomb, two mosques, a cemetery and an assembly ground. At 17 metres (56\u00a0ft) in height it is the largest pre-colonial architectural monument in Gao. It is a notable example of the Sudano-Sahelian architectural style that later spread throughout the region.\nNigeria.\nOne of the unique structures of Igbo culture was the Nsude pyramids, in the Nigerian town of Nsude, northern Igboland. Ten pyramidal structures were built of clay/mud. The first base section was in circumference and in height. The next stack was in circumference. Circular stacks continued to the top. The structures were temples for the god Ala, who was believed to reside there. A stick was placed at the top to represent the god's residence. The structures were laid in groups of five parallel to each other. Because it was built of clay/mud like the Deffufa of Nubia, over time periodic reconstruction has been required.\nEurope.\nGreece.\nPausanias (2nd century AD) mentions two buildings resembling pyramids, one, 19 kilometres (12\u00a0mi) southwest of a still standing structure at Hellenikon, a common tomb for soldiers who died in a legendary struggle for the throne of Argos and another that he was told was the tomb of Argives killed in a battle around 669/8 BC. Neither survives and no evidence indicates that they resembled Egyptian pyramids.\nAt least two surviving pyramid-like structures are available to study, one at Hellenikon and the other at Ligourio/Ligurio, a village near the ancient theatre Epidaurus. These buildings have inwardly sloping walls, but bear no other resemblance to Egyptian pyramids. They had large central rooms (unlike Egyptian pyramids) and the Hellenikon structure is rectangular rather than square, which means that the sides could not have met at a point. The stone used to build these structures was limestone quarried locally and was cut to fit, not into freestanding blocks like the Great Pyramid of Giza.\nThese structures were dated from pot shards excavated from the floor and grounds. The latest estimates are around the 5th and 4th centuries. Normally this technique is used for dating pottery, but researchers used it to try to date stone flakes from the structure walls. This launched debate about whether or not these structures are actually older than Egypt, part of the Black Athena controversy.\nLefkowitz criticised this research, suggesting that some of the research was done not to determine the reliability of the dating method, as was suggested, but to back up a claim and to make points about pyramids and Greek civilization. She claimed that not only were the results imprecise, but that other structures mentioned in the research are not in fact pyramids, e.g. a tomb alleged to be the tomb of Amphion and Zethus near Thebes, a structure at Stylidha (Thessaly) which is a long wall, etc. She pushed the possibility that the stones that were dated might have been recycled from earlier constructions. She claimed that earlier research from the 1930s, confirmed in the 1980s by Fracchia, was ignored.\nLiritzis responded that Lefkowitz failed to understand and misinterpreted the methodology.\nPoland.\nKuyavian Pyramids, known as Kuyavian Mounds, Graves of Giants or Polish Pyramids \u2013 enormous tombs, megalithic structures in Kuyavia, Poland.\nSpain.\nThe Pyramids of G\u00fc\u00edmar refer to six rectangular pyramid-shaped, terraced structures, built from lava without mortar. They are located in the district of Chacona, part of the town of G\u00fc\u00edmar on the island of Tenerife in the Canary Islands. The structures were dated to the 19th century and their function explained as a byproduct of contemporary agricultural techniques.\nAutochthonous Guanche traditions as well as surviving images indicate that similar structures (also known as, \"Morras\", \"Majanos\", \"Molleros\", or \"Paredones\") were built in many locations on the island. However, over time they were dismantled and used as building material. G\u00fc\u00edmar hostred nine pyramids, only six of which survive.\nRoman Empire.\nThe 27-metre-high Pyramid of Cestius was built by the end of the 1st century BC and survives close to the Porta San Paolo. Another, named \"Meta Romuli\", stood in the \"Ager Vaticanus\" (today's Borgo), but was destroyed at the end of the 15th century.\nMedieval Europe.\nPyramids were occasionally used in Christian architecture during the feudal era, e.g. as the tower of Oviedo's Gothic Cathedral of San Salvador.\nAmericas.\nPeru.\nAndean cultures used pyramids in various architectural structures such as the ones in Caral, T\u00facume and Chav\u00edn de Huantar, constructed around the same time as early Egyptian pyramids.\nMesoamerica.\nSeveral Mesoamerican cultures built pyramid-shaped structures. Mesoamerican pyramids were usually stepped, with temples on top, more similar to the Mesopotamian ziggurat than the Egyptian pyramid.\nThe largest by volume is the Great Pyramid of Cholula, in the Mexican state of Puebla. Constructed from the 3rd century BC to the 9th century AD, this pyramid is the world's largest monument, and is still not fully excavated. The third largest pyramid in the world, the Pyramid of the Sun, at Teotihuacan, is also located in Mexico. An unusual pyramid with a circular plan survives at the site of Cuicuilco, now inside Mexico City and mostly covered with lava from an eruption of the Xitle Volcano in the 1st century BC. Several circular stepped pyramids called Guachimontones survive in Teuchitl\u00e1n, Jalisco.\nPyramids in Mexico were often used for human sacrifice. Harner stated that for the dedication of the Great Pyramid of Tenochtitlan in 1487, \"one source states 20,000, another 72,344, and several give 80,400\" as the number of humans sacrificed.\nUnited States.\nMany pre-Columbian Native American societies of ancient North America built large pyramidal earth structures known as platform mounds. Among the largest and best-known of these structures is Monks Mound at the site of Cahokia in what became Illinois, completed around 1100 AD. It has a base larger than that of the Great Pyramid. Many mounds underwent repeated episodes of expansion. They are believed to have played a central role in the mound-building peoples' religious life. Documented uses include semi-public chief's house platforms, public temple platforms, mortuary platforms, charnel house platforms, earth lodge/town house platforms, residence platforms, square ground and rotunda platforms, and dance platforms. Cultures that built substructure mounds include the Troyville culture, Coles Creek culture, Plaquemine culture and Mississippian cultures.\nAsia.\nMany square flat-topped mound tombs in China. The first emperor Qin Shi Huang (c.\u2009221 BC, who unified the seven pre-imperial kingdoms) was buried under a large mound outside modern-day Xi'an. In the following centuries about a dozen more Han dynasty royal persons were also buried under flat-topped pyramidal earthworks.\nIndia.\nNumerous giant, granite, temple pyramids were built in South India during the Chola Empire, many of which remain in use. Examples include Brihadisvara Temple at Thanjavur, Brihadisvara Temple at Gangaikonda Cholapuram, and the Airavatesvara Temple at Darasuram. However, the largest temple (area) is the Ranganathaswamy Temple in Srirangam, Tamil Nadu. The Thanjavur temple was built by Raja Raja Chola in the 11th century. The Brihadisvara Temple was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1987; the Temple of Gangaikondacholapuram and the Airavatesvara Temple at Darasuram were added in 2004.\nIndonesia.\nAustronesian megalithic culture in Indonesia featured earth and stone step pyramid structures called \"punden berundak.\" These were discovered in Pangguyangan near Cisolok and in Cipari near Kuningan. The stone pyramids were based on beliefs that mountains and high places were the abode for the spirit of the ancestors.\nThe step pyramid is the basic design of the 8th century Borobudur Buddhist monument in Central Java. However later Java temples were influenced by Indian Hindu architecture, as exemplified by the spires of Prambanan temple. In the 15th century, during late Majapahit period, Java saw the revival of indigenous Austronesian elements as displayed by Sukuh temple that somewhat resemble Mesoamerican pyramids, and also stepped pyramids of Mount Penanggungan.\nEast Asia, Southeast Asia and Central Asia.\nIn east Asia, Buddhist stupas were usually represented as tall pagodas. However, some pyramidal stupas survive. One theory is that these pyramids were inspired by the Borobudur monument through Sumatran and Javanese monks. A similar Buddhist monument survives in Vrang, Tajikistan. At least nine Buddhist step pyramids survive, 4 from former Gyeongsang Province of Korea, 3 from Japan, 1 from Indonesia (Borobudur) and 1 from Tajikistan.\nOceania.\nSeveral pyramids were erected throughout the Pacific islands, such as Pu\u02bbukohol\u0101 Heiau in Hawaii, the Pulemelei Mound in Samoa, and Nan Madol in Pohnpei.\nModern pyramids.\nModern mausoleums.\nWith the Egyptian Revival movement in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, pyramids became more common in funerary architecture. The tomb of Quintino Sella, outside the monumental cemetery of Oropa, is pyramid-shaped. This style was popular with tycoons in the US. The Schoenhofen Pyramid Mausoleum (1889) in Chicago and Hunt's Tomb (1930) in Phoenix, Arizona are notable examples. Some people build pyramid tombs for themselves. Nicolas Cage bought a pyramid tomb for himself in a famed New Orleans graveyard.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23705", "revid": "28677468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23705", "title": "Predestination", "text": "Doctrine in Christian theology\nPredestination, in theology, is the doctrine that all events have been willed by God, usually with reference to the eventual fate of the individual soul. Explanations of predestination often seek to address the paradox of free will, whereby God's omniscience seems incompatible with human free will. In this usage, predestination can be regarded as a form of religious determinism; and usually predeterminism, also known as theological determinism.\nPredestination has been a topic of debate throughout Jewish and Christian history. In pre-Christian texts like the Book of Enoch and the Book of Jubilees, some writings suggest a mix of determinism and free will, while authors like Ben Sira affirm human choice. Scholars debate New Testament passages such as Romans 8\u201311, with interpretations ranging from predestination being corporate or service-based, to God choosing some individuals for salvation while leaving others to reprobation. Jewish groups like the Essenes may have believed in predestination, but there were complex differences among sects.\nIn the early Christian centuries, the Patristic period saw varied views on predestination. Origen tied predestination to foreknowledge of individual merits, while others, like the Thomasines and Valentinus, developed systems of election or salvation according to one\u2019s innate spiritual nature. Augustine of Hippo later emphasized that salvation results from God\u2019s grace rather than human merit, sparking debates over double predestination. Subsequent thinkers, including John of Damascus, Thomas Aquinas, and William of Ockham, further explored how God\u2019s providence, foreknowledge, and human freedom interact, with medieval and Reformation theologians like Gottschalk, Calvin, and Zwingli developing influential predestination doctrines, including double predestination.\nDifferent Christian branches interpret predestination differently. Eastern Orthodoxy emphasizes the synergy of human effort and divine grace, while Roman Catholicism teaches that God predestines in harmony with human response and rejects predestining anyone to sin. Protestant traditions vary: Lutheranism affirms unconditional election to salvation but denies predestination to damnation, Calvinism teaches double predestination, and Arminianism links election to foreseen human faith. The LDS Church rejects predestination but teaches foreordination, emphasizing moral agency. Other variations, like corporate election, focus on God choosing groups or the church collectively rather than individuals.\nHistory.\nPre-Christian period.\nSome have argued that the Book of Enoch contains a deterministic worldview that is combined with dualism. The book of Jubilees seems to harmonize or mix together a doctrine of free will and determinism.\nBen Sira affirms free will, where God allows a choice of bad or good before the human and thus they can choose which one to follow.\nNew Testament period.\nBiblical scholar N. T. Wright argues that Josephus's portrayal of these groups is incorrect, and that the Jewish debates referenced by Josephus should be seen as having to do with God's work to liberate Israel rather than philosophical questions about predestination. Wright asserts that Essenes were content to wait for God to liberate Israel while Pharisees believed Jews needed to act in cooperation with God. John Barclay responded that Josephus's description was an over-simplification and there were likely to be complex differences between these groups which may have been similar to those described by Josephus. Francis Watson has also argued on the basis of 4 Ezra, a document dated to the first century AD, that Jewish beliefs in predestination are primarily concerned with God's choice to save some individual Jews.\nHowever some in the Qumran community possibly believed in predestination, for example 1QS states that \"God has caused (his chosen ones) to inherit the lot of the Holy Ones\".\nIn the New Testament, Romans 8\u201311 presents a statement on predestination. In Romans 8:28\u201330, Paul writes,&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We know that in everything God works for good with those who love him, who are called according to his purpose. For those whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, in order that he might be the first-born among many brethren. And those whom he predestined he also called; and those whom he called he also justified; and those whom he justified he also glorified.\nBiblical scholars have interpreted this passage in several ways. Many say this only has to do with service, and is not about salvation. The Catholic biblical commentator Brendan Byrne wrote that the predestination mentioned in this passage should be interpreted as applied to the Christian community corporately rather than individuals. Another Catholic commentator, Joseph Fitzmyer, wrote that this passage teaches that God has predestined the salvation of all humans. Douglas Moo, a Protestant biblical interpreter, reads the passage as teaching that God has predestined a certain set of people to salvation, and predestined the remainder of humanity to reprobation (damnation). Similarly, Wright's interpretation is that in this passage Paul teaches that God will save those whom he has chosen, but Wright also emphasizes that Paul does not intend to suggest that God has eliminated human free will or responsibility. Instead, Wright asserts, Paul is saying that God's will works through that of humans to accomplish salvation.\nPatristic period.\nPre-Nicene period.\nOrigen, writing in the third century, taught that God's providence extends to every individual. He believed God's predestination was based on God's foreknowledge of every individual's merits, whether in their current life or a previous life.\nGill and Gregg Alisson argued that Clement of Rome held to a predestinarian view of salvation.\nSome verses in the Odes of Solomon, which was made by an Essene convert into Christianity, might possibly suggest a predestinarian worldview, where God chooses who are saved and go into heaven, although there is controversy about what it teaches. The Odes of Solomon talks about God \"imprinting a seal on the face of the elect before they existed\". The Thomasines saw themselves as children of the light, but the ones who were not part of the elect community were sons of darkness. The Thomasines thus had a belief in a type of election or predestination, they saw themselves as elect because they were born from the light.\nValentinus believed in a form of predestination, in his view humans are born into one of three natures, depending on which elements prevail in the person. In the views of Valentinus, a person born with a bad nature can never be saved because they are too inclined into evil, some people have a nature which is a mixture of good and evil, thus they can choose salvation, and others have a good nature, who will be saved, because they will be inclined into good.\nIrenaeus also attacked the doctrine of predestination set out by Valentinus, arguing that it is unfair. For Irenaeus, humans were free to choose salvation or not.\nJustin Martyr attacked predestinarian views held by some Greek philosophers.\nPost-Nicene period.\nLater in the fourth and fifth centuries, Augustine of Hippo (354\u2013430) also taught that God orders all things while preserving human freedom. Prior to 396, Augustine believed that predestination was based on God's foreknowledge of whether individuals would believe, that God's grace was \"a reward for human assent\". Later, in response to Pelagius, Augustine said that the sin of pride consists in assuming that \"we are the ones who choose God or that God chooses us (in his foreknowledge) because of something worthy in us\", and argued that it is God's grace that causes the individual act of faith. Scholars are divided over whether Augustine's teaching implies double predestination, or the belief that God chooses some people for damnation as well as some for salvation. Catholic scholars tend to deny that he held such a view while some Protestants and secular scholars affirm that Augustine did believe in double predestination.\nAugustine's position raised objections. Julian of Eclanum expressed the view that Augustine was bringing Manichean thoughts into the church. For Vincent of L\u00e9rins, this was a disturbing innovation.\nThe Council of Arles in the late fifth century condemned the position \"that some have been condemned to death, others have been predestined to life\", though this may seem to follow from Augustine's teaching. The Second Council of Orange in 529 also condemned the position that \"some have been truly predestined to evil by divine power\".\nIn the eighth century, John of Damascus emphasized the freedom of the human will in his doctrine of predestination, and argued that acts arising from peoples' wills are not part of God's providence at all. Damascene teaches that people's good actions are done in cooperation with God, but are not caused by him.\nProsper of Aquitaine (390 \u2013 c.\u2009455 AD) defended Augustine's view of predestination against semi-Pelagians. Marius Mercator, who was a pupil of Augustine, wrote five books against Pelagianism and one book about predestination. Fulgentius of Ruspe and Caesarius of Arles rejected the view that God gives free choice to believe and instead believed in predestination.\nCassian believed that despite predestination being a work that God does, God only decides to predestinate based on how human beings will respond.\nAugustine stated, \"And thus Christ's Church has never failed to hold the faith of this predestination, which is now being defended with new solicitude against these modern heretics.\"\nMiddle Ages.\nGottschalk of Orbais, a ninth-century Saxon monk, argued that God predestines some people to hell as well as predestining some to heaven, a view known as double predestination. He was condemned by several synods, but his views remained popular. Irish theologian John Scotus Eriugena wrote a refutation of Gottschalk. Eriugena abandoned Augustine's teaching on predestination. He wrote that God's predestination should be equated with his foreknowledge of people's choices.\nIn the thirteenth century, Thomas Aquinas taught that God predestines certain people to the beatific vision based solely on his own goodness rather than that of creatures. Aquinas also believed that people are free in their choices, fully cause their own sin, and are solely responsible for it. According to Aquinas, there are several ways in which God wills actions. He directly wills the good, indirectly wills evil consequences of good things, and only permits evil. Aquinas held that in permitting evil, God does not will it to be done or not to be done.\nIn the thirteenth century, William of Ockham taught that God does not cause human choices and equated predestination with divine foreknowledge. Though Ockham taught that God predestines based on people's foreseen works, he maintained that God's will was not constrained to do this. Medieval theologians who believed in predestination include: Ratramnus (died 868), Thomas Bradwardine (1300\u20131349), Gregory of Rimini (1300\u20131358), John Wycliffe (1320s\u20131384), Johann Ruchrat von Wesel (died 1481), Girolamo Savonarola (1452\u20131498) and Johannes von Staupitz (1460\u20131524).\nThe medieval Cathars denied the free will of humans.\nReformation.\nJohn Calvin rejected the idea that God permits rather than actively decrees the damnation of sinners, as well as other evil. Calvin did not believe God to be guilty of sin, but rather he considered God inflicting sin upon his creations to be an unfathomable mystery. Though he maintained God's predestination applies to damnation as well as salvation, he taught that the damnation of the damned is caused by their sin, but that the salvation of the saved is solely caused by God. Other Protestant Reformers, including Huldrych Zwingli, also held double predestinarian views.\nViews of Christian branches.\nEastern Orthodoxy.\nThe Eastern Orthodox view was summarized by Bishop Theophan the Recluse in response to the question, \"What is the relationship between the Divine provision and our free will?\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Answer: The fact that the Kingdom of God is \"taken by force\" presupposes personal effort. When the Apostle Paul says, \"it is not of him that willeth,\" this means that one's efforts do not produce what is sought. It is necessary to combine them: to strive \"and\" to expect all things from grace. It is not one's own efforts that will lead to the goal, because without grace, efforts produce little; nor does grace without effort bring what is sought, because grace acts in us and for us \"through\" our efforts. Both combine in a person to bring progress and carry him to the goal. (God's) foreknowledge is unfathomable. It is enough for us with our whole heart to believe that it never opposes God's grace and truth, and that it does not infringe man's freedom. Usually this resolves as follows: God foresees how a man will freely act and makes dispositions accordingly. Divine determination depends on the life of a man, and not his life upon the determination.\nRoman Catholicism.\nRoman Catholicism teaches the doctrine of predestination. The Catechism of the Catholic Church says, \"To God, all moments of time are present in their immediacy. When therefore He establishes His eternal plan of 'predestination', He includes in it each person's free response to his grace.\" \nAccording to the Roman Catholic Church, God does not will anyone to mortally sin and so to deserve punishment in hell.\nPope John Paul II wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The universality of salvation means that it is granted not only to those who explicitly believe in Christ and have entered the Church. Since salvation is offered to all, it must be made concretely available to all. But it is clear that today, as in the past, many people do not have an opportunity to come to know or accept the gospel revelation or to enter the Church. (...)\nFor such people salvation in Christ is accessible by virtue of a grace which, while having a mysterious relationship to the Church, does not make them formally part of the Church but enlightens them in a way which is accommodated to their spiritual and material situation. This grace comes from Christ; it is the result of his Sacrifice and is communicated by the Holy Spirit. It enables each person to attain salvation through his or her free cooperation.\nAugustine of Hippo laid the foundation for much of the later Roman Catholic teaching on predestination. His teachings on grace and free will were largely adopted by the Second Council of Orange (529), whose decrees were directed against the Semipelagians. Augustine wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[God] promised not from the power of our will but from His own predestination. For He promised what He Himself would do, not what men would do. Because, although men do those good things which pertain to God's worship, He Himself makes them to do what He has commanded; it is not they that cause Him to do what He has promised. Otherwise the fulfilment of God's promises would not be in the power of God, but in that of men\"\nThomas Aquinas' views concerning predestination are largely in agreement with Augustine and can be summarized by many of his writings in his \"Summa Theologi\u00e6\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God does reprobate some. For it was said above (A[1]) that predestination is a part of providence. To providence, however, it belongs to permit certain defects in those things which are subject to providence, as was said above (Q[22], A[2]). Thus, as men are ordained to eternal life through the providence of God, it likewise is part of that providence to permit some to fall away from that end; this is called reprobation. Thus, as predestination is a part of providence, in regard to those ordained to eternal salvation, so reprobation is a part of providence in regard to those who turn aside from that end. Hence reprobation implies not only foreknowledge, but also something more, as does providence, as was said above (Q[22], A[1]). Therefore, as predestination includes the will to confer grace and glory; so also reprobation includes the will to permit a person to fall into sin, and to impose the punishment of damnation on account of that sin.\"\nProtestantism.\nComparison.\nThis table summarizes the classical views of three different Protestant beliefs.\nLutheranism.\nLutherans historically hold to unconditional election to salvation. However, some do not believe that there are certain people that are predestined to salvation, but salvation is predestined for those who seek God. Lutherans believe Christians should be assured that they are among the predestined. However, they disagree with those who make predestination the source of salvation rather than Christ's suffering, death, and resurrection. Unlike some Calvinists, Lutherans do not believe in a predestination to damnation. Instead, Lutherans teach eternal damnation is a result of the unbeliever's rejection of the forgiveness of sins and unbelief.\nArminianism.\nAt the beginning of the 17th century, the Dutch theologian Jacobus Arminius formulated Arminianism and disagreed with Calvin in particular on election and predestination. Arminianism is defined by God's limited mode of providence. This mode of providence affirms the compatibility between human free will and divine foreknowledge, but its incompatibility with theological determinism. Thus predestination in Arminianism is based on divine foreknowledge, unlike in Calvinism. It is therefore a predestination by foreknowledge.\nFrom this perspective, comes the notion of a conditional election on the one who wills to have faith in God for salvation.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) rejects the doctrine of predestination, but does believe in foreordination. Foreordination, an important doctrine of the LDS Church, teaches that during the pre-mortal existence, God selected (\"foreordained\") particular people to fulfill certain missions (\"callings\") during their mortal lives. \nThe LDS Church teaches the doctrine of moral agency, the ability to choose and act for oneself, and decide whether to accept Christ's atonement.\nTypes of predestination.\nSupralapsarianism and infralapsarianism.\nIn common English parlance, the doctrine of predestination often has particular reference to the doctrines of Calvinism. The version of predestination espoused by John Calvin, after whom Calvinism is named, is sometimes referred to as \"double predestination\" because in it God predestines some people for salvation (i.e. unconditional election) and some for condemnation (i.e. reprobation) which results by allowing the individual's own sins to condemn them. Calvin himself defines predestination as \"the eternal decree of God, by which he determined with himself whatever he wished to happen with regard to every man. Not all are created on equal terms, but some are preordained to eternal life, others to eternal damnation; and, accordingly, as each has been created for one or other of these ends, we say that he has been predestined to life or to death.\"\nOn the spectrum of beliefs concerning predestination, Calvinism is the strongest form among Christians. It teaches that God's predestining decision is based on the knowledge of his own will rather than foreknowledge, concerning every particular person and event; and, God continually acts with entire freedom, in order to bring about his will in completeness, but in such a way that the freedom of the creature is not violated, \"but rather, established\".\nCalvinists who hold the infralapsarian view of predestination usually prefer that term to \"sublapsarianism,\" perhaps with the intent of blocking the inference that they believe predestination is on the basis of foreknowledge (\"sublapsarian\" meaning, assuming the fall into sin). The different terminology has the benefit of distinguishing the Calvinist double predestination version of infralapsarianism from Lutheranism's view that predestination is a mystery, which forbids the unprofitable intrusion of prying minds since God only reveals partial knowledge to the human race.\nDouble predestination.\nDouble predestination, or the double decree, is the doctrine that God actively reprobates, or decrees damnation of some, as well as salvation for those whom he has elected. During the Protestant Reformation John Calvin held this double predestinarian view: \"By predestination we mean the eternal decree of God, by which he determined with himself whatever he wished to happen with regard to every man. All are not created on equal terms, but some are preordained to eternal life, others to eternal damnation; and, accordingly, as each has been created for one or other of these ends, we say that he has been predestinated to life or to death.\"\nGottschalk of Orbais taught double predestination explicitly in the ninth century, and Gregory of Rimini in the fourteenth. Some trace this doctrine to statements made by Augustine in the early fifth century that on their own also seem to teach double predestination, but in the context of his other writings it is not clear whether he held this view. In \"The City of God\", Augustine describes all of humanity as being predestinated for salvation (i.e., the city of God) or damnation (i.e., the earthly city of man); but Augustine also held that all human beings were born \"reprobate\" but \"need not necessarily remain\" in that state of reprobation.\nCorporate election.\nCorporate election is a non-traditional Arminian view of election. In corporate election, God does not choose which individuals he will save prior to creation, but rather God chooses the church as a whole. Or put differently, God chooses a group of people he will save (members of the church), and individuals may work their way into (or out of) the said group. Another way the New Testament puts this is to say that God chose the church in Christ (Eph. 1:4). In other words, God chose from all eternity to save all those who would be found in Christ, by faith in God. This choosing is not primarily about salvation from eternal destruction either but is about God's chosen agency in the world. Thus individuals have full freedom in terms of whether they become members of the church or not.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23706", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23706", "title": "Primitive notion", "text": "Concept that is not defined in terms of previously defined concepts\nIn mathematics, logic, philosophy, and formal systems, a primitive notion is a concept that is not defined in terms of previously defined concepts. It is often motivated informally, usually by an appeal to intuition or taken to be self-evident. In an axiomatic theory, relations between primitive notions are restricted by axioms. Some authors refer to the latter as \"defining\" primitive notions by one or more axioms, but this can be misleading. Formal theories cannot dispense with primitive notions, under pain of infinite regress (per the regress problem).\nFor example, in contemporary geometry, \"point\", \"line\", and \"contains\" are some primitive notions.\nDetails.\nAlfred Tarski explained the role of primitive notions as follows:\nWhen we set out to construct a given discipline, we distinguish, first of all, a certain small group of expressions of this discipline that seem to us to be immediately understandable; the expressions in this group we call PRIMITIVE TERMS or UNDEFINED TERMS, and we employ them without explaining their meanings. At the same time we adopt the principle: not to employ any of the other expressions of the discipline under consideration, unless its meaning has first been determined with the help of primitive terms and of such expressions of the discipline whose meanings have been explained previously. The sentence which determines the meaning of a term in this way is called a DEFINITION...\nAn inevitable regress to primitive notions in the theory of knowledge was explained by Gilbert de B. Robinson:\nTo a non-mathematician it often comes as a surprise that it is impossible to define explicitly all the terms which are used. This is not a superficial problem but lies at the root of all knowledge; it is necessary to begin somewhere, and to make progress one must clearly state those elements and relations which are undefined and those properties which are taken for granted.\nExamples.\nThe necessity for primitive notions is illustrated in several axiomatic foundations in mathematics:\nRussell's primitives.\nIn his book on philosophy of mathematics, \"The Principles of Mathematics\" Bertrand Russell used the following notions: for class-calculus (set theory), he used relations, taking set membership as a primitive notion. To establish sets, he also establishes propositional functions as primitive, as well as the phrase \"such that\" as used in set builder notation. (pp 18,9) Regarding relations, Russell takes as primitive notions the converse relation and complementary relation of a given \"xRy\". Furthermore, logical products of relations and relative products of relations are primitive. (p 25) As for denotation of objects by description, Russell acknowledges that a primitive notion is involved. (p 27) The thesis of Russell\u2019s book is \"Pure mathematics uses only a few notions, and these are logical constants.\" (p xxi)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23707", "revid": "50706976", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23707", "title": "Priest", "text": "Person authorized to lead the sacred rituals of a religion\nA priest is a religious leader authorized to perform the sacred rituals of a religion, especially as a mediatory agent between humans and one or more deities. They also have the authority or power to administer religious rites; in particular, rites of sacrifice to, and propitiation of, a deity or deities. Their office or position is the \"priesthood\", a term which also may apply to such persons collectively. A priest may have the duty to hear confessions periodically, give marriage counseling, provide prenuptial counseling, give spiritual direction, teach catechism, or visit those confined indoors, such as the sick in hospitals and nursing homes.\nDescription.\nAccording to the trifunctional hypothesis of prehistoric Proto-Indo-European society, priests have existed since the earliest of times and in the simplest societies, most likely as a result of agricultural surplus and consequent social stratification. The necessity to read sacred texts and keep temple or church records helped foster literacy in many early societies. Priests exist in many religions today, such as all or some branches of Judaism, Christianity, Buddhism, Shinto, and Hinduism. They are generally regarded as having privileged contact with the deity or deities of the religion to which they subscribe, often interpreting the meaning of events and performing the rituals of the religion. There is no common definition of the duties of priesthood between faiths; but generally it includes mediating the relationship between one's congregation, worshippers, and other members of the religious body, and its deity or deities, and administering religious rituals and rites. These often include blessing worshipers with prayers of joy at marriages, after a birth, and at consecrations, teaching the wisdom and dogma of the faith at any regular worship service, and mediating and easing the experience of grief and death at funerals \u2013 maintaining a spiritual connection to the afterlife in faiths where such a concept exists. Administering religious building grounds and office affairs and papers, including any religious library or collection of sacred texts, is also commonly a responsibility \u2013 for example, the modern term for clerical duties in a secular office refers originally to the duties of a cleric. The question of which religions have a \"priest\" depends on how the titles of leaders are used or translated into English. In some cases, leaders are more like those that other believers will often turn to for advice on spiritual matters, and less of a \"person authorized to perform the sacred rituals.\" For example, clergy in Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy are \"priests\", as with certain synods of Lutheranism and Anglicanism, though other branches of Protestant Christianity, such as Methodists and Baptists, use \"minister\" and \"pastor.\" The terms \"priest\" and \"priestess\" are sufficiently generic that they may be used in an anthropological sense to describe the religious mediators of an unknown or otherwise unspecified religion.\nIn many religions, being a priest or priestess is a full-time position, ruling out any other career. Many Christian priests and pastors choose or are mandated to dedicate themselves to their churches and receive their living directly from their churches. In other cases, it is a part-time role. For example, in the early history of Iceland the chieftains were titled \"go\u00f0i\", a word meaning \"priest\". As seen in the saga of Hrafnkell Freysgo\u00f0i, however, being a priest consisted merely of offering periodic sacrifices to the Norse gods and goddesses; it was not a full-time role, nor did it involve ordination.\nIn some religions, being a priest or priestess is by human election or human choice. In Judaism, the priesthood is inherited in familial lines. In a theocracy, a society is governed by its priesthood.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"priest\", is ultimately derived from Latin via Greek \"presbyter\", the term for \"elder\", especially elders of Jewish or Christian communities in late antiquity. The Latin \"presbyter\" ultimately represents Greek \"presb\u00fateros\", the regular Latin word for \"priest\" being \"sacerdos\", corresponding to \"hiere\u00fas\".\nIt is possible that the Latin word was loaned into Old English, and only from Old English reached other Germanic languages via the Anglo-Saxon mission to the continent, giving Old Icelandic \"prestr\", Old Swedish \"pr\u00e4ster\", Old High German \"priast\". Old High German also has the disyllabic \"priester, priestar\", apparently derived from Latin independently via Old French \"presbtre\".\nAn alternative theory makes \"priest\" cognate with Old High German \"priast\", \"prest\", from Vulgar Latin *\"prevost\" \"one put over others\", from Latin \"praepositus\" \"person placed in charge\".\nThat English should have only the single term \"priest\" to translate \"presbyter\" and \"sacerdos\" came to be seen as a problem in English Bible translations. The \"presbyter\" is the minister who both presides and instructs a Christian congregation, while the \"sacerdos\", offerer of sacrifices, or in a Christian context the eucharist, performs \"mediatorial offices between God and man\".\nThe feminine English noun, \"priestess\", was coined in the 17th century, to refer to female priests of the pre-Christian religions of classical antiquity. In the 20th century, the word was used in controversies surrounding the women ordained in the Anglican communion, who are referred to as \"priests\", irrespective of gender, and the term priestess is generally considered archaic in Christianity.\nWebster's 1829 Dictionary stated \"PRIEST, \"noun\" [Latin proestes, a chief, one that presides; proe, before, and sto, to stand, or sisto.]\" https://webstersdictionary1828.com/Dictionary/priest\nHistorical religions.\nIn historical polytheism, a priest administers the sacrifice to a deity, often in highly elaborate ritual. In the Ancient Near East, the priesthood also acted on behalf of the deities in managing their property.\nPriestesses in antiquity often performed sacred prostitution, and in Ancient Greece, some priestesses such as Pythia, priestess at Delphi, acted as oracles.\nAncient Egypt.\nIn ancient Egyptian religion, the right and obligation to interact with the gods belonged to the pharaoh. He delegated this duty to priests, who were effectively bureaucrats authorized to act on his behalf. Priests staffed temples throughout Egypt, giving offerings to the cult images in which the gods were believed to take up residence and performing other rituals for their benefit. Little is known about what training may have been required of priests, and the selection of personnel for positions was affected by a tangled set of traditions, although the pharaoh had the final say. In the New Kingdom of Egypt, when temples owned great estates, the high priests of the most important cult\u2014that of Amun at Karnak\u2014were important political figures.\nHigh-ranking priestly roles were usually held by men. Women were generally relegated to lower positions in the temple hierarchy, although some held specialized and influential positions, especially that of the God's Wife of Amun, whose religious importance overshadowed the High Priests of Amun in the Late Period.\nAncient Rome.\nIn ancient Rome and throughout Italy, the ancient sanctuaries of Ceres and Proserpina were invariably led by female \"sacerdotes\", drawn from women of local and Roman elites. It was the only public priesthood attainable by Roman matrons and was held in great honor.\nA Roman matron was any mature woman of the upper class, married or unmarried. Females could serve public cult as Vestal Virgins but few were chosen, and then only from young maidens of the upper class.\nAbrahamic religions.\nJudaism.\nHistorical.\nAfter the departure of the Israelites from Egypt, priests in ancient Israel were required by the Law of Moses to be direct patrileneal descendants of Aaron, the elder brother of Moses. In Exodus 30:22\u201325 God instructs Moses to make a holy anointing-oil to consecrate the priests \"for all of eternity\". During the times of the two Jewish Temples in Jerusalem, the Aaronic priests performed the daily and special Jewish-holiday offerings and sacrifices within the temples; these offerings are known as the \"korbanot\".\nIn Hebrew, the word for \"priest\" is \"kohen\" (singular \u05db\u05d4\u05df \"kohen\", plural \u05db\u05bc\u05d4\u05e0\u05b4\u05d9\u05dd \"kohanim\"), hence the family names \"Cohen\", \"Cahn\", \"Kahn\", \"Kohn\", \"Kogan\", etc. Jewish families with these names belong to the tribe of Levi (Levites \u2013 descended from Levi, the great-grandfather of Aaron) and in twenty-four instances are called by scripture as such. In Hebrew, the word for \"priesthood\" is \"kehunnah\".\nThe Hebrew word \"kohen\" comes from the root KWN/KON \u05db-\u05d5-\u05df 'to stand, to be ready, established' in the sense of \"someone who stands ready before God\", and has cognates in other Semitic languages, e.g. Phoenician KHN \ud802\udd0a\ud802\udd04\ud802\udd0d \"priest\" or Arabic \"kahin\" \u0643\u0627\u0647\u0646 \"priest\".\nModern Judaism.\nSince the destruction of the Second Temple, and (therefore) the cessation of the daily and seasonal temple ceremonies and sacrifices, kohanim have become much less prominent. In traditional Judaism (Orthodox Judaism and to some extent, Conservative Judaism) a few priestly and Levitical functions, such as the \"pidyon haben\" (redemption of a first-born son) ceremony and the Priestly Blessing, have been retained. Especially in Orthodox Judaism, kohanim remain subject to a number of restrictions concerning matters related to marriage and ritual purity.\nOrthodox Judaism regard the kohanim as being held in reserve for a future restored Temple. Kohanim do not perform roles of propitiation, sacrifice, or sacrament in any branch of Rabbinical Judaism or in Karaite Judaism. The principal religious function of any kohanim is to perform the Priestly Blessing, although an individual kohen may also become a rabbi or other professional religious leader.\nBeta Israel.\nThe traditional Beta Israel community in Israel had little direct contact with other Jewish groups after the destruction of the temple and developed separately for almost two thousand years. While some Beta Israel now follow Rabbinical Jewish practices, the Ethiopian Jewish religious tradition (Haymanot) uses the word Kahen to refer to a type non-hereditary cleric.\nSamaritanism.\nAaronic Kohanim also officiated at the Samaritan temple on Mount Gerizim. The Samaritan kohanim have retained their role as religious leaders.\nChristianity.\nWith the spread of Christianity and the formation of parishes, the Greek word \"hiere\u00fas\" and Latin word \"sacerdos\", which Christians had since the 3rd century applied to bishops and only in a secondary sense to presbyters, began in the 6th century to be used for presbyters, and is today commonly used for presbyters, distinguishing them from bishops.\nToday, the term \"priest\" is used in the Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, the Church of the East, and many branches of Lutheranism and Anglicanism, to refer to those who have been ordained to a ministerial position through receiving the sacrament of Holy Orders, although \"presbyter\" is also used. Since the Protestant Reformation, non-sacramental denominations are more likely to use the term \"elder\" to refer to their pastors. The Christian term \"priest\" does not have an entry in the Anchor Bible Dictionary, but the dictionary does deal with the above-mentioned terms under the entry for \"Sheep, Shepherd.\" \nIn Western Christianity, priests are usually styled \"The Reverend\".\nEastern Orthodoxy.\nIn Orthodoxy, the normal minimum age is thirty (Can. 11 of Neocaesarea) but a bishop may dispense with this if needed. In neither tradition may priests marry after ordination. In the Catholic Church, priests in the Latin Church must be celibate except under special rules for married clergy converting from certain other Christian confessions. Married men may become priests in Eastern Orthodoxy, but cannot marry after ordination, even if they become widowed. In the view of the Eastern Orthodox Churches:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCandidates for bishop are chosen only from among the celibate. Orthodox priests will either wear a clerical collar similar to the above-mentioned, or simply a very loose black robe that does not have a collar. The garb of an Eastern Orthodox priest is generally the same as that of an Eastern Catholic or Eastern Lutheran priest.\nOriental Orthodoxy.\nIn the Oriental Orthodox Churches, there are different orders of ministry, each with different vestments. The order of the priest is known as the \"Kashisho\".\nIn addition to the ministerial priesthood, Oriental Orthodoxy does affirm the priesthood of believers, which is called the \"Ulmoyo\".\nCatholicism.\nThe most significant liturgical acts reserved to priests in these traditions are the administration of the Sacraments, including the celebration of the Holy Mass or Divine Liturgy (the terms for the celebration of the Eucharist in the Latin and Byzantine traditions, respectively), and the Sacrament of Reconciliation, also called Confession. The sacraments of Anointing of the Sick (Extreme Unction) and Confirmation are also administered by priests, though in the Western tradition Confirmation is ordinarily celebrated by a bishop. In the East, Chrismation is performed by the priest (using oil specially consecrated by a bishop) immediately after Baptism, and Unction is normally performed by several priests (ideally seven), but may be performed by one if necessary. In the West, Holy Baptism may be celebrated by anyone. The Vatican catechism states that \"According to Latin tradition, the spouses as ministers of Christ's grace mutually confer upon each other the sacrament of Matrimony\". Thus marriage is a sacrament administered by the couple to themselves, but may be witnessed and blessed by a deacon, or priest (who usually administers the ceremony). In the East, Holy Baptism and Marriage (which is called \"Crowning\") may be performed only by a priest. If a person is baptized \"in extremis\" (i.e., when in fear of immediate death), only the actual threefold immersion together with the scriptural words may be performed by a layperson or deacon. The remainder of the rite, and Chrismation, must still be performed by a priest, if the person survives. The only sacrament which may be celebrated only by a bishop is that of Ordination (\"cheirotonia\", \"Laying-on of Hands\"), or Holy Orders.\nIn these traditions, only men who meet certain requirements may become priests. In Catholicism, the canonical minimum age is twenty-five. Bishops may dispense with this rule and ordain men up to one year younger. Dispensations of more than a year are reserved to the Holy See (Can. 1031 \u00a7\u00a7\u00a01, 4.) A Catholic priest must be incardinated by his bishop or his major religious superior in order to engage in public ministry. Secular priests are incardinated into a diocese, whereas religious priests live the consecrated life and can work anywhere in the world that their specific community operates.\nMarried men may become priests in the Eastern Catholic Churches, but cannot marry after ordination, even if they become widowed.\nLutheranism.\nConservative Lutheran reforms are reflected in the theological and practical view of the ministry of the church. Much of European Lutheranism follows the traditional Catholic governance of deacon, priest, and bishop. The Lutheran archbishops of Finland, Sweden, etc. and Baltic countries are the historic national primates and some ancient cathedrals and parishes in the Lutheran church were constructed many centuries before the Reformation. Indeed, ecumenical work within the Moravian Church, Anglican Communion and among Scandinavian Lutherans mutually recognize the historic apostolic legitimacy and full communion. Likewise in America, Lutherans have embraced the apostolic succession of bishops in the full communion with Moravians and Episcopalians. Most Lutheran ordinations are performed by a bishop.\nThe Church of Sweden has a threefold ministry of bishop, priest, and deacon and those ordained to the presbyterate are referred to as priests. In the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland, ordained presbyters are referred to by various publications, including Finnish ones, as pastors, or priests. In the United States, denominations like the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod use the terms \"reverend\" and \"pastor\" interchangeably for ordained members of the clergy; the Lutheran Church - International, a Confessional Lutheran denomination of Evangelical Catholic churchmanship, uses the term \"priest\" for those ordained to the presbyterate, who are addressed as \"Father\".\nApart from the ministerial priesthood, the general priesthood or the priesthood of all believers, is a Christian doctrine derived from several passages of the New Testament. It is a foundational concept of Protestantism. It is this doctrine that Martin Luther adduces in his 1520 \"To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation\" in order to dismiss the medieval Christian belief that Christians were to be divided into two classes: \"spiritual\" and \"temporal\" or non-spiritual.\nAnglican or Episcopalian.\nThe role of a priest in the Anglican Communion and the Free Church of England is largely the same as within the Roman Catholic Church and Eastern Christianity, except that canon law in almost every Anglican province restricts the administration of confirmation to the bishop, just as with ordination. Although Anglican priests who are members of religious orders must remain celibate (although there are exceptions, such as priests in the Anglican Order of Cistercians), the secular clergy\u2014bishops, priests, and deacons who are not members of religious orders\u2014are permitted to marry before or after ordination (although in most provinces they are not permitted to marry a person of the same sex). The Anglican churches, unlike the Roman Catholic or Eastern Christian traditions, have allowed the ordination of women as priests (referred to as \"priests\" not \"priestesses\") in some provinces since 1971. This practice remains controversial, however; a minority of provinces (10 out of the 38 worldwide) retain an all-male priesthood. Most Continuing Anglican churches do not ordain women to the priesthood.\nAs Anglicanism represents a broad range of theological opinion, its presbyterate includes priests who consider themselves no different in any respect from those of the Roman Catholic Church, and a minority who prefer to use the title \"presbyter\" in order to distance themselves from the more sacrificial theological implications which they associate with the word \"priest\".\nWhile \"priest\" is the official title of a member of the presbyterate in every Anglican province worldwide (retained by the Elizabethan Settlement), the ordination rite of certain provinces (including the Church of England) recognizes the breadth of opinion by adopting the title \"The Ordination of Priests (also called Presbyters).\" Even though both words mean 'elders' historically the term \"priest\" has been more associated with the \"High Church\" or Anglo-Catholic wing, whereas the term \"minister\" has been more commonly used in \"Low Church\" or Evangelical circles.\nLatter Day Saints.\nIn the Latter Day Saint movement, the priesthood is the power and authority of God given to man, including the authority to perform ordinances and to act as a leader in the church. A body of priesthood holders is referred to as a quorum. Priesthood denotes elements of both power and authority. The priesthood includes the power Jesus gave his apostles to perform miracles such as the casting out of devils and the healing of sick (Luke 9:1). Latter Day Saints believe that the Biblical miracles performed by prophets and apostles were performed by the power of the priesthood, including the miracles of Jesus, who holds all of the keys of the priesthood. The priesthood is formally known as the \"Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God\", but to avoid the too frequent use of the name of deity, the priesthood is referred to as the Melchizedek priesthood (Melchizedek being the high priest to whom Abraham paid tithes). As an authority, the priesthood is the authority by which a bearer may perform ecclesiastical acts of service in the name of God. Latter Day Saints believe that acts (and in particular, ordinances) performed by one with priesthood authority are recognized by God and are binding in heaven, on earth, and in the afterlife.\nThere is some variation among the Latter Day Saint denominations regarding who can be ordained to the priesthood. In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), all worthy males above the age of 12 can be ordained to the priesthood. However, prior to a policy change in 1978, the LDS Church did not ordain men or boys who were of black African descent. The LDS Church does not ordain women to any of its priesthood offices. The Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (now the Community of Christ), the second largest denomination of the movement, began ordaining women to all of its priesthood offices in 1984. This decision was one of the reasons that led to a schism in the church, which prompted the formation of the independent Restoration Branches movement from which other denominations have sprung, including the Remnant Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.\nIslam.\nIslam has no sacerdotal priesthood. There are, however, a variety of academic and administrative offices which have evolved to assist Muslims with this task, such as the im\u0101ms and the mull\u0101hs.\nMandaeism.\nA Mandaean priest refers to an ordained religious leader in Mandaeism. In Mandaean scriptures, priests are referred to as \"Na\u1e63uraiia\" (Na\u1e63oraeans). All priests must undergo lengthy ordination ceremonies, beginning with tarmida initiation. Mandaean religious leaders and copyists of religious texts hold the title \"Rabbi\" or in Arabic 'Sheikh'.\nAll Mandaean communities traditionally require the presence of a priest, since priests are required to officiate over all important religious rituals, including masbuta, masiqta, birth and wedding ceremonies. Priests also serve as teachers, scribes, and community leaders.\nThere are three types of priests in Mandaeism:\nPriests have lineages based on the succession of \"ganzibria\" priests who had initiated them. Priestly lineages, which are distinct from birth lineages, are typically recorded in the colophons of many Mandaean texts. The position is not hereditary, and any Mandaean male who is highly knowledgeable about religious matters is eligible to become a priest.\nEastern religions.\nHinduism.\nA Hindu priest traditionally comes from the Brahmin community. Priests are ordained and trained before practicing. Their training consists of a precise memorisation of texts in a written or printed form and learning how to pronouciate and recite these texts from a guru. There are two types of Hindu priests, \"pujaris\" (\"swamis\", \"yogis\", and \"gurus\") and \"purohitas\" (\"pandits\"). A \"pujari\" performs rituals in a temple. These rituals include bathing the \"murtis\" (the statues of the gods/goddesses), performing \"puja\" (a ritualistic offering of various items to the gods), and waving a \"ghee\" or oil lamp (an offering in light) known in Hinduism as \"aarti\", before the \"murtis\". \"Pujaris\" are often married.\nA \"purohita\", on the other hand, performs rituals and sa\u1e43sk\u0101ras (sacraments), yajnas (sacrifices) outside the temple. There are special \"purohitas\" who perform only funeral rites.\nIn many cases, a \"purohita\" also functions as a \"pujari\".\nWhile only men have traditionally been ordained as priests, recent developments, such as feminism in India, have led to the opening of training schools for women to become priests.\nZoroastrianism.\nA Zoroastrian priest are called a Mobad and they officiate the \"Yasna\", pouring libations into the sacred fire to the accompaniment of ritual chants. The Mobad also prepare drinks for the \"haoma\" ritual.\nIn Indian Zoroastrianism, the priesthood is reserved for men and is a mostly hereditary position, but women have been ordained in Iran and North America as a mobedyar, meaning an assistant mobed.\nTaoism.\nThe Taoist priests (\u9053\u58eb \"master of the Dao\" p.\u00a0488) act as interpreters of the principles of Yin-Yang 5 elements (fire, water, soil, wood, and metal p.\u00a053) school of ancient Chinese philosophy, as they relate to marriage, death, festival cycles, and so on. The Taoist priest seeks to share the benefits of meditation with his or her community through public ritual and liturgy (p.\u00a0326). In the ancient priesthood before the Tang, the priest was called \"Jijiu\" (\"libationer\" p.\u00a0550), with both male and female practitioners selected by merit. The system gradually changed into a male only hereditary Taoist priesthood until more recent times (p.\u00a0550,551).\nIndigenous and ethnic religions.\nShinto.\nThe Shinto priest is called a \", originally pronounced \"kamunushi\", sometimes referred to as a . A kannushi is the person responsible for the maintenance of a Shinto shrine, or \"jinja\", purificatory rites, and for leading worship and veneration of a certain \"kami\". Additionally, \"kannushi\" are aided by another priest class, \", for many rites. The maidens may either be family members in training, apprentices, or local volunteers.\n\"Saiin\" were female relatives of the Japanese emperor (termed \"sai\u014d\") who served as High Priestesses in Kamo Shrine. \"Sai\u014d\" also served at Ise Shrine. \"Saiin\" priestesses usually were elected from royalty. In principle, \"Saiin\" remained unmarried, but there were exceptions. Some \"Saiin\" became consorts of the emperor, called \"Ny\u014dgo\" in Japanese. The \"Saiin\" order of priestesses existed throughout the Heian and Kamakura periods.\nAfrica.\nThe Yoruba people of western Nigeria practice an indigenous religion with a chiefly hierarchy of priests and priestesses that dates to AD 800\u20131000. If\u00e1 priests and priestesses bear the titles Babalawo for men and Iyanifa for women. Priests and priestesses of the varied Orisha are titled Babalorisa for men and Iyalorisa for women. Initiates are also given an Orisa or If\u00e1 name that signifies under which deity they are initiated. For example, a Priestess of Osun may be named Osunyemi, and a Priest of If\u00e1 may be named If\u00e1yemi. This traditional culture continues to this day as initiates from all around the world return to Nigeria for initiation into the priesthood, and varied derivative sects in the New World (such as Cuban Santer\u00eda and Brazilian Umbanda) use the same titles to refer to their officers as well.\nIn a kingdom, tribe or clan in Africa the traditional leader is also a priest cause of his mission between the spirit of ancestors ( Throne ) and people. Everything the traditional ruler must do, is according to the ritual, ceremony and worship. They call him sometimes royal Priest.\nAfro-Latin American religions.\nIn Brazil, the priests in the Umbanda, Candombl\u00e9 and Quimbanda religions are called \"pai-de-santo\" (literally \"Father of saint\" in English), or \"babalorix\u00e1\" (a word borrowed from Yoruba \"b\u00e0b\u00e1l\u00f3r\u00ecs\u00e0\", meaning \"Father of the Orisha\"); its female equivalent is the \"m\u00e3e-de-santo\" (\"Mother of saint\"), also referred to as \"ialorix\u00e1\" (Yoruba: \"iy\u00e1l\u00f3r\u00ecs\u00e0\").\nIn the Cuban Santer\u00eda, a male priest is called \"Santero\", while female priests are called \"Iyanifas\" or \"mothers of wisdom\".\nNeo-paganism.\nWicca.\nAccording to traditional Wiccan beliefs, every member of the religion is considered a priestess or priest, as it is believed that no person can stand between another and the divine. However, in response to the growing number of Wiccan temples and churches, several denominations of the religion have begun to develop a core group of ordained priestesses and priests serving a larger laity. This trend is far from widespread, but is gaining acceptance due to increased interest in the religion.\nDress.\nThe dress of religious workers in ancient times may be demonstrated in frescoes and artifacts from the cultures. The dress is presumed to be related to the customary clothing of the culture, with some symbol of the deity worn on the head or held by the person. Sometimes special colors, materials, or patterns distinguish celebrants, as the white wool veil draped on the head of the Vestal Virgins.\nOccasionally, the celebrants at religious ceremonies shed all clothes in a symbolic gesture of purity. This was often the case in ancient times. An example of this is shown to the left on a Kylix dating from c. 500\u00a0BC where a priestess is featured. Modern religious groups tend to avoid such symbolism and some may be quite uncomfortable with the concept.\nThe retention of long skirts and vestments among many ranks of contemporary priests when they officiate may be interpreted to express the ancient traditions of the cultures from which their religious practices arose.\nIn most Christian traditions, priests wear clerical clothing, a distinctive form of street dress. Even within individual traditions it varies considerably in form, depending on the specific occasion. In Western Christianity, the stiff white clerical collar has become the nearly universal feature of priestly clerical clothing, worn either with a cassock or a clergy shirt. The collar may be either a full collar or a vestigial tab displayed through a square cutout in the shirt collar.\nEastern Christian priests mostly retain the traditional dress of two layers of differently cut cassock: the \"rasson\" (Greek) or \"podriasnik\" (Russian) beneath the outer \"exorasson\" (Greek) or \"riasa\" (Russian). If a pectoral cross has been awarded it is usually worn with street clothes in the Russian tradition, but not so often in the Greek tradition.\nDistinctive clerical clothing is less often worn in modern times than formerly, and in many cases it is rare for a priest to wear it when not acting in a pastoral capacity, especially in countries that view themselves as largely secular in nature. There are frequent exceptions to this however, and many priests rarely if ever go out in public without it, especially in countries where their religion makes up a clear majority of the population. Pope John Paul II often instructed Catholic priests and religious to always wear their distinctive (clerical) clothing, unless wearing it would result in persecution or grave verbal attacks.\nChristian traditions that retain the title of priest also retain the tradition of special liturgical vestments worn only during services. Vestments vary widely among the different Christian traditions.\nIn modern Pagan religions, such as Wicca, there is no one specific form of dress designated for the clergy. If there is, it is a particular of the denomination in question, and not a universal practice. However, there is a traditional form of dress, (usually a floor-length tunic and a knotted cord cincture, known as the \"cingulum\"), which is often worn by worshipers during religious rites. Among those traditions of Wicca that do dictate a specific form of dress for its clergy, they usually wear the traditional tunic in addition to other articles of clothing (such as an open-fronted robe or a cloak) as a distinctive form of religious dress, similar to a habit.\nAssistant priest.\nIn many religions, there are one or more layers of assistant priests.\nIn the Ancient Near East, hierodules served in temples as assistants to the priestess.\nIn ancient Judaism, the Priests (Kohanim) had a whole class of Levites as their assistants in making the sacrifices, in singing psalms and in maintaining the Temple. The Priests and the Levites were in turn served by servants called Nethinim. These lowest level of servants were not priests.\nIn the Catholic Church the term assistant priest applies to a minister assisting the main celebrant, whether it is the Pope, a bishop, or another priest, at a Mass or the Divine Office.\nAn assistant priest is a priest in the Anglican and Episcopal churches who is not the senior member of clergy of the parish to which they are appointed, but is nonetheless in priests' orders; there is no difference in function or theology, merely in 'grade' or 'rank'. Some assistant priests have a \"sector ministry\", that is to say that they specialize in a certain area of ministry within the local church, for example youth work, hospital work, or ministry to local light industry. They may also hold some diocesan appointment part-time. In most (though not all) cases, an assistant priest has the legal status of assistant curate, although not all assistant curates are priests, as this legal status also applies to many deacons working as assistants in a parochial setting.\nThe corresponding term in the Catholic Church is \"parochial vicar\" \u2013 an ordained priest assigned to assist the pastor (Latin: \"parochus\") of a parish in the pastoral care of parishioners. Normally, all pastors are also ordained priests; occasionally an auxiliary bishop will be assigned that role.\nIn Wicca, the leader of a coven or temple (either a high priestess or high priest) often appoints an assistant. This assistant is often called a 'deputy', but the more traditional terms 'maiden' (when female and assisting a high priestess) and 'summoner' (when male and assisting a high priest) are still used in many denominations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23708", "revid": "50981008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23708", "title": "PL/I", "text": "Procedural, imperative computer programming language\nPL/I (Programming Language One, pronounced and sometimes written PL/1) is a procedural, imperative computer programming language initially developed by IBM. It is designed for scientific, engineering, business and system programming. It has been in continuous use by academic, commercial and industrial organizations since it was introduced in the 1960s.\nA PL/I American National Standards Institute (ANSI) technical standard, X3.53-1976, was published in 1976.\nPL/I's main domains are data processing, numerical computation, scientific computing, and system programming. It supports recursion, structured programming, linked data structure handling, fixed-point, floating-point, complex, character string handling, and bit string handling. The language syntax is English-like and suited for describing complex data formats with a wide set of functions available to verify and manipulate them.\nEarly history.\nIn the 1950s and early 1960s, business and scientific users programmed using different programming languages, usually on different computer hardware. Business users were moving from Autocoders via COMTRAN to COBOL, while scientific users programmed in Fortran, ALGOL, GEORGE, and others. The IBM System/360 (announced in 1964 and delivered in 1966) was designed as a common machine architecture for both groups of users, superseding all existing IBM architectures. Similarly, IBM wanted a single programming language for all users. It hoped that Fortran could be extended to include the features needed by commercial programmers. In October 1963 a committee was formed composed originally of three IBMers from New York and three members of SHARE, the IBM\nscientific users group, to propose these extensions to Fortran. Given the constraints of Fortran, they were unable to do this and embarked on the design of a new programming language based loosely on ALGOL labeled NPL. This acronym conflicted with that of the UK's National Physical Laboratory and was replaced briefly by MPPL (MultiPurpose Programming Language) and, in 1965, with PL/I (with a Roman numeral \"I\"). The first definition appeared in April 1964.\nIBM took NPL as a starting point and completed the design to a level that the first compiler could be written: the NPL definition was incomplete in scope and in detail. Control of the PL/I language was vested initially in the New York Programming Center and later at the IBM UK Laboratory at Hursley. The SHARE and GUIDE user groups were involved in extending the language and had a role in IBM's process for controlling the language through their PL/I Projects. The experience of defining such a large language showed the need for a formal definition of PL/I. A project was set up in 1967 in IBM Laboratory Vienna to make an unambiguous and complete specification. This led in turn to one of the first large scale Formal Methods for development, VDM.\nFred Brooks is credited with ensuring PL/I had the CHARACTER data type. Christopher J. Date and a colleague added relational database extensions based on Edgar Codd's work.\nThe language was first specified in detail in the manual \"PL/I Language Specifications. C28-6571\", written in New York in 1965, and superseded by \"PL/I Language Specifications. GY33-6003\", written by Hursley in 1967. IBM continued to develop PL/I in the late sixties and early seventies, publishing it in the GY33-6003 manual. These manuals were used by the Multics group and other early implementers.\nThe first compiler was delivered in 1966. The Standard for PL/I was approved in 1976.\nGoals and principles.\nThe goals for PL/I evolved during the early development of the language. Competitiveness with COBOL's record handling and report writing was required. The language's scope of usefulness grew to include system programming and event-driven programming. Additional goals for PL/I were:\nTo achieve these goals, PL/I borrowed ideas from contemporary languages while adding substantial new capabilities and casting it with a distinctive concise and readable syntax. Many principles and capabilities combined to give the language its character and were important in meeting the language's goals:\nLanguage summary.\nThe language is designed to provide sufficient facilities to be able to satisfy the needs of all programmers, regardless of what problems the language is being applied to. The summary is extracted from the ANSI PL/I Standard\nand the ANSI PL/I General-Purpose Subset Standard.\nA PL/I program consists of a set of procedures, each of which is written as a sequence of statements. The codice_5 construct is used to include text from other sources during program translation. All of the statement types are summarized here in groupings which give an overview of the language (the Standard uses this organization).\nNames may be declared to represent data of the following types, either as single values, or as aggregates in the form of arrays, with a lower-bound and upper-bound per dimension, or structures (comprising nested structure, array and scalar variables):\nThe codice_6 type comprises these attributes:\nThe base, scale, precision and scale factor of the codice_7 type is encoded within the codice_8. The mode is specified separately, with the codice_9 applied to both the real and the imaginary parts.\nValues are computed by expressions written using a specific set of operations and builtin functions, most of which may be applied to aggregates as well as to single values, together with user-defined procedures which, likewise, may operate on and return aggregate as well as single values. The assignment statement assigns values to one or more variables.\nThere are no reserved words in PL/I. A statement is terminated by a semi-colon. The maximum length of a statement is implementation defined. A comment may appear anywhere in a program where a space is permitted and is preceded by the characters forward slash, asterisk and is terminated by the characters asterisk, forward slash (i.e. ). Statements may have a label-prefix introducing an entry name (codice_10 and codice_11 statements) or label name, and a condition prefix enabling or disabling a computational condition\u00a0\u2013 e.g., codice_12). Entry and label names may be single identifiers or identifiers followed by a subscript list of constants (as in codice_13).\nA sequence of statements becomes a \"group\" when preceded by a codice_4 statement and followed by an codice_15 statement. Groups may include nested groups and begin blocks. The codice_16 statement specifies a group or a single statement as the codice_17 part and the codice_18 part (see the sample program). The group is the unit of iteration. The begin \"block\" (codice_19) may contain declarations for names and internal procedures local to the block. A \"procedure\" starts with a codice_11 statement and is terminated syntactically by an codice_15 statement. The body of a procedure is a sequence of blocks, groups, and statements and contains declarations for names and procedures local to the procedure or codice_22 to the procedure.\nAn \"ON-unit\" is a single statement or block of statements written to be executed when one or more of these \"conditions\" occur:\na \"computational condition\",\nor an \"Input/Output\" condition,\nor one of the conditions:\nA declaration of an identifier may contain one or more of the following attributes (but they need to be mutually consistent):\nCurrent compilers from Micro Focus, and particularly that from IBM implement many extensions over the standardized version of the language. The IBM extensions are summarised in the Implementation sub-section for the compiler later. Although there are some extensions common to these compilers the lack of a current standard means that compatibility is not guaranteed.\nStandardization.\nLanguage standardization began in April 1966 in Europe with ECMA TC10. In 1969 ANSI established a \"Composite Language Development Committee\", nicknamed \"Kludge\", later renamed X3J1 PL/I. Standardization became a joint effort of ECMA TC/10 and ANSI X3J1. A subset of the GY33-6003 document was offered to the joint effort by IBM and became the base document for standardization. The major features omitted from the base document were multitasking and the attributes for program optimization (e.g., codice_27 and codice_28).\nProposals to change the base document were voted upon by both committees. In the event that the committees disagreed, the chairs, initially Michael Marcotty of General Motors and C.A.R. Hoare representing ICL had to resolve the disagreement. In addition to IBM, Honeywell, CDC, Data General, Digital Equipment Corporation, Prime Computer, Burroughs, RCA, and Univac served on X3J1 along with major users Eastman Kodak, MITRE, Union Carbide, Bell Laboratories, and various government and university representatives. Further development of the language occurred in the standards bodies, with continuing improvements in structured programming and internal consistency, and with the omission of the more obscure or contentious features.\nAs language development neared an end, X3J1/TC10 realized that there were a number of problems with a document written in English text. Discussion of a single item might appear in multiple places which might or might not agree. It was difficult to determine if there were omissions as well as inconsistencies. Consequently, David Beech (IBM), Robert Freiburghouse (Honeywell), Milton Barber (CDC), M. Donald MacLaren (Argonne National Laboratory), Craig Franklin (Data General), Lois Frampton (Digital Equipment Corporation), and editor, D.J. Andrews of IBM undertook to rewrite the entire document, each producing one or more complete chapters. The standard is couched as a formal definition using a \"PL/I Machine\" to specify the semantics. It was the first programming language standard to be written as a semi-formal definition.\nA \"PL/I General-Purpose Subset\" (\"Subset-G\") standard was issued by ANSI in 1981 and a revision published in 1987. The General Purpose subset was widely adopted as the kernel for PL/I implementations.\nImplementations.\nIBM PL/I F and D compilers.\nPL/I was first implemented by IBM, at its Hursley Laboratories in the United Kingdom, as part of the development of System/360. The first production PL/I compiler was the PL/I F compiler for the OS/360 Operating System, built by John Nash's team at Hursley in the UK: the runtime library team was managed by I.M. (Nobby) Clarke. The PL/I F compiler was written entirely in System/360 assembly language. Release 1 shipped in 1966. OS/360 is a real-memory environment and the compiler was designed for systems with as little as 64 kilobytes of real storage \u2013 F being 64 kB in S/360 parlance. To fit a large compiler into the 44 kilobytes of memory available on a 64-kilobyte machine, the compiler consists of a control phase and a large number of compiler phases (approaching 100). The phases are brought into memory from disk, one at a time, to handle particular language features and aspects of compilation. Each phase makes a single pass over the partially-compiled program, usually held in memory.\nAspects of the language were still being designed as PL/I F was implemented, so some were omitted until later releases. PL/I RECORD I/O was shipped with PL/I F Release 2. The list processing functions\u00a0\u2013 Based Variables, Pointers, Areas and Offsets and LOCATE-mode I/O\u00a0\u2013 were first shipped in Release 4. In a major attempt to speed up PL/I code to compete with Fortran object code, PL/I F Release 5 does substantial program optimization of DO-loops facilitated by the REORDER option on procedures.\nA version of PL/I F was released on the TSS/360 timesharing operating system for the System/360 Model 67, adapted at the IBM Mohansic Lab. The IBM La Gaude Lab in France developed \"Language Conversion Programs\" to convert Fortran, Cobol, and Algol programs to the PL/I F level of PL/I.\nThe PL/I D compiler, using 16 kilobytes of memory, was developed by IBM Germany for the DOS/360 low end operating system. It implements a subset of the PL/I language requiring all strings and arrays to have fixed extents, thus simplifying the run-time environment. Reflecting the underlying operating system, it lacks dynamic storage allocation and the \"controlled\" storage class. It was shipped within a year of PL/I F.\nMultics PL/I and derivatives.\nCompilers were implemented by several groups in the early 1960s. The Multics project at MIT, one of the first to develop an operating system in a high-level language, used Early PL/I (EPL), a subset dialect of PL/I, as their implementation language in 1964. EPL was developed at Bell Labs and MIT by Douglas McIlroy, Robert Morris, and others. Initially, it was developed using the TMG compiler-compiler. The influential Multics PL/I compiler [sic \"PL/1\"] was the source of compiler technology used by a number of manufacturers and software groups. EPL was a system programming language and a dialect of PL/I that had some capabilities absent in the original PL/I.\nThe Honeywell PL/I compiler (for Series 60) is an implementation of the full ANSI X3J1 standard.\nIBM PL/I optimizing and checkout compilers.\nThe PL/I Optimizer and Checkout compilers produced in Hursley support a common level of PL/I language and aimed to replace the PL/I F compiler. The checkout compiler is a rewrite of PL/I F in BSL, IBM's PL/I-like proprietary implementation language (later PL/S). The performance objectives set for the compilers are shown in an IBM presentation to the BCS. The compilers had to produce identical results\u00a0\u2013 the Checkout Compiler is used to debug programs that would then be submitted to the Optimizer. Given that the compilers had entirely different designs and were handling the full PL/I language this goal was challenging: it was achieved.\nIBM introduced new attributes and syntax including BUILTIN, case statements (SELECT/WHEN/OTHERWISE), loop controls (ITERATE and LEAVE) and null argument lists to disambiguate, e.g., codice_29.\nThe PL/I optimizing compiler took over from the PL/I F compiler and was IBM's workhorse compiler from the 1970s to the 1990s. Like PL/I F, it is a multiple pass compiler with a 44 kilobyte design point, but it is an entirely new design. Unlike the F compiler, it has to perform compile time evaluation of constant expressions using the run-time library, reducing the maximum memory for a compiler phase to 28 kilobytes. A second-time around design, it succeeded in eliminating the annoyances of PL/I F such as cascading diagnostics. It was written in S/360 Macro Assembler by a team, led by Tony Burbridge, most of whom had worked on PL/I F. Macros were defined to automate common compiler services and to shield the compiler writers from the task of managing real-mode storage, allowing the compiler to be moved easily to other memory models. The gamut of program optimization techniques developed for the contemporary IBM Fortran H compiler were deployed: the Optimizer equaled Fortran execution speeds in the hands of good programmers. Announced with IBM S/370 in 1970, it shipped first for the DOS/360 operating system in August 1971, and shortly afterward for OS/360, and the first virtual memory IBM operating systems DOS/VS, OS/VS1, OS/VS2, and VM/370. (The developers were unaware that while they were shoehorning the code into 28 kb sections, IBM Poughkeepsie was finally ready to ship virtual memory support.) It supported the batch programming environments and, under TSO and CMS, it could be run interactively. This compiler went through many versions covering all mainframe operating systems including the operating systems of the Japanese plug-compatible machines (PCMs).\nThe compiler has been superseded by \"IBM PL/I for OS/2, AIX, Linux, z/OS\" below.\nThe PL/I checkout compiler, (colloquially \"The Checker\") announced in August 1970 was designed to speed and improve the debugging of PL/I programs. The team was led by Brian Marks. The three-pass design cut the time to compile a program to 25% of that taken by the F Compiler. It can be run from an interactive terminal, converting PL/I programs into an internal format, \"H-text\". This format is interpreted by the Checkout compiler at run-time, detecting virtually all types of errors. Pointers are represented in 16 bytes, containing the target address and a description of the referenced item, thus permitting \"bad\" pointer use to be diagnosed. In a conversational environment when an error is detected, control is passed to the user who can inspect any variables, introduce debugging statements and edit the source program. Over time the debugging capability of mainframe programming environments developed most of the functions offered by this compiler and it was withdrawn (in the 1990s?)\nDEC PL/I.\nPerhaps the most commercially successful implementation aside from IBM's was Digital Equipment Corporation's VAX-11 PL/I, later known as VAX PL/I, then DEC PL/I. The implementation is \"a strict superset of the ANSI X3.4-1981 PL/I General Purpose Subset and provides most of the features of the new ANSI X3.74-1987 PL/I General Purpose Subset\", and was first released in 1980. It originally used a compiler backend named the VAX Code Generator (VCG) created by a team led by Dave Cutler. The front end was designed by Robert Freiburghouse, and was ported to VAX/VMS from Multics. It runs on VMS on VAX and Alpha, and on Tru64. During the 1990s, Digital sold the compiler to UniPrise Systems, who later sold it to a company named Kednos. Kednos marketed the compiler as Kednos PL/I until October 2016 when the company ceased trading.\nTeaching subset compilers.\nIn the late 1960s and early 1970s, many US and Canadian universities were establishing time-sharing services on campus and needed conversational compiler/interpreters for use in teaching science, mathematics, engineering, and computer science. Dartmouth was developing BASIC, but PL/I was a popular choice, as it was concise and easy to teach. As the IBM offerings were unsuitable, a number of schools built their own subsets of PL/I and their own interactive support. Examples are:\nIn the 1960s and early 1970s, Allen-Babcock implemented the Remote Users of Shared Hardware (RUSH) time sharing system for an IBM System/360 Model 50 with custom microcode and subsequently implemented IBM's CPS, an interactive time-sharing system for OS/360 aimed at teaching computer science basics, offered a limited subset of the PL/I language in addition to BASIC and a remote job entry facility.\nPL/C, a dialect for teaching, a compiler developed at Cornell University, had the unusual capability of never failing to compile any program through the use of extensive automatic correction of many syntax errors and by converting any remaining syntax errors to output statements. The language was almost all of PL/I as implemented by IBM. PL/C was a very fast compiler.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;SL/1 (Student Language/1, Student Language/One or Subset Language/1) was a PL/I subset, initially available late 1960s, that ran interpretively on the IBM 1130; instructional use was its strong point.\nPLAGO, created at the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, used a simplified subset of the PL/I language and focused on good diagnostic error messages and fast compilation times.\nThe Computer Systems Research Group of the University of Toronto produced the SP/k compilers which supported a sequence of subsets of PL/I called SP/1, SP/2, SP/3, ..., SP/8 for teaching programming. Programs that ran without errors under the SP/k compilers produced the same results under other contemporary PL/I compilers such as IBM's PL/I F compiler, IBM's checkout compiler or Cornell University's PL/C compiler.\nOther examples are PL0 by P. Grouse at the University of New South Wales, PLUM by Marvin Victor Zelkowitz at the University of Maryland., and PLUTO from the University of Toronto.\nIBM PL/I for OS/2, AIX, Linux, z/OS.\nIn a major revamp of PL/I, IBM Santa Teresa in California launched an entirely new compiler in 1992. The initial shipment was for OS/2 and included most ANSI-G features and many new PL/I features. Subsequent releases provided additional platforms (MVS, VM, OS/390, AIX and Windows), but as of 2021, the only supported platforms are z/OS and AIX. IBM continued to add functions to make PL/I fully competitive with other languages (particularly C and C++) in areas where it had been overtaken. The corresponding \"IBM Language Environment\" supports inter-operation of PL/I programs with Database and Transaction systems, and with programs written in C, C++, and COBOL, the compiler supports all the data types needed for intercommunication with these languages.\nThe PL/I design principles were retained and withstood this major extension, comprising several new data types, new statements and statement options, new exception conditions, and new organisations of program source. The resulting language is a compatible super-set of the PL/I Standard and of the earlier IBM compilers. Major topics added to PL/I were:\nThe latest series of PL/I compilers for z/OS, called Enterprise PL/I for z/OS, leverage code generation for the latest z/Architecture processors (z14, z13, zEC12, zBC12, z196, z114) via the use of ARCHLVL parm control passed during compilation, and was the second high-level language supported by z/OS Language Environment to do so (XL C/C++ being the first, and Enterprise COBOL v5 the last.)\nData types.\nORDINAL is a new computational data type. The ordinal facilities are like those in Pascal,\ne.g., \nbut in addition the name and internal values are accessible via built-in functions. Built-in functions provide access to an ordinal value's predecessor and successor. The codice_39 and codice_40 type functions provide access to an ordinal set's range.\nThe DEFINE-statement (see below) allows additional TYPEs to be declared composed from PL/I's built-in attributes.\nThe codice_41 locator data type is similar to the POINTER data type, but strongly typed to bind only to a particular data structure. The codice_42 operator is used to select a data structure using a handle.\nThe UNION attribute (equivalent to CELL in early PL/I specifications) permits several scalar variables, arrays, or structures to share the same storage in a unit that occupies the amount of storage needed for the largest alternative.\nCompetitiveness on PC and with C.\nThese attributes were added:\nNew string-handling functions were added\u00a0\u2013 to centre text, to edit using a picture format, and to trim blanks or selected characters from the head or tail of text, codice_59 to codice_60 from the right. and codice_61 and codice_62 functions.\nCompound assignment operators a la C e.g., codice_63, codice_64, codice_65, codice_66 were added. codice_67 is equivalent to codice_68.\nAdditional parameter descriptors and attributes were added for omitted arguments and variable length argument lists.\nProgram readability \u2013 making intentions explicit.\nThe VALUE attribute declares an identifier as a constant (derived from a specific literal value or restricted expression).\nParameters can have the BYADDR (pass by address) or BYVALUE (pass by value) attributes.\nThe ASSIGNABLE and NONASSIGNABLE attributes prevent unintended assignments.\ncodice_69 obviates the need for the contrived construct .\nThe DEFINE-statement introduces user-specified names (e.g., INTEGER) for combinations of built-in attributes (e.g., codice_70). Thus codice_71 creates the TYPE name INTEGER as an alias for the set of built-in attributes FIXED BINARY(31.0). codice_32 applies to structures and their members; it provides a TYPE name for a set of structure attributes and corresponding substructure member declarations for use in a structure declaration (a generalisation of the LIKE attribute).\nStructured programming additions.\nA LEAVE statement to exit a loop, and an ITERATE to continue with the next iteration of a loop.\nUPTHRU and DOWNTHRU options on iterative groups.\nThe package construct consisting of a set of procedures and declarations for use as a unit. Variables declared outside of the procedures are local to the package, and can use STATIC, BASED or CONTROLLED storage. Procedure names used in the package also are local, but can be made external by means of the EXPORTS option of the PACKAGE-statement.\nInterrupt handling.\nThe RESIGNAL-statement executed in an ON-unit terminates execution of the ON-unit, and raises the condition again in the procedure that called the current one (thus passing control to the corresponding ON-unit for that procedure).\nThe INVALIDOP condition handles invalid operation codes detected by the PC processor, as well as illegal arithmetic operations such as subtraction of two infinite values.\nThe ANYCONDITION condition is provided to intercept conditions for which no specific ON-unit has been provided in the current procedure.\nThe STORAGE condition is raised when an ALLOCATE statement is unable to obtain sufficient storage.\nOther mainframe and minicomputer compilers.\nA number of vendors produced compilers to compete with IBM PL/I F or Optimizing compiler on mainframes and minicomputers in the 1970s. In the 1980s the target was usually the emerging ANSI-G subset.\nUsage.\nPL/I implementations were developed for mainframes from the late 1960s, mini computers in the 1970s, and personal computers in the 1980s and 1990s. Although its main use has been on mainframes, there are PL/I compilers for MS-DOS, Windows, OS/2, AIX, OpenVMS, and Unix.\nIt has been widely used in business data processing and for system use for writing operating systems on certain platforms. Very complex and powerful systems have been built with PL/I:\nPL/I did not fulfill its supporters' hopes that it would displace Fortran and COBOL and become the major player on mainframes. It remained a minority but significant player. There cannot be a definitive explanation for this, but some trends in the 1970s and 1980s militated against its success by progressively reducing the territory on which PL/I enjoyed a competitive advantage.\nFirst, the nature of the mainframe software environment changed. Application subsystems for database and transaction processing (CICS and IMS and Oracle on System 370) and application generators became the focus of mainframe users' application development. Significant parts of the language became irrelevant because of the need to use the corresponding native features of the subsystems (such as tasking and much of input/output). Fortran was not used in these application areas, confining PL/I to COBOL's territory; most users stayed with COBOL. But as the PC became the dominant environment for program development, Fortran, COBOL and PL/I all became minority languages overtaken by C++, Java and the like.\nSecond, PL/I was overtaken in the system programming field. The IBM system programming community was not ready to use PL/I; instead, IBM developed and adopted a proprietary dialect of PL/I for system programming. \u2013 PL/S. With the success of PL/S inside IBM, and of C outside IBM, the unique PL/I strengths for system programming became less valuable.\nThird, the development environments grew capabilities for interactive software development that, again, made the unique PL/I interactive and debugging strengths less valuable.\nFourth, features such as structured programming, character string operations, and object orientation were added to COBOL and Fortran, which further reduced PL/I's relative advantages.\nOn mainframes there were substantial business issues at stake too. IBM's hardware competitors had little to gain and much to lose from success of PL/I. Compiler development was expensive, and the IBM compiler groups had an in-built competitive advantage. Many IBM users wished to avoid being locked into proprietary solutions. With no early support for PL/I by other vendors it was best to avoid PL/I.\nEvolution of the PL/I language.\nThis article uses the PL/I standard as the reference point for language features. But a number of features of significance in the early implementations were not in the Standard; and some were offered by non-IBM compilers. And the de facto language continued to grow after the standard, ultimately driven by developments on the Personal Computer.\nSignificant features omitted from the standard.\nMultithreading.\nMultithreading, under the name \"multitasking\", was implemented by PL/I F, the PL/I Checkout and Optimizing compilers, and the newer AIX and Z/OS compilers. It comprised the data types EVENT and TASK, the TASK-option on the CALL-statement (Fork), the WAIT-statement (Join), the codice_74, EVENT-options on the record I/O statements and the UNLOCK statement to unlock locked records on EXCLUSIVE files. Event data identify a particular event and indicate whether it is complete ('1'B) or incomplete ('0'B): task data items identify a particular task (or process) and indicate its priority relative to other tasks.\nPreprocessor.\nThe first IBM \"Compile time preprocessor\" was built by the IBM Boston Advanced Programming Center located in Cambridge, Mass, and shipped with the PL/I F compiler. The codice_5 statement was in the Standard, but the rest of the features were not. The DEC and Kednos PL/I compilers implemented much the same set of features as IBM, with some additions of their own. IBM has continued to add preprocessor features to its compilers. The preprocessor treats the written source program as a sequence of tokens, copying them to an output source file or acting on them. When a % token is encountered the following compile time statement is executed: when an identifier token is encountered and the identifier has been DECLAREd, ACTIVATEd, and assigned a compile time value, the identifier is replaced by this value. Tokens are added to the output stream if they do not require action (e.g., codice_76), as are the values of ACTIVATEd compile time expressions. Thus a compile time variable PI could be declared, activated, and assigned using codice_77. Subsequent occurrences of PI would be replaced by codice_78.\nThe data type supported are codice_79 integers and CHARACTER strings of varying length with no maximum length. The structure statements are:\nand the simple statements, which also may have a \nThe feature allowed programmers to use identifiers for constants\u00a0\u2013 e.g., product part numbers or mathematical constants\u00a0\u2013 and was superseded in the standard by named constants for computational data. Conditional compiling and iterative generation of source code, possible with compile-time facilities, was not supported by the standard. Several manufacturers implemented these facilities.\nStructured programming additions.\nStructured programming additions were made to PL/I during standardization but were not accepted into the standard. These features were the LEAVE-statement to exit from an iterative DO, the UNTIL-option and REPEAT-option added to DO, and a case statement of the general form:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pre/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThese features were all included in IBM's PL/I Checkout and Optimizing compilers and in DEC PL/I.\nDebug facilities.\nPL/I F had offered some debug facilities that were not put forward for the standard but were implemented by others\u00a0\u2013 notably the CHECK(variable-list) condition prefix, codice_84 on-condition and the codice_85 option. The IBM Optimizing and Checkout compilers added additional features appropriate to the conversational mainframe programming environment (e.g., an codice_86 condition).\nSignificant features developed since the standard.\nSeveral attempts had been made to design a structure member type that could have one of several datatypes (codice_87 in early IBM). With the growth of classes in programming theory, approaches to this became possible on a PL/I base\u00a0\u2013 codice_35, codice_34 etc. have been added by several compilers.\nPL/I had been conceived in a single-byte character world. With support for Japanese and Chinese language becoming essential, and the developments on International Code Pages, the character string concept was expanded to accommodate wide non-ASCII/EBCDIC strings.\nTime and date handling were overhauled to deal with the millennium problem, with the introduction of the DATETIME function that returned the date and time in one of about 35 different formats. Several other date functions deal with conversions to and from days and seconds.\nCriticisms.\nImplementation issues.\nThough the language is easy to learn and use, implementing a PL/I compiler is difficult and time-consuming. A language as large as PL/I needed subsets that most vendors could produce and most users master. This was not resolved until \"ANSI G\" was published. The compile time facilities, unique to PL/I, took added implementation effort and additional compiler passes. A PL/I compiler was two to four times as large as comparable Fortran or COBOL compilers, and also that much slower\u2014supposedly offset by gains in programmer productivity. This was anticipated in IBM before the first compilers were written.\nSome argue that PL/I is unusually hard to parse. The PL/I \"keywords\" are not reserved so programmers can use them as variable or procedure names in programs. Because the original PL/I(F) compiler attempts \"auto-correction\" when it encounters a keyword used in an incorrect context, it often assumes it is a variable name. This leads to \"cascading diagnostics\", a problem solved by later compilers.\nThe effort needed to produce good object code was perhaps underestimated during the initial design of the language. Program optimization (needed to compete with the excellent program optimization carried out by available Fortran compilers) is unusually complex owing to side effects and pervasive problems with aliasing of variables. Unpredictable modification can occur asynchronously in exception handlers, which may be provided by \"ON statements\" in (unseen) callers. Together, these make it difficult to reliably predict when a program's variables might be modified at runtime. In typical use, however, user-written error handlers (the ON-unit) often do not make assignments to variables. In spite of the aforementioned difficulties, IBM produced the PL/I Optimizing Compiler in 1971.\nPL/I contains many rarely used features, such as multitasking support (an IBM extension to the language) which add cost and complexity to the compiler, and its co-processing facilities require a multi-programming environment with support for non-blocking multiple threads for processes by the operating system. Compiler writers were free to select whether to implement these features.\nAn undeclared variable is, by default, declared by first occurrence\u2014thus misspelling might lead to unpredictable results. This \"implicit declaration\" is no different from FORTRAN programs. For PL/I(F), however, an attribute listing enables the programmer to detect any misspelled or undeclared variable.\nProgrammer issues.\nMany programmers were slow to move from COBOL or Fortran due to a perceived complexity of the language and immaturity of the PL/I F compiler. Programmers were sharply divided into scientific programmers (who used Fortran) and business programmers (who used COBOL), with significant tension and even dislike between the groups. PL/I syntax borrowed from both COBOL and Fortran syntax. So instead of noticing features that would make their job easier, Fortran programmers of the time noticed COBOL syntax and had the opinion that it was a business language, while COBOL programmers noticed Fortran syntax and looked upon it as a scientific language.\nBoth COBOL and Fortran programmers viewed it as a \"bigger\" version of their own language, and both were somewhat intimidated by the language and disinclined to adopt it. Another factor was \"pseudo\"-similarities to COBOL, Fortran, and ALGOL. These were PL/I elements that looked similar to one of those languages, but worked differently in PL/I. Such frustrations left many experienced programmers with a jaundiced view of PL/I, and often an active dislike for the language. An early UNIX fortune file contained the following tongue-in-cheek description of the language:\nSpeaking as someone who has delved into the intricacies of PL/I, I am sure that only Real Men could have written such a machine-hogging, cycle-grabbing, all-encompassing monster. Allocate an array and free the middle third? Sure! Why not? Multiply a character string times a bit string and assign the result to a float decimal? Go ahead! Free a controlled variable procedure parameter and reallocate it before passing it back? Overlay three different types of variable on the same memory location? Anything you say! Write a recursive macro? Well, no, but Real Men use rescan. How could a language so obviously designed and written by Real Men not be intended for Real Man use?\nOn the positive side, full support for pointers to all data types (including pointers to structures), recursion, multitasking, string handling, and extensive built-in functions meant PL/I was indeed quite a leap forward compared to the programming languages of its time. However, these were not enough to persuade a majority of programmers or shops to switch to PL/I.\nThe PL/I F compiler's compile time preprocessor was unusual (outside the Lisp world) in using its target language's syntax and semantics (\"e.g.\" as compared to the C preprocessor's \"#\" directives).\nSpecial topics in PL/I.\nStorage classes.\nPL/I provides several 'storage classes' to indicate how the lifetime of variables' storage is to be managed\u00a0\u2013 codice_90, codice_91, codice_92, and codice_93, and codice_23.\ncodice_90 data is allocated and initialized at load-time, as is done in COBOL \"working-storage\" and early Fortran. This is the default for codice_22 variables (similar to C \u201cextern\u201d or Fortran \u201cnamed common\"),\ncodice_91 is PL/I's default storage class for codice_98 variables, similar to that of other block-structured languages influenced by ALGOL, like the \"auto\" storage class in the C language, the default storage allocation in Pascal, and \"local-storage\" in IBM COBOL. Storage for codice_91 variables is allocated upon entry into the procedure, codice_100-block, or codice_101-unit in which they are declared. The compiler and runtime system allocate memory for a stack frame to contain them and other housekeeping information. If a variable is declared with an codice_102-attribute, code to set it to an initial value is executed at this time. Care is required to manage the use of initialization properly. Large amounts of code can be executed to initialize variables every time a scope is entered, especially if the variable is an array or structure. Storage for codice_91 variables is freed at block exit.\ncodice_90, codice_92, or codice_93 variables are used to retain variables' contents between invocations of a procedure or block. \ncodice_92 storage is managed using a stack, but the pushing and popping of allocations on the stack is managed by the programmer, using codice_108 and codice_109 statements.\nStorage for codice_93 variables is also managed using codice_108/codice_109, but instead of a stack these allocations have independent lifetimes and are addressed through codice_113 or codice_114 variables. codice_93 variables can also be used to address arbitrary storage areas by setting the associated codice_114 variable, for example following a linked list.\nThe codice_23 attribute is used to declare programmer-defined heaps. Data can be allocated and freed within a specific area, and the area can be deleted, read, and written as a unit.\nStorage type sharing.\nThere are several ways of accessing allocated storage through different data declarations. Some of these are well defined and safe, some can be used safely with careful programming, and some are inherently unsafe or machine dependent.\nPassing a variable as an argument to a parameter by reference allows the argument's allocated storage to be referenced using the parameter. The DEFINED attribute (e.g., codice_118) allows part or all of a variable's storage to be used with a different, but consistent, declaration. The language definition includes a CELL attribute (later renamed UNION) to allow different definitions of data to share the same storage. This was not supported by many early IBM compilers. These usages are safe and machine independent.\nRecord I/O and list processing produce situations where the programmer needs to fit a declaration to the storage of the next record or item, before knowing what type of data structure it has. Based variables and pointers are key to such programs. The data structures must be designed appropriately, typically using fields in a data structure to encode information about its type and size. The fields can be held in the preceding structure or, with some constraints, in the current one. Where the encoding is in the preceding structure, the program needs to allocate a based variable with a declaration that matches the current item (using expressions for extents where needed). Where the type and size information are to be kept in the current structure (\"self defining structures\") the type-defining fields must be ahead of the type dependent items and in the same place in every version of the data structure. The REFER-option is used for self-defining extents (e.g., string lengths as in codice_119, etc \u00a0\u2013 where LENGTH is used to allocate instances of the data structure. For self-defining structures, any typing and REFERed fields are placed ahead of the \"real\" data. If the records in a data set, or the items in a list of data structures, are organised this way they can be handled safely in a machine independent way.\nPL/I implementations do not (except for the PL/I Checkout compiler) keep track of the data structure used when storage is first allocated. Any BASED declaration can be used with a pointer into the storage to access the storage\u00a0\u2013 inherently unsafe and machine dependent. However, this usage has become important for \"pointer arithmetic\" (typically adding a certain amount to a known address). This has been a contentious subject in computer science. In addition to the problem of wild references and buffer overruns, issues arise due to the alignment and length for data types used with particular machines and compilers. Many cases where pointer arithmetic might be needed involve finding a pointer to an element inside a larger data structure. The ADDR function computes such pointers, safely and machine independently.\nPointer arithmetic may be accomplished by aliasing a binary variable with a pointer as in\nIt relies on pointers being the same length as codice_120 integers and aligned on the same boundaries.\nWith the prevalence of C and its free and easy attitude to pointer arithmetic, recent IBM PL/I compilers allow pointers to be used with the addition and subtraction operators to giving the simplest syntax (but compiler options can disallow these practices where safety and machine independence are paramount).\nON-units and exception handling.\nWhen PL/I was designed, programs only ran in batch mode, with no possible intervention from the programmer at a terminal. An exceptional condition such as division by zero would abort the program yielding only a hexadecimal core dump. PL/I exception handling, via ON-units, allowed the program to stay in control in the face of hardware or operating system exceptions and to recover debugging information before closing down more gracefully. As a program became properly debugged, most of the exception handling could be removed or disabled: this level of control became less important when conversational execution became commonplace.\nComputational exception handling is enabled and disabled by condition prefixes on statements, blocks (including ON-units) and procedures. \u2013 e.g., codice_121. Operating system exceptions for Input/Output and storage management are always enabled.\nThe ON-unit is a single statement or BEGIN-block introduced by an ON-statement. Executing the ON statement enables the condition specified, e.g., codice_122-unit. When the exception for this condition occurs and the condition is enabled, the ON-unit for the condition is executed. ON-units are inherited down the call chain. When a block, procedure or ON-unit is activated, the ON-units established by the invoking activation are inherited by the new activation. They may be over-ridden by another ON-statement and can be reestablished by the REVERT-statement. The exception can be simulated using the SIGNAL-statement \u2013 e.g., to help debug the exception handlers. The dynamic inheritance principle for ON-units allows a routine to handle the exceptions occurring within the subroutines it uses.\nIf no ON-unit is in effect when a condition is raised a standard system action is taken (often this is to raise the ERROR condition). The system action can be reestablished using the SYSTEM option of the ON-statement. With some conditions it is possible to complete executing an ON-unit and return to the point of interrupt (e.g., the STRINGRANGE, UNDERFLOW, CONVERSION, OVERFLOW, AREA, and FILE conditions) and resume normal execution. With other conditions such as codice_123, the ERROR condition is raised when this is attempted. An ON-unit may be terminated with a codice_124 preventing a return to the point of interrupt, but permitting the program to continue execution elsewhere as determined by the programmer.\nAn ON-unit needs to be designed to deal with exceptions that occur in the ON-unit itself. The codice_125 statement allows a nested error trap; if an error occurs within an ON-unit, control might pass to the operating system where a system dump might be produced, or, for some computational conditions, continue execution (as mentioned above).\nThe PL/I RECORD I/O statements have relatively simple syntax as they do not offer options for the many situations from end-of-file to record transmission errors that can occur when a record is read or written. Instead, these complexities are handled in the ON-units for the various file conditions. The same approach was adopted for AREA sub-allocation and the AREA condition.\nThe existence of exception handling ON-units can have an effect on optimization, because variables can be inspected or altered in ON-units. Values of variables that might otherwise be kept in registers between statements, may need to be returned to storage between statements. This is discussed in the section on Implementation Issues above.\nGO TO with a non-fixed target.\nPL/I has counterparts for COBOL and FORTRAN's specialized GO TO statements.\nSyntax for both COBOL and FORTRAN exist for coding two special two types of GO TO, each of which has a target that is not always the same.\nPL/I has statement label variables (with the LABEL attribute), which can store the value of a statement label, and later be used in a GOTO statement.\nThe programmer can also create an array of static label constants by subscripting the statement labels.\n GO TO HERE(LUCKY_NUMBER); /* minus 1, zero, or ... */\n HERE(-1): PUT LIST (\"I O U\"); GO TO Lottery;\n HERE(0): PUT LIST (\"No Cash\"); GO TO Lottery;\n HERE(1): PUT LIST (\"Dollar Bill\"); GO TO Lottery;\n HERE(2): PUT LIST (\"TWO DOLLARS\"); GO TO Lottery;\nStatement label variables can be passed to called procedures, and used to return to a different statement in the calling routine.\nSample programs.\nHello world program.\nHello2: proc options(main);\n put list ('Hello, World!');\nend Hello2;\nSearch for a string.\n/* Read in a line, which contains a string,\n/* and then print every subsequent line that contains that string. */\nfind_strings: procedure options (main);\n declare pattern character (100) varying;\n declare line character (100) varying;\n declare line_no fixed binary;\n on endfile (sysin) stop;\n get edit (pattern) (L);\n line_no = 1;\n do forever;\n get edit (line) (L);\n if index(line, pattern) &gt; 0 then\n put skip list (line_no, line);\n line_no = line_no + 1;\n end;\nend find_strings;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23711", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23711", "title": "Punctuation", "text": "Marks to indicate pacing of written text\nPunctuation marks are marks indicating how a piece of written text should be read (silently or aloud) and, consequently, understood. The oldest known examples of punctuation marks were found in the Mesha Stele from the 9th century BC, consisting of points between the words and horizontal strokes between sections. The alphabet-based writing began with no spaces, no capitalization, no vowels (see abjad), and with only a few punctuation marks, as it was mostly aimed at recording business transactions. Only with the Greek playwrights (such as Euripides and Aristophanes) did the ends of sentences begin to be marked to help actors know when to make a pause during performances. Punctuation includes space between words and both obsolete and modern signs.\nBy the 19th century, grammarians explained the difference between the punctuation marks by means of a hierarchy that ascribed different weight to them. Six marks, proposed in 1966 by the French author Herv\u00e9 Bazin, could be seen as predecessors of emoticons and emojis. \nIn rare cases, the meaning of a text can be changed substantially by using different punctuation, such as in \"woman, without her man, is nothing\" (emphasizing the importance of men to women), contrasted with \"woman: without her, man is nothing\" (emphasizing the importance of women to men). Similar changes in meaning can be achieved in spoken forms of most languages by using elements of speech such as suprasegmentals. The rules of punctuation vary with the language, location, register, and time. In online chat and text messages, punctuation is used tachygraphically, especially among younger users.\nHistory.\nWestern antiquity.\nDuring antiquity, most scribes in the West wrote in , i.e., without punctuation delimiting word boundaries. Around the 5th century\u00a0BC, the Greeks began using punctuation consisting of vertically arranged dots\u2014usually a dicolon or tricolon\u2014as an aid in the oral delivery of texts. After 200\u00a0BC, Greek scribes adopted the system invented by Aristophanes of Byzantium, where a single dot called a was placed at one of several heights to denote rhetorical divisions in speech:\nIn addition, the Greeks used the paragraphos (or gamma) to mark the beginning of sentences, marginal diples to mark quotations, and a koronis to indicate the end of major sections.\nDuring the 1st century\u00a0BC, Romans also made occasional use of symbols to indicate pauses, but by the 4th century\u00a0AD the Greek \u2014called in Latin\u2014prevailed, as reported by Aelius Donatus and Isidore of Seville (7th century). Latin texts were sometimes laid out , where each sentence was placed on its own line. Diples were used, but by the late period, these often degenerated into comma-shaped marks.\nMedieval.\nPunctuation developed dramatically when large numbers of copies of the Bible started to be produced. These were designed to be read aloud, so the copyists began to introduce a range of marks to aid the reader, including indentation, various punctuation marks (diple, , ), and an early version of initial capitals (). Jerome and his colleagues, who translated the Bible into Latin, the Vulgate (c.\u2009AD 400), employed a layout system based on established practices for teaching the speeches of Demosthenes and Cicero. Under his layout every sense-unit was indented and given its own line. This layout was solely used for biblical manuscripts during the 5th\u20139th centuries, but was abandoned in favor of punctuation.\nIn the 7th\u20138th centuries Irish and Anglo-Saxon scribes, whose native languages were not derived from Latin, added more visual cues to render texts more intelligible. Irish scribes introduced the practice of word separation. Likewise, insular scribes adopted the system while adapting it for minuscule script (so as to be more prominent) by using not differing height but rather a differing number of marks\u2014aligned horizontally (or sometimes triangularly)\u2014to signify a pause's duration: one mark for a minor pause, two for a medium one, and three for a major one. Most common were the , a comma-shaped mark, and a 7-shaped mark (), often used in combination. The same marks could be used in the margin to mark off quotations.\nIn the late 8th century, a different system emerged in France under the Carolingian dynasty. Originally indicating how the voice should be modulated when chanting the liturgy, the migrated into any text meant to be read aloud, and then to all manuscripts. first reached England in the late 10th century, probably during the Benedictine reform movement, but was not adopted until after the Norman conquest. The original were the , marking a minor pause within the sentence, , marking a major pause within the sentence, , marking the end of a declarative sentence, and , marking the end of an interrogative sentence. A fifth symbol, the was added in the 10th century to indicate a pause of a value between the and . In the late 11th/early 12th century, the disappeared and was taken over by the simple (now with two distinct values).\nThe late Middle Ages saw the addition of the (slash or slash with a midpoint dot), which was often used in conjunction with the for different types of pauses. Direct quotations were marked with marginal diples, as in Antiquity, but from at least the 12th century, scribes also began entering diples (sometimes double) within the column of text.\nMedieval China.\nPunctuation marks, especially spacing, were not needed in logographic or syllabic (such as Chinese and Mayan script) texts because disambiguation and emphasis could be communicated by employing a separate written form distinct from the spoken form of the language. Ancient Chinese classical texts were transmitted without punctuation. However, many Warring States period bamboo texts contain the symbols \u27e8\u2514\u27e9 and \u27e8\u2584\u27e9 indicating the end of a chapter and full stop, respectively. By the Song dynasty, the addition of punctuation to texts by scholars to aid comprehension became common.\nPrinting-press era.\nThe amount of printed material and its readership began to increase after the invention of moveable type in Europe in the 1450s. Martin Luther's German Bible translation was one of the first mass-printed works; he used only virgule, full stop, and less than one percent question marks as punctuation. The focus of punctuation still was rhetorical, to aid reading aloud. As explained by writer and editor Lynne Truss, \"The rise of printing in the 14th and 15th centuries meant that a standard system of punctuation was urgently required.\" Printed books, whose letters were uniform, could be read much more rapidly than manuscripts. Rapid reading, or reading aloud, did not allow time to analyze sentence structures. This increased speed led to the greater use and finally standardization of punctuation, which showed the relationships of words with each other: where one sentence ends and another begins, for example.\nThe introduction of a standard system of punctuation has also been attributed to the Venetian printers Aldus Manutius and his grandson. They have been credited with popularizing the practice of ending sentences with the colon or full stop (period), inventing the semicolon, making occasional use of parentheses, and creating the modern comma by lowering the virgule. By 1566, Aldus Manutius the Younger was able to state that the main object of punctuation was the clarification of syntax.\nBy the 19th century, punctuation in the Western world had evolved \"to classify the marks hierarchically, in terms of weight\". Cecil Hartley's poem identifies their relative values:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin:1.2em 0 1.5em 3em;\"&gt;\nThe stop point out, with truth, the time of pause\nA sentence doth require at ev'ry clause.\nAt ev'ry comma, stop while \"one\" you count;\nAt semicolon, \"two\" is the amount;\nA colon doth require the time of \"three\";\nThe period \"four\", as learned men agree.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe use of punctuation was not standardised until after the invention of printing. According to the 1885 edition of \"The American Printer\", the importance of punctuation was noted in various sayings by children, such as:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin:1.2em 0 1.5em 3em;\"&gt;\nCharles the First walked and talked\nHalf an hour after his head was cut off.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nWith a semicolon and a comma added, it reads as follows:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin:1.2em 0 1.5em 3em;\"&gt;\nCharles the First walked and talked;\nHalf an hour after, his head was cut off.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn a 19th-century manual of typography, Thomas MacKellar writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Shortly after the invention of printing, the necessity of stops or pauses in sentences for the guidance of the reader produced the colon and full point. In the process of time, the comma was added, which was then merely a perpendicular line, proportioned to the body of the letter. These three points were the only ones used until the close of the fifteenth century, when Aldo Manuccio gave a better shape to the comma, and added the semicolon; the comma denoting the shortest pause, the semicolon next, then the colon, and the full point terminating the sentence. The marks of interrogation and admiration were introduced many years later.\nTypewriters and electronic communication.\nThe introduction of electrical telegraphy with a limited set of transmission codes and typewriters with a limited set of keys influenced punctuation subtly. For example, curved quotes and apostrophes were all collapsed into two characters (' and \"). The hyphen, minus sign, and dashes of various widths have been collapsed into a single character (-), sometimes repeated to represent a long dash. The spaces of different widths available to professional typesetters were generally replaced by a single full-character-width space, with typefaces monospaced. In some cases, a typewriter keyboard did not include an exclamation point (!), which could otherwise be constructed by the overstrike of an apostrophe and a period; the original Morse code did not have an exclamation point.\nThese simplifications have been carried forward into digital writing, with teleprinters and the ASCII character set essentially supporting the same characters as typewriters. Treatment of whitespace in HTML discouraged the practice (in English prose) of putting two full spaces after a full stop, since a single or double space would appear the same on the screen. (Most style guides now discourage double spaces, and some electronic writing tools, including Wikipedia's software, automatically collapse double spaces to single.) The full traditional set of typesetting tools became available with the advent of desktop publishing and more sophisticated word processors. Despite the widespread adoption of character sets like Unicode that support the punctuation of traditional typesetting, writing forms like text messages tend to use the simplified ASCII style of punctuation, with the addition of new non-text characters like emoji. Informal text speak tends to drop punctuation when not needed, including some ways that would be considered errors in more formal writing.\nIn the computer era, punctuation characters were recycled for use in programming languages and URLs. Due to its use in email and Twitter handles, the at sign (@) has gone from an obscure character mostly used by sellers of bulk commodities (10 pounds @$2.00 per pound), to a very common character in common use for both technical routing and an abbreviation for \"at\". The tilde (~), in moveable type only used in combination with vowels, for mechanical reasons ended up as a separate key on mechanical typewriters, and like @ it has been put to completely new uses.\nIn English.\nThere are two major styles of punctuation in English: British or American. These two styles differ mainly in the way in which they handle quotation marks, particularly in conjunction with other punctuation marks. In British English, punctuation marks such as full stops and commas are placed inside the quotation mark only if they are part of what is being quoted, and placed outside the closing quotation mark if part of the containing sentence. In American English, however, such punctuation is generally placed inside the closing quotation mark regardless. This rule varies for other punctuation marks; for example, American English follows the British English rule when it comes to semicolons, colons, question marks, and exclamation points. The serial comma is used much more often in the United States than in the UK.\nOther languages.\nOther languages of Europe use much the same punctuation as English. The similarity is so strong that the few variations may confuse a native English reader. Quotation marks are particularly variable across European languages. For example, in French and Russian, quotes would appear as: (In French, the quotation marks are spaced from the enclosed material; in Russian, they are not.)\nIn the French of France and Belgium, the marks \u27e8:\u27e9, \u27e8;\u27e9, \u27e8?\u27e9 and \u27e8!\u27e9 are preceded by a thin space. In Canadian French, this is only the case for \u27e8:\u27e9.\nIn Greek, the question mark is written as the English semicolon, while the functions of the colon and semicolon are performed by a raised point \u27e8\u00b7\u27e9, known as the ().\nIn Georgian, three dots \u27e8\u10fb\u27e9 were formerly used as a sentence or paragraph divider. It is still sometimes used in calligraphy.\nSpanish and Asturian (both of them Romance languages used in Spain) use an inverted question mark \u27e8\u00bf\u27e9 at the beginning of a question and the normal question mark at the end, as well as an inverted exclamation mark \u27e8\u00a1\u27e9 at the beginning of an exclamation and the normal exclamation mark at the end.\nArmenian uses several punctuation marks of its own. The full stop is represented by a colon, and vice versa; the exclamation mark is represented by a diagonal similar to a tilde \u27e8~\u27e9, while the question mark \u27e8\u055e\u27e9 resembles an unclosed circle placed after the last vowel of the word.\nArabic, Urdu, and Persian\u2014written from right to left\u2014use a reversed question mark: \u27e8\u061f\u27e9, and a reversed comma: \u27e8\u060c\u27e9. This is a modern innovation; pre-modern Arabic did not use punctuation. Hebrew, which is also written from right to left, uses the same characters as in English, \u27e8,\u27e9 and \u27e8?\u27e9.\nOriginally, Sanskrit had no punctuation. In the 17th century, Sanskrit and Marathi, both written using Devanagari, started using the vertical bar \u27e8\u0964\u27e9 to end a line of prose and double vertical bars \u27e8\u0965\u27e9 in verse.\nPunctuation was not used in Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese ch\u1eef N\u00f4m writing until the adoption of punctuation from the West in the late 19th and early 20th century. In unpunctuated texts, the grammatical structure of sentences in classical writing is inferred from context. Most punctuation marks in modern Chinese, Japanese, and Korean have similar functions to their English counterparts; however, they often look different and have different customary rules.\nIn the Indian subcontinent, \u27e8\u27e9 is sometimes used in place of colon or after a subheading. Its origin is unclear, but it could be a remnant of the British Raj. Another punctuation practice common in the Indian Subcontinent for writing monetary amounts is the use of \u27e8/-\u27e9 or after the number. For example, Rs. 20/- or Rs. 20/= implies 20 whole rupees.\nThai, Khmer, Lao, and Burmese did not use punctuation until the adoption of punctuation from the West in the 20th century. Blank spaces are more frequent than full stops or commas.\nNovel punctuation marks.\nInterrobang.\nIn 1962, American advertising executive Martin K. Speckter proposed the interrobang (\u203d), a combination of the question mark and exclamation point, to mark rhetorical questions or questions stated in a tone of disbelief. Although the new punctuation mark was widely discussed in the 1960s, it failed to achieve widespread use. Nevertheless, both it and its inverted form were given code points in Unicode: , .\nPredecessors of emoticons and emojis.\nThe six additional punctuation marks proposed in 1966 by the French author Herv\u00e9 Bazin in his book (\"Let's pluck the bird\", 1966) could be seen as predecessors of emoticons and emojis.\nThese were:\n\"Question comma\", \"exclamation comma\".\nAn international patent application was filed, and published in 1992 under World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) number WO9219458, for two new punctuation marks: the \"question comma\" and the \"exclamation comma\". The \"question comma\" has a comma instead of the dot at the bottom of a question mark, while the \"exclamation comma\" has a comma in place of the point at the bottom of an exclamation mark. These were intended for use as question and exclamation marks within a sentence, a function for which normal question and exclamation marks can also be used, but which may be considered obsolescent. The patent application entered the national phase only in Canada. It was advertised as lapsing in Australia on 27 January 1994 and in Canada on 6 November 1995.\nOthers.\nOther proposed punctuation marks include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23712", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23712", "title": "Pentomino", "text": "Geometric shape formed from five squares\nA pentomino (or 5-omino) is a polyomino of order 5; that is, a polygon in the plane made of 5 equal-sized squares connected edge to edge. The term is derived from the Greek word for '5' and \"domino\". When rotations and reflections are not considered to be distinct shapes, there are 12 different \"free\" pentominoes. When reflections are considered distinct, there are 18 \"one-sided\" pentominoes. When rotations are also considered distinct, there are 63 \"fixed\" pentominoes.\nPentomino tiling puzzles and games are popular in recreational mathematics. Usually, video games such as \"Tetris\" imitations and \"Rampart\" consider mirror reflections to be distinct, and thus use the full set of 18 one-sided pentominoes. (Tetris itself uses 4-square shapes.)\nEach of the twelve pentominoes satisfies the Conway criterion; hence, every pentomino is capable of tiling the plane. Each chiral pentomino can tile the plane without being reflected.\nHistory.\nThe earliest puzzle containing a complete set of pentominoes appeared in Henry Dudeney's book, The Canterbury Puzzles, published in 1907. The earliest tilings of rectangles with a complete set of pentominoes appeared in the Problemist Fairy Chess Supplement in 1935, and further tiling problems were explored in the PFCS, and its successor, the Fairy Chess Review.\nPentominoes were formally defined by American professor Solomon W. Golomb starting in 1953 and later in his 1965 book \"\". They were introduced to the general public by Martin Gardner in his October 1965 Mathematical Games column in Scientific American. Golomb coined the term \"pentomino\" from the Ancient Greek / \"p\u00e9nte\", \"five\", and the -omino of domino, fancifully interpreting the \"d-\" of \"domino\" as if it were a form of the Greek prefix \"di-\" (two). Golomb named the 12 \"free\" pentominoes after letters of the Latin alphabet that they resemble, using the mnemonic FILiPiNo along with the end of the alphabet (TUVWXYZ).\nJohn Horton Conway proposed an alternate labeling scheme for pentominoes, using O instead of I, Q instead of L, R instead of F, and S instead of N. The resemblance to the letters is more strained, especially for the O pentomino, but this scheme has the advantage of using 12 consecutive letters of the alphabet. It is used by convention in discussing Conway's Game of Life, where, for example, one speaks of the R-pentomino instead of the F-pentomino.\nSymmetry.\nThe F, L, N, P, Y, and Z pentominoes are chiral; adding their reflections (F\u2032, J, N\u2032, Q, Y\u2032, S) brings the number of \"one-sided\" pentominoes to 18. If rotations are also considered distinct, then the pentominoes from the first category count eightfold, the ones from the next three categories (T, U, V, W, Z) count fourfold, I counts twice, and X counts only once. This results in 5\u00d78 + 5\u00d74 + 2 + 1 = 63 \"fixed\" pentominoes.\nThe eight possible orientations of the F, L, N, P, and Y pentominoes, and the four possible orientations of the T, U, V, W, and Z pentominoes are illustrated:\nFor 2D figures in general there are two more categories:\nGames.\nTiling puzzle (2D).\nA standard pentomino puzzle is to tile a rectangular box with the pentominoes, i.e. cover it without overlap and without gaps. Each of the 12 pentominoes has an area of 5 unit squares, so the box must have an area of 60 units. Possible sizes are 6\u00d710, 5\u00d712, 4\u00d715 and 3\u00d720.\nThe 6\u00d710 case was first solved in 1960 by married couple Colin Brian Haselgrove and Jenifer Haselgrove. There are exactly 2,339 solutions, excluding trivial variations obtained by rotation and reflection of the whole rectangle but including rotation and reflection of a subset of pentominoes (which sometimes provides an additional solution in a simple way). The 5\u00d712 box has 1010 solutions, the 4\u00d715 box has 368 solutions, and the 3\u00d720 box has just 2 solutions (one is shown in the figure, and the other one can be obtained from the solution shown by rotating, as a whole, the block consisting of the L, N, F, T, W, Y, and Z pentominoes).\nA somewhat easier (more symmetrical) puzzle, the 8\u00d78 rectangle with a 2\u00d72 hole in the center, was solved by Dana Scott as far back as 1958. There are 65 solutions. Scott's algorithm was one of the first applications of a backtracking computer program. Variations of this puzzle allow the four holes to be placed in any position. One of the external links uses this rule.\nEfficient algorithms have been described to solve such problems, for instance by Donald Knuth. Running on modern hardware, these pentomino puzzles can now be solved in mere seconds.\nMost such patterns are solvable, with the exceptions of placing each pair of holes near two corners of the board in such a way that both corners could only be fitted by a P-pentomino, or forcing a T-pentomino or U-pentomino in a corner such that another hole is created.\nThe pentomino set is the only free polyomino set that can be packed into a rectangle, with the exception of the trivial monomino and domino sets, each of which consists only of a single rectangle.\nBox filling puzzle (3D).\nA pentacube is a polycube of five cubes. Of the 29 one-sided pentacubes, exactly twelve pentacubes are flat (1-layer) and correspond to the twelve pentominoes extruded to a depth of one square.\nA pentacube puzzle or 3D pentomino puzzle, amounts to filling a 3-dimensional box with the 12 flat pentacubes, i.e. cover it without overlap and without gaps. Since each pentacube has a volume of 5 unit cubes, the box must have a volume of 60 units. Possible sizes are 2\u00d73\u00d710 (12 solutions), 2\u00d75\u00d76 (264 solutions) and 3\u00d74\u00d75 (3940 solutions).\nAlternatively one could also consider combinations of five cubes that are themselves 3D, i.e., those which include more than just the 12 \"flat\" single-layer thick combinations of cubes. However, in addition to the 12 \"flat\" pentacubes formed by extruding the pentominoes, there are 6 sets of chiral pairs and 5 additional pieces, forming a total of 29 potential pentacube pieces, which gives 145 cubes in total (=29\u00d75); as 145 can only be packed into a box measuring 29\u00d75\u00d71, it cannot be formed by including the non-flat pentominoes.\nCommercial board games.\nThere are board games of skill based entirely on pentominoes. Such games are often simply called \"Pentominoes\".\nOne of the games is played on an 8\u00d78 grid by two or three players. Players take turns in placing pentominoes on the board so that they do not overlap with existing tiles and no tile is used more than once. The objective is to be the last player to place a tile on the board. This version of Pentominoes is called \"Golomb's Game\".\nThe two-player version has been weakly solved in 1996 by Hilarie Orman. It was proved to be a first-player win by examining around 22 billion board positions.\nPentominoes, and similar shapes, are also the basis of a number of other tiling games, patterns and puzzles. For example, the French board game \"Blokus\" is played with 4 colored sets of polyominoes, each consisting of every pentomino (12), tetromino (5), triomino (2) domino (1) and monomino (1). Like the game \"Pentominoes\", the goal is to use all of your tiles, and a bonus is given if the monomino is played on the last move. The player with the fewest blocks remaining wins.\nThe game of \"Cathedral\" is also based on polyominoes.\nParker Brothers released a multi-player pentomino board game called \"Universe\" in 1966. Its theme is based on a deleted scene from the 1968 film \"\" in which an astronaut is playing a two-player pentomino game against the HAL 9000 computer (a scene with a different astronaut playing chess was retained). The front of the board game box features scenes from the movie as well as a caption describing it as the \"game of the future\". The game comes with four sets of pentominoes in red, yellow, blue, and white. The board has two playable areas: a base 10x10 area for two players with an additional 25 squares (two more rows of 10 and one offset row of five) on each side for more than two players.\nGame manufacturer Lonpos has a number of games that use the same pentominoes, but on different game planes. Their \"101 Game\" has a 5 x 11 plane. By changing the shape of the plane, thousands of puzzles can be played, although only a relatively small selection of these puzzles are available in print.\nVideo games.\nYou can also have a pentomino made out of nine pentominoes. \nLiterature.\nPentominoes were featured in a prominent subplot of Arthur C. Clarke's 1975 novel \"Imperial Earth\". Clarke also wrote an essay in which he described the game and how he got hooked on it.\nThey were also featured in Blue Balliett's \"Chasing Vermeer\", which was published in 2003 and illustrated by Brett Helquist, as well as its sequels, \"The Wright 3\" and \"The Calder Game\".\nIn \"The New York Times\" crossword puzzle for June 27, 2012, the clue for an 11-letter word at 37 across was \"Complete set of 12 shapes formed by this puzzle's black squares.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23713", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23713", "title": "Pepys Samuel", "text": ""}
{"id": "23715", "revid": "4947829", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23715", "title": "Rotation-powered pulsar", "text": ""}
{"id": "23716", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23716", "title": "Programmer", "text": "Person who writes computer software\nA programmer, computer programmer or coder is an author of computer source code \u2013 someone with skill in computer programming.\nThe professional titles \"software developer\" and \"software engineer\" are used for jobs that require a programmer.\nIdentification.\nSometimes a programmer or job position is identified by the language used or target platform. For example, assembly programmer, web developer.\nJob title.\nThe job titles that include programming tasks have differing connotations across the computer industry and to different individuals. The following are notable descriptions.\nA \"software developer\" primarily implements software based on specifications and fixes bugs. Other duties may include reviewing code changes and testing. \nTo achieve the required skills for the job, they might obtain a computer science or associate degree, attend a programming boot camp or be self-taught.\nA \"software engineer\" usually is responsible for the same tasks as a developer\nplus broader responsibilities of software engineering including architecting and designing new features and applications, targeting new platforms, managing the software development lifecycle (design, implementation, testing, and deployment), leading a team of programmers, communicating with customers, managers and other engineers, considering system stability and quality, and exploring software development methodologies.\nSometimes, a software engineer is required to have a degree in software engineering, computer engineering, or computer science. Some countries legally require an engineering degree to be called \"engineer\".\nHistory.\nBritish countess and mathematician Ada Lovelace is often considered to be the first computer programmer.\nShe authored an algorithm, which was published in October 1842, for calculating Bernoulli numbers on the Charles Babbage analytical engine. \nBecause the machine was not completed in her lifetime, she never experienced the algorithm in action.\nIn 1941, German civil engineer Konrad Zuse was the first person to execute a program on a working, program-controlled, electronic computer. From 1943 to 1945, per computer scientist Wolfgang K. Giloi and AI professor Ra\u00fal Rojas et al., Zuse created the first, high-level programming language, Plankalk\u00fcl.\nMembers of the 1945 ENIAC programming team of Kay McNulty, Betty Jennings, Betty Snyder, Marlyn Wescoff, Fran Bilas and Ruth Lichterman have since been credited as the first professional computer programmers.\nThe software industry.\nThe first company founded specifically to provide software products and services was the Computer Usage Company in 1955. Before that time, computers were programmed either by customers or the few commercial computer manufacturers of the time, such as Sperry Rand and IBM.\nThe software industry expanded in the early 1960s, almost immediately after computers were first sold in mass-produced quantities. Universities, governments, and businesses created a demand for software. Many of these programs were written in-house by full-time staff programmers; some were distributed between users of a particular machine for no charge, while others were sold on a commercial basis. Other firms, such as Computer Sciences Corporation (founded in 1959), also started to grow. Computer manufacturers soon started bundling operating systems, system software and programming environments with their machines; the IBM 1620 came with the 1620 Symbolic Programming System and FORTRAN.\nThe industry expanded greatly with the rise of the personal computer (PC) in the mid-1970s, which brought computing to the average office worker. In the following years, the PC also helped create a constantly growing market for games, applications and utility software. This resulted in increased demand for software developers for that period of time.\nNature of the work.\nComputer programmers write, test, debug, and maintain the detailed instructions, called computer programs, that computers must follow to perform their functions. Programmers also conceive, design, and test logical structures for solving problems by computer. Many technical innovations in programming\u00a0\u2014 advanced computing technologies and sophisticated new languages and programming tools\u00a0\u2014 have redefined the role of a programmer and elevated much of the programming work done today. Job titles and descriptions may vary, depending on the organization.\nProgrammers work in many settings, including corporate information technology (IT) departments, big software companies, small service firms and government entities of all sizes. Many professional programmers also work for consulting companies at client sites as contractors. Licensing is not typically required to work as a programmer, although professional certifications are commonly held by programmers. Programming is considered a profession.\nProgrammers' work varies widely depending on the type of business for which they are writing programs. For example, the instructions involved in updating financial records are very different from those required to duplicate conditions on an aircraft for pilots training in a flight simulator. Simple programs can be written in a few hours. More complex ones may require more than a year of work, while others are never considered 'complete' but rather are continuously improved as long as they stay in use. In most cases, several programmers work together as a team under a senior programmer's supervision.\nTypes of software.\nProgramming editors, also known as source code editors, are text editors that are specifically designed for programmers or developers to write the source code of an application or a program. Most of these editors include features useful for programmers, which may include color syntax highlighting, auto indentation, auto-complete, bracket matching, syntax check, and allows plug-ins. These features aid the users during coding, debugging and testing.\nGlobalization.\nMarket changes in the UK.\nAccording to BBC News, 17% of computer science students could not find work in their field six months after graduation in 2009 which was the highest rate of the university subjects surveyed while 0% of medical students were unemployed in the same survey.\nMarket changes in the US.\nAfter the crash of the dot-com bubble (1999\u20132001) and the Great Recession (2008), many U.S. programmers were left without work or with lower wages. In addition, enrollment in computer-related degrees and other STEM degrees (STEM attrition) in the US has been dropping for years, especially for women, which, according to Beaubouef and Mason, could be attributed to a lack of general interest in science and mathematics and also out of an apparent fear that programming will be subject to the same pressures as manufacturing and agriculture careers. For programmers, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Occupational Outlook originally predicted a growth for programmers of 12 percent from 2010 to 2020 and thereafter a decline of -7 percent from 2016 to 2026, a further decline of -9 percent from 2019 to 2029, a decline of -10 percent from 2021 to 2031. and then a decline of -11 percent from 2022 to 2032. The current prediction for 2024 to 2034 is a decline of -6 percent. Since computer programming can be done from anywhere in the world, companies sometimes hire programmers in countries where wages are lower. If domestic demand has increased, it is mainly to replace existing programmers who have retired or switched occupations. However, for software developers BLS projects current growth at 17% that is down from their prediction from 2019 to 2029 of a 22% increase in employment, from 1,469,200 to 1,785,200 jobs with a median base salary of $110,000 per year. This prediction is lower than the earlier 2010 to 2020 predicted increase of 30% for software developers. Though the distinction is somewhat ambiguous, software developers engage in a wider array of aspects of application development and are generally higher skilled than programmers, making outsourcing less of a risk. Another reason for the decline for programmers is their skills are being merged with other professions, such as developers, as employers increase the requirements for a position over time (i.e. Full-stack developer). Then there is the additional concern that recent advances in artificial intelligence might drastically impact the demand for future generations of Software professions.\nMarket changes in Japan.\nAs of 2024 in Japan, the demand for programmers is increasing rapidly due mainly to the aging demographics of their workforce and their low birth rate not being sufficient for replacement has led to more use of AI to help fill the gap. On the other hand, despite the fact that there are more than 1.2 million programmers in Japan as of 2020, more than 40% of Japanese companies say they do not have enough skilled and qualified IT personnel, including programmers; by 2030, the number of programmers will exceed 1.6 million, but about 800,000 people, including programmers, a shortage of engineers is expected to occur.\nProgramming education.\nProgramming education involves the teaching and learning of computer programming concepts, languages, and practices. It is offered through various formats, including formal computer science degree programs, vocational training, career and technical education centers, coding bootcamps, libraries, online courses, and self-directed learning. Educational initiatives often focus on problem-solving, computational thinking, logical thinking, and the development of algorithms. In primary and secondary education, programming is increasingly integrated into computer literacy curricula through initiatives such as Hour of Code, Code Club, Learn to Code, and by getting computers in the classroom. At the higher education level, programming instruction may include coursework in software engineering, data structures, debugging, software design, and specialized domains such as game development, artificial intelligence, cryptography, or data science. Numerous platforms and resources like AI chat bots, educational programming software, and online integrated development environments have expanded access to programming education.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23718", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23718", "title": "Periodic table (big)", "text": ""}
{"id": "23719", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23719", "title": "Periodic table (detailed cells)", "text": ""}
{"id": "23721", "revid": "14342788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23721", "title": "Peter Singer", "text": "Australian moral philosopher (born 1946)\nPeter Albert David Singer (born 6 July 1946) is an Australian moral philosopher who is Emeritus Ira\u00a0W. DeCamp Professor of Bioethics at Princeton University. Singer's work specialises in applied ethics, approaching the subject from a secular, utilitarian perspective. He wrote the book \"Animal Liberation\" (1975), in which he argues for vegetarianism, and the essay \"Famine, Affluence, and Morality\", which argues the moral imperative of donating to help the poor around the world. For most of his career, he was a preference utilitarian. He revealed in \"The Point of View of the Universe\" (2014), coauthored with Katarzyna de Lazari-Radek, that he had become a hedonistic utilitarian.\nOn two occasions, Singer served as chair of the philosophy department at Monash University, where he founded its Centre for Human Bioethics. In 1996, he stood unsuccessfully as a Greens candidate for the Australian Senate. In 2004, Singer was recognised as the Australian Humanist of the Year by the Council of Australian Humanist Societies. In 2005, \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" placed him among Australia's ten most influential public intellectuals. Singer is a cofounder of Animals Australia and the founder of the non-profit organization The Life You Can Save.\nEarly life and education.\nPeter Singer was born in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, on 6 July 1946. His parents were Austrian Jews who immigrated to Australia from Vienna after Austria's annexation (\"Anschluss\") by Nazi Germany in 1938, and settled in Melbourne. His paternal grandparents were taken by the Nazis to \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, and were most likely murdered, since they were never heard from again; his maternal grandfather David Ernst Oppenheim (1881\u20131943), an educator and psychologist who collaborated with Sigmund Freud and Alfred Adler, was murdered in the Theresienstadt concentration camp. Oppenheim was a member of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society and wrote a joint article with Sigmund Freud, before joining the Adlerian Society for Individual Psychology. Singer later wrote a biography of Oppenheim.\nSinger is an atheist and was raised in a prosperous, non-religious family. His father had a successful business importing tea and coffee. His family rarely observed Jewish holidays, and Singer declined to have a Bar Mitzvah. Singer attended Preshil, and later Scotch College. After leaving school, Singer studied law, history, and philosophy as a resident of Ormond College at the University of Melbourne, earning a bachelor's degree in 1967. Singer explained that he elected to major in philosophy after his interest was piqued by discussions with his sister's then-boyfriend. He earned a master's degree for a thesis entitled \"Why Should I Be Moral?\" at the same university in 1969. He was awarded a scholarship to study at the University of Oxford and obtained from there a Bachelor of Philosophy in 1971 with a thesis on civil disobedience supervised by R. M. Hare and published as a book in 1973. Singer names Hare, Australian philosopher H. J. McCloskey and British philosopher J. L. H. Thomas, who taught him \"how to read and understand Hegel\", as his most important mentors.\nIn the preface to \"Hegel: A Very Short Introduction\", Singer recalls his time in Thomas' \"remarkable\" classes at Oxford where students were forced to \"probe passages of the \"Phenomenology\" sentence by sentence, until they yielded their meaning\". One day at Balliol College in Oxford, he had what he refers to as probably the decisive formative experience of his life. He was having a discussion after class with fellow graduate student Richard Keshen, who would later become a professor at Cape Breton University. During their lunch Keshen opted to have a salad after being told that the spaghetti sauce contained meat. Singer had the spaghetti. Singer eventually questioned Keshen about his reason for avoiding meat. Keshen explained his ethical objections. Singer would later state, \"I'd never met a vegetarian who gave such a straightforward answer that I could understand and relate to.\" Keshen later introduced Singer to his vegetarian friends. Singer was able to find one book in which he could read up on the issue (\"Animal Machines\" by Ruth Harrison) and within a week or two he approached his wife saying that he thought they needed to make a change to their diet and that he did not think they could justify eating meat.\nAcademic career.\nAfter spending three years as a Radcliffe lecturer at University College, Oxford, he was a visiting professor at New York University for 16 months, where he influenced the views of James Rachels and Peter Unger about animals and famine. In 1977, he returned to Melbourne where he spent most of his career, aside from appointments as visiting faculty abroad, until his move to Princeton in 1999.\nIn June 2011, Singer joined the professoriate of New College of the Humanities, a private college in London, in addition to his work at Princeton. He gave his last lecture at Princeton in 2023, and has retired. He has been a regular contributor to Project Syndicate since 2001.\nAccording to philosopher Helga Kuhse, Singer is almost certainly the best-known and most widely read of all contemporary philosophers. Michael Specter wrote that Singer is among the most influential of contemporary philosophers. He co-founded the open-access \"Journal of Controversial Ideas\" along with bioethicist Francesca Minerva and moral philosopher Jeff McMahan in 2018.\nApplied ethics.\n\"Practical Ethics\".\nSinger's \"Practical Ethics\" (1979) is a book in applied ethics, where he systematically applies a preference utilitarian framework to a wide range of contemporary moral issues, such as equality, global poverty, euthanasia, ethical vegetarianism, environmental ethics, civil disobedience and violence. He challenges readers to reconsider their moral intuitions and to adopt a more rational and consistent ethical stance, often leading to controversial conclusions.\nThe book analyzes why and how living beings' interests should be weighed. According to Singer, ethics requires an impartial, \"universal\" perspective and proposes the principle of \"equal consideration of interests\". This does not mean equal treatment, as different interests (e.g., avoiding pain versus cultivating abilities) warrant different treatment, and factors like diminishing marginal utility can affect how similar interests are treated (e.g., a starving person's interest in food over a slightly hungry person's). The fundamental criterion for a being to have interests warranting equal consideration is sentience, defined as the capacity for suffering or happiness. Sentient beings also have interests in developing their abilities, in satisfying basic needs for food and shelter, in enjoying warm personal relationships, in being free to pursue one's projects without interference, \"and many others\". The conclusion is that one must adopt the course of action that likely maximises the interests of those affected.\nSinger's universalising step applies to interests regardless of who has them, whereas the Kantian's applies to the judgments of rational agents (for example in Kant's kingdom of Ends or John Rawls's original position). This universalising step, which Singer traces from Immanuel Kant to Hare,is crucial and sets him apart from those moral theorists, from Thomas Hobbes to David Gauthier, who tie morality to prudence. According to Singer, universalisation leads directly to utilitarianism, on the strength of the thought that one's own interests cannot count for more than the interests of others. Singer regards Kantian universalisation as unjust to animals. As for the Hobbesians, Singer attempts a response in the final chapter of \"Practical Ethics\", arguing that self-interested reasons support adoption of the moral point of view, such as \"the paradox of hedonism\", which counsels that happiness is best found by not looking for it, and the need most people feel to relate to something larger than their own concerns. Singer identifies as a sentientist; sentientism is an ethical position that grants moral consideration to all sentient beings.\nEffective altruism and world poverty.\nSinger's ideas have contributed to the rise of effective altruism. He argues that people should try not only to reduce suffering but to reduce it in the most effective manner possible. While Singer has previously written at length about the moral imperative to reduce poverty and eliminate the suffering of nonhuman animals, particularly in the meat industry, he writes about how the effective altruism movement is doing these things more effectively in his 2015 book \"The Most Good You Can Do\". He is a board member of Animal Charity Evaluators, a charity evaluator used by many members of the effective altruism community which recommends the most cost-effective animal advocacy charities and interventions.\nHis own organisation, The Life You Can Save (TLYCS), recommends a selection of charities deemed by charity evaluators such as GiveWell to be the most effective when it comes to helping those in extreme poverty. TLYCS was founded after Singer released his 2009 eponymous book, in which he argues more generally in favour of giving to charities that help to end global poverty. In particular, he expands upon some of the arguments made in his 1972 essay \"Famine, Affluence, and Morality\", in which he posits that citizens of rich nations are morally obligated to give at least some of their disposable income to charities that help the global poor. He supports this using the \"drowning child analogy\", which states that most people would rescue a drowning child from a pond, even if it meant that their expensive clothes were ruined. He argues that similarly, lives could be saved, notably by donating to effective charities, and that as a result a significant portion of the money spent on unnecessary possessions should instead be donate to charity. Since November 2009, Singer is a member of Giving What We Can, an international organisation whose members pledge to give at least 10% of their income to effective charities.\nAnimal liberation and speciesism.\nPublished in 1975, \"Animal Liberation\" has been cited as a formative influence on leaders of the modern animal liberation movement. The central argument of the book is an expansion of the utilitarian concept that \"the greatest good of the greatest number\" is the only measure of good or ethical behaviour, and Singer believes that there is no reason not to apply this principle to other animals, arguing that the boundary between human and \"animal\" is completely arbitrary. For example, there are far more differences between a great ape and an oyster than between a human and a great ape, and yet the former two are lumped together as \"animals\", whereas we are considered \"human\" in a way that supposedly differentiates us from all other \"animals\". He popularised the term \"speciesism\", which had been coined by English writer Richard D. Ryder to describe the practice of privileging humans over other animals, and therefore argues in favour of the equal consideration of interests of all sentient beings.\nIn \"Animal Liberation\", Singer argues in favour of vegetarianism and against most animal experimentation. He stated in a 2006 interview that he does not eat meat and that he has been a vegetarian since 1971. He also said that he has \"gradually become increasingly vegan\" and that \"I am largely vegan but I'm a flexible vegan. I don't go to the supermarket and buy non-vegan stuff for myself. But when I'm traveling or going to other people's places I will be quite happy to eat vegetarian rather than vegan.\" In 2022, Singer stated that he is not fully vegan because he occasionally consumes oysters, mussels, and clams due to their lack of a central nervous system. According to Singer, meat-eating can be ethically permissible if \"farms really give the animals good lives, and then humanely kill them, preferably without transporting them to slaughterhouses or disturbing them. In \"Animal Liberation\", I don't really say that it's the killing that makes [meat-eating] wrong, it's the suffering.\"\nIn an article for the online publication Chinadialogue, Singer called Western-style meat production cruel, unhealthy, and damaging to the ecosystem. He rejected the idea that the method was necessary to meet the population's increasing demand, explaining that animals in factory farms have to eat food grown explicitly for them, and they burn up most of the food's energy just to breathe and keep their bodies warm. In a 2010 \"Guardian\" article he titled, \"Fish: the forgotten victims on our plate\", Singer drew attention to the welfare of fish. He quoted author Alison Mood's startling statistics from a report she wrote, which was released on fishcount.org.uk just a month before the \"Guardian\" article. Singer states that she \"has put together what may well be the first-ever systematic estimate of the size of the annual global capture of wild fish. It is, she calculates, in the order of one trillion, although it could be as high as 2.7tn.\"\nSome chapters of \"Animal Liberation\" are dedicated to criticising testing on animals. Unlike groups such as PETA, Singer is willing to accept testing when there is a clear benefit for medicine. In November 2006, Singer appeared on the BBC programme \"Monkeys, Rats and Me: Animal Testing\" and said that he felt that Tipu Aziz's experiments on monkeys for research into treating Parkinson's disease could be justified. Whereas Singer has continued since the publication of \"Animal Liberation\" to promote vegetarianism and veganism, he has been much less vocal in recent years on the subject of animal experimentation. Singer has defended some of the actions of the Animal Liberation Front such as the stealing of footage from Thomas Gennarelli's laboratory in May 1984 (as shown in the documentary \"Unnecessary Fuss\") but condemned other actions such as the use of explosives by some animal-rights activists, and sees the freeing of captive animals as largely futile when they are easily replaced. Singer features in the 2017 documentary \"Empathy\", directed by Ed Antoja, which aims to promote a more respectful way of life towards all animals. The documentary won the \"Public Choice Award\" of the Greenpeace Film Festival. Singer has frequently collaborated on op-eds and otherwise with animal rights advocate Karen Dawn.\nOther views.\nMeta-ethical views.\nIn the past, Singer did not hold that objective moral values exist, on the basis that reason could favour both egoism and equal consideration of interests. Singer himself adopted utilitarianism on the basis that people's preferences can be universalised, leading to a situation where one takes the \"point of view of the universe\" and \"an impartial standpoint\". In the second edition of \"Practical Ethics\", he concedes that the question of why we should act morally \"cannot be given an answer that will provide everyone with overwhelming reasons for acting morally\".\nWhen co-authoring \"The Point of View of the Universe\" (2014), Singer shifted to the position that objective moral values do exist, and defends the 19th-century utilitarian philosopher Henry Sidgwick's view that objective morality can be derived from fundamental moral axioms that are knowable by reason. Additionally, he endorses Derek Parfit's view that there are object-given reasons for action. Furthermore, Singer and Katarzyna de Lazari-Radek (the co-author of the book) argue that evolutionary debunking arguments can be used to demonstrate that it is more rational to take the impartial standpoint of \"the point of view of the universe\", as opposed to egoism\u2014pursuing one's own self-interest\u2014because the existence of egoism is more likely to be the product of evolution by natural selection, rather than because it is correct, whereas taking an impartial standpoint and equally considering the interests of all sentient beings is in conflict with what we would expect from natural selection, meaning that it is more likely that impartiality in ethics is the correct stance to pursue.\nPolitical views.\nWhilst a student in Melbourne, Singer campaigned against the Vietnam War as president of the Melbourne University Campaign Against Conscription. He also spoke publicly for the legalization of abortion in Australia. Singer joined the Australian Labor Party in 1974 but resigned after disillusionment with the centrist leadership of Bob Hawke; in 1992, he became a founding member of the Victorian Greens. He has run for political office twice for the Greens: he received 28% of the vote in the 1994 Kooyong by-election, and received 3% of the vote in 1996 when running for the Australian Senate (elected by proportional representation). Before the 1996 election, he co-authored a book \"The Greens\" with Bob Brown. In \"A Darwinian Left\", Singer outlines a plan for the political left to adapt to the lessons of evolutionary biology. He says that evolutionary psychology suggests that humans naturally tend to be self-interested. He further argues that the evidence that selfish tendencies are natural must not be taken as evidence that selfishness is \"right\". He concludes that game theory (the mathematical study of strategy) and experiments in psychology offer hope that self-interested people would make short-term sacrifices for the good of others, if society provides the right conditions.\nSinger argues that although humans possess selfish, competitive tendencies naturally, they have a substantial capacity for cooperation that also has been selected for during human evolution. Singer's writing in \"Greater Good\" magazine, published by the Greater Good Science Center of the University of California, Berkeley, explores scientific studies on why people are compassionate, selfless, and capable of forming peaceful relationships. Singer has criticized the United States for receiving \"oil from countries run by dictators ... who pocket most of the\" financial gains, thus \"keeping the people in poverty\". Singer believes that the wealth of these countries \"should belong to the people\" within them rather than their \"de facto government. In paying dictators for their oil, we are in effect buying stolen goods, and helping to keep people in poverty.\" Singer holds that America \"should be doing more to assist people in extreme poverty\". He is disappointed in U.S. foreign aid policy, deeming it \"a very small proportion of our GDP, less than a quarter of some other affluent nations.\" Singer maintains that little \"private philanthropy from the U.S.\" is \"directed to helping people in extreme poverty, although there are some exceptions, most notably, of course, the Gates Foundation.\"\nSinger describes himself as not anti-capitalist, stating in a 2010 interview with the New Left Project: \"Capitalism is very far from a perfect system, but so far we have yet to find anything that clearly does a better job of meeting human needs than a regulated capitalist economy coupled with a welfare and health care system that meets the basic needs of those who do not thrive in the capitalist economy.\" Singer added that \"[i]f we ever do find a better system, I'll be happy to call myself an anti-capitalist.\" Similarly, in his book \"Marx\", Singer is sympathetic to Karl Marx's criticism of capitalism but is skeptical about whether a better system is likely to be created, writing: \"Marx saw that capitalism is a wasteful, irrational system, a system which controls us when we should be controlling it. That insight is still valid; but we can now see that the construction of a free and equal society is a more difficult task than Marx realized.\"\nSinger is opposed to the death penalty, claiming that it does not effectively deter the crimes for which it is the punitive measure, and that he cannot see any other justification for it. In 2010, Singer signed a petition renouncing his right of return to Israel because it is \"a form of racist privilege that abets the colonial oppression of the Palestinians.\" Singer called on Jill Stein to withdraw from the 2016 United States presidential election in states that were close between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump on the grounds that the stakes were \"too high\". He argued against the view that there was no significant difference between Clinton and Trump, whilst also saying that he would not advocate such a tactic in Australia's electoral system, which allows for ranking of preferences. When writing in 2017 on Trump's climate change denial and plans to withdraw from the Paris Accords, Singer advocated a boycott of all consumer goods from the United States to pressure the Trump administration to change its environmental policies. In 2021, Singer described the war on drugs as an expensive, ineffective and extremely harmful policy.\nEuthanasia and infanticide.\nSinger has argued that the right to life is essentially tied to a being's capacity to hold preferences. In \"Practical Ethics\", Singer argues in favour of abortion rights on the grounds that fetuses are neither rational nor self-aware, and can therefore hold no preferences. As a result, he argues that the preference of a mother to have an abortion automatically takes precedence. In sum, Singer argues that a fetus lacks personhood. Similar to his argument for abortion rights, Singer argues that newborns lack the essential characteristics of personhood\u2014\"rationality, autonomy, and self-consciousness\"\u2014and therefore \"killing a newborn baby is never equivalent to killing a person, that is, a being who wants to go on living\". Singer has clarified that his \"view of when life begins isn't very different from that of opponents of abortion.\" He deems it not \"unreasonable to hold that an individual human life begins at conception. If it doesn't, then it begins about 14 days later, when it is no longer possible for the embryo to divide into twins or other multiples.\" Singer disagrees with abortion rights opponents in that he does not \"think that the fact that an embryo is a living human being is sufficient to show that it is wrong to kill it.\" Singer wishes \"to see American jurisprudence, and the national abortion debate, take up the question of which capacities a human being needs to have in order for it to be wrong to kill it\" as well as \"when, in the development of the early human being, these capacities are present.\"\nSinger classifies euthanasia as voluntary, involuntary, or non-voluntary. Voluntary euthanasia is that to which the subject consents. He argues in favour of voluntary euthanasia and some forms of non-voluntary euthanasia, including infanticide in certain instances, but opposes involuntary euthanasia. Bioethicists associated with the disability rights and disability studies communities have argued that his epistemology is based on ableist conceptions of disability. Singer's positions have also been criticised by some advocates for disability rights and right-to-life supporters, concerned with what they see as his attacks upon human dignity. Religious critics have argued that Singer's ethics ignores and undermines the traditional notion of the sanctity of life. Singer agrees and believes the notion of the sanctity of life ought to be discarded as outdated, unscientific, and irrelevant to understanding problems in contemporary bioethics. Disability rights activists have held many protests against Singer at Princeton University and at his lectures over the years. Singer has replied that many people judge him based on secondhand summaries and short quotations taken out of context, not on his books or articles, and that his aim is to elevate the status of animals, not to lower that of humans.\nAmerican publisher Steve Forbes ceased his donations to Princeton University in 1999 because of Singer's appointment to a prestigious professorship. Nazi-hunter Simon Wiesenthal wrote to organisers of a Swedish book fair to which Singer was invited that \"[a] professor of morals ... who justifies the right to kill handicapped newborns ... is in my opinion unacceptable for representation at your level.\" Conservative psychiatrist Theodore Dalrymple wrote in 2010 that Singerian moral universalism is \"preposterous\u2014psychologically, theoretically, and practically\". In 2002, disability rights activist Harriet McBryde Johnson debated Singer, challenging his belief that it is morally permissible to euthanise newborn children with severe disabilities. \"Unspeakable Conversations\", Johnson's account of her encounters with Singer and the pro-euthanasia movement, was published in the \"New York Times Magazine\" in 2003. In 2015, Singer debated Archbishop Anthony Fisher on the legalisation of euthanasia at Sydney Town Hall. Singer rejected arguments that legalising euthanasia would result in a slippery slope where the practice might become widespread as a means to remove undesirable people for financial or other motives. Singer has experienced the complexities of some of these questions in his own life. His mother had Alzheimer's disease. He said, \"I think this has made me see how the issues of someone with these kinds of problems are really very difficult.\" In an interview with Ronald Bailey, published in December 2000, he explained that his sister shares the responsibility of making decisions about his mother. He said that, if he were solely responsible, his mother might not continue to live.\nSurrogacy.\nIn 1985, Singer wrote a book with the physician Deanne Wells arguing that surrogate motherhood should be allowed and regulated by the state by establishing nonprofit 'State Surrogacy Boards', which would ensure fairness between surrogate mothers and surrogacy-seeking parents. Singer and Wells endorsed both the payment of medical expenses endured by surrogate mothers and an extra \"fair fee\" to compensate the surrogate mother.\nReligion.\nSinger was a speaker at the 2012 Global Atheist Convention. He has debated with Christians including John Lennox and Dinesh D'Souza. Singer has pointed to the problem of evil as an objection against the Christian conception of God. He stated: \"The evidence of our own eyes makes it more plausible to believe that the world was not created by any god at all. If, however, we insist on believing in divine creation, we are forced to admit that the god who made the world cannot be all-powerful and all good. He must be either evil or a bungler.\" In keeping with his considerations of nonhuman animals, Singer also takes issue with the original sin reply to the problem of evil, saying that, \"animals also suffer from floods, fires, and droughts, and, since they are not descended from Adam and Eve, they cannot have inherited original sin.\"\nMedical intervention in the aging process.\nSinger supports the view that medical intervention into the ageing process would do more to improve human life than research on therapies for specific chronic diseases in the developed world. He stated:\nSinger worries that \"If we discover how to slow aging, we might have a world in which the poor majority must face death at a time when members of the rich minority are only a 10th of the way through their expected lifespans\", thus risking that \"overcoming aging will increase the stock of injustice in the world\". Singer cautiously highlights that as with other medical developments, they would reach the more economically disadvantaged over time once developed, whereas they can never do so if they are not. As to the concern that longer lives might contribute to overpopulation, Singer notes that \"success in overcoming aging could itself ... delay or eliminate menopause, enabling women to have their first children much later than they can now\" and thus slowing the birth rate, and also that technology may reduce the consequences of rising human populations by (for instance) enabling more zero-greenhouse gas energy sources.\nIn 2012, Singer's department sponsored the \"Science and Ethics of Eliminating Aging\" seminar at Princeton.\nProtests.\nIn 1989 and 1990, Singer's work was the subject of a number of protests in Germany. A course in ethics led by Hartmut Kliemt at the University of Duisburg where the main text used was Singer's \"Practical Ethics\" was, according to Singer, \"subjected to organised and repeated disruption by protesters objecting to the use of the book on the grounds that in one of its ten chapters it advocates active euthanasia for severely disabled newborn infants\". The protests led to the course being shut down.\nWhen Singer tried to speak during a lecture at Saarbr\u00fccken, he was interrupted by a group of protesters including advocates for disability rights. One of the protesters expressed that entering serious discussions would be a tactical error. The same year, Singer was invited to speak in Marburg at a European symposium on \"Bioengineering, Ethics and Mental Disability\". The invitation was fiercely attacked by leading intellectuals and organisations in the German media, with an article in \"Der Spiegel\" comparing Singer's positions to Nazism. Eventually, the symposium was cancelled and Singer's invitation withdrawn.\nA lecture at the Zoological Institute of the University of Zurich was interrupted by two groups of protesters. The first group was a group of disabled people who staged a brief protest at the beginning of the lecture. They objected to inviting an advocate of euthanasia to speak. At the end of this protest, when Singer tried to address their concerns, a second group of protesters rose and began chanting \"Singer raus! Singer raus!\" (\"Singer out!\" in German) When Singer attempted to respond, a protester jumped on stage and grabbed his glasses, and the host ended the lecture. Singer explains \"my views are not threatening to anyone, even minimally\", and says that some groups play on the anxieties of those who hear only keywords that are understandably worrying (given the constant fears of ever repeating the Holocaust) if taken with any less than the full context of his belief system.\nIn 1991, Singer was due to speak along with R. M. Hare and Georg Meggle at the 15th International Wittgenstein Symposium in Kirchberg am Wechsel, Austria. Singer has stated that threats were made to Adolf H\u00fcbner, then the president of the Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society, that the conference would be disrupted if Singer and Meggle were given a platform. H\u00fcbner proposed to the board of the society that Singer's invitation, as well as the invitations of a number of other speakers, be withdrawn. The Society decided to cancel the symposium.\nIn an article originally published in \"The New York Review of Books\", Singer argued that the protests dramatically increased the amount of coverage he received, saying that \"instead of a few hundred people hearing views at lectures in Marburg and Dortmund, several millions read about them or listened to them on television\". Despite this, Singer argues that it has led to a difficult intellectual climate, with professors in Germany unable to teach courses on applied ethics and campaigns demanding the resignation of professors who invited Singer to speak.\nCriticism.\nSinger was criticised in 2017 for an op-ed co-written with Jeff McMahan, in which he defends Anna Stubblefield, who was convicted of aggravated sexual assault against D.J., a man with severe physical disability. Singer and McMahan argued that the judge refused to consider independent evidence that D.J. was indirectly able to communicate, and could have been interrogated. They argued that Anna Stubblefield believes her love to be reciprocal, and that D.J. still had not given sign of hostility towards Stubblefield. Nathan J. Robinson, founder of \"Current Affairs\", criticised when Singer and McMahan wrote that even supposing that D.J. is not just physically but also cognitively impaired (which they contest), then D.J. may not even understand the concept of consent, and it \"seems reasonable to assume that the experience was pleasurable to him\", as \"he was capable of struggling to resist.\" Robinson called this a \"rape\", and considers that Singer and McMahan's argument implies that it would be permissible to rape or sexually assault sufficiently disabled people as long as they do not try to resist.\nRoger Scruton was critical of the consequentialist, utilitarian approach of Singer. Scruton alleged that Singer's works, including \"Animal Liberation\" (1975), \"contain little or no philosophical argument. They derive their radical moral conclusions from a vacuous utilitarianism that counts the pain and pleasure of all living things as equally significant and that ignores just about everything that has been said in our philosophical tradition about the real distinction between persons and animals.\" Anthropologist Xenia Cherkaev has criticised Singer's foundational essay \"Animal Liberation\", published in 1973, for comparing the interests of \"slum children\" with the interests of the rats that bite them \u2013 at a time when poor and predominantly Black American children were regularly attacked and bitten by rats, sometimes fatally.\nRecognition.\nSinger was elected a corresponding fellow of the Australian Academy of the Humanities in 1981. He was inducted into the United States Animal Rights Hall of Fame in 2000. In June 2012, Singer was appointed a Companion of the Order of Australia (AC) for \"eminent service to philosophy and bioethics as a leader of public debate and communicator of ideas in the areas of global poverty, animal welfare and the human condition\". Singer received \"Philosophy Now\"'s 2016 Award for Contributions in the Fight Against Stupidity for his efforts \"to disturb the comfortable complacency with which many of us habitually ignore the desperate needs of others ... particularly for this work as it relates to the Effective Altruism movement\".\nIn 2018, Singer was cited in the book \"Rescuing Ladybugs\" by author and animal advocate Jennifer Skiff as a \"hero among heroes in the world\" who, in arguing against speciesism \"gave the modern world permission to believe what we innately know \u2013 that animals are sentient and that we have a moral obligation not to exploit or mistreat them.\" The book states that Singer's \"moral philosophy on animal equality was sparked when he asked a fellow student at Oxford University a simple question about his eating habits.\"\nIn 2021, Singer was awarded the US$1-million Berggruen Prize, and decided to give it away. He decided in particular to give half of the prize money to his foundation The Life You Can Save, because \"over the last three years, each dollar spent by it generated an average of $17 in donations for its recommended nonprofits\". He added he has never taken money for personal use from the organisation. Moreover, he plans to donate more than a third of the money to organisations combating intensive animal farming, and recommended as effective by Animal Charity Evaluators.\nFor 2022, Singer received the BBVA Foundation Frontiers of Knowledge Award in the category of \"Humanities and Social Sciences\".\nSinger serves on the Executive Advisory Board of the World.Minds Foundation, contributing to global ethical discussions on science, society, and responsibility.\nPersonal life.\nSince 1968, Singer has been married to Renata Singer (n\u00e9e Diamond; born in 1947 in Wa\u0142brzych, Poland). They have three children: Ruth, a textile artist; Marion, a law student and youth arts specialist; and Esther, a linguist and teacher. Singer's wife is a novelist and author, and has collaborated on publications with her husband. Until 2021, she was president of the Kadimah Jewish Cultural Centre and National Library in Melbourne.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23723", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23723", "title": "Pozna\u0144", "text": "City in Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland\nPozna\u0144 ( ) is a city on the River Warta in west Poland, within the Greater Poland region. The city is an important cultural and business center and one of Poland's most populous regions with many regional customs such as Saint John's Fair (\"Jarmark \u015awi\u0119toja\u0144ski\"), traditional Saint Martin's croissants and a local dialect. Among its most important heritage sites are the Renaissance Old Town, Town Hall and Pozna\u0144 Cathedral.\nPozna\u0144 is the fifth-largest city in Poland. As of 2023, the city's population is 540,146, while the Pozna\u0144 metropolitan area (\"Metropolia Pozna\u0144\") comprising Pozna\u0144 County and several other communities is inhabited by over 1.029\u00a0million people. It is one of four historical capitals of medieval Poland and the ancient capital of the Greater Poland region, currently the administrative capital of the province called Greater Poland Voivodeship.\nPozna\u0144 is a center of trade, sports, education, technology and tourism. It is an important academic site, with about 130,000 students and Adam Mickiewicz University, the third largest Polish university. The city serves as the seat of the oldest Polish diocese, now being one of the most populous Catholic archdioceses in the country. The city also hosts the Pozna\u0144 International Fair, the biggest industrial fair in Poland and one of the largest in Europe. The city's other renowned landmarks include the National Museum, Grand Theatre, Fara Church and the Imperial Castle.\nPozna\u0144 is classified as a Gamma\u2212global city by Globalization and World Cities Research Network. According to several rankings it is one of the most business-friendly cities in Poland. It also ranks highly in safety and healthcare quality. The city of Pozna\u0144 has also, many times, won the prize awarded by \"Superbrands\" for a very high quality city brand. In 2012, the Pozna\u0144's Art and Business Centre \"Stary Browar\" won a competition organised by National Geographic Traveler and was given the first prize as one of the seven \"New Polish Wonders\". Companies headquartered in the city include energy provider Enea, e-commerce company Allegro and convenience store chain \u017babka.\nThe official patron saints of Pozna\u0144 are Saint Peter and Paul of Tarsus, the patrons of the cathedral. Martin of Tours \u2013 the patron of the main street \u015awi\u0119ty Marcin \u2013 is also regarded as one of the patron saints of the city.\nNames.\nThe name Pozna\u0144 probably comes from the personal name \"Poznan\", which was in turn derived from the Polish participle \u2013 \"one who is known/recognized\", and would mean \"Poznan's town\". It is also possible that the name comes directly from the verb \"pozna\u0107\", which means \"to get to know\" or \"to recognize\", so it may simply mean \"known town\".\nThe earliest surviving references to the city are found in the chronicles of Thietmar of Merseburg written between 1012 and 1018: (\"bishop of Pozna\u0144\", in an entry for 970) and \"ab urbe Posnani\" (\"from the city of Pozna\u0144\", for 1005). The city's name appears in documents in the Latin nominative case as \"Posnania\" in 1236 and \"Poznania\" in 1247. The phrase \"in Poznan\" appears in 1146 and 1244.\nThe city's full official name is \"Sto\u0142eczne Miasto Pozna\u0144\" (The Capital City of Pozna\u0144), in reference to its role as a centre of political power in the early Polish state under the Piast dynasty. Pozna\u0144 is known as \"Posen\" in German, and was officially called \"Haupt- und Residenzstadt Posen\" (Capital and Residence City of Posen) between 20 August 1910 and 28 November 1918. The Latin names of the city are \"Posnania\" and \"Civitas Posnaniensis\". Its Yiddish name is , or \"Poyzn\".\nHistory.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nFor centuries before the Christianization of Poland (an event that essentially is credited as the creation of the very first Polish state, the Duchy of Poland), Pozna\u0144 was an important cultural and political centre of the Western Polans. It consisted of a fortified stronghold between the Warta and Cybina rivers on what is now Ostr\u00f3w Tumski. Mieszko I, the first historically recorded ruler of the West Polans and of the early Polish state which they dominated, built one of his main gords in Pozna\u0144. Mieszko's baptism in AD 966, seen as a defining moment in the Christianization of the Polish state, may have taken place in Pozna\u0144.\n11th to 16th centuries.\nFollowing the baptism, construction began of Pozna\u0144's cathedral, the first in Poland. Pozna\u0144 was the main seat of the first missionary bishop sent to Poland, Bishop Jordan. The Congress of Gniezno in 1000 led to the country's first permanent archbishopric being established in Gniezno (which is generally regarded as Poland's capital in that period), although Pozna\u0144 continued to have independent bishops of its own. Pozna\u0144's cathedral was the place of burial of the early Piast monarchs, among them Mieszko I, Boles\u0142aw I the Brave, Mieszko II Lambert, Casimir I, and later of Przemys\u0142 I and Przemys\u0142 II.\nThe pagan reaction that followed Mieszko II's death (probably in Pozna\u0144) in 1034 left the region weak, and in 1038, Duke Bretislaus I of Bohemia sacked and destroyed both Pozna\u0144 and Gniezno. Poland was reunited under Casimir I the Restorer in 1039, but the capital was moved to Krak\u00f3w, which had been relatively unaffected by the troubles. In 1138, by the testament of Boleslaus III, Poland was divided into separate duchies under the late king's sons, and Pozna\u0144 and its surroundings became the domain of Mieszko III the Old, the first of the Dukes of Greater Poland. This period of fragmentation lasted until 1320. Duchies frequently changed hands; control of Pozna\u0144, Gniezno and Kalisz sometimes lay with a single duke, but at other times these constituted separate duchies.\nIn about 1249, Duke Przemys\u0142 I began constructing what would become the Royal Castle on a hill on the left bank of the Warta. Then in 1253, Przemys\u0142 issued a charter to Thomas of Gubin for the founding of a town under Magdeburg law, between the castle and the river. Thomas brought a large number of German settlers to aid in the building and settlement of the city \u2013 this is an example of the German eastern migration () characteristic of that period. The city, which covered the area of today's Old Town neighbourhood, was surrounded by a defensive wall, integrated with the castle. The royal chancery and the university ensured a first flourishing of Polish literary culture in the city.\nIn reunited Poland, and later in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, Pozna\u0144 was the seat of a voivodeship. The city's importance began to grow in the Jagiellonian period, due to its position on trading routes from Lithuania and Ruthenia to western Europe. It would become a major center for the fur trade by the late 16th century. Suburban settlements developed around the city walls, on the river islands, and on the right bank, with some (Ostr\u00f3w Tumski, \u015ar\u00f3dka, Chwaliszewo, Ostr\u00f3wek) obtaining their own town charters. However, the city's development was hampered by regular major fires and floods. On 2 May 1536 a fire destroyed 175 buildings, including the castle, the town hall, the monastery, and the suburban settlement called St. Martin. In 1519, the Lubra\u0144ski Academy had been established in Pozna\u0144 as an institution of higher education, but without the right to award degrees, which was reserved to Krak\u00f3w's Jagiellonian University. However, the Jesuits' college, founded in the city in 1571 during the Counter-Reformation, had the right to award degrees from 1611 until 1773, when it was combined with the academy.\n17th and 18th centuries.\nIn the second half of the 17th century and most of the 18th, Pozna\u0144 was severely affected by a series of wars, attendant military occupations, lootings and destruction \u2013 the Second and Third Northern Wars, the War of the Polish Succession, the Seven Years' War and the Bar Confederation. During the Deluge, Pozna\u0144's Jewish community was accused of collaborating with the invading Swedish enemy, and as a result suffered pogroms carried out by both the city's non-Jewish residents and units of the Polish Crown Army.\nIt was also hit by frequent outbreaks of plague, and by floods, particularly that of 1736, which destroyed most of the suburban buildings. The population of the conurbation declined from 20,000 around 1600 to 6,000 around 1730, and Bambergian and Dutch settlers (Bambers and Ol\u0119ders) were brought in to rebuild the devastated suburbs. In 1778, a \"Committee of Good Order\" (\"Komisja Dobrego Porz\u0105dku\") was established in the city, which oversaw rebuilding efforts and reorganized the city's administration. However, in 1793, in the Second Partition of Poland, Pozna\u0144 came under the control of the Kingdom of Prussia, becoming part of (and initially the seat of) the province of South Prussia.\n19th century to World War I.\nThe Prussian authorities expanded the city boundaries, making the walled city and its closest suburbs into a single administrative unit. Left-bank suburbs were incorporated in 1797, and Ostr\u00f3w Tumski, Chwaliszewo, \u015ar\u00f3dka, Ostr\u00f3wek and \u0141acina (St. Roch) in 1800. The old city walls were taken down in the early 19th century, and major development took place to the west of the old city, with many of the main streets of today's city center being laid out.\nIn the Greater Poland uprising of 1806, Polish soldiers and civilian volunteers assisted the efforts of Napoleon by driving out Prussian forces from the region. The city became a part of the Duchy of Warsaw in 1807, and was the seat of Pozna\u0144 Department \u2013 a unit of administrative division and local government. However, in 1815, following the Congress of Vienna, the region was returned to Prussia, and Pozna\u0144 became the capital of the semi-autonomous Grand Duchy of Posen. Around 1820, Pozna\u0144 had over 20,000 inhabitants, 70% of whom were Poles, 20% Jews, and 10% Germans.\nThe city continued to expand, and various projects were funded by Polish philanthropists, such as the Raczy\u0144ski Library and the Bazar hotel. The city's first railway, running north-west to Stargard, opened in 1848. Due to its strategic location, the Prussian authorities intended to make Pozna\u0144 into a fortress city, building a ring of defensive fortifications around it. Work began on the citadel with \"Fort Winiary\" in 1828, and in subsequent years the entire set of defenses called \"Festung Posen\" was completed.\nA Greater Poland Uprising during the Revolutions of 1848 was ultimately unsuccessful, and the Grand Duchy lost its remaining autonomy, Pozna\u0144 becoming simply the capital of the Prussian Province of Posen. It would become part of the German Empire with the unification of German states in 1871. Polish patriots continued to form societies such as the Central Economic Society for the Grand Duchy of Pozna\u0144, and Polish Theatre opened in 1875. It became a national stage for the inhabitants of the province of Posen, and even in whole Greater Poland region, acting as a mainstay of Polish tradition and culture, and as a sign of resistance against the restrictive policies of the Prussian partition authorities. However, the authorities made efforts to Germanize the region, particularly through the Prussian Settlement Commission founded in 1886. Germans accounted for 38% of the city's population in 1867, though this percentage would later decline somewhat, particularly after the region returned to Poland.\nAnother expansion of \"Festung Posen\" was planned, with an outer ring of more widely spaced forts around the perimeter of the city. Building of the first nine forts began in 1876, and nine intermediate forts were built from 1887. The inner ring of fortifications was now considered obsolete and came to be mostly taken down by the early 20th century, although the citadel remained in use. This made space for further civilian construction, particularly the Prussian Royal Residence Palace (\"Zamek\") which was completed in 1910, and other grand buildings around it, including today's central university buildings and the opera house. The city's boundaries were also significantly extended to take in former suburban villages: Piotrowo and Berdychowo in 1896, \u0141azarz, G\u00f3rczyn, Je\u017cyce and Wilda in 1900, and So\u0142acz in 1907.\nIn 1910, Pozna\u0144 had 156,696 inhabitants, of which nearly 60% were Poles (over 91,000 Polish inhabitants of the city), and around 40% were Germans (over 65,000 German inhabitants of the city). Other nationalities accounted for 1-2% of the population (mainly Jews). Germans tended to settle in the newer western part of the city, the \"Kaiserviertel\" or Kaiser district, Poles in the older east side. And while there was tension between the two major populations there was also some overlap between them, particularly in cultural events.\nThe percentage of Polish-speakers declined from 76.6% in 1846 to 69.9% in 1858 and just 50.4% in 1890, but then rebounded to 57.9% in 1910. According to censuses of elementary school pupils the share of Polish-speakers among pupils was higher: 63.7% in 1886 and 78.7% in 1911.\nAfter independence the percentage of Polish-speakers was 92.8% in 1921 and 96.6% in 1931.\nInterbellum.\nAt the end of World War I, the Treaty of Versailles awarded the province and city of Posen to the new Poland. The local German populace were forced to acquire Polish citizenship or leave the country, forfeiting all property to the Polish State. This led to a wide emigration of the ethnic Germans of the town's population \u2013 the town's German population decreased from 65,321 in 1910 to 5,980 by 1926 and further to 4,387 in 1934.\nIn the interwar Second Polish Republic, the city again became the capital of Pozna\u0144 Voivodeship. Pozna\u0144's university, today called Adam Mickiewicz University, was founded in 1919, and in 1924 the Pozna\u0144 International Fair began. In 1929, the fair site was the venue for a major National Exhibition (\"Powszechna Wystawa Krajowa\", popularly \"PeWuKa\") marking the tenth anniversary of independence; organized on a space of 650,000 square metres it attracted around 4.5\u00a0million visitors. In the 1930s, the fair ranked as European fourth largest organiser of international trade events. Staging\u00a0of\u00a0the\u00a0Exhibition\u00a0 coincided\u00a0with the\u00a0advent\u00a0of\u00a0the economic\u00a0 crisis.\u00a0Preparations\u00a0for the Exhibition required\u00a0an enormous\u00a0amount of\u00a0work, and considerable investments were\u00a0needed\u00a0to build a suitable infrastructure. Pozna\u0144 became a large building site, with many labourers coming to the city in search of employment. After 1929 those labourers added to the large group of the unemployed in the aftermath of the great economic crisis. The city's boundaries were again expanded in 1925 to include G\u0142\u00f3wna, Komandoria, Rataje, Staro\u0142\u0119ka, D\u0119biec, Szel\u0105g and Winogrady, and in 1933: Gol\u0119cin and Podolany.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the German occupation of 1939\u20131945, Pozna\u0144 was incorporated into Nazi Germany as the capital of the \"Reichsgau Wartheland\". Many Polish inhabitants, even children as young as ten, were executed, arrested, expelled to the General Government or used as forced labour. Polish children were also kidnapped and deported to an infamous camp for Polish children in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a. At the same time, many Germans and \"Volksdeutsche\" were settled in the city. The German population increased from around 5,000 in 1939 (about 2% of the inhabitants) to around 95,000 in 1944.\nThe Jewish community's history in the city dates back to the 13th century. In earlier centuries, the Jewish council of Pozna\u0144 became one of the most important in Poland. On the eve of World War II, there were at least about 2,000 Jews in the city. Most were murdered in the Holocaust, primarily in the Che\u0142mno extermination camp and other sites of mass execution.\nA German Nazi concentration camp was established in Fort VII, one of the 19th-century perimeter forts. The camp was later moved to \u017babikowo south of Pozna\u0144. The Stalag XXI-D German prisoner-of-war camp for Allied POWs of various nationalities also operated in the city.\nThe Polish resistance was active in Pozna\u0144, with various organizations operating in secrecy. An underground Polish parliament was also established in the city.\nThe German occupation authorities significantly expanded Pozna\u0144\u2019s boundaries to include most of the present day area of the city (these borders were retained after the war). Pozna\u0144 was captured by the Red Army during the Battle of Pozna\u0144 on 23 February 1945. The city had been designated a \"Festung\". The Citadel was the last point to succumb to the assault. The fighting left much of Pozna\u0144 in ruins, especially the Old Town that was severely damaged. Many monuments, including the statue of Woodrow Wilson by Gutzon Borglum were destroyed and removed.\n1945\u2013present.\nDue to the expulsion and flight of German population, Pozna\u0144's post-war population became almost uniformly Polish. The city again became a voivodeship capital. In 1950, the size of Pozna\u0144 Voivodeship was reduced, and the city itself was given separate voivodeship status. This status was lost in the 1975 reforms, which also significantly reduced the size of Pozna\u0144 Voivodeship.\nThe Pozna\u0144 1956 protests are seen as an early instance of discontent with communist rule. In June 1956, a protest by workers at the city's Cegielski locomotive factory developed into a series of strikes and popular protests against the policies of the government. After a protest march on 28 June was fired on, crowds attacked the communist party and secret police headquarters, where they were repulsed by gunfire. Riots continued for two days until being quelled by the army; 67 people were killed according to official figures. A monument to the victims was erected in 1981 at Plac Mickiewicza.\nThe post-war years had seen much reconstruction work on buildings damaged in the fighting. From the 1960s onwards intensive housing development took place, consisting mainly of pre-fabricated concrete blocks of flats, especially in Rataje and Winogrady, and later Pi\u0105tkowo, following its incorporation into the city in 1974. Another infrastructural change, which was completed in 1968, was the rerouting of the river Warta to follow two straight branches either side of Ostr\u00f3w Tumski.\nThe most recent expansion of the city's boundaries took place in 1987, with the addition of new areas mainly to the north, including Morasko, Radojewo and Kiekrz. The first free local elections following the fall of communism took place in 1990. With the Polish local government reforms of 1999, Pozna\u0144 again became the capital of a larger province entitled Greater Poland Voivodeship. It also became the seat of a \"powiat\" Pozna\u0144 County, with the city itself gaining separate \"powiat\" status.\nPost-communist infrastructural developments include the opening of the \"Pestka\" Fast Tram route in 1997, and Pozna\u0144's first motorway connections in 2003, with Poland's east\u2013west A2 highway running south of the city centre, serving also as a bypass. In 2006, the country's first F-16 Fighting Falcons came to be stationed at the 31st Air Base in Krzesiny in the south-east of the city.\nPozna\u0144 continues to host regular trade fairs and international events, including the United Nations Climate Change Conference in 2008. It was one of the host cities for UEFA Euro 2012.\nGeography.\nLocation and topography.\nPozna\u0144 covers an area of , and has coordinates in the range 52\u00b017'34\"\u201352\u00b030'27\"N, 16\u00b044'08\"\u201317\u00b004'28\"E. Its highest point, with an altitude of , is the summit of Morasko hill within the Morasko meteorite nature reserve in the north of the city. The lowest altitude is , in the Warta valley.\nPozna\u0144's main river is the Warta, which flows through the city from south to north. As it approaches the city centre it divides into two branches, flowing west and east of Ostr\u00f3w Tumski Cathedral island, and meeting again further north. The smaller Cybina river flows through eastern Pozna\u0144 to meet the east branch of the Warta, which is also called Cybina \u2013 its northern section was originally a continuation of that river, while its southern section has been artificially widened to form a main stream of the Warta. Other tributaries of the Warta within Pozna\u0144 are the Junikowo Stream \"(Strumie\u0144 Junikowski)\", which flows through southern Pozna\u0144 from the west, meeting the Warta just outside the city boundary in Lubo\u0144; the Bogdanka and Wierzbak, formerly two separate tributaries flowing from the north-west and along the north side of the city centre, now with their lower sections diverted underground; the G\u0142\u00f3wna, flowing through the neighbourhood of the same name in north-east Pozna\u0144; and the Rose Stream \"(Strumie\u0144 R\u00f3\u017cany)\" flowing east from Morasko in the north of the city. The course of the Warta in central Pozna\u0144 was formerly quite different from today: the main stream ran between Grobla and Chwaliszewo, which were originally both islands. The branch west of Grobla (the \"Zgni\u0142a Warta\" \u2013 \"rotten Warta\") was filled in late in the 19th century, and the former main stream west of Chwaliszewo was diverted and filled in during the 1960s. This was done partly to prevent floods, which did serious damage to Pozna\u0144 frequently throughout history.\nPozna\u0144's largest lake is Kiekrz in the north-west end of the city. Other large lakes include Malta, an artificial lake formed in 1952 on the lower Cybina river, Strzeszyn on the Bogdanka, and Rusa\u0142ka, an artificial lake formed in 1943 further down the Bogdanka river. The latter two are popular bathing places. Kiekrz lake is much used for sailing, while Malta is a competitive rowing and canoeing venue.\nThe city centre \u2013 including the Old Town, the former islands of Grobla and Chwaliszewo, the main street \u015awi\u0119ty Marcin and many other important buildings and districts \u2013 lies on the west side of the Warta. Opposite it between the two branches of the Warta is Ostr\u00f3w Tumski, containing Cathedral and other ecclesiastical buildings, as well as housing and industrial facilities. Facing the cathedral on the east bank of the river is the historic district of \u015ar\u00f3dka. Large areas of apartment blocks, built from the 1960s onwards, include Rataje in the east, and Winogrady and Pi\u0105tkowo north of the centre. Older residential and commercial districts include those of Wilda, \u0141azarz and G\u00f3rczyn to the south, and Je\u017cyce to the west. There are also significant areas of forest within the city boundaries, particularly in the east adjoining Swarz\u0119dz, and around the lakes in the north-west.\nFor more details on Pozna\u0144's geography, see the articles on its five main districts: Stare Miasto, Nowe Miasto, Je\u017cyce, Grunwald, and Wilda.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Pozna\u0144 is within the transition zone between a humid continental and oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\" to \"Dfb\" although it just fits in the second in the 0\u00a0\u00b0C isotherm) and with relatively cold winters and warm summers. Snow is common in winter, when night-time temperatures are typically below zero. In summer temperatures may often reach . Annual rainfall is more than , among the lowest in Poland. The rainiest month is July, mainly due to short but intense cloudbursts and thunderstorms. The number of hours of sunshine are among the highest in the country. The warmest temperature was recorded on 11 July 1959 at \nAdministration.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe city of Pozna\u0144, serving as the administrative center of the Greater Poland Voivodeship, houses both the Voivode of Greater Poland and the Marshal of Greater Poland. Pozna\u0144, which holds the status of both a municipality and a county city, is home not only to the local authorities of Pozna\u0144 but also to the authorities of the Pozna\u0144 County. Additionally, the city hosts the[Union of Polish Cities and the Association of Municipalities and Counties of Greater Poland.\nThe Pozna\u0144 City Council is the legislative and supervisory body, elected for a four-year term. The current council members were elected in 2023. The council consists of 37 members. The Chairman of the Pozna\u0144 City Council is Grzegorz Ganowicz (KO), and the Vice-Chairpersons are Przemys\u0142aw Alexandrowicz (PiS), Agnieszka Lewandowska (KO), and Halina Owsianna. The council members collaborate within 14 permanent committees.\nThe office of the President of Pozna\u0144 is held by Jacek Ja\u015bkowiak, with the Deputy Presidents being Marcin Go\u0142ek, Mariusz Wi\u015bniewski, J\u0119drzej Solarski, and Natalia Weremczuk. The position of City Treasurer is occupied by Barbara Sajnaj, while Stanis\u0142aw Tamm serves as the City Secretary.\nAdministrative services for citizens are managed by 30 departments and equivalent organizational units of the City of Pozna\u0144 Office. Additionally, the city operates 328 municipal organizational units to fulfill various public tasks. Throughout the year, the departments of the City of Pozna\u0144 Office and municipal administrative units issue approximately 565,000 administrative decisions.\nAdministrative division.\nPozna\u0144 is divided into 42 neighbourhoods called \"osiedle\", each of which has its own elected council with certain decision-making and spending powers. The first uniform elections for these councils covering the whole area of the city were held on 20 March 2011.\nFor certain administrative purposes, the old division into five districts called \"dzielnica\" is used \u2013 although they ceased to be governmental units in 1990. These are:\nMany citizens of Pozna\u0144 thanks to the strong economy of the city and high salaries started moving to suburbs of the Pozna\u0144 County (powiat) in the 1990s. Although the number of inhabitants in Pozna\u0144 itself was decreasing for the past two decades, the suburbs gained almost twice as many inhabitants. The Pozna\u0144 metropolitan area \"Metropolia Pozna\u0144\" comprising Pozna\u0144 County and several other communities is home to over 1\u00a0million inhabitants. The complex infrastructure, population density, number of companies and gross product per capita of Pozna\u0144 suburbs may be only compared to Warsaw suburbs. Many parts of closer suburbs such as Tarnowo Podgorne, Komorniki, Suchy Las, and Dopiewo produce more in terms of GDP per capita than the city itself.\nArchitecture.\nGothic.\nThe relocation of Pozna\u0144 from the right to the left bank of the Warta River occurred in the mid-13th century, during the height of the Gothic architecture. This significant urban shift led to the preservation of numerous Gothic structures, both religious and secular, on both sides of the Warta River, within the area of the former chartered town. The Gothic style in Pozna\u0144 flourished from approximately the mid-13th century to the end of the 15th century.\nThe Archcathedral Basilica of St. Peter and St. Paul on Ostr\u00f3w Tumski is considered the most important Gothic sacred building in Pozna\u0144. Its current form emerged following a 14th-15th century reconstruction that replaced an earlier pre-Romanesque and Romanesque church. The Gothic design of the three-aisled basilica, with a presbytery surrounded by an ambulatory and a ring of chapels, was consolidated through post-World War II restorations aimed at recovering the cathedral\u2019s medieval character. The spatial layout exhibits all the hallmarks of mature Gothic architecture. The interior is unified by a system of cross-rib vaults in the main nave and lierne vaults in the presbytery, supported by slender pillars. The vertical division includes pointed inter-nave arcades and a triforium gallery. The western fa\u00e7ade is flanked by two massive towers with pointed pinnacles, between which rises a stepped gable adorned with ceramic decoration and a large rose window. The dominant building material is red, hand-formed brick, typical of North European Gothic. However, the Pozna\u0144 cathedral embodies not only the broader tradition of Brick Gothic but also features specific elements of Polish Gothic, visible in both spatial organization and architectural detailing. Particularly characteristic of the local tradition are thick structural walls and the decorative use of clinker brick (\"zendr\u00f3wka\" \u2013 dark, overfired brick often used for visual contrast in elevations). Another feature of Polish Gothic is the presence of numerous side chapels, designed as individual recesses set between buttresses \u2013 a solution typical of cathedrals founded by the Piast dynasty.\nNotable Gothic sites in the older, right-bank part of the city include:\nIn the left-bank part of the city, the most prominent Gothic monuments include:\nRenaissance.\nThe introduction of the Renaissance to Pozna\u0144 resulted in the construction of many grand buildings. Noteworthy among these is the Town Hall, an exemplary piece of Renaissance architecture in Poland. The Town Hall underwent a significant reconstruction in the mid-16th century, after a fire in 1536. The city authorities entrusted the reconstruction to Giovanni Battista Quadro from Lugano in 1550. He expanded the building westward by approximately 11 meters and added an additional floor. The reconstruction was completed in 1560. The Renaissance Town Hall is characterized by its rectangular plan, three-story loggia on the facade, and three polygonal turrets. The central turret houses a clock mechanism featuring goats, a popular attraction in Pozna\u0144 since 1551. The attic frieze depicts Jagiellonian kings, while the blind arcades feature rulers from the Piast dynasty.\nMost of the tenement fa\u00e7ades around the Old Market Square exhibit a Renaissance character. The town hall is surrounded by guild houses from the 16th century, distinguished by a rhythmic arrangement of windows separated by lesenes, as well as decorative attics and rusticated arcades. The fa\u00e7ades were often adorned with sgraffito or heraldic motifs \u2014 a testament to the decorative and symbolic values of the Renaissance. A distinctive feature is the adaptation of Gothic vaulting structures (rib vaults) to the new Renaissance order.\nAn example of a representative urban residence from Renaissance-era Pozna\u0144 is the G\u00f3rka Palace, currently housing the Archaeological Museum. The building was constructed between 1545 and 1549 through the reconstruction of several Gothic townhouses for Andrzej G\u00f3rka, the Starost General of Greater Poland. The Renaissance entrance portal, made of sandstone, is likely the work of an Italian artist. The entrance archway with a semicircular arch is framed by pilasters supporting a lintel. The rich ornamentation includes laurel leaf festoons, cornucopias, masks, and grotesque-vegetal motifs. The portal leads to an inner courtyard surrounded by a three-winged arcaded cloister. The palace stands out with its architecture that reflects the late Renaissance order on a residential scale and serves as an example of Italian Mannerist influence on 16th-century urban architecture.\nBaroque.\nThe Baroque, which began to develop in Pozna\u0144 in the second half of the 17th century, brought a sense of monumentality to the urban space. The architecture of this period was supported by Counter-Reformation orders and the urban elite. From the Baroque period, the Pozna\u0144 Fara or Collegiate Basilica of Our Lady of Perpetual Help, St. Mary Magdalene, and St. Stanislaus Bishop stands out as one of the most significant Baroque structures in Poland. The construction of this church began in the mid-17th century under the guidance of prominent Baroque architects such as Giovanni Catenazzi, Tomasz Poncino, and Pompeo Ferrari. The church was finally consecrated in 1705, although it was not fully completed at the time. The interior of the basilica is characterized by a monumental three-aisled layout with a transept and galleries, with columns made of red artificial marble supporting the vaults and organ galleries. One of the most remarkable features is the illusionistic dome \u2014 in reality, a painted pseudo-dome on the ceiling that creates an optical impression of depth.\nMany other examples of Baroque sacred architecture have been preserved in Pozna\u0144, among which two Franciscan churches stand out. The Church of St. Anthony of Padua, built between 1674 and 1728 according to a design by Jerzy Catenazzi, is a representative example of late Baroque architecture already bearing signs of Classicism. The interior is richly decorated with stuccowork and polychromes executed between 1702 and 1735 by the brothers Adam and Antoni Swach. The paintings in the presbytery and main nave depict scenes from the life of St. Francis, while the Chapel of the Blessed Virgin Mary contains the revered image of Our Lady of Pozna\u0144. The Church of St. Francis, originally Gothic, was thoroughly rebuilt in the Baroque style between 1661 and 1668. Its fa\u00e7ade, completed in the 18th century, features a characteristic tiered composition with towers rising 29 meters high, topped with roof lanterns and late Baroque domes. Between the pilasters and cornices are niches containing statues of from 1730. On the southern side adjoins the preserved Chapel of Our Lady of Loreto, dating from the 18th century, which houses a Renaissance-style Holy House modeled after the Santa Casa in Loreto. This church exemplifies the adaptation of a medieval structure to the new Baroque aesthetic.\nAmong the examples of secular Baroque architecture, a special place is occupied by the Dzia\u0142y\u0144ski Palace, built between 1773 and 1776 according to a design by Antoni H\u00f6hne. Although the building represents a transitional phase between the Baroque and Classicism, it retains many features characteristic of the late Baroque style. The fa\u00e7ade is structured in a classical pilaster order, with symmetrically arranged window openings and a simple crowning cornice. The interior of the palace\u2014particularly the representative Red Hall\u2014features rich stucco decoration in the Rococo style. The hall contains stuccowork likely designed by Jan Chrystian Kamsetzer, along with representations of Kings Stephen Bathory, W\u0142adys\u0142aw IV, and John III Sobieski. Additionally, there are two pairs of sculptures by Augustyn Sch\u00f6ps, depicting W\u0142adys\u0142aw the Elbow-high and Casimir the Great, as well as W\u0142adys\u0142aw Jagie\u0142\u0142o and Duke Vytautas. The Red Hall played an important representative role and served as a venue for meetings, lectures, and cultural events.\nOther significant examples of Baroque architecture include the Jesuit College, the Basilica of St. Joseph and the Carmelite Monastery, and the Church of St. Casimir.\nArt Nouveau.\nThe early 20th-century expansion of Pozna\u0144 to include Je\u017cyce, Wilda, and \u0141azarz facilitated the development of new architectural spaces. The demolition of the city's fortifications also allowed for the construction of permanent buildings on former fortress grounds. During this period, numerous new urban developments and residential complexes were established.\nOne of them is the so-called Johow-Gel\u00e4nde in the \u0141azarz district, based on an urban concept by Max Johow, one of the leading architects in Pozna\u0144 at the beginning of the 20th century. The tenement houses, built in a dense layout without backyards, were preceded by front gardens and, in addition to the high standard of the apartments, also impressed with richly decorated entrance halls and varied building facades. Numerous Art Nouveau tenement houses can also be found on neighboring streets such as Matejki, Wyspia\u0144skiego, and Ma\u0142eckiego.\nIn the early 20th century, many residential developments also emerged in the Je\u017cyce district, including a complex of villa-style tenements on Roosevelta Street, designed by the architectural firm of Herman B\u00f6hmer and Paul Preul for the German Civil Servants' Housing Cooperative. Particularly noteworthy are the wrought iron grilles at 5 Roosevelta Street and the oversized bas-relief of a naked woman supporting the balcony on the facade of building number 4. Nearby there is also the New Theatre, constructed in 1906, designed by the same architects, which facade design reflects Art Nouveau typical of the German region, featuring geometric forms with varied colors and textures. Similar architecture can be found in the central part of Je\u017cyce, along streets such as D\u0105browskiego, Kraszewskiego, Mickiewicza, Prusa, and S\u0142owackiego.\nAmong the notable Art Nouveau structures are Oskar Hoffman's tenement house at 69 \u015awi\u0119ta Marcin Street or tenement house at 14 Wolno\u015bci Square.\nRevival architecture and Neoclassicism.\nThe Romanesque Revival, Renaissance Revival and Neoclassical architectural styles are particularly visible in the so-called Imperial District. In 1903, architect Josef St\u00fcbben presented a plan for the construction of a new district in the area of the demolished Berlin Gate (located at the intersection of today's \u015awi\u0119ty Marcin and Ko\u015bciuszki streets), which was realized between 1904 and 1910.\nThe central point of this district is the Imperial Castle, built between 1905 and 1910 for Wilhelm II. Over the years, the Castle's purpose has evolved. During the interwar period, university lectures were held in its halls, during World War II, the building was adapted to serve as Hitler's headquarters, and since the 1960s, it has functioned as a cultural center. Inside, one can find the Pa\u0142acowe Cinema, a modern concert hall, exhibition spaces, a library, a bookstore, a caf\u00e9, educational rooms, and areas for visitors to explore the castle's historical rooms.\nThe heart of the district is Adam Mickiewicz Square, featuring a monument to the poet. At the boundary of the square and Adam Mickiewicz Park there is a monument commemorating the Victims of June 1956. The district's buildings are located around the square and along \u015awi\u0119ty Marcin and Fredry streets.\nThe Municipal Theater \u2013 now the Grand Theater, 1910, architect Max Littmann \u2013 inspired by the Villa Rotonda in Vicenza; Collegium Maius (formerly the Colonization Commission), 1908-1910, with a monument to the founder of the Polish university, Professor Heliodor \u015awi\u0119cicki, in front of the building; Adolf Landsberg's Villa, 1911; Institute of Hygiene, 1912; Collegium Minus, 1905-1910; Music Academy (formerly the Evangelical House \u2013 Evangelisches Vereinhaus), 1907\u20131908; Collegium Iuridicum (formerly the Raiffeisen Cooperative Bank), 1907; Pozna\u0144 Philharmonic, 1910; and Post Office Directorate, 1910.\nIn addition to the Imperial Castle, the most important buildings in the Imperial District include: To the west, the district is enclosed by a semicircular line of parks that were created on the site of the 19th-century fortifications of Pozna\u0144 Fortress. In the following years, an informal university district developed to the south of the Imperial District, featuring buildings of the Music Academy, the University of Economics, and Adam Mickiewicz University.\nModernism.\nModern architecture in Pozna\u0144 began to emerge in the 1930s with buildings like the ZUS office on D\u0105browskiego Street, continuing through the 1980s. The Okr\u0105glak, constructed between 1949 and 1954, is a prominent example, designed by architect Marek Leykam. Built on a circular plan using prefabricated elements, its nine-story cylindrical structure features a flat roof with a central skylight and a surrounding terrace. The facade, without a dominant elevation, is characterized by a glass surface divided by rectangular window openings and vertical \"razor blade\" partitions.\nOther examples of modernist architecture in Pozna\u0144 include the Alfa Towers on \u015awi\u0119ty Marcin and the Poznan University of Physical Education building on Kr\u00f3lowej Jadwigi Street. Another important modernist monument is the Arena Hall, which was built in 1974 and was inspired by the shape of the Palazzetto dello Sport, a hall constructed in Rome several years earlier.\nContemporary Architecture.\nThe development of postmodernism in Pozna\u0144 began at the start of the 21st century, primarily influencing office architecture. One of the most acclaimed buildings, which has received numerous awards, is Ba\u0142tyk \u2014 a 16-story office tower located near Rondo Kaponiera. This project marked the first realization in Poland by one of the world's most renowned architectural firms, MVRDV. The unique form of the building gives it a different appearance from every angle \u2014 it appears to expand or contract, simultaneously slender and expansive. Other notable examples of modern architecture include the Porta Posnania, the Andersia office complex, Pixel, and the Nowy Rynek office complex.\nA significant trend in the city's architecture is the modernization of historical buildings and their integration with contemporary elements, exemplified by Stary Browar. This complex was developed on the site of the 19th-century Hugger Brewery. The shopping center largely consists of new forms, styled to resemble historical ones and based on the iconography of 19th-century industrial architecture.\nCulture and heritage.\nPozna\u0144 possesses many historic buildings and heritage sites, mostly concentrated around the Old Town and other parts of the city centre. Many of these lie on the tourist Royal-Imperial Route \u2013 a walk leading through the most important parts of the city showing its history, culture and identity. Parts of the city centre are listed as one of Poland's official national historic monuments, as designated 28 November 2008, along with other portions of the city's historic core. Its listing is maintained by the National Heritage Board of Poland.\nApart from traditional theatres with a long history such as \"Teatr Wielki\", \"Teatr Polski\", \"Teatr Nowy\", and others like \"Teatr Animacji\", \"Teatr Muzyczny\" and Polish Dance Theatre, Pozna\u0144 is also home to a growing number of different kind of alternative theatre groups. It is believed that even up to 30 more or less known groups may work in the city, and thus, the city has recently become a new Polish off-theatre performance centre.\nClassical music events include the Henryk Wieniawski Violin Competition which is held every 5 years, and classical music concerts by the Pozna\u0144 Philharmonic orchestra held each month in the Hall of the Adam Mickiewicz University, considered to be one of the best in terms of acoustics in Poland. Especially popular are concerts by the Pozna\u0144 Nightingales.\nPozna\u0144 developed as one of the country's main centres of hip-hop and rap music in the 90s.. Most rappers have been strongly linked to the Lech supporter scene and the club prominently features in their music. Arguably the most famous, Peja, was an ardent supporter since he was 15 years old, and was active in the hooligan scene in the 90s. Evtis, Ascetoholix, Bzyk and DJ Decks are all prominent supporters. The fans have produced recorded and released two rap CD's called \"Definicja Kibol\" and \"Definicja Kibol 2\" as compilation of various artists.\nOther rappers include duo Pi\u0119\u0107 Dwa, S\u0142o\u0144, Paluch, and Nag\u0142y Atak Spawacza.\nOther contemporary notable local musicians include Adam Nowak, the co-founder and leader of the band Raz, Dwa, Trzy; pop singer Sylwia Grzeszczak; rock band Pid\u017cama Porno; and DJ duo Kalwi &amp; Remi.\nEvery year on 11 November, city residents celebrate the Day of St. Martin. A procession of horses, with Saint Martin at its head, parades along Saint Martin Street (\"ulica \u015awi\u0119ty Marcin\"), in front of the Imperial Castle. The renowned St. Martin's Croissant, a regional product of Pozna\u0144, are widely sold during the festivities.\nSince the year 2000, Pozna\u0144 has hosted \"Betlejem Pozna\u0144skie\" a cultural and entertainment event associated with the Advent season and Christmas. The event begins with the onset of Advent and concludes on 23 December. The central attraction is a live nativity scene featuring real animals, accompanied by a large stage where musical concerts, competitions, and various artistic and entertainment activities take place. Surrounding the nativity scene are numerous stalls offering handcrafted goods, regional products, traditional foods, mulled wine, and hot meals. The ambiance is reminiscent of German Christmas markets, known as Weihnachtsmarkte. In addition to the permanent attractions, \"Betlejem Pozna\u0144skie\" includes recurring events such as carol singing reviews, the election of the Pozna\u0144 \"Gwiazdor\" (a fictional character who distributes gifts on Christmas Eve, appearing in Greater Poland's tradition), art workshops, city games, and more.\nA highlight is the International Ice Sculpture Festival, held annually since 2006. The event also features the \"Betlejemskie \u015awiat\u0142o Pokoju\" (Bethlehem Light of Peace) brought from the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem. During this time, city officials, the consular corps, and rectors of Pozna\u0144's universities exchange festive greetings.\nAn important cultural event in Pozna\u0144 is the annual Malta Festival, which takes place at many city venues, usually in late June and early July. It hosts mainly modern experimental off-theatre performances often taking place on squares and other public spaces. It also includes cinema, visual, music and dancing events. Pozna\u0144 also stages the Ale Kino! International Young Audience Film Festival in December, and Off Cinema festival of independent films. Other festivals: Animator (animated film festival), Ethno Port festival of traditional world's ethnic music, Maski Theater Festival, Dance International Workshops by Polish Dance Theater, Made in Chicago (jazz festival), Festival of Ice Sculpture, Science and Art Festival, Tzadik (Jewish music festival), and Meditations Biennale (modern art).\nPozna\u0144 has several museums as well as cinemas, including multiplexes and art-house institutions. The Rozbrat social centre, a squatted former factory in Je\u017cyce, serves as a home for independent and open-minded culture. It hosts frequent gigs, an anarchist library, vernissages, exhibitions, annual birthday festival in October, poetry evenings and graffiti festivals. The city centre has many clubs, pubs and coffee houses.\nA popular venue is \"Malta\", a park with an artificial lake situated in its centre. On one south bank of the lake there are ski and sleigh slopes of Malta Ski centre, and on the opposite bank a large complex of \"Termy Malta\u0144skie\" swimming pools.\nPozna\u0144 Zoological Garden has two facilities. The Old Zoo is one of the oldest in Poland, established in 1874 just west of the city centre. The large was opened to the public in 1974, becoming second largest in Poland in terms of area. It is located on a hilly forest area with six large ponds at the eastern city's wedge of greenery, beyond the Malta lake. There is a dedicated and adored by children \"Maltanka\" mini-railway, that starts the route near the \"\u015ar\u00f3dka\" roundabout.\nEconomy.\nPozna\u0144 has been an important trade centre since the Middle Ages. Starting in the 19th century, local heavy industry began to grow. Several major factories were built, including the Hipolit Cegielski's steel mill and railway factory, popularly called \"Ceglorz\".\nNowadays, Pozna\u0144 is one of the major trade centres in Poland. It is regarded as the second most prosperous city in Poland after its capital Warsaw. The city of Pozna\u0144 produced PLN 31.8\u00a0billion of Poland's gross domestic product in 2006.\nMany European companies have established their Polish headquarters in Pozna\u0144 or in nearby towns such as Tarnowo Podg\u00f3rne and Swarz\u0119dz. Most foreign investors are German (36%) and Dutch companies (14%). The best known examples of corporation who have their headquarters in Pozna\u0144 and the surrounding areas are that of Volkswagen, GlaxoSmithKline, Amazon, Bridgestone, Beiersdorf, Raben Group (near K\u00f3rnik) and Kuehne + Nagel (near G\u0105dki). There are also several shared services centers, and IT branch offices. Investors are mostly from the food processing, furniture, automotive and transport and logistics industries. Foreign companies are primarily attracted by relatively low labour costs, good road and railway network, good vocational skills of workers, and relatively liberal employment laws.\nSome of the best-known major corporations founded and still based in Pozna\u0144 and the city's metropolitan area include Allegro \u2013 owner of the Poland's biggest e-commerce site, H. Cegielski-Pozna\u0144 SA \u2013 a historic manufacturer, Solaris Bus &amp; Coach \u2013 a modern bus and coach maker based in Bolechowo, and Enea S.A. \u2013 one of the country's biggest energy firms. Kompania Piwowarska based in Pozna\u0144 produces some of Poland's best known beers, and includes not only the local Lech Brewery's products but also Tyskie from Tychy and Dojlidy Brewery from Bia\u0142ystok among many others.\nIn 2008, three Pozna\u0144 students founded Netguru, a software development and digital consultancy company. It grew fast to employ about 600 people in 2019.\n\"Stary Browar\", the center of commerce and art opened in 2003, won several awards for its architecture. Other notable shopping centers include \"Posnania\", the biggest commerce facility in Greater Poland, \"Galeria Malta\", and the shops at the Hotel Bazar \u2013 a historical hotel and commercial center in the Old Town.\nPopulation.\nIn 1600, approximately 20,000 inhabitants resided in the whole Pozna\u0144 conurbation. By 1732 the population had dropped to 4,000 due to wars, floods and plague. Historically, its growth rate was high throughout the 19th and 20th centuries; in the year 1900 approximately 110,000 people were registered as residents and by 1939 there was already 274,155 people. The population of Pozna\u0144 has declined steadily since 1990, when it reached a maximum of 590,101. This phenomenon, which also affected other European cities, is caused in part by the growth of satellite suburbs at the expense of the downtown region within the city proper. In 2020, Pozna\u0144 had 532,048 registered inhabitants being the fifth most populous town in Poland, while the metropolitan area had a population of about 1,000,000 people. The city's population density was .\nContemporary Pozna\u0144 has one of the highest concentration of foreigners in Poland alongside Warsaw and Wroc\u0142aw; a significant majority are migrant workers from Ukraine; others came from Italy, Spain, Belarus, Russia and Serbia. No exact statistic exists on the number of temporary residents from abroad. Many are students studying at Pozna\u0144's schools and institutions of higher learning.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation and science.\nPozna\u0144 is one of the four largest academic centres in Poland. The number of students in the city is about 140,000, which ranks it the third or fourth after Warsaw and Krak\u00f3w and about equal to Wroc\u0142aw in student population. Every one in four inhabitants of Pozna\u0144 is a student. Since Pozna\u0144 is smaller than Warsaw or Krak\u00f3w still having a very large number of students it makes the city even more vibrant and dense academic hub than both former and current capital of Poland \u2013 Krak\u00f3w and Warsaw respectively. Pozna\u0144 with its almost 30 universities and colleges has the second richest educational offering in the country after Warsaw.\nPublic universities.\nThe city has eight state-owned universities. Adam Mickiewicz University (\"UAM\") is one of the most influential and biggest universities in Poland. Pozna\u0144 University of Technology (PUT, \"PP\" in Polish) is one of the most influential and biggest technical universities in Poland.\nThe Adam Mickiewicz University is one of the three most important universities in Poland after University of Warsaw and University of Krak\u00f3w. All three host a large number of international students and lead in scientist exchange, research grants and top publications. The University's Morasko Campus in northern Pozna\u0144 comprises the Faculties of Biology, Physics, Mathematics, Chemistry, Political Sciences, and Geography. The campus infrastructure belongs to the most impressive among Polish universities. It is situated close to the Morasko meteorite nature reserve, one of the rare sites in Europe where a number of meteorites fell and some traces may be still seen.\nPozna\u0144 University of Technology was ranked fifth among all universities in Poland, and third among Polish technical universities, in the 2018 international Scimago Institutions Ranking. In the 2019 Academic Ranking of World Universities, known also as the Shanghai Ranking, PUT was classified among the 500 best universities in the world in two disciplines, i.e. \"Computer Science &amp; Engineering\" and \"Mechanical Engineering\". PUT was ranked third among all Polish universities in the 2019\u201320 Ministry of Science and Higher Education popularity ranking. Recent years have brought extensive development of university infrastructure at the \"Warta campus\", located on the right side of Warta river between Malta lake and Pozna\u0144 city center.\nPrivate universities.\nThere is also a great number of smaller, mostly private-run colleges and institutions of higher education, including SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Collegium Da Vinci, and WSB University.\nHigh schools.\nPozna\u0144 has numerous high schools, which have different programmes focusing on different subjects. Some of the most notable are:\nSports.\nThere are several multi-sport clubs in Pozna\u0144. Warta Pozna\u0144 was one of the most successful clubs in pre-World War II history, and Lech Pozna\u0144 football team frequently plays in European cups. Lech plays at the Municipal Stadium, which hosted the 2012 European Championship group stages as well as the opening game and the final of the 2006 under-19 Euro Championship. Warta usually plays at the small D\u0119bi\u0144ska Road Stadium, a former training ground for Edmund Szyc Stadium, however, since the latter fell into disrepair in 1998 and was sold in 2001, it became the team's main ground. The club was planning to rebuild Szyc Stadium with historical 60,000-seat capacity. In recent seasons Warta played their matches at the Dyskobolia Stadium in Grodzisk Wielkopolski, as their current did not fulfill the footballing authority's requirements.\nThe city's third professional football team of multi-sport Olimpia Pozna\u0144 club ceased activity in 2004, and the club focused on other sports, achieving good results in judo and tennis. Olimpia is hosting the annual tennis Pozna\u0144 Open tournament at its Olimpia Tennis Park. The club owns a large sports complex near Rusa\u0142ka lake, and apart from the tennis facilities boasts a large city recreation areas: mountain biking facilities with a four-cross track, an athletics stadium with 3,000 capacity, and a football-speedway stadium with 20,000 capacity. The latter had fallen into vast disrepair until it was acquired by the City Council from the Police in 2013 and was renovated. The football-speedway stadium hosts speedway club PS\u017b Pozna\u0144, rugby union side NKR Chaos, American football team the Armia Pozna\u0144, and football team Poznaniak Pozna\u0144.\nThe artificial Malta lake, which was formed in 1952 and is about long, hosted the 2009 World Rowing Championships and some regattas of the World Rowing Cup. It also held the ICF Canoe Sprint World Championships in 1990, 2001, and 2010.\n\"Termy Malta\u0144skie\", big water sports and recreation complex featuring Olympic-size swimming pool, is located at the north bank of the lake. A 50-metre pool can be divided into two 25-metre pools. The other pool with a diving tower also fulfils all requirements necessary for organizing sports competitions. \"Termy Malta\u0144skie\" consists of as many as 18 sports and recreational swimming pools with a total water surface area of as well as many other attractions such as different kind of saunas and spa, among others. The complex uses natural geothermal waters drawn nearby from a depth of and saturated with beneficial minerals and elements, for some of the swimming pools.\nAt the south bank of the lake, Malta-Ski year-round skiing complex is situated, and is hosting minor sport competitions, equipped with a toboggan run and a minigolf course. There is also a roller rink with a roller skating club nearby.\nSince 2000, the city has been the host of the Pozna\u0144 Marathon, one of the largest such races in the country.\nPozna\u0144's multi-purpose sports and entertainment indoor arena is simply called \"Arena\". Located west of city centre and built in 1974, it originally seated about 5,500 people and is used for many different sports and cultural events such as volleyball and concerts, among others. The facility has since been modernized, including lowering the level of the ground floor to increase arena capacity to about 9,200. Pozna\u0144 has experience as a host for international sporting events such as the 2009 EuroBasket.\nThe city has the largest motorsport race track in Poland, Tor Pozna\u0144, located at the west city's suburbs in Prze\u017amierowo.\nPozna\u0144 is also considered to be the hotbed of Polish field hockey, with several top teams of Warta Pozna\u0144, Grunwald Pozna\u0144 \u2013 multi-sport club which also has shooting, wrestling, handball and tennis sections, Pocztowiec Pozna\u0144, and AZS AWF Pozna\u0144 \u2013 an academic club which also fields professional teams in women's volleyball and basketball. Other clubs include: Posnania Pozna\u0144 \u2013 one of the best rugby union teams in the country, Polonia Pozna\u0144 \u2013 formerly a multi-sport club achieving many successes in rugby with only a football section remaining, KKS Wiara Lecha \u2013 football club formed by the supporters of Lech Pozna\u0144, and Odlew Pozna\u0144 \u2013 arguably the most famous amateur club in the country due to their extensive media coverage and humorous exploits. There are also numerous rhythmic gymnastics and synchronised swimming clubs, as well as numerous less notable amateur football teams.\nThe E11 European long distance path for hikers passes through Pozna\u0144.\nPozna\u0144 bid for the 2014 Summer Youth Olympics but lost to Nanjing, with the Chinese city receiving 47 votes over Pozna\u0144's 42.\nPublic services.\nHealthcare.\nA total of 574 healthcare providers offer outpatient services to the residents of Pozna\u0144. \nThe independent public healthcare facilities providing inpatient care include municipal hospitals:\nThe municipal hospitals employ just over 2,000 people.\nIn addition to the stationary treatment facilities managed by the City of Pozna\u0144, there are 20 hospitals operating, including 5 hospitals under the jurisdiction of the Greater Poland Voivodeship, 5 clinical hospitals affiliated with the Pozna\u0144 University of Medical Sciences, and 10 private hospitals. \nHospitals managed by the Greater Poland Voivodeship:\nClinical hospitals of the Karol Marcinkowski Medical University:\nSome of the private hospitals include:\nAdditionally, on the Dojazd Street, there is a departmental hospital administered by the Ministry of the Interior and Administration.\nBesides the hospital care Pozna\u0144 Center for Specialist Medical Services (POSUM) on Solidarno\u015bci Avenue provides services in the fields of outpatient treatment, diagnostics, rehabilitation, preventive care, and occupational medicine.\nEach year, more than 300,000 people are hospitalized in Pozna\u0144. The clinical hospitals of the Pozna\u0144 University of Medical Sciences have the highest number of beds and patients, accounting for about 56% of the total.\nPolice and Municipal Guard.\nIn Pozna\u0144, various Police units operate across different administrative levels to ensure public safety. At the regional level, the Voivodship Police Headquarters in Pozna\u0144 (Komenda Wojew\u00f3dzka Policji w Poznaniu, KWP) coordinates police activities across the entire Greater Poland Voivodeship. Within the city, the key role is played by the Municipal Police Headquarters in Pozna\u0144 (Komenda Miejska Policji w Poznaniu, KMP), responsible for maintaining order and safety. KMP supervises several police stations located in different districts:\nAdditionally, the Municipal Police Headquarters oversees stations in the Pozna\u0144 County, including locations in Murowana Go\u015blina, Suchy Las, Swarz\u0119dz, Kostrzyn, Pobiedziska, Tarnowo Podg\u00f3rne, Buk, St\u0119szew, Komorniki, Lubo\u0144, Puszczykowo, Mosina, K\u00f3rnik, Dopiewo, Kleszczewo, Rokietnica, and Prze\u017amierowo.\nThe Municipal Police Headquarters in Pozna\u0144 employs approximately 1,800 officers. Each station is responsible for patrolling and responding to incidents within its jurisdiction. In some areas of the city, smaller police posts provide additional law enforcement presence, supporting the main stations and serving local communities. All these units work closely together to effectively protect Pozna\u0144's residents. Since September 2016, the National Safety Threat Map (Krajowa Mapa Zagro\u017ce\u0144 Bezpiecze\u0144stwa) has been active in the area covered by the Pozna\u0144 Municipal Police Headquarters. This tool facilitates communication between the police and the public, aiming to improve safety in residential areas.\nThe City Guard (Stra\u017c Miejska Miasta Poznania) operates under the City Hall, overseeing five district branches and employing about 300 guards.\nThe city also maintains a video surveillance system to enhance safety and crime detection, with 395 cameras in operation. The footage is monitored and analyzed by staff at six Surveillance Centers located within police stations. Additionally, the video feed is accessible to the Municipal Police Headquarters, the Traffic Management Center (ZDM), the MPK dispatch center, the Crisis Management Center, and the City Guard headquarters.\nTransport.\nThe main Pozna\u0144 railway station is called \"Pozna\u0144 G\u0142\u00f3wny\", and is located just southwest of the city centre. There are also the smaller \"East Pozna\u0144\" and \"Pozna\u0144 Garbary\" stations northeast of the centre, and a number of other stations on the outskirts of the city. The main east\u2013west A2 motorway runs south of the city centre connecting it with Berlin in the west and \u0141\u00f3d\u017c and Warsaw in the east, serving also as a centre bypass. Other main roads run in the direction of Warsaw, Bydgoszcz, W\u0105growiec, Oborniki, Katowice, Wroc\u0142aw, Buk and Berlin.\nThe city has an international airport Pozna\u0144-\u0141awica. As of March 2013, flights could be flown from it to 25 airports located mainly in Western European countries. In addition, during the 2013 summer season, charter planes departed from Pozna\u0144 to 36 popular resorts. In 2012. \u0141awica handled nearly 1.6 million passengers, which placed it in the 6th position in Poland in terms of air traffic volume.\nIn 2016 it handled approximately 1.71\u00a0million passengers.\nSince the end of the communist era in 1989, city investments into transportation have been mostly into public transport. While the number of cars since 1989 has at least doubled, municipal policy concentrated on improving public transport, which mostly consists of trams and both urban and suburban buses. New tram lines are planned and built, including \"Pestka\" Fast Tram sections, and the rolling stock is being replaced for modern low-floor vehicles such as Solaris Tramino, Siemens Combino and Moderus Gamma trams, and buses such as Solaris Urbino.\nPaid parking zones in the city centre were established, and Park &amp; Ride car parks have been built to encourage commuters to leave their car on the outskirts of the city and continue their journey by public transport, as well as to allow safe and legal parking outside the city centre. Limiting car access to the strict centre actually increased the level of ridership.\nInternational relations.\nOne of the two principal and five total cemeteries of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission in Poland is located in Pozna\u0144, with more than 400 burials from both world wars.\nConsulates.\nThere is a consular agency of the United States, and 18 honorary consulates in Pozna\u0144 \u2013 Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland, Luxembourg, Mexico, Peru, Portugal, Turkey, Slovakia.\nTwin towns \u2013 Sister cities.\nPozna\u0144 is twinned with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23725", "revid": "51011593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23725", "title": "Peter Falk", "text": "American actor (1927\u20132011)\nPeter Michael Falk (September 16, 1927 \u2013 June 23, 2011) was an American actor. He is best known for his role as Lieutenant Columbo on the NBC/ABC series \"Columbo\" (1968\u20131978, 1989\u20132003), for which he won four Primetime Emmy Awards (1972, 1975, 1976, 1990) and a Golden Globe Award (1973). In 1996, \"TV Guide\" ranked Falk No. 21 on its 50 Greatest TV Stars of All Time list. He received a posthumous star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2013.\nHe first starred as Columbo in two 2-hour \"World Premiere\" TV pilots; the first with Gene Barry in 1968 and the second with Lee Grant in 1971. The show then aired as part of \"The NBC Mystery Movie\" series from 1971 to 1978, and again on ABC from 1989 to 2003.\nFalk was twice nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, for \"Murder, Inc.\" (1960) and \"Pocketful of Miracles\" (1961), and won his first Emmy Award in 1962 for \"The Dick Powell Theatre\". He was the first actor to be nominated for an Academy Award and an Emmy Award in the same year, achieving the feat twice (1961 and 1962). He went on to appear in such films as \"It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World\" (1963), \"The Great Race\" (1965), \"Anzio\" (1968), \"Murder by Death\" (1976), \"The Cheap Detective\" (1978), \"The Brink's Job\" (1978), \"The In-Laws \"(1979), \"The Princess Bride\" (1987), \"Wings of Desire\" (1987), \"The Player\" (1992), and \"Next\" (2007), as well as many television guest roles.\nFalk was also known for his collaborations with filmmaker, actor, and personal friend John Cassavetes, acting in films such as \"Husbands\" (1970), \"A Woman Under the Influence\" (1974), \"Big Trouble\" (1986), Elaine May's \"Mikey and Nicky\" (1976) and the \"Columbo\" episode \"\u00c9tude in Black\" (1972). He cameoed as a theatergoer in Cassavetes' 1977 film \"Opening Night.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Manhattan, New York City, Falk was the son of Michael Peter Falk, owner of a clothing and dry goods store, and his wife, Madeline (n\u00e9e Hochhauser). Both his parents were Jewish.\nFalk's right eye was surgically removed when he was three because of a retinoblastoma. He wore an artificial eye for most of his life. The artificial eye was the cause of his trademark squint. Despite this limitation, as a boy he participated in team sports, mainly baseball and basketball. In a 1997 interview in \"Cigar Aficionado\" magazine with Arthur Marx, Falk said: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I remember once in high school the umpire called me out at third base when I was sure I was safe. I got so mad I took out my glass eye, handed it to him and said, 'Try this.' I got such a laugh you wouldn't believe.\"\nFalk's first stage appearance was at age 12 in \"The Pirates of Penzance\" at Camp High Point in upstate New York, where one of his camp counselors was Ross Martin. Falk attended Ossining High School in Westchester County, New York, where he was a star athlete and president of his senior class. He graduated in 1945.\nFalk briefly attended Hamilton College in Clinton, New York. He then tried to join the armed services, as World War II was drawing to a close. Rejected because of his missing eye, he joined the United States Merchant Marine and served as a cook and mess boy. Falk said of the experience in 1997: \"There they don't care if you're blind or not. The only one on a ship who has to see is the captain. And in the case of the \"Titanic\", he couldn't see very well, either.\" Falk recalled in his autobiography: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A year on the water was enough for me, so I returned to college. I didn't stay long. Too itchy. What to do next? I signed up to go to Israel to fight in the war on its attack on Egypt. I wasn't passionate about Israel, I wasn't passionate about Egypt\u2014I just wanted more excitement\u00a0... I got assigned a ship and departure date but the war was over before the ship ever sailed.\nAfter a year and a half in the Merchant Marine, Falk returned to Hamilton College and also attended the University of Wisconsin. He transferred to The New School for Social Research in New York City, which awarded him a bachelor's degree in literature and political science in 1951.\nFalk traveled in Europe and worked on a railroad in Yugoslavia for six months. He returned to New York, enrolling at Syracuse University, but he recalled in his 2006 memoir, \"Just One More Thing\", that he was unsure what he wanted to do with his life for years after leaving high school. Falk obtained a Master of Public Administration degree at the Maxwell School of Syracuse University in 1953. The program was designed to train civil servants for the federal government, a career that Falk said in his memoir he had \"no interest in and no aptitude for.\"\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nHe applied for a job with the CIA, but he was rejected because of his membership in the Marine Cooks and Stewards Union while serving in the Merchant Marine, even though he was required to join and was not active in the union (which had been under fire for communist leanings). He then became a management analyst with the Connecticut State Budget Bureau in Hartford. In 1997, Falk characterized his Hartford job as \"efficiency expert\": \"I was such an efficiency expert that the first morning on the job, I couldn't find the building where I was to report for work. Naturally, I was late, which I always was in those days, but ironically it was my tendency never to be on time that got me started as a professional actor.\"\nStage career.\nWhile working in Hartford, Falk joined a community theater group called the Mark Twain Masquers, where he performed in plays that included \"The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial\", \"The Crucible\", and \"The Country Girl\" by Clifford Odets. Falk also studied with Eva Le Gallienne, who was giving an acting class at the White Barn Theatre in Westport, Connecticut. Falk later recalled how he \"lied his way\" into the class, which was for professional actors. He drove down to Westport from Hartford every Wednesday, when the classes were held, and was usually late. In his 1997 interview with Arthur Marx in \"Cigar Aficionado\" Magazine, Falk said of Le Gallienne: \"One evening when I arrived late, she looked at me and asked, 'Young man, why are you always late?' and I said, 'I have to drive down from Hartford.'\" She looked down her nose and said, \"What do you do in Hartford? There's no theater there. How do you make a living acting?\" Falk confessed he was not a professional actor. According to him Le Gallienne looked at him sternly and said: \"Well, you should be.\" He drove back to Hartford and quit his job. Falk stayed with the Le Gallienne group for a few months more, and obtained a letter of recommendation from Le Galliene to an agent at the William Morris Agency in New York. In 1956, he left his job with the Budget Bureau and moved to Greenwich Village to pursue an acting career.\nFalk's first New York stage role was in an off-Broadway production of Moli\u00e8re's \"Don Juan\" at the Fourth Street Theatre that closed after its only performance on January 3, 1956. Falk played the second lead, Sganarelle. His next theater role proved far better for his career. In May, he appeared as Rocky Pioggi at Circle in the Square in a revival of \"The Iceman Cometh\" directed by Jose Quintero, with Jason Robards playing the lead role of Theodore \"Hickey\" Hickman.\nLater in 1956, Falk made his Broadway debut, appearing in Alexander Ostrovsky's \"Diary of a Scoundrel\". As the year came to an end, he appeared again on Broadway as an English soldier in Shaw's \"Saint Joan\" with Siobh\u00e1n McKenna. Falk continued to act in summer stock theater productions, including a staging of Arnold Schulman's \"A Hole in the Head\", at the Colonie Summer Theatre (near Albany, NY) in July 1962; it starred Priscilla Morrill.\nIn 1972, Falk appeared in Broadway's \"The Prisoner of Second Avenue\". According to film historian Ephraim Katz: \"His characters derive added authenticity from his squinty gaze, the result of the loss of an eye...\" However, this production caused Falk a great deal of stress, both on and offstage. He struggled with memorizing a short speech, spending hours trying to memorize three lines. The next day at rehearsal, he reported behaving strangely and feeling a tingling sensation in his neck. This caught the attention of a stage manager, who told him to go \"take a Valium\". Only later did Falk realize he was having an anxiety attack. He would not go on to perform in any other plays, citing both this incident and his preference for acting in film and television productions.\nEarly films.\nDespite his stage success, a theatrical agent advised Falk not to expect much film acting work because of his artificial eye. He failed a screen test at Columbia Pictures and was told by studio boss Harry Cohn: \"For the same price I can get an actor with two eyes.\" He also failed to get a role in the film \"Marjorie Morningstar\", despite a promising interview for the second lead. His first film performances were in small roles in \"Wind Across the Everglades\" (1958), \"The Bloody Brood\" (1959), and \"Pretty Boy Floyd\" (1960). Falk's performance in \"Murder, Inc.\" (1960) was a turning point in his career. He was cast in the supporting role of killer Abe Reles in a film based on the real-life murder gang of that name who terrorized New York in the 1930s. \"The New York Times\" film critic Bosley Crowther, while dismissing the movie as \"an average gangster film,\" singled out Falk's \"amusingly vicious performance.\" Crowther wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. Falk, moving as if weary, looking at people out of the corners of his eyes and talking as if he had borrowed Marlon Brando's chewing gum, seems a travesty of a killer, until the water suddenly freezes in his eyes and he whips an icepick from his pocket and starts punching holes in someone's ribs. Then viciousness pours out of him and you get a sense of a felon who is hopelessly cracked and corrupt.\nThe film turned out to be Falk's breakout role. In his autobiography, \"Just One More Thing\" (2006), Falk said his selection for the film from thousands of other Off-Broadway actors was a \"miracle\" that \"made my career\" and that without it, he would not have received the other significant movie roles that he later played. Falk, who played Reles again in the 1960 TV series \"The Witness\", was nominated for a Best Supporting Actor Academy Award for his performance in the film.\nIn 1961, multiple Academy Award-winning director Frank Capra cast Falk in the comedy \"Pocketful of Miracles\". The film was Capra's last feature, and although it was not the commercial success he hoped it would be, he \"gushed about Falk's performance.\" Falk was nominated for an Oscar for the role. In his autobiography, Capra wrote about Falk:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The entire production was agony\u00a0... except for Peter Falk. He was my joy, my anchor to reality. Introducing that remarkable talent to the techniques of comedy made me forget pains, tired blood, and maniacal hankerings to murder Glenn Ford (the film's star). Thank you Peter Falk.\nFor his part, Falk says he \"never worked with a director who showed greater enjoyment of actors and the acting craft. There is nothing more important to an actor than to know that the one person who represents the audience to you, the director, is responding well to what you are trying to do.\" Falk once recalled how Capra reshot a scene even though he yelled \"Cut and Print,\" indicating the scene was finalized. When Falk asked him why he wanted it reshot: \"He laughed and said that he loved the scene so much he just wanted to see us do it again. How's that for support!\"\nFor the remainder of the 1960s, Falk had mainly supporting movie roles and TV guest-starring appearances. Falk portrayed one of two cabbies who falls victim to greed in the epic 1963 star-studded comedy \"It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World\", although he appears only in the last fifth of the movie. His other roles included the character of Guy Gisborne in the Rat Pack musical comedy \"Robin and the 7 Hoods\" (1964), in which he sings one of the film's numbers, and the spoof \"The Great Race\" (1965) with Jack Lemmon and Tony Curtis.\nEarly television roles.\nFalk first appeared on television in 1957, in the dramatic anthology programs that later became known as the \"Golden Age of Television\". In 1957, he appeared in one episode of \"Robert Montgomery Presents.\" He was also cast in \"Studio One,\" \"Kraft Television Theater,\" \"New York Confidential,\" \"Naked City,\" \"The Untouchables\", \"Have Gun\u2013Will Travel,\" \"The Islanders,\" and \"Decoy\" with Beverly Garland cast as the first female police officer in a series lead. Falk often portrayed unsavory characters on television during the early 1960s. In \"The Twilight Zone\" episode \"The Mirror,\" Falk starred as a paranoid Castro-type revolutionary who, intoxicated with power, begins seeing would-be assassins in a mirror. He also starred in two of Alfred Hitchcock's television series, as a gangster terrified of death in a 1961 episode of \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\" and as a homicidal evangelist in 1962's \"The Alfred Hitchcock Hour\".\nIn 1961, Falk was nominated for an Emmy Award for his performance in the episode \"Cold Turkey\" of James Whitmore's short-lived series \"The Law and Mr. Jones\" on ABC. On September 29, 1961, Falk and Walter Matthau guest-starred in the premiere episode, \"The Million Dollar Dump\", of ABC's crime drama \"\", with Stephen McNally and Robert Harland. He won an Emmy for \"The Price of Tomatoes,\" a drama carried in 1962 on \"The Dick Powell Show\".\nIn 1961, Falk earned the distinction of becoming the first actor to be nominated for an Oscar and an Emmy in the same year. He received nominations for his supporting roles in \"Murder, Inc.\" and the television program \"The Law and Mr. Jones\". Incredibly, Falk repeated this double nomination in 1962, being nominated again for a supporting actor role in \"Pocketful of Miracles\" and best actor in \"The Price of Tomatoes,\" an episode of \"The Dick Powell Show\", for which he took home the award.\nIn 1963, Falk and Tommy Sands appeared in \"The Gus Morgan Story\" on ABC's \"Wagon Train\" as brothers who disagreed on the route for a railroad. Falk played the title role of \"Gus\", and Sands was his younger brother, Ethan Morgan. After Ethan accidentally shoots wagonmaster Chris Hale, played by John McIntire, while in the mountains, Gus has to decide whether to rescue Hale or his brother (suffering from oxygen deprivation). This episode is remembered for its examination of how far a man will persist amid adversity to preserve his own life and that of his brother.\nHaving had many roles in film and television during the early 1960s, Falk's first lead in a television series came with CBS's \"The Trials of O'Brien\". The show ran from 1965 to 1966, its 22 episodes featuring Falk as a Shakespeare-quoting lawyer who defends clients while solving mysteries. In 1966, he also co-starred in a television production of \"Brigadoon\" with Robert Goulet.\nIn 1971, Pierre Cossette produced the first Grammy Awards show on television with some help from Falk. Cossette writes in his autobiography, \"What meant the most to me, though, is the fact that Peter Falk saved my ass. I love show business, and I love Peter Falk.\"\n\"Columbo\".\nAlthough Falk appeared in numerous other television roles in the 1960s and 1970s, he is best known as the star of the TV series \"Columbo\", \"everyone's favorite rumpled television detective.\" His character, known for his catchphrase: \"Just one more thing,\" is a shabby and deceptively absent-minded police detective driving a Peugeot 403, who had first appeared in the 1968 film \"Prescription: Murder.\" \"Columbo\" was created by William Link and Richard Levinson. The show was of a type known as an inverted detective story; it typically reveals the murderer at the beginning, then shows how the Los Angeles homicide detective goes about solving the crime. Falk would describe his role to film historian and author David Fantle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTelevision critic Ben Falk (no relation) added that Falk \"created an iconic cop... who always got his man (or woman) after a tortuous cat-and-mouse investigation.\" He also noted the idea for the character was \"apparently inspired by Dostoyevsky's dogged police inspector, Porfiry Petrovich, in the novel \"Crime and Punishment.\"\"\nPeter Falk tries to analyze the character and notes the correlation between his own personality and Columbo's:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I'm a Virgo Jew, and that means I have an obsessive thoroughness. It's not enough to get most of the details; it's necessary to get them all. I've been accused of perfectionism. When Lew Wasserman (head of Universal Studios) said that Falk is a perfectionist, I don't know whether it was out of affection or because he felt I was a monumental pain in the ass.\nWith \"general amazement\", Falk notes: \"The show is all over the world. I've been to little villages in Africa with maybe one TV set, and little kids will run up to me shouting, 'Columbo, Columbo!'\" Singer Johnny Cash recalled acting in one episode (\"Swan Song\"), and although he was not an experienced actor, he writes in his autobiography, \"Peter Falk was good to me. I wasn't at all confident about handling a dramatic role, and every day he helped me in all kinds of little ways.\"\nThe first episode of \"Columbo\" as a series was directed in 1971 by a 24-year-old Steven Spielberg in one of his earliest directing jobs. Falk recalled the episode to Spielberg biographer Joseph McBride:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let's face it, we had some good fortune at the beginning. Our debut episode, in 1971, was directed by this young kid named Steven Spielberg. I told the producers, Link and Levinson: \"This guy is too good for \"Columbo\"\"... Steven was shooting me with a long lens from across the street. That wasn't common twenty years ago. The comfort level it gave me as an actor, besides it's a great look artistically\u2014well, it told you that this wasn't any ordinary director.\nThe character of Columbo had previously been played by Bert Freed in a 1960 television episode of \"The Chevy Mystery Show\" (\"Enough Rope\"), and by Thomas Mitchell on Broadway. Falk first played Columbo in \"Prescription: Murder\", a 1968 TV movie, and the 1970 pilot for the series, \"Ransom for a Dead Man\". From 1971 to 1978, \"Columbo\" aired regularly on NBC as part of the umbrella series \"NBC Mystery Movie\". All episodes were of TV movie length, in a 90- or 120-minute slot including commercials. In 1989, the show returned on ABC in the form of a less frequent series of TV movies, still starring Falk, airing until 2003. Falk won four Emmys for his role as Columbo.\n\"Columbo\" was so popular, co-creator William Link wrote a series of short stories published as \"The Columbo Collection\" (Crippen &amp; Landru, 2010) which includes a drawing by Falk of himself as Columbo, while the cover features a caricature of Falk/Columbo by Al Hirschfeld.\nLieutenant Columbo owns a Basset Hound named Dog. Originally, it was not going to appear in the show because Peter Falk believed that it \"already had enough gimmicks\" but once the two met, Falk stated that Dog \"was exactly the type of dog that Columbo would own\", so he was added to the show and made his first appearance in 1972's \"\u00c9tude In Black\".\nColumbo's wardrobe was provided by Peter Falk; they were his own clothes, including the high-topped shoes and the shabby raincoat, which made its first appearance in \"Prescription: Murder\". Falk would often ad lib his character's idiosyncrasies (fumbling through his pockets for a piece of evidence and discovering a grocery list, asking to borrow a pencil, becoming distracted by something irrelevant in the room at a dramatic point in a conversation with a suspect, etc.), inserting these into his performance as a way to keep his fellow actors off-balance. He felt it helped to make their confused and impatient reactions to Columbo's antics more genuine. According to Levinson, the catchphrase \"one more thing\" was conceived when he and Link were writing the play: \"we had a scene that was too short, and we'd already had Columbo make his exit. We were too lazy to retype the scene, so we had him come back and say, 'Oh, just one more thing...' It was never planned.\"\n\"Columbo\" featured an unofficial signature tune, the children's song \"This Old Man\". It was introduced in the episode \"Any Old Port in a Storm\" in 1973 and the detective can be heard humming or whistling it often in subsequent films. Peter Falk admitted that it was a melody he enjoyed, and one day it became a part of his character. The tune was also used in various score arrangements throughout the three decades of the series, including opening and closing credits. A version of it, titled \"Columbo\", was created by one of the show's composers, Patrick Williams.\nA few years prior to his death, Falk had expressed interest in returning to the role. In 2007, he said he had chosen a script for one last Columbo episode, \"Columbo: Hear No Evil\". The script was renamed \"Columbo's Last Case\". ABC declined the project. In response, producers for the series attempted to shop the project to foreign production companies. However, Falk was diagnosed with dementia in late 2007. Falk died on June 23, 2011, aged 83.\nPeter Falk won four Emmy Awards for his portrayal of Lieutenant Columbo in 1972, 1975, 1976 and 1990. Falk directed just one episode: \"Blueprint for Murder\" in 1971, although it is rumored that he and John Cassavetes were largely responsible for direction duties on \"\u00c9tude in Black\" in 1972. Falk's own favorite \"Columbo\" episodes were \"Any Old Port in a Storm\", \"Forgotten Lady\", \"Now You See Him\" and \"Identity Crisis\". Falk was rumored to be earning a record $300,000 per episode when he returned for season 6 of \"Columbo\" in 1976. This doubled to $600,000 per episode when the series made its comeback in 1989. In 1997, \"Murder by the Book\" was ranked at No. 16 in \"TV Guide\"'s '100 Greatest Episodes of All Time' list. Two years later, the magazine ranked Lieutenant Columbo No. 7 on its '50 Greatest TV Characters of All Time' list.\nLater career.\nFalk was a close friend of independent film director John Cassavetes and appeared in his films \"Husbands\", \"A Woman Under the Influence\", and, in a cameo, at the end of \"Opening Night\". Cassavetes guest-starred in the \"Columbo\" episode \"\u00c9tude in Black\" in 1972; Falk, in turn, co-starred with Cassavetes in Elaine May's film \"Mikey and Nicky\" (1976). Falk describes his experiences working with Cassavetes, specifically remembering his directing strategies: \"Shooting an actor when he might be unaware the camera was running.\" &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You never knew when the camera might be going. And it was never: 'Stop. Cut. Start again.' John would walk in the middle of a scene and talk, and though you didn't realize it, the camera kept going. So I never knew what the hell he was doing. [Laughs] But he ultimately made me, and I think every actor, less self-conscious, less aware of the camera than anybody I've ever worked with.\nIn 1978, Falk appeared on the comedy TV show \"The Dean Martin Celebrity Roast\", portraying his Columbo character, with Frank Sinatra the evening's victim. Director William Friedkin said of Falk's role in his film \"The Brink's Job\" (1978): \"Peter has a great range from comedy to drama. He could break your heart or he could make you laugh.\"\nFalk continued to work in films, including his performance as an ex-CIA officer of questionable sanity in the comedy \"The In-Laws\". Director Arthur Hiller said during an interview that the \"film started out because Alan Arkin and Peter Falk wanted to work together. They went to Warner Brothers and said, 'We'd like to do a picture,' and Warner said fine\u00a0... and out came \"The In-laws\"\u00a0... of all the films I've done, \"The In-laws\" is the one I get the most comments on.\" Movie critic Roger Ebert compared the film with a later remake:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Peter Falk and Alan Arkin in the earlier film, versus Michael Douglas and Albert Brooks this time\u00a0... yet the chemistry is better in the earlier film. Falk goes into his deadpan lecturer mode, slowly and patiently explaining things that sound like utter nonsense. Arkin develops good reasons for suspecting he is in the hands of a madman.\nFalk appeared in \"The Great Muppet Caper\", \"The Princess Bride\", \"Murder by Death\", \"The Cheap Detective\", \"Vibes\", \"Made\", and in Wim Wenders' 1987 German language film \"Wings of Desire\" and its 1993 sequel, \"Faraway, So Close!.\" In \"Wings of Desire\", Falk played a semi-fictionalized version of himself, a famous American actor who had once been an angel, but who had grown disillusioned with only observing life on Earth and had in turn given up his immortality. Falk described the role as \"the craziest thing that I've ever been offered\", but he earned critical acclaim for his supporting performance in the film.\nIn 1998, Falk returned to the New York stage to star in an Off-Broadway production of Arthur Miller's \"Mr. Peters' Connections\". His previous stage work included shady real estate salesman Shelley \"the Machine\" Levine in the 1986 Boston/Los Angeles production of David Mamet's prizewinning \"Glengarry Glen Ross\".\nFalk starred in a trilogy of holiday television movies\u00a0\u2013 \"A Town Without Christmas\" (2001), \"Finding John Christmas\" (2003), and \"When Angels Come to Town\" (2004)\u00a0\u2013 in which he portrayed Max, a quirky guardian angel who uses disguises and subterfuge to steer his charges onto the right path. In 2005, he starred in \"The Thing About My Folks\". Although movie critic Roger Ebert was not impressed with most of the other actors, he wrote in his review: \"... We discover once again what a warm and engaging actor Peter Falk is. I can't recommend the movie, but I can be grateful that I saw it, for Falk.\" In 2007, Falk appeared with Nicolas Cage in the thriller \"Next\".\nFalk's autobiography, \"Just One More Thing\", was published in 2006.\nPersonal life.\nFalk married Alyce Mayo, whom he met when the two were students at Syracuse University, on April 17, 1960. The couple adopted two daughters, Catherine (who became a private investigator) and Jackie. Falk and his wife divorced in 1976. On December 7, 1977, he married actress Shera Danese, who guest-starred in more episodes of the \"Columbo\" series than any other actress.\nFalk was an accomplished artist, and in October 2006 he had an exhibition of his drawings at the Butler Institute of American Art. He took classes at the Art Students League of New York for many years.\nFalk was a chess aficionado and a spectator at the American Open in Santa Monica, California, in November 1972, and at the U.S. Open in Pasadena, California, in August 1983.\nHis memoir \"Just One More Thing\" () was published by Carroll &amp; Graf on August 23, 2006.\nHealth.\nIn December 2008, it was reported that Falk had been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease. In June 2009, at a two-day conservatorship trial in Los Angeles, one of Falk's personal physicians, Dr. Stephen Read, reported he had rapidly slipped into dementia after a series of dental operations in 2007. Read said it was unclear whether Falk's condition had worsened as a result of anesthesia or some other reaction to the operations. Shera Danese Falk was appointed as her husband's conservator.\nDeath.\nOn the evening of June 23, 2011, Falk died at his longtime home on Roxbury Drive in Beverly Hills at the age of 83. The causes of death were pneumonia and Alzheimer's disease. His daughters said they would remember his \"wisdom and humor\". He is buried at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles, California.\nHis death was marked by tributes from many film celebrities including Jonah Hill and Stephen Fry. Steven Spielberg said, \"I learned more about acting from him at that early stage of my career than I had from anyone else\". Rob Reiner said: \"He was a completely unique actor\", and went on to say that Falk's work with Alan Arkin in \"The In-Laws\" was \"one of the most brilliant comedy pairings we've seen on screen\". His epitaph reads: \"I'm not here, I'm home with Shera.\"\nPeter Falk's Law.\nAccording to Falk's daughter Catherine, his second wife Shera Danese (who also was his conservator) allegedly stopped some of his family members from visiting him; did not notify them of major changes in his condition; and did not notify them of his death and funeral arrangements. Catherine encouraged the passage in 2015 of legislation called colloquially \"Peter Falk's Law\". The new law was passed in New York state to protect children from being cut off from news of serious medical and end-of-life developments regarding their parents or from contact with them. The law provides guidelines regarding visitation rights and notice of death with which an incapacitated person's guardians or conservators must comply.\nAs of 2020, more than fifteen states had enacted such laws. In introducing the measure, New York State Senator John DeFrancisco said, \"For every wrong there should be a remedy. This bill gives a remedy to children of elderly and infirm parents who have been cut off from receiving information about their parents. It also gives them an avenue through the courts to obtain visitation rights with the parents.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23726", "revid": "50969637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23726", "title": "Pixies (band)", "text": "American alternative rock band\nThe Pixies are an American alternative rock band from Boston, Massachusetts, formed in 1986. The original lineup of the band consisted of Black Francis (vocals, rhythm guitar), Joey Santiago (lead guitar), Kim Deal (bass, vocals) and David Lovering (drums). The Pixies are associated with the 1990s alternative rock boom, and draw on elements including punk rock and surf rock. Their music is known for dynamic \"loud-quiet-loud\" shifts and song structures. Francis is the primary songwriter; his often surreal lyrics cover offbeat subjects such as extraterrestrials, incest, and biblical violence. \nTheir debut release was the mini-LP \"Come On Pilgrim\" in 1987, followed by the album \"Surfer Rosa\" and released in early 1988. They followed those up with the next two albums \"Doolittle\" and \"Bossanova.\" They followed it up with \"Trompe le Monde\" in 1991 before breaking up in 1993. Pixies found only modest success in their home country, but were significantly more successful in the United Kingdom and elsewhere in Europe, although in their initial run the band did not find mainstream success with their studio albums. \nTheir popularity grew after their breakup, leading to a 2004 reunion and sold-out world tours. Deal left in 2012, and was replaced with Kim Shattuck for their 2013 tour. She was later replaced with Paz Lenchantin, who became a full member in 2016. With Lenchantin, the Pixies recorded the albums \"Head Carrier\" (2016), \"Beneath the Eyrie\" (2019) and \"Doggerel\" (2022). In 2024, Lenchantin was replaced by Emma Richardson, formerly of Band of Skulls. The ninth Pixies album, \"The Night the Zombies Came,\" was released that year.\nTheir alternative rock sound influenced acts such as Nirvana, Radiohead, Modest Mouse, the Smashing Pumpkins and Weezer.\nHistory.\nFormation (1984\u20131986).\nGuitarist Joey Santiago and songwriter Black Francis (born Charles Michael Kittridge Thompson IV) met in 1984 when they lived next to each other while attending the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Although Santiago was worried about distractions, he noticed Francis played music and the pair began to jam together. Francis spent six months in Puerto Rico studying Spanish, then returned to Amherst and dropped out of the university. Francis and Santiago spent the following year working in a Boston-area warehouse, with Francis composing songs on his acoustic guitar and writing lyrics on the subway.\nThe pair formed a band in January 1986. Two weeks later, Francis placed an advertisement seeking a bass player who liked both the folk act Peter, Paul and Mary and the alternative rock band H\u00fcsker D\u00fc. Kim Deal was the only person to respond, and arrived at the audition without a bass, as she had never played one before. She was invited to join as she liked the songs Francis showed her. She obtained a bass, and the trio started rehearsing in Deal's apartment.\nAfter recruiting Deal, Kim paid for her sister, Kelley Deal, to fly to Boston and audition as a drummer. Though Francis approved, Kelley was not confident in her drumming, and was more interested in playing songs written by Kim; she later joined Kim's band the Breeders. Kim's husband suggested they hire David Lovering, whom Kim had met at her wedding reception. The group arrived at a name after Santiago selected the word \"pixies\" randomly from a dictionary, liking how it looked and its definition as \"mischievous little elves\". The Pixies moved rehearsals to Lovering's parents' garage in mid-1986 and began to play shows at bars in the Boston area.\n\"Come On Pilgrim\" (1987).\nWhile the Pixies were playing a concert with Throwing Muses, they were noticed by the producer Gary Smith, the manager of Fort Apache Studios. He told them he \"could not sleep until you guys are world famous\". Funded by Francis' father, the Pixies spent three days recording a 17-track demo at Fort Apache, which would become known as the \"Purple Tape\" for its purple cover. Promoter Ken Goes became the Pixies' manager, and he passed the demo to Ivo Watts-Russell of the independent record label 4AD. Watts-Russell found the Pixies too normal and \"too rock 'n' roll\", but was persuaded to sign them by his girlfriend.\nUpon signing with 4AD, eight tracks from the Purple Tape were selected for the \"Come On Pilgrim\" mini-LP, the Pixies' first release. Francis drew upon his experiences in Puerto Rico, mostly in the songs \"Vamos\" and \"Isla de Encanta\", describing the poverty in Puerto Rico and singing in loose Spanish. The religious lyrics and later albums came from his parents' born-again Christian days in the Pentecostal Church. The critic Heather Phares identified themes such as sexual frustration (\"I've Been Tired\") and incest (\"Nimrod's Son\" and \"The Holiday Song\").\n\"Surfer Rosa\" and \"Doolittle\" (1988\u20131989).\n\"Come On Pilgrim\" was followed by the Pixies' first full-length album, \"Surfer Rosa\". It was recorded by Steve Albini, completed in two weeks, and released in early 1988. \"Surfer Rosa\" gained the Pixies acclaim in Europe; both \"Melody Maker\" and \"Sounds\" named it their \"Album of the Year\". American critical response was positive but more muted, a reaction that persisted for much of the Pixies' career. \"Surfer Rosa\" was eventually certified gold in the US in 2005. The Pixies arrived in England to support Throwing Muses on the European \"Sex and Death\" tour, beginning at the Mean Fiddler in London. The tour also took them to the Netherlands, where the Pixies had already received a significant amount of media attention.\nThe Pixies signed an American distribution deal with the major record label Elektra. Around this time, they struck up a relationship with the British producer Gil Norton. Norton produced their second full album, \"Doolittle\", which was recorded in the last six weeks of 1988. \"Doolittle\" had a much cleaner sound compared to the raw sound of their first two releases, largely due to Norton and the production budget of US$40,000, which was quadruple that of \"Surfer Rosa\". \"Doolittle\" featured the single \"Here Comes Your Man\", which biographers Josh Frank and Caryn Ganz describe as an unusually jaunty and pop-like song for the band. \"Monkey Gone to Heaven\" was popular on alternative rock radio in the US, reached the top 10 on the \"Billboard\" Modern Rock Tracks, and the single entered the Top 100 in the U.K. Like \"Surfer Rosa\", \"Doolittle\" was acclaimed by fans and music critics alike. \"Doolittle\" was their first album to enter into the \"Billboard\" 200, peaking at 98. In the UK, the album was a commercial success, reaching number 8 in the Albums Chart.\nBreak (1989\u20131990).\nAfter \"Doolittle\", the tensions that had been growing between Deal and Francis came to a head (for example, Francis threw a guitar at Deal during a concert in Stuttgart), and Deal was almost fired from the band when she refused to play at a concert in Frankfurt. Santiago, in an interview with \"Mojo\", described Deal as being \"headstrong and want[ing] to include her own songs, to explore her own world\" on the band's albums; eventually she accepted that Francis was the singer and had musical control of the band, but after the Frankfurt incident, \"they kinda stopped talking\". The band became increasingly tired during the post-\"Doolittle\" \"Fuck or Fight\" tour of the United States and fighting among members continued. After the tour's final date in New York City, the band was too exhausted to attend the end-of-tour party the following night and soon announced a hiatus.\nDuring this time, Santiago and Lovering went on vacation while Francis performed a short solo tour, made up of a number of concerts to generate gas money as he traveled across the country. Deal formed a new band, the Breeders, with Tanya Donelly of Throwing Muses and bass player Josephine Wiggs of Perfect Disaster. Their debut album, \"Pod\", was released in 1990.\n\"Bossanova\" and \"Trompe le Monde\" (1990\u20131992).\nIn 1990, all members of the group except Deal moved to Los Angeles. Lovering stated that he, Santiago, and Francis moved there \"because the recording studio was there\". Unlike previous recordings, the band had little time to practice beforehand, and Black Francis wrote much of the album in the studio. Featuring the singles \"Velouria\" and \"Dig for Fire\", \"Bossanova\" reached number 70 in the United States. In contrast, the album peaked at number three in the United Kingdom. Also in 1990, the Pixies released a cover of the Paul Butterfield Blues Band's \"Born in Chicago\" on the compilation album \"\".\nThe band continued to tour and released \"Trompe le Monde\" in 1991, their final album before their break-up. The album included \"U-Mass\", which has been described as being about college apathy, and featured a guitar riff written years earlier at the University of Massachusetts before Francis and Santiago dropped out. The album also featured a cover of \"Head On\" by the Jesus and Mary Chain. Also that year, the band contributed a cover of \"I Can't Forget\" to the Leonard Cohen tribute album \"I'm Your Fan\", and began an international tour on which they played stadiums in Europe and smaller venues in the United States. In 1992, they supported U2 on the lucrative US leg of their Zoo TV Tour. Their final performance took place om April 25, 1992 at the Commodore Ballroom in Vancouver, British Columbia. Tensions rose among band members, and they went on sabbatical and focused on separate projects. \nBreakup and solo projects (1993\u20132003).\nIn early 1993, Francis announced in an interview with BBC Radio 5 that the Pixies were finished, without telling the other members of the band. He offered no explanation at the time. He later called Santiago and notified Deal and Lovering via fax.\nAfter the breakup, the members embarked on separate projects. Black Francis renamed himself Frank Black, and released several solo albums, including a string of releases with Frank Black and the Catholics. Deal returned to the Breeders and released several albums, including a hit single, \"Cannonball\", from the platinum-selling \"Last Splash\" in 1993. She also formed the Amps, who released one album.\nSantiago played lead guitar on a number of Frank Black albums and other artists' albums. He wrote music for the television show \"Undeclared\" and theme music for the film \"Crime and Punishment in Suburbia\". He formed the Martinis with his wife, Linda Mallari, and released the album \"Smitten\" in 2004. In 2004, he also played lead guitar on the album \"Statecraft\" by the novelist and musician Charles Douglas. Lovering became a magician and performed a style of magic he called \"scientific phenomenalism\". He was temporarily a member of the Martinis, and later drummed with the band Cracker.\n4AD and Elektra Records continued to release Pixies material: the best-of album \"Death to the Pixies\" (1997), the Peel-session compilation \"Pixies at the BBC\" (1998), and the \"Complete 'B' Sides\" compilation (2001). In 2002, material from the Pixies' original 17-track demo tape was released as an EP, \"Pixies\", on Cooking Vinyl in the U.K. and SpinART Records in the U.S.; Black has also used these labels to release solo work and albums with the Catholics. Their song \"Where is My Mind\" was played during the climax of the movie \"Fight Club\" in 1999, introducing the song to a new generation of fans.\nReunion (2003\u20132012).\nIn the years following the Pixies' breakup, Black dismissed rumors of a reunion, but incorporated an increasing number of Pixies songs in his sets with the Catholics, and occasionally included Santiago in his solo work and Lovering's magic show as an opening act to concerts. In 2003, a series of phone calls among band members resulted in some low-key rehearsals, and soon the decision to reunite. By February 2004, a full tour was announced, and tickets for nearly all the initial tour dates sold out within minutes.\nThe Pixies played their first reunion concert on April 13, 2004, at the Fine Line Music Cafe in Minneapolis, Minnesota. A warm-up tour through the U.S. and Canada (in which all dates were recorded and released as individual limited-edition CDs) was followed by an appearance at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival. The band toured Europe in the spring and summer of 2004, beginning on 26 May in Reykjavik and concluding on 22 August in Chelmsford. The group won the Act-of-the-Year award in the 2004 \"Boston Music Awards\". The 2004 reunion tour grossed over $14\u00a0million in ticket sales. \"Pitchfork\" would later credit the band for ushering in \"the indie-icon reunion-tour circuit ... a long overdue opportunity to play for the sort of massive crowds that their famous fans\u2014Nirvana, Radiohead, and Weezer among them\u2014had built on their influence.\"\nIn June 2004, the band released a new song, \"Bam Thwok\" exclusively on the iTunes Music Store; it reached number one in the UK Official Download Chart. 4AD released ', along with a companion DVD, \"Pixies\". The band also contributed a rendition of \"Ain't That Pretty at All\" to the Warren Zevon tribute album '.\nIn 2005, the Pixies made appearances at festivals including Lollapalooza, \"T on the Fringe\", and the Newport Folk Festival. They continued to make appearances throughout 2006 and 2007, culminating in their first shows in Australia. Francis suggested that a new Pixies studio album was possible but unlikely, the main obstacle being Deal's reluctance.\nTo celebrate the 20th anniversary of the release of \"Doolittle\", the Pixies launched a tour in October 2009 where they performed the album track-for-track, including the associated B-sides. The tour began in Europe, continued in the United States in November, with the South American and Australian tour following in March 2010, then New Zealand, and more European dates in spring 2010, and back to North America in 2010.\nDeal's departure, \"Indie Cindy\" and the arrival of Lenchantin (2013\u20132015).\nIn October 2012, shortly after the Pixies began recording new material, Deal left the band. Her departure was announced in June 2013. Two weeks later, the band released a new song, \"Bagboy\", as a free download via the Pixies' website. It features Jeremy Dubs of Bunnies and formerly of the Bennies on vocals in place of Deal. In 2023, Santaigo said Deal was not in contact with her former bandmates and was \"living her own life\".\nOn July 1, 2013, the Pixies announced the addition of the Muffs and Pandoras guitarist and vocalist Kim Shattuck to replace Deal for their 2013 European tour. On September 3, 2013, the Pixies released an EP of new songs, \"EP1\". On November 29, 2013, Shattuck announced that she had been dismissed from the band. In December 2013, it was announced that the Entrance Band and A Perfect Circle bassist Paz Lenchantin was joining the Pixies for the 2014 tour. Lenchantin said she had been a \"die-hard\" Pixies fan as a teenager and that Black was the greatest artist she had worked with. The Pixies released \"EP2\" on January 3, 2014, supported by the single \"Blue Eyed Hexe\". \"EP3\" was released on March 24. All the EPs were only available as downloads and limited-edition vinyl. The three EPs were collected as the first Pixies album in over two decades, \"Indie Cindy,\" in April 2014. In 2015, the Pixies toured in support of Robert Plant for a series of dates across North America.\n\"Head Carrier\", \"Beneath the Eyrie\" and \"Doggerel\" (2016\u20132023).\nIn July 2016, the Pixies announced that Lenchantin had become a permanent member, and that their sixth album, \"Head Carrier\", would be released on September 30, 2016. Their seventh album, \"Beneath the Eyrie\", was released on September 13, 2019, with the lead single, \"On Graveyard Hill\". The Pixies released a podcast, \"It's a Pixies Podcast\", documenting the recording of the album. The Pixies released a non-album single, \"Human Crime\", in March 2022. They released their eighth studio album, \"Doggerel\", with the single \"There's a Moon On\" on September 30 via BMG.\nLenchantin's departure, arrival of Richardson and \"The Night the Zombies Came\" (2024\u2013present).\nOn 4 March 2024, the Pixies announced that Lenchantin had left \"to concentrate on her own projects\". In a statement to \"Rolling Stone\", Lenchantin said that the choice was not hers and that her \"departure [was] a bit of a surprise to [her] as it is to many\". She was replaced on the following tour by Emma Richardson, formerly of Band of Skulls. The tour celebrated the Pixies' third and fourth albums, \"Bossanova\" (1990) and \"Trompe le Monde\" (1991), with Francis describing it as \"delightful\". In June, the Pixies released the single \"You're So Impatient\", Richardson's first studio credit with the band.\nOn October 25, 2024, the Pixies released their ninth full-length studio album, \"The Night the Zombies Came\", produced by Tom Dalgety, who also worked on their previous three studio albums. Regarding the title, Francis said: \"It's not like I wrote a bunch of songs about zombies or that we tried to make the album sound scary or anything like that. 'Zombie' is just an associative word. You can do with it what you like. And it's not a concept record, but that word kept popping up in the lyrics. When I combed through all the other lyrics for a title, they just sounded corny as shit. The only thing that made sense was \"The Night the Zombies Came\". And I was like, 'You know what? That's a pretty good title. I'd go see that movie.'\" The album was preceded by the singles \"You're So Impatient\", \"Chicken\", \"Oyster Beds\" and \"Motoroller\".\nStyle.\nMusic.\nThe Pixies incorporate elements of surf rock and punk rock, with an emphasis on contrasting volume dynamics. \"Spin\" described them as \"surf music-meets-Stooges spikiness and oft-imitated stop/start and quiet/loud dynamics\". Writing for \"The Guardian\", Laura Barton described their music as \"an unorthodox marriage of surf music and punk rock ... characterized by Black's bristling lyrics and hackle-raising caterwaul, Deal's whispered harmonies and waspy basslines, Joey Santiago's fragile guitar, and the persistent flush of David Lovering's drums.\"\nTheir music incorporates extreme dynamic shifts, with Francis saying in 1991 that there are \"...two basic components of rock music\u00a0... the dreamy side and the rockin' side. It's always been either sweaty or laid back and cool. We do try to be dynamic, but it's dumbo dynamics, because we don't know how to do anything else. We can play loud or quiet\u2014that's it.\"\nInfluences.\nThe Pixies are influenced by a range of artists and genres; each member came from a different musical background. When he first started writing songs for the Pixies, Francis says he was listening to nothing but H\u00fcsker D\u00fc, Captain Beefheart, and Iggy Pop; whilst in the run up to recording \"Come On Pilgrim\" he listened to R.E.M.'s \"Murmur\" a lot, which he described as \"hugely influential\" to his songwriting. During the making of \"Doolittle\" he listened heavily to the Beatles' \"White Album\". He has cited Buddy Holly as a model for his compressed songwriting. Francis did not discover punk rock until he was 16, saying \"it was good I didn't listen to these hip records\". As a child, he listened mainly to 1960s songs, religious music and Emerson Lake and Palmer and the Talking Heads, who he says \"weren't punk either\".\nSantiago listened to 1970s and 1980s punk (e.g. Black Flag), as well as David Bowie and T. Rex. Guitarists who influenced him include Jimi Hendrix, Les Paul, Wes Montgomery, Lou Reed and George Harrison. Deal's musical background was folk music and country; she had formed a country-folk band with her sister in her teenage years, and played covers of artists such as the Everly Brothers and Hank Williams. Other artists Deal listened to included XTC, Gang of Four and Elvis Costello. Lovering is a fan of the band Rush.\nFilm has influenced the Pixies; Francis cites surrealist films \"Eraserhead\" and \"Un chien andalou\" (as mentioned in \"Debaser\") as influences. He has said he \"didn't have the patience to sit around reading Surrealist novels\", but found it easier to watch twenty-minute films.\nSongwriting, lyrical themes and vocals.\nMost of the Pixies' songs are composed and sung by Francis. Critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine has described Francis's writing as containing \"bizarre, fragmented lyrics about space, religion, sex, mutilation, and pop culture\". Biblical violence is a theme of \"Doolittle\"'s \"Dead\" and \"Gouge Away\"; Francis told a \"Melody Maker\" interviewer, \"It's all those characters in the Old Testament. I'm obsessed with them. Why it comes out so much I don't know.\" He has described \"Come On Pilgrim's\" \"Caribou\" as being about reincarnation, and extraterrestrial themes appear in a number of songs on \"Bossanova\".\nDeal co-wrote \"Doolittle\"'s \"Silver\" with Francis, and they share lead harmony vocals on the track. She also co-wrote and sang lead vocals on \"Surfer Rosa\"'s \"Gigantic\", and wrote the 2004 single \"Bam Thwok\". She was credited as Mrs. John Murphy on \"Gigantic\"\u2014at the time she was married, and she used this name as an ironic feminist joke. She also sang lead vocals on the song \"Into the White\" and the Neil Young cover \"Winterlong\", both B-sides.\nLovering sang lead vocals on \"Doolittle\"'s \"La La Love You\" and the B-side \"Make Believe\". Lenchantin made her lead vocal debut on \"Head Carrier\"'s \"All I Think About Now\". She also provided lead vocals on \"Los Surfers Muertos\", from 2019's \"Beneath The Eyrie\" and the 2020 September single \"Hear Me Out\".\nLegacy.\nThe Pixies' first album, \"Surfer Rosa\", is certified gold, while \"Doolittle\" is certified platinum, selling over 1\u00a0million copies. The band influenced a number of musicians associated with the alternative rock boom of the 1990s. Gary Smith, who produced \"Come On Pilgrim\", said in 1997:\nI've heard it said about the Velvet Underground that while not a lot of people bought their albums, everyone who did started a band. I think this is largely true about the Pixies as well. Charles' secret weapon turned out to be not so secret and, sooner or later, all sorts of bands were exploiting the same strategy of wide dynamics. It became a kind of new pop formula and, within a short while, \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\" was charging up the charts and even the members of Nirvana said later that it sounded for all the world like a Pixies song.\nThe Pixies are credited with popularizing the extreme dynamics and stop-start timing that would become widespread in alternative rock. Their songs typically feature hushed, restrained verses, and explosive, wailing choruses.\nArtists including David Bowie, Matt Noveskey, Radiohead, PJ Harvey, U2, Nirvana, the Strokes, Alice in Chains, Arcade Fire, Pavement, Everclear, Kings of Leon and Matthew Good have cited admiration of the Pixies. Bono of U2, said the Pixies had made \"just about the most compelling music of the entire 80s\" and were one of the greatest American bands. Radiohead's Thom Yorke said that the Pixies \"changed [his] life\".\nKurt Cobain cited the band as an influence on Nirvana's \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\", which he admitted was a conscious attempt to co-opt the Pixies' style. In a January 1994 interview with \"Rolling Stone\", he said, \"I was trying to write the ultimate pop song. I was basically trying to rip off the Pixies. I have to admit it [smiles]. When I heard the Pixies for the first time, I connected with that band so heavily I should have been in that band\u2014or at least in a Pixies cover band. We used their sense of dynamics, being soft and quiet and then loud and hard.\" Cobain cited \"Surfer Rosa\" as one of his main musical influences, and particularly admired the album's natural and powerful drum sounds, which were a result of Steve Albini's work on the record. Albini later produced Nirvana's 1993 \"In Utero\" at the request of Cobain.\nOther bands and artists who have cited the Pixies as an influence include Weezer, Gavin Rossdale of Bush, Snow Patrol, Slowdive, OK Go, Eve 6, Thrice, Better Than Ezra, Toadies, Ash, Ride, Veruca Salt, Sleeper, Lemuria, and Treepeople.\nMusic videos and DVDs.\nNo music videos were released from \"Come On Pilgrim\" or \"Surfer Rosa\". From \"Doolittle\" onwards, the following videos were made: \"Monkey Gone To Heaven\", \"Here Comes Your Man\", \"Velouria\", \"Dig For Fire\", \"Allison\", \"Alec Eiffel\", \"Head On\", and \"Debaser\"; these were later released on the 2004 DVD \"Pixies\". The videos for \"Here Comes Your Man\" and \"Allison\" were also released on \"The Complete 'B' Sides\". A music video accompanied the release of their 2013 song, \"Bagboy\", as well an alternate video released on a later date. Videos were made for all the songs on both \"EP1\" and \"EP2\" and for \"Silver Snail\" and \"Ring the Bell\" from \"EP3\". From \"Head Carrier\" onwards, the following videos were made: \"Tenement Song\", \"Um Chagga Lagga\", \"On Graveyard Hill\", \"Catfish Kate\", \"Long Rider\", \"Hear Me Out\", \"Human Crime\" and \"Vault of Heaven\".\nBy \"Bossanova\", the band had developed a severe aversion to recording music videos, and Francis refused to lip-sync to them. For example, in the \"Here Comes Your Man\" video, both Black and Deal open their mouths wide instead of mouthing their lyrics. According to their record label, this became one of the reasons that Pixies never achieved major coverage on MTV. With \"Bossanova\"'s release, 4AD hoped to have the Pixies chosen to perform their single \"Velouria\" on the BBC's \"Top of the Pops\". To this end, the band was pressured into producing a video for the song, and made one cheaply with the band members filmed running down a quarry, shown in slow motion. The group was ultimately not given a spot on the show.\nThe 90-minute documentary \"loudQUIETloud: a film about the Pixies\" was directed by Steven Cantor and Matthew Galkin and released in 2006. The film documents their 2004 reunion and tour, and covers the years after the break-up. In addition to \"Pixies\" and \"LoudQUIETloud\", four other Pixies DVDs were released between 2004 and 2006, all featuring concert performances: \"Live at the Town and Country Club 1988\", \"The Pixies\u2014Sell Out\", \"The Pixies Acoustic: Live in Newport\", and \"The Pixies Club Date: Live at the Paradise in Boston\".\nBand members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23728", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23728", "title": "Plasma Ashing", "text": ""}
{"id": "23731", "revid": "1151650081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23731", "title": "Plasma ashing", "text": "In semiconductor manufacturing plasma ashing is the process of removing the photoresist (light sensitive coating) from an etched wafer. Using a plasma source, a monatomic (single atom) substance known as a reactive species is generated. Oxygen or fluorine are the most common reactive species. Other gases used are N2/H2 where the H2 portion is 2%. The reactive species combines with the photoresist to form ash which is removed with a vacuum pump.\nTypically, monatomic oxygen plasma is created by exposing oxygen gas (O2) at a low pressure to high power radio waves, which ionise it. This process is done under vacuum in order to create a plasma. As the plasma is formed, many free radicals and also oxygen ions are created. These ions could damage the wafer due to the electric field build up between the plasma and the wafer surface. Newer, smaller circuitry is increasingly susceptible to these charged particles that can get implanted into the surface. Originally, plasma was generated in the process chamber, but as the need to get rid of the ions has increased, many machines now use a downstream plasma configuration, where plasma is formed remotely and the desired particles are channeled to the wafer. This allows electrically charged particles time to recombine before they reach the wafer surface, and prevents damage to the wafer surface.\nTypes.\nTwo forms of plasma ashing are typically performed on wafers. High temperature ashing, or stripping, is performed to remove as much photo resist as possible, while the \"descum\" process is used to remove residual photo resist in trenches. The main difference between the two processes is the temperature the wafer is exposed to while in an ashing chamber. Typical issues arise when this photoresist has undergone an implant step previously and heavy metal are embedded in the photoresist and it has experienced high temperatures causing it to be resistant to oxidizing. \nMonatomic oxygen is electrically neutral and although it does recombine during the channeling, it does so at a slower rate than the positively or negatively charged free radicals, which attract one another. This means that when all of the free radicals have recombined, there is still a portion of the active species available for process. Because a large portion of the active species is lost to recombination, process times may take longer. To some extent, these longer process times can be mitigated by increasing the temperature of the reaction area. This also contribute to the observation of the spectral optical traces, these can be what is normally expected when the emission declines, the process is over; it can also mean that spectral lines increase in illuminance as the available reactants are consumed causing a rise in certain spectral lines representing the available ionic species."}
{"id": "23732", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23732", "title": "Psychophysiology", "text": "Branch of psychology\nPsychophysiology (from Greek , \"ps\u0233kh\u0113\", \"breath, life, soul\"; , \"physis\", \"nature, origin\"; and , \"-logia\") is the branch of psychology that is concerned with the physiological bases of psychological processes. While psychophysiology was a general, broad field of research in the 1960s and 1970s, it has now become quite specialized, based on methods, topic of studies, and scientific traditions. Methods vary as combinations of electrophysiological methods (such as EEG), neuroimaging (MRI, PET), and neurochemistry. Topics have branched into subspecializations such as social, sport, cognitive, cardiovascular, clinical, and other branches of psychophysiology.\nBackground.\nSome people have difficulty distinguishing a psychophysiologist from a physiological psychologist, which has two very different perspectives. Psychologists are interested in why we may fear spiders and physiologists may be interested in the input/output system of the amygdala. A psychophysiologist will attempt to link the two. Psychophysiologists generally study the psychological/physiological link in intact human subjects. While early psychophysiologists almost always examined the impact of psychological states on physiological system responses, since the 1970s, psychophysiologists have also frequently studied the impact of physiological states and systems on psychological states and processes. It is this perspective of studying the interface of mind and body that makes psychophysiologists most distinct.\nHistorically, most psychophysiologists tended to examine the physiological responses and organ systems innervated by the autonomic nervous system. More recently, psychophysiologists have been equally, or potentially more, interested in the central nervous system, exploring brain potentials such as the many types of event-related potentials (ERPs), brain waves, and utilizing advanced technology such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), MRI, PET, MEG, and other neuroimagery techniques.\nA psychophysiologist may look at how exposure to a stressful situation will produce a result in the cardiovascular system such as a change in heart rate (HR), vasodilation/vasoconstriction, myocardial contractility, or stroke volume. Overlaps in areas of interest between psychophysiologists and physiological psychologist may consist of observing how one cardiovascular event may influence another cardiovascular or endocrine event; or how activation of one neural brain structure exerts excitatory activity in another neural structure which then induces an inhibitory effect in some other system. Often, physiological psychologists examine the effects that they study in infrahuman subjects using surgical or invasive techniques and processes.\nPsychophysiology is closely related to the field of neuroscience, which primarily concerns itself with relationships between psychological events and brain processes. Psychophysiology is also related to the medical disciplines, such as endocrinology, psychosomatic, and psychopharmacology.\nWhile psychophysiology was a discipline off the mainstream of psychological and medical science prior to roughly the 1940s, more recently, psychophysiology has found itself positioned at the intersection of psychological and medical science, and its popularity and importance have expanded commensurately with the realization of the inter-relatedness of mind and body.\nMeasures.\nPsychophysiology measures exist in multiple domains; reports, electrophysiological studies, studies in neurochemistry, neuroimaging, and behavioral methods. Evaluative reports involve participant introspection and self-ratings of internal psychological states or physiological sensations, such as self-report of arousal levels on the self-assessment manikin, or measures of interoceptive visceral awareness such as heartbeat detection. Merits to self-report are an emphasis on accurately understand the participants' subjective experience and understanding their perception; however, its pitfalls include the possibility of participants misunderstanding a scale or incorrectly recalling events.\nPhysiological responses also can be measured via instruments that read bodily events such as heart rate change, electrodermal activity (EDA), muscle tension, and cardiac output. Many indices are part of modern psychophysiology, including brain waves (electroencephalography, EEG), fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging), electrodermal activity (a standardized term encompassing skin conductance response, SCR, and galvanic skin response, GSR), cardiovascular measures (heart rate, HR; beats per minute, BPM; heart rate variability, HRV; vasomotor activity), muscle activity (electromyography, EMG), electrogastrogram (EGG), changes in pupil diameter with thought, emotion, and perception (pupillometry), eye movements, recorded via the electro-oculogram (EOG) and direction-of-gaze methods, cardiodynamics, recorded via impedance cardiography, and grip force.\nThese measures are beneficial because they provide accurate and observer-independent objective data recorded by machinery. The downsides, however, are that any physical activity or motion can alter responses, and basal levels of arousal and responsiveness can differ among individuals and even between situations.\nNeurochemical methods are used to study functionality and processes associated to neurotransmitters and neuropeptides\nFinally, one can measure overt action or behavior, which involves the observation and recording actual actions, such as running, freezing, eye movement, and facial expression. These are good response measures and easy to record in animals, but they are not as frequently used in human studies.\nUses.\nPsychophysiological measures are often used to study emotion and attention responses to stimuli, during exertion, and increasingly, to better understand cognitive processes.\nPhysiological sensors have been used to detect emotions in schools and intelligent tutoring systems.\nEmotions as example of psychophysiological studies.\nPsychophysiology studies multiple aspects of behavior, and emotions are the most common example. \nIt has long been recognized that emotional episodes are partly constituted by physiological responses. Early work done linking emotions to psychophysiology started with research on mapping consistent autonomic nervous system (ANS) responses to discrete emotional states. For example, anger might be constituted by a certain set of physiological responses, such as increased cardiac output and high diastolic blood pressure, which would allow us to better understand patterns and predict emotional responses.\nSome studies were able to detect consistent patterns of ANS responses that corresponded to specific emotions under certain contexts, like an early study by Paul Ekman and colleagues in 1983 \"Emotion-specific activity in the autonomic nervous system was generated by constructing facial prototypes of emotion muscle by muscle and by reliving past emotional experiences. The autonomic activity produced distinguished not only between positive and negative emotions, but also among negative emotions\". \nHowever, as more studies were conducted, more variability was found in ANS responses to discrete emotion inductions, not only among individuals but also over time in the same individuals, and greatly between social groups.\nSome of these differences can be attributed to variables like induction technique, context of the study, or classification of stimuli, which can alter a perceived scenario or emotional response. However, it was also found that features of the participant could also alter ANS responses. Factors such as basal level of arousal at the time of experimentation or between-test recovery, learned or conditioned responses to certain stimuli, range and maximal level of effect of ANS action, and individual attentiveness can all alter physiological responses in a lab setting. Even supposedly discrete emotional states fail to show specificity. For example, some emotional typologists consider fear to have subtypes, which might involve fleeing or freezing, both of which can have distinct physiological patterns and potentially distinct neural circuitry. As such no definitive correlation can be drawn linking specific autonomic patterns to discrete emotions, causing emotion theorists to rethink classical definitions of emotions.\nPsychophysiological inference and physiological computer games.\nPhysiological computing represents a category of affective computing that incorporates real-time software adaption to the psychophysiological activity of the user. The main goal of this is to build a computer that responds to user emotion, cognition and motivation. The approach is to enable implicit and symmetrical human-computer communication by granting the software access to a representation of the user's psychological status.\nThere are several possible methods to represent the psychological state of the user (discussed in the affective computing page). The advantages of using psychophysiological indices are that their changes are continuous, measures are covert and implicit, and only available data source when the user interacts with the computer without any explicit communication or input device. These systems rely upon an assumption that the psychophysiological measure is an accurate one-to-one representation of a relevant psychological dimension, such as mental effort, task engagement, and frustration.\nPhysiological computing systems all contain an element that may be termed as an adaptive controller that may be used to represent the player. This adaptive controller represents the decision-making process underlying software adaptation. In their simplest form, adaptive controllers are expressed in Boolean statements. Adaptive controllers encompass not only the decision-making rules but also the psychophysiological inference that is implicit in the quantification of those trigger points used to activate the rules. The representation of the player using an adaptive controller can become very complex and often only one-dimensional. The loop used to describe this process is known as the biocybernetic loop. The biocybernetic loop describes the closed-loop system that receives psychophysiological data from the player, transforms that data into a computerized response, which then shapes the future psychophysiological response from the player. A positive control loop tends towards instability as the player-software loop strives towards a higher standard of desirable performance. The physiological computer game may wish to incorporate both positive and negative loops into the adaptive controller.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA. Weissman, M. Aranovitch, S. Blazer, and E. Z. Zimmer (2009)\nPediatrics 124, e921-e92\nL. P.T. Hua, C. A. Brown, S. J.M. Hains, M. Godwin, and J. L. Parlow (2009)\nBiol Res Nurs 11, 129\u2013143"}
{"id": "23733", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23733", "title": "Periodization", "text": "Categorizing the past into named blocks of time\nIn historiography, periodization is the process or study of categorizing the past into discrete, quantified, and named blocks of time for the purpose of study or analysis. This is usually done to understand current and historical processes, and the causality that might have linked those events.\nPeriodizations can provide a convenient segmentation of time, wherein events within the period might consist of relatively similar characteristics. However, determining the precise beginning and ending of any 'period' is often arbitrary, since it has changed over time and over the course of history. Systems of periodization are more or less arbitrary, yet it provides a framework to help us understand them. Periodizing labels are continually challenged and redefined, but once established, period \"brands\" are so convenient that many are hard to change.\nHistory.\nThe practice of dividing history into ages or periods is as early as the development of writing, and can be traced to the Sumerian \n period. The \"Sumerian King List\", dating to the second millennium BC\u2014and for most parts it is not considered historically accurate\u2014is \"periodized\" into dynastic regnal eras. The classical division into a Golden Age, Silver Age, Bronze Age, Heroic Age, and Iron Age goes back to Hesiod in the 8th \u2013 7th century BC.\nOne Biblical periodization scheme commonly used in the Middle Ages was Saint Paul's theological division of history into three ages: the first before the age of Moses (under nature); the second under Mosaic law (under law); the third in the age of Christ (under grace). But perhaps the most widely discussed periodization scheme of the Middle Ages was the Six Ages of the World, written by the early 5th century AD, where every age was a thousand years counting from Adam to the present, with the present time (in the Middle Ages) being the sixth and final age.\nBackground.\nPeriodizing blocks might overlap, conflict or contradict one another. Some have a cultural usage (the \"Gilded Age\"), others refer to prominent historical events ('the Interwar period), while others are defined by decimal numbering systems ('the 1960s', 'the 17th century'). Other periods are named from influential individuals (the 'Napoleonic Era', the 'Victorian Era', and the 'Porfiriato').\nSome of these usages will also be geographically specific. This is especially true of periodizing labels derived from individuals or ruling dynasties, such as the Jacksonian Era in America, the Meiji Era in Japan, or the Merovingian Period in France. Cultural terms may also have a limited reach. Thus the concept of the \"Romantic period\" is largely meaningless outside the Western world of Europe and European-influenced cultures. Likewise, 'the 1960s', though technically applicable to anywhere in the world according to Common Era numbering, has a certain set of specific cultural connotations in certain countries. For this reason, it may be possible to say such things as \"The 1960s never occurred in Spain\". This would mean that the sexual revolution, counterculture, youth rebellion and so on never developed during that decade in Spain's conservative Roman Catholic culture and under Francisco Franco's authoritarian regime. The historian Arthur Marwick mentions that \"the 1960s' began in the late 1950s and ended in the early 1970s\". This was because the cultural and economic conditions that define the meaning of the period covers more than the accidental fact of a 10-year block beginning with the number 6. This extended usage is termed the 'long 1960s'. This usage derives from other historians who have adopted labels such as \"the long 19th century\" (1789\u20131914) to reconcile arbitrary decimal chronology with meaningful cultural and social phases. Eric Hobsbawm has also argued for what he calls \"the short twentieth century\", encompassing the period from the First World War through to the end of the Cold War.\nPeriodizing terms often have negative or positive connotations that may affect their usage. This includes \"Victorian\", which often negatively suggests sexual repression and class conflict. Other labels such as \"Renaissance\" have strongly positive characteristics. As a result, these terms sometimes extend in meaning. Thus the \"English Renaissance\" is often used for a period largely identical to the \"Elizabethan Period\" or reign of Elizabeth I, and begins some 200 years later than the Italian Renaissance. However the \"Carolingian Renaissance\" is said to have occurred during the reign of the Frankish king Charlemagne, and his immediate successors, and the Macedonian Renaissance occurred in the Eastern Roman Empire. Other examples, neither of which constituted a \"rebirth\" in the sense of revival, are the \"American Renaissance\" of the 1820s\u20131860s, referring mainly to literature, and the \"Harlem Renaissance\" of the 1920s, referring mainly to literature but also to music and the visual arts.\nThe conception of a 'rebirth' of Classical Latin learning is first credited to the Italian poet Petrarch (1304\u20131374), the father of Renaissance Humanism, but the conception of a rebirth has been in common use since Petrarch's time. The dominant usage of the word \"Renaissance\" refers to the cultural changes that occurred in Italy that culminated in the High Renaissance around 1500\u20131530. This concept applies dominantly to the visual arts, and the work of Michelangelo, Raphael, and Leonardo da Vinci. Secondarily it is applied to other arts, but it is questionable whether it is useful to describe a phase in economic, social and political history. Many professional historians now refer to the historical periods commonly known as the Renaissance and the Reformation as the start of the Early Modern Period, which extends much later. There is a gradual change in the courses taught and books published to correspond to the change in period nomenclature, which in part reflects differences between social history and cultural history. The new nomenclature suggests a broader geographical coverage and a growing attention to the relationships between Europe and the wider world.\nThe term Middle Ages also derives from Petrarch. He was comparing his own period to the Ancient or Classical world, seeing his time as a time of rebirth after a dark intermediate period, the Middle Ages. The idea that the Middle Ages was a middle phase between two other large scale periodizing concepts, Ancient and Modern, still persists. It can be subdivided into the Early, High and Late Middle Ages. The term Dark Ages is no longer in common use among modern scholars because of the difficulty of using it neutrally, though some writers have attempted to retain it and divest it of its negative connotations. The term \"Middle Ages\" and especially the adjective \"medieval\" can also have a negative ring in colloquial use, but does not carry over into academic terminology. However, other terms, such as Gothic architecture, used to refer to a style typical of the High Middle Ages have largely lost the negative connotations they initially had, acquiring new meanings over time (see Gothic architecture and Goth subculture).\nThe Gothic and the Baroque were both named during subsequent stylistic periods when the preceding style was unpopular. The word \"Gothic\" was applied as a pejorative term to all things Northern European and, hence, barbarian, probably first by Giorgio Vasari. He coined the term \"Gothic\" in an effort to describe (particularly architecture) what he found objectionable. The word \"baroque\"\u2014derived from similar words in Portuguese, Spanish, or French\u2014literally refers to an irregular or misshapen pearl. Its first use outside the field of jewellery manufacture was in the early 18th century, as a criticism of music that was viewed as over-complicated and rough. Later, the term was also used to describe architecture and art. The Baroque period was first designated as such in the 19th century, and is generally considered to have begun around 1600 in all media. Music history places the end of the period in the year 1750 with the death of J. S. Bach, while art historians consider the main period to have ended significantly earlier in most areas.\nThree-age system.\nIn archeology, the usual method for periodization of the distant prehistoric past is to rely on changes in material culture and technology, such as the Stone Age, Bronze Age and Iron Age and their sub-divisions also based on different styles of material remains. Despite the development over recent decades of the ability through radiocarbon dating and other scientific methods to give actual dates for many sites or artefacts, these long-established schemes seem likely to remain in use. In many cases neighbouring cultures with writing have left some history of cultures without it, which may be used. The system further underwent subdivisions, including the 1865 partitioning of the Stone Age into Palaeolithic, Mesolithic and Neolithic periods by John Lubbock.\nHistoriography.\nSome events or short periods of change have such a drastic effect on the cultures they affect that they form a natural break in history. These are often marked by the widespread use of both \"pre-\" and \"post-\" phrases centered on the event, as in \"pre-Reformation\" and \"post-Reformation\", or \"pre-colonial\" and \"post-colonial\". Both pre-war and post-war are still understood to refer to World War II, though at some future point the phrases will need to be altered to make that clear.\nWorld history.\nSeveral major periods that English-speaking and Germanic historians may use are:\nIn French and Romance-language historiography, the early modern period is labelled \"modern\" () and the late modern and contemporary periods are grouped as \"contemporary\" ().\nAlthough \"post-classical\" is synonymous with the Middle Ages of Western Europe, the term \"post-classical\" is not necessarily a member of the traditional tripartite periodization of Western European history into 'classical', 'middle' and 'modern'.\nSome popularized periodizations using the terms long or short by historians are:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* List of time periods\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23734", "revid": "31866656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23734", "title": "Petrarch", "text": "Italian scholar and poet (1304\u20131374)\nFrancis Petrarch (; 20 July 1304 \u2013 19 July 1374; ; modern ), born Francesco di Petracco, was a scholar from Arezzo and poet of the early Italian Renaissance, as well as one of the earliest humanists.\nPetrarch's rediscovery of Cicero's letters is often credited with initiating the 14th-century Italian Renaissance and the founding of Renaissance humanism. In the 16th century, Pietro Bembo created the model for the modern Italian language based on Petrarch's works, as well as those of Giovanni Boccaccio, and, to a lesser extent, Dante Alighieri. Petrarch was later endorsed as a model for Italian style by the .\nPetrarch's sonnets were admired and imitated throughout Europe during the Renaissance and became a model for lyrical poetry. He is also known for being the first to develop the concept of the \"Dark Ages\".\nBiography.\nYouth and early career.\nPetrarch was born in the Tuscan city Arezzo on 20 July 1304. He was the son of Ser Petracco (a diminutive nickname for \"Pietro\") and his wife Eletta Canigiani. Petrarch's birth name was \"Francesco di Petracco\" (\"Francesco [son] of Petracco\"), which he Latinized to \"Franciscus Petrarcha\". His younger brother Gherardo (Gerard Petrarch) was born in Incisa in Val d'Arno in 1307. Dante Alighieri was a friend of his father.\nPetrarch spent his early childhood in the village of Incisa, near Florence. He spent much of his early life at Avignon and nearby Carpentras, where his family moved to follow Pope Clement V, who moved there in 1309 to begin the Avignon Papacy. Petrarch studied law at the University of Montpellier (1316\u201320) and Bologna (1320\u201323) with a lifelong friend and schoolmate, Guido Sette, future archbishop of Genoa. Because his father was in the legal profession (a notary), he insisted that Petrarch and his brother also study law. Petrarch, however, was primarily interested in writing and studying Latin literature and considered these seven years wasted. Petrarch became so distracted by his non-legal interests that his father once threw his books into a fire, which he later lamented. Additionally, he proclaimed that through legal manipulation his guardians robbed him of his small property inheritance in Florence, which only reinforced his dislike for the legal system. He protested, \"I couldn't face making a merchandise of my mind\", since he viewed the legal system as the art of selling justice.\nPetrarch was a prolific letter writer and counted Boccaccio among the notable friends with whom he regularly corresponded. After the death of their parents, Petrarch and his brother Gherardo went back to Avignon in 1326, where he worked in numerous clerical offices. This work gave him much time to devote to his writing. With his first large-scale work, \"Africa\", an epic poem in Latin about the great Roman general Scipio Africanus, Petrarch emerged as a European celebrity. On 8 April 1341, he became the second poet laureate since classical antiquity and was crowned by Roman \"Senatori\" Giordano Orsini and Orso dell'Anguillara on the holy grounds of Rome's Capitoline hill.\nHe traveled widely in Europe, served as an ambassador, and has been called \"the first tourist\" because he traveled for pleasure such as his ascent of Mont Ventoux. During his travels, he collected crumbling Latin manuscripts and was a prime mover in the recovery of knowledge from writers of Rome and Greece. He encouraged and advised Leontius Pilatus's translation of Homer from a manuscript purchased by Boccaccio, although he was severely critical of the result. Petrarch had acquired a copy, which he did not entrust to Leontius, but he knew no Greek; Petrarch said of himself, \"Homer was dumb to him, while he was deaf to Homer\". In 1345 he personally discovered a collection of Cicero's letters not previously known to have existed, the collection \"Epistulae ad Atticum\", in the Chapter Library (\"Biblioteca Capitolare\") of Verona Cathedral.\nDisdaining what he believed to be the ignorance of the era in which he lived, Petrarch is credited with creating the concept of a historical \"Dark Ages\", which most modern scholars now find inaccurate and misleading.\nMount Ventoux.\nPetrarch recounts that on 26 April 1336, with his brother and two servants, he climbed to the top of Mont Ventoux (, a feat which he undertook for recreation rather than necessity. The exploit is described in a famous letter addressed to his friend and confessor, the monk Dionigi di Borgo San Sepolcro, composed some time after the fact. In it, Petrarch claimed to have been inspired by Philip V of Macedon's ascent of Mount Haemo and that an aged peasant had told him that nobody had ascended Ventoux before or after himself, 50 years earlier, and warned him against attempting to do so. The nineteenth-century Swiss historian Jacob Burckhardt noted that Jean Buridan had climbed the same mountain a few years before, and ascents accomplished during the Middle Ages have been recorded, including that of Anno II, Archbishop of Cologne.\nScholars note that Petrarch's letter to Dionigi displays a strikingly \"modern\" attitude of aesthetic gratification in the grandeur of the scenery and is still often cited in books and journals devoted to the sport of mountaineering. In Petrarch, this attitude is coupled with an aspiration for a virtuous Christian life, and on reaching the summit, he took from his pocket a volume by his beloved mentor, Saint Augustine, that he always carried with him.\nFor pleasure alone he climbed Mont Ventoux, which rises to more than six thousand feet, beyond Vaucluse. It was no great feat, of course; but he was the first recorded Alpinist of modern times, the first to climb a mountain merely for the delight of looking from its top. (Or almost the first; for in a high pasture he met an old shepherd, who said that fifty years before he had attained the summit, and had got nothing from it save toil and repentance and torn clothing.) Petrarch was dazed and stirred by the view of the Alps, the mountains around Lyons, the Rhone, the Bay of Marseilles. He took Augustine's \"Confessions\" from his pocket and reflected that his climb was merely an allegory of aspiration toward a better life.\nAs the book fell open, Petrarch's eyes were immediately drawn to the following words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPetrarch's response was to turn from the outer world of nature to the inner world of \"soul\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJames Hillman argues that this rediscovery of the inner world is the real significance of the Ventoux event. The Renaissance begins not with the ascent of Mont Ventoux but with the subsequent descent\u2014the \"return [...] to the valley of soul\", as Hillman puts it.\nLater years.\nPetrarch spent the later part of his life journeying through northern Italy and southern France as an international scholar and poet-diplomat. His career in the Church did not allow him to marry, but he is believed to have fathered two children by a woman (or women) unknown to posterity. A son, Giovanni, was born in 1337, and a daughter, Francesca, was born in 1343. He later legitimized both.\nFor a number of years in the 1340s and 1350s he lived in a small house at Fontaine-de-Vaucluse east of Avignon in France.\nGiovanni died of the plague in 1361. In the same year Petrarch was named canon in Monselice near Padua. Francesca married Francescuolo da Brossano (who was later named executor of Petrarch's will) that same year. In 1362, shortly after the birth of a daughter, Eletta (the same name as Petrarch's mother), they joined Petrarch in Venice to flee the plague then ravaging parts of Europe. A second grandchild, Francesco, was born in 1366, but died before his second birthday. Francesca and her family lived with Petrarch in Venice for five years from 1362 to 1367 at Palazzo Molina; although Petrarch continued to travel in those years. Between 1361 and 1369 the younger Boccaccio paid the older Petrarch two visits. The first was in Venice, the second was in Padua.\nAbout 1368 Petrarch and Francesca (with her family) moved to the small town of Arqu\u00e0 in the Euganean Hills near Padua, where he passed his remaining years in religious contemplation. He died in his house in Arqu\u00e0 on 18/19 July 1374. The house now hosts a permanent exhibition of Petrarch's works and curiosities, including the famous tomb of an embalmed cat long believed to be Petrarch's (although there is no evidence Petrarch actually had a cat). On the marble slab, there is a Latin inscription written by Antonio Quarenghi:\nPetrarch's will (dated 4 April 1370) leaves fifty florins to Boccaccio \"to buy a warm winter dressing gown\"; various legacies (a horse, a silver cup, a lute, a Madonna) to his brother and his friends; his house in Vaucluse to its caretaker; money for Masses offered for his soul, and money for the poor; and the bulk of his estate to his son-in-law, Francescuolo da Brossano, who is to give half of it to \"the person to whom, as he knows, I wish it to go\"; presumably his daughter, Francesca, Brossano's wife. The will mentions neither the property in Arqu\u00e0 nor his library; Petrarch's library of notable manuscripts was already promised to Venice, in exchange for the Palazzo Molina. This arrangement was probably cancelled when he moved to Padua, the enemy of Venice, in 1368. The library was seized by the da Carrara lords of Padua, and his books and manuscripts are now widely scattered over Europe. Nevertheless, the Biblioteca Marciana traditionally claimed this bequest as its founding, although it was in fact founded by Cardinal Bessarion in 1468.\nWorks.\nPetrarch is best known for his Italian poetry, notably the \"Rerum vulgarium fragmenta\" (\"Fragments of Vernacular Matters\"), a collection of 366 lyric poems in various genres also known as 'canzoniere' ('songbook'), and \"I trionfi\" (\"The Triumphs\"), a six-part narrative poem of Dantean inspiration. However, Petrarch was an enthusiastic Latin scholar and did most of his writing in this language. His Latin writings include scholarly works, introspective essays, letters, and more poetry. Among them are \"Secretum\" (\"My Secret Book\"), an intensely personal, imaginary dialogue with a figure inspired by Augustine of Hippo; \"De Viris Illustribus\" (\"On Famous Men\"), a series of moral biographies; \"Rerum Memorandarum Libri\", an incomplete treatise on the cardinal virtues; \"De Otio Religiosorum\" (\"On Religious Leisure\") and \"De vita solitaria\" (\"On the Solitary Life\"), which praise the contemplative life; \"De Remediis Utriusque Fortunae\" (\"Remedies for Fortune Fair and Foul\"), a self-help book which remained popular for hundreds of years; \"Itinerarium\" (\"Petrarch's Guide to the Holy Land\"); invectives against opponents such as doctors, scholastics, and the French; the \"Carmen Bucolicum\", a collection of 12 pastoral poems; and the unfinished epic \"Africa\". He translated seven psalms, a collection known as the \"Penitential Psalms\".\nPetrarch also published many volumes of his letters, including a few written to long-dead figures from history such as Cicero and Virgil. Cicero, Virgil, and Seneca were his literary models. Most of his Latin writings are difficult to find today, but several of his works are available in English translations. Several of his Latin works are scheduled to appear in the Harvard University Press series \"I Tatti\". It is difficult to assign any precise dates to his writings because he tended to revise them throughout his life.\nPetrarch collected his letters into four major sets of books called \nThe first and the fourth are available in English translation. The plan for his letters was suggested to him by knowledge of Cicero's letters. These were published \"without names\" to protect the recipients, all of whom had close relationships to Petrarch. The recipients of these letters included Philippe de Cabassoles, bishop of Cavaillon; Ildebrandino Conti, bishop of Padua; Cola di Rienzo, tribune of Rome; Francesco Nelli, priest of the Prior of the Church of the Holy Apostles in Florence; and Niccol\u00f2 di Capoccia, a cardinal and priest of Saint Vitalis. His \"Letter to Posterity\" (the last letter in \"Seniles\") gives an http:// and a synopsis of his philosophy in life. It was originally written in Latin and was completed in 1371 or 1372\u2014the first such autobiography in a thousand years (since Saint Augustine).\nWhile Petrarch's poetry was set to music frequently after his death, especially by Italian madrigal composers of the Renaissance in the 16th century, only one musical setting composed during Petrarch's lifetime survives. This is \"Non al suo amante\" by Jacopo da Bologna, written around 1350.\nLaura and poetry.\nOn 6 April 1327, after Petrarch gave up his vocation as a priest, the sight of a woman called \"Laura\" in the church of Sainte-Claire d'Avignon in 1327, awoke in him a lasting passion, celebrated in the \"Rerum vulgarium fragmenta\" (\"Fragments of Vernacular Matters\"). Laura may have been Laura de Noves, the wife of Count Hugues de Sade (an ancestor of the Marquis de Sade). There is little definite information in Petrarch's work concerning Laura, except that she is lovely to look at, fair-haired, with a modest, dignified bearing. Laura and Petrarch had little or no personal contact. According to his \"Secretum\", she refused him because she was already married. He channeled his feelings into love poems that were exclamatory rather than persuasive, and wrote prose that showed his contempt for men who pursue women. Upon her death in 1348, the poet found that his grief was as difficult to live with as was his former despair. Later, in his \"Letter to Posterity\", Petrarch wrote: \"In my younger days I struggled constantly with an overwhelming but pure love affair\u2014my only one, and I would have struggled with it longer had not premature death, bitter but salutary for me, extinguished the cooling flames. I certainly wish I could say that I have always been entirely free from desires of the flesh, but I would be lying if I did\".\nWhile it is possible she was an idealized or pseudonymous character\u2014particularly since the name \"Laura\" has a linguistic connection to the poetic \"laurels\" Petrarch coveted\u2014Petrarch himself always denied it. His frequent use of \"l'aura\" is also remarkable: for example, the line \"Erano i capei d'oro a \"l'aura\" sparsi\" may mean both \"her hair was all over Laura's body\" and \"the wind (\"l'aura\") blew through her hair\". There is psychological realism in the description of Laura, although Petrarch draws heavily on conventionalised descriptions of love and lovers from troubadour songs and other literature of courtly love. Her presence causes him unspeakable joy, but his unrequited love creates unendurable desires, inner conflicts between the ardent lover and the mystic Christian, making it impossible to reconcile the two. Petrarch's quest for love leads to hopelessness and irreconcilable anguish, as he expresses in the series of paradoxes in Rima 134 \"Pace non trovo, et non \u00f2 da far guerra;/e temo, et spero; et ardo, et son un ghiaccio\": \"I find no peace, and yet I make no war:/and fear, and hope: and burn, and I am ice\".\nLaura is unreachable and evanescent \u2013 descriptions of her are evocative yet fragmentary. Francesco de Sanctis praises the powerful music of his verse in his \"Storia della letteratura italiana\". Gianfranco Contini, in a famous essay (\"Preliminari sulla lingua del Petrarca\". Petrarca, Canzoniere. Turin, Einaudi, 1964), has described Petrarch's language in terms of \"unilinguismo\" (contrasted with Dantean \"plurilinguismo\").\nDante.\nPetrarch is very different from Dante and his \"Divina Commedia\". In spite of the metaphysical subject, the \"Commedia\" is deeply rooted in the cultural and social milieu of turn-of-the-century Florence: Dante's rise to power (1300) and exile (1302); his political passions call for a \"violent\" use of language, where he uses all the registers, from low and trivial to sublime and philosophical. Petrarch confessed to Boccaccio that he had never read the \"Commedia\", remarks Contini, wondering whether this was true or Petrarch wanted to distance himself from Dante. Dante's language evolves as he grows old, from the courtly love of his early stilnovistic \"Rime\" and \"Vita nuova\" to the \"Convivio\" and \"Divina Commedia\", where Beatrice is sanctified as the goddess of philosophy\u2014the philosophy announced by the Donna Gentile at the death of Beatrice.\nIn contrast, Petrarch's thought and style are relatively uniform throughout his life\u2014he spent much of it revising the songs and sonnets of the \"Canzoniere\" rather than moving to new subjects or poetry. Here, poetry alone provides a consolation for personal grief, much less philosophy or politics (as in Dante), for Petrarch fights within himself (sensuality versus mysticism, profane versus Christian literature), not against anything outside of himself. The strong moral and political convictions which had inspired Dante belong to the Middle Ages and the libertarian spirit of the commune; Petrarch's moral dilemmas, his refusal to take a stand in politics, his reclusive life point to a different direction, or time. The free commune, the place that had made Dante an eminent politician and scholar, was being dismantled: the \"signoria\" was taking its place. Humanism and its spirit of empirical inquiry, however, were making progress\u2014but the papacy (especially after Avignon) and the empire (Henry VII, the last hope of the white Guelphs, died near Siena in 1313) had lost much of their original prestige.\nPetrarch polished and perfected the sonnet form inherited from Giacomo da Lentini and which Dante widely used in his \"Vita nuova\" to popularise the new courtly love of the \"Dolce Stil Novo\". The tercet benefits from Dante's terza rima (compare the \"Divina Commedia\"), the quatrains prefer the ABBA\u2013ABBA to the ABAB\u2013ABAB scheme of the Sicilians. The imperfect rhymes of \"u\" with closed \"o\" and \"i\" with closed \"e\" (inherited from Guittone's mistaken rendering of Sicilian verse) are excluded, but the rhyme of open and closed \"o\" is kept. Finally, Petrarch's enjambment creates longer semantic units by connecting one line to the following. The vast majority (317) of Petrarch's 366 poems collected in the \"Canzoniere\" (dedicated to Laura) were \"sonnets\", and the Petrarchan sonnet still bears his name.\nPhilosophy.\nPetrarch is often referred to as the father of humanism and considered by many to be the \"father of the Renaissance\". In \"Secretum meum\", he points out that secular achievements do not necessarily preclude an authentic relationship with God, arguing instead that God has given humans their vast intellectual and creative potential to be used to its fullest. He inspired humanist philosophy, which led to the intellectual flowering of the Renaissance. He believed in the immense moral and practical value of the study of ancient history and literature\u2014that is, the study of human thought and action. Petrarch was a devout Catholic and did not see a conflict between realizing humanity's potential and having religious faith, although many philosophers and scholars have styled him a Proto-Protestant who challenged the Pope's dogma.\nA highly introspective man, Petrarch helped shape the nascent humanist movement as many of the internal conflicts and musings expressed in his writings were embraced by Renaissance humanist philosophers and argued continually for the next 200 years. For example, he struggled with the proper relation between the active and contemplative life, and tended to emphasize the importance of solitude and study. In a clear disagreement with Dante, in 1346 Petrarch argued in \"De vita solitaria\" that Pope Celestine V's refusal of the papacy in 1294 was a virtuous example of solitary life. Later the politician and thinker Leonardo Bruni (1370\u20131444) argued for the active life, or \"civic humanism\". As a result, a number of political, military, and religious leaders during the Renaissance were inculcated with the notion that their pursuit of personal fulfillment should be grounded in classical example and philosophical contemplation.\nPetrarchism.\nPetrarchism was a 16th-century literary movement of Petrarch's style by Italian, French, Spanish and English followers (partially coincident with Mannerism), who regarded his collection of poetry \"Il Canzoniere\" as a canonical text. Among them, the names are listed in order of precedence: Pietro Bembo, Michelangelo, Mellin de Saint-Gelais, Vittoria Colonna, Cl\u00e9ment Marot, Garcilaso de la Vega, Giovanni della Casa, Thomas Wyatt, Henry Howard, Joachim du Bellay, Edmund Spenser, and Philip Sidney. Thus, in Pietro Bembo's book \"Prose of the Vernacular Tongue\" (1525) Petrarch is the model of verse composition.\nLegacy.\nPetrarch's influence is evident in the works of Serafino Ciminelli from Aquila (1466\u20131500) and in the works of Marin Dr\u017ei\u0107 (1508\u20131567) from Dubrovnik.\nThe Romantic composer Franz Liszt set three of Petrarch's Sonnets (47, 104, and 123) to music for voice, \"Tre sonetti del Petrarca\", which he later would transcribe for solo piano for inclusion in the suite \"Ann\u00e9es de P\u00e8lerinage\". Liszt also set a poem by Victor Hugo, \"Oh! quand je dors\" in which Petrarch and Laura are invoked as the epitome of erotic love.\nWhile in Avignon in 1991, Modernist composer Elliott Carter completed his solo flute piece \"Scrivo in Vento\" which is in part inspired by and structured by Petrarch's Sonnet 212, \"Beato in sogno\". It was premiered on Petrarch's 687th birthday. In 2004, Finnish composer Kaija Saariaho crafted a miniature for solo piccolo flute titled \"Dolce tormento\", in which the flutist whispers fragments of Petrarch's Sonnet 132 into the instrument.\nIn November 2003, it was announced that pathological anatomists would be exhuming Petrarch's body from his casket in Arqu\u00e0 Petrarca, to verify 19th-century reports that he had stood 1.83 meters (about six feet), which would have been tall for his period. The team from the University of Padua also hoped to reconstruct his cranium to generate a computerized image of his features to coincide with his 700th birthday. The tomb had been opened previously in 1873 by Professor Giovanni Canestrini, also of Padua University. When the tomb was opened, the skull was discovered in fragments and a DNA test revealed that the skull was not Petrarch's, prompting calls for the return of Petrarch's skull.\nThe researchers are fairly certain that the body in the tomb is Petrarch's due to the fact that the skeleton bears evidence of injuries mentioned by Petrarch in his writings, including a kick from a donkey when he was 42.\nNumismatics.\nHe is credited with being the first and most famous aficionado of numismatics. He described visiting Rome and asking peasants to bring him ancient coins they would find in the soil which he would buy from them, and writes of his delight at being able to identify the names and features of Roman emperors.\nWorks in English translation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23735", "revid": "135518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23735", "title": "PLD", "text": "PLD may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23736", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23736", "title": "Poem", "text": ""}
{"id": "23738", "revid": "15951685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23738", "title": "Propeller", "text": "Device that transmits rotational power into linear thrust on a fluid\nA propeller (often called a screw if on a ship or an airscrew if on an aircraft) is a device with a rotating hub and radiating blades that are set at a pitch to form a helical spiral which, when rotated, exerts linear thrust upon a working fluid such as water or air. Propellers are used to pump fluid through a pipe or duct, or to create thrust to propel a boat through water or an aircraft through air. \nThe blades are shaped so that their rotational motion through the fluid causes a pressure difference between the two surfaces of the blade by Bernoulli's principle which exerts force on the fluid. Most marine propellers are screw propellers with helical blades rotating on a propeller shaft with an approximately horizontal axis.\nHistory.\nEarly developments.\nThe principle employed in using a screw propeller is derived from stern sculling. In sculling, a single blade is moved through an arc, from side to side taking care to keep presenting the blade to the water at the effective angle. The innovation introduced with the screw propeller was the extension of that arc through more than 360\u00b0 by attaching the blade to a rotating shaft. Propellers can have a single blade, but in practice there is nearly always more than one so as to balance the forces involved.\nThe origin of the screw propeller starts with the first records of a water screw, or screw pump, dates back to Ancient Mesopotamia, a cuneiform inscription of Assyrian King Sennacherib (704\u2013681 BC) describes casting water screws in bronze. This is consistent with classical author Strabo, who describes the Hanging Gardens as watered by screws. Later, Archimedes (c.\u2009287 \u2013 c.\u2009212 BC) used a screw to lift water for irrigation and bailing boats, so famously that it became known as Archimedes' screw. It was probably an application of spiral movement in space (spirals were a special study of Archimedes) to a hollow segmented water-wheel used for irrigation by Egyptians for centuries. Later, modern propeller designs usually began with truncating a long screw at the tip.\nAdditionally, a flying toy, the bamboo-copter, was enjoyed in China beginning around 320 AD.\nIn 1661, Toogood and Hays proposed using screws for waterjet propulsion, though not as a propeller. Robert Hooke in 1681 designed a horizontal watermill which was remarkably similar to the Kirsten-Boeing vertical axis propeller designed almost two and a half centuries later in 1928; two years later Hooke modified the design to provide motive power for ships through water. In 1693 a Frenchman by the name of Du Quet invented a screw propeller which was tried in 1693 but later abandoned. In 1752, the \"Academie des Sciences\" in Paris granted Burnelli a prize for a design of a propeller-wheel. At about the same time, the French mathematician Alexis-Jean-Pierre Paucton suggested a water propulsion system based on the Archimedean screw. In 1771, the steam-engine inventor James Watt in a private letter suggested using \"spiral oars\" to propel boats, although he did not use them with his steam engines or ever implement the idea.\nOne of the first practical and applied uses of a propeller was on a submarine dubbed which was designed in New Haven, Connecticut, in 1775 by David Bushnell, a Yale student and inventor, with the help of Isaac Doolittle, a clock maker, engraver, and brass foundryman of New Haven. Bushnell's brother Ezra Bushnell and Phineas Pratt, a ship's carpenter and clock maker, constructed the hull in Saybrook, Connecticut. On the night of September 6, 1776, Sergeant Ezra Lee piloted \"Turtle\" in an attack on in New York Harbor. \"Turtle\" also has the distinction of being the first submarine used in battle. Bushnell later described the propeller in an October 1787 letter to Thomas Jefferson: \"An oar formed upon the principle of the screw was fixed in the forepart of the vessel its axis entered the vessel and being turned one way rowed the vessel forward but being turned the other way rowed it backward. It was made to be turned by the hand or foot.\" The brass propeller, like all the brass and moving parts on \"Turtle\", was crafted by Doolittle.\nIn 1785, Joseph Bramah of England proposed a propeller solution of a rod going through the underwater aft of a boat attached to a bladed propeller, though he never built it.\nIn February 1800, Edward Shorter of London proposed using a similar propeller attached to a rod angled down temporarily deployed from the deck above the waterline and thus requiring no water seal, and intended only to assist becalmed sailing vessels. He tested it on the transport ship at Gibraltar and Malta, achieving a speed of .\nIn 1802, the American lawyer and inventor John Stevens built a boat with a rotary steam engine coupled to a four-bladed propeller. The craft achieved a speed of , but Stevens abandoned propellers because of the inherent danger in using the high-pressure steam engines. His subsequent vessels were paddle-wheeled boats.\nBy 1827, the Czech inventor Josef Ressel had invented a screw propeller with multiple blades on a conical base. He tested it in February 1826 on a manually-driven ship and successfully used it on a steamboat in 1829. His 48-ton ship \"Civetta\" reached 6 knots. This was the first successful Archimedes screw-propelled ship. His experiments were banned by police after a steam engine accident. Ressel, a forestry inspector, held an Austro-Hungarian patent for his propeller. The screw propeller was an improvement over paddlewheels as it wasn't affected by ship motions or draft changes.\nJohn Patch, a mariner in Yarmouth, Nova Scotia, developed a two-bladed, fan-shaped propeller in 1832 and publicly demonstrated it in 1833, propelling a row boat across Yarmouth Harbour and a small coastal schooner at Saint John, New Brunswick, but his patent application in the United States was rejected until 1849 because he was not an American citizen. His efficient design drew praise in American scientific circles but by then he faced multiple competitors.\nScrew propellers.\nDespite experimentation with screw propulsion before the 1830s, few of these inventions were pursued to the testing stage, and those that were proved unsatisfactory for one reason or another.\nIn 1835, two inventors in Britain, John Ericsson and Francis Pettit Smith, began working separately on the problem. Smith was first to take out a screw propeller patent on 31 May, while Ericsson, a gifted Swedish engineer then working in Britain, filed his patent six weeks later. Smith quickly built a small model boat to test his invention, which was demonstrated first on a pond at his Hendon farm, and later at the Royal Adelaide Gallery of Practical Science in London, where it was seen by the Secretary of the Navy, Sir William Barrow. Having secured the patronage of a London banker named Wright, Smith then built a , canal boat of six tons burthen called \"Francis Smith\", which was fitted with his wooden propeller and demonstrated on the Paddington Canal from November 1836 to September 1837. By a fortuitous accident, the wooden propeller of two turns was damaged during a voyage in February 1837, and to Smith's surprise the broken propeller, which now consisted of only a single turn, doubled the boat's previous speed, from about four miles an hour to eight. Smith would subsequently file a revised patent in keeping with this accidental discovery.\nIn the meantime, Ericsson built a screw-propelled steamboat, \"Francis B. Ogden\" in 1837, and demonstrated his boat on the River Thames to senior members of the British Admiralty, including Surveyor of the Navy Sir William Symonds. In spite of the boat's achieving a speed of 10 miles an hour, comparable with that of existing paddle steamers, Symonds and his entourage were unimpressed. The Admiralty maintained that screw propulsion would be ineffective in ocean-going service, while Symonds himself believed that screw propelled ships could not be steered efficiently. Following this rejection, Ericsson built a second, larger screw-propelled boat, \"Robert F. Stockton\", and had her sailed in 1839 to the United States, where he was soon to gain fame as the designer of the U.S. Navy's first screw-propelled warship, .\nApparently aware of the Royal Navy's view that screw propellers would prove unsuitable for seagoing service, Smith determined to prove this assumption wrong. In September 1837, he took his small vessel (now fitted with an iron propeller of a single turn) to sea, steaming from Blackwall, London to Hythe, Kent, with stops at Ramsgate, Dover and Folkestone. On the way back to London on the 25th, Smith's craft was observed making headway in stormy seas by officers of the Royal Navy. This revived Admiralty's interest, and Smith was encouraged to build a full-size ship to more conclusively demonstrate the technology.\n was built in 1838 by Henry Wimshurst of London, as the world's first steamship to be driven by a screw propeller.\nThe \"Archimedes\" had considerable influence on ship development, encouraging the adoption of screw propulsion by the Royal Navy, in addition to her influence on commercial vessels. Trials with Smith's \"Archimedes\" led to a tug-of-war competition in 1845 between and with the screw-driven \"Rattler\" pulling the paddle steamer \"Alecto\" backward at .\nThe \"Archimedes\" also influenced the design of Isambard Kingdom Brunel's in 1843, then the world's largest ship and the first screw-propelled steamship to cross the Atlantic Ocean in August 1845.\n and were both heavily modified to become the first Royal Navy ships to have steam-powered engines and screw propellers. Both participated in Franklin's lost expedition, last seen in July 1845 near Baffin Bay.\nScrew propeller design stabilized in the 1880s.\nAircraft.\nThe Wright brothers pioneered the twisted aerofoil shape of modern aircraft propellers. They realized an air propeller was similar to a wing. They verified this using wind tunnel experiments. They introduced a twist in their blades to keep the angle of attack constant. Their blades were only 5% less efficient than those used 100 years later. Understanding of low-speed propeller aerodynamics was complete by the 1920s, although increased power and smaller diameters added design constraints. \nAlberto Santos Dumont, another early pioneer, applied the knowledge he gained from experiences with airships to make a propeller with a steel shaft and aluminium blades for his 14 bis biplane. Some of his designs used a bent aluminium sheet for blades, thus creating an airfoil shape. They were heavily undercambered, and this plus the absence of lengthwise twist made them less efficient than the Wright propellers. Even so, this may have been the first use of aluminium in the construction of an airscrew.\nTheory.\nIn the nineteenth century, several theories concerning propellers were proposed. The momentum theory or disk actuator theory \u2013 a theory describing a mathematical model of an ideal propeller \u2013 was developed by W.J.M. Rankine (1865), A.G. Greenhill (1888) and R.E. Froude (1889). The propeller is modelled as an infinitely thin disc, inducing a constant velocity along the axis of rotation and creating a flow around the propeller.\nA screw turning through a solid will have zero \"slip\"; but as a propeller screw operates in a fluid (either air or water), there will be some losses. The most efficient propellers are large-diameter, slow-turning screws, such as on large ships; the least efficient are small-diameter and fast-turning (such as on an outboard motor). Using Newton's laws of motion, one may usefully think of a propeller's forward thrust as being a reaction proportionate to the mass of fluid sent backward per time and the speed the propeller adds to that mass, and in practice there is more loss associated with producing a fast jet than with creating a heavier, slower jet. (The same applies in aircraft, in which larger-diameter turbofan engines tend to be more efficient than earlier, smaller-diameter turbofans, and even smaller turbojets, which eject less mass at greater speeds.)\nPropeller geometry.\nThe geometry of a marine screw propeller is based on a helicoidal surface. This may form the face of the blade, or the faces of the blades may be described by offsets from this surface. The back of the blade is described by offsets from the helicoid surface in the same way that an aerofoil may be described by offsets from the chord line. The pitch surface may be a true helicoid or one having a warp to provide a better match of angle of attack to the wake velocity over the blades. A warped helicoid is described by specifying the shape of the radial reference line and the pitch angle in terms of radial distance. The traditional propeller drawing includes four parts: a side elevation, which defines the rake, the variation of blade thickness from root to tip, a longitudinal section through the hub, and a projected outline of a blade onto a longitudinal centreline plane. The expanded blade view shows the section shapes at their various radii, with their pitch faces drawn parallel to the base line, and thickness parallel to the axis. The outline indicated by a line connecting the leading and trailing tips of the sections depicts the expanded blade outline. The pitch diagram shows variation of pitch with radius from root to tip. The transverse view shows the transverse projection of a blade and the developed outline of the blade.\nThe \"blades\" are the foil section plates that develop thrust when the propeller is rotated\nThe \"hub\" is the central part of the propeller, which connects the blades together and fixes the propeller to the shaft. This is called the \"boss\" in the UK.\n\"Rake\" is the angle of the blade to a radius perpendicular to the shaft.\n\"Skew\" is the tangential offset of the line of maximum thickness to a radius\nThe propeller characteristics are commonly expressed as dimensionless ratios:\nCavitation.\nCavitation is the formation of vapor bubbles in water near a moving propeller blade in regions of very low pressure. It can occur if an attempt is made to transmit too much power through the screw, or if the propeller is operating at a very high speed. Cavitation can waste power, create vibration and wear, and cause damage to the propeller. It can occur in many ways on a propeller. The two most common types of propeller cavitation are suction side surface cavitation and tip vortex cavitation.\nSuction side surface cavitation forms when the propeller is operating at high rotational speeds or under heavy load (high blade lift coefficient). The pressure on the upstream surface of the blade (the \"suction side\") can drop below the vapor pressure of the water, resulting in the formation of a vapor pocket. Under such conditions, the change in pressure between the downstream surface of the blade (the \"pressure side\") and the suction side is limited, and eventually reduced as the extent of cavitation is increased. When most of the blade surface is covered by cavitation, the pressure difference between the pressure side and suction side of the blade drops considerably, as does the thrust produced by the propeller. This condition is called \"thrust breakdown\". Operating the propeller under these conditions wastes energy, generates considerable noise, and as the vapor bubbles collapse it rapidly erodes the screw's surface due to localized shock waves against the blade surface. \nTip vortex cavitation is caused by the extremely low pressures formed at the core of the tip vortex. The tip vortex is caused by fluid wrapping around the tip of the propeller; from the pressure side to the suction side. This https:// demonstrates tip vortex cavitation. Tip vortex cavitation typically occurs before suction side surface cavitation and is less damaging to the blade, since this type of cavitation doesn't collapse on the blade, but some distance downstream.\nTypes of propellers.\nVariable-pitch propeller.\nVariable-pitch propellers may be either controllable (controllable-pitch propellers) or automatically feathering (folding propellers). Variable-pitch propellers have significant advantages over the fixed-pitch variety, namely:\nSkewback propeller.\nAn advanced type of propeller used on the American Los Angeles-class submarine as well as the German Type 212 submarine is called a skewback propeller. As in the scimitar blades used on some aircraft, the blade tips of a skewback propeller are swept back against the direction of rotation. In addition, the blades are tilted rearward along the longitudinal axis, giving the propeller an overall cup-shaped appearance. This design preserves thrust efficiency while reducing cavitation, and thus makes for a quiet, stealthy design.\nA small number of ships use propellers with winglets similar to those on some airplane wings, reducing tip vortices and improving efficiency.\nModular propeller.\nA modular propeller provides more control over the boat's performance. There is no need to change an entire propeller when there is an opportunity to only change the pitch or the damaged blades. Being able to adjust pitch will allow for boaters to have better performance while in different altitudes, water sports, or cruising.\nShaftless.\nA rim-driven thruster integrates an electric motor into a ducted propeller. The cylindrical duct acts as the stator, while the tips of the blades act as the rotor. They typically provide high torque and operate at low RPMs, producing less noise. The system does not require a shaft, reducing weight. Units can be placed at various locations around the hull and operated independently, e.g., to aid in maneuvering. The absence of a shaft allows alternative rear hull designs.\nToroidal.\nTwisted-toroid (ring-shaped) propellers, first invented over 120 years ago, replace the blades with a-circular rings. They are significantly quieter (particularly at audible frequencies) and more efficient than traditional propellers for both air and water applications. The design distributes vortices generated by the propeller across the entire shape, causing them to dissipate faster in the atmosphere.\nDamage protection.\nShaft protection.\nFor smaller engines, such as outboards, where the propeller is exposed to the risk of collision with heavy objects, the propeller often includes a device that is designed to fail when overloaded; the device or the whole propeller is sacrificed so that the more expensive transmission and engine are not damaged.\nTypically in smaller (less than ) and older engines, a narrow shear pin through the drive shaft and propeller hub transmits the power of the engine at normal loads. The pin is designed to shear when the propeller is put under a load that could damage the engine. After the pin is sheared the engine is unable to provide propulsive power to the boat until a new shear pin is fitted.\nIn larger and more modern engines, a rubber bushing transmits the torque of the drive shaft to the propeller's hub. Under a damaging load the friction of the bushing in the hub is overcome and the rotating propeller slips on the shaft, preventing overloading of the engine's components. After such an event the rubber bushing may be damaged. If so, it may continue to transmit reduced power at low revolutions, but may provide no power, due to reduced friction, at high revolutions. Also, the rubber bushing may perish over time leading to its failure under loads below its designed failure load.\nIn some modern propellers, a hard polymer insert called a \"drive sleeve\" replaces the rubber bushing. The splined or other non-circular cross section of the sleeve inserted between the shaft and propeller hub transmits the engine torque to the propeller, rather than friction. The polymer is weaker than the components of the propeller and engine so it fails before they do when the propeller is overloaded. This fails completely under excessive load, but can easily be replaced.\nWeed hatches and rope cutters.\nWhereas the propeller on a large ship will be immersed in deep water and free of obstacles and flotsam, yachts, barges and river boats often suffer propeller fouling by debris such as weed, ropes, cables, nets and plastics. British narrowboats invariably have a weed hatch over the propeller, and once the narrowboat is stationary, the hatch may be opened to give access to the propeller, enabling debris to be cleared. Yachts and river boats rarely have weed hatches; instead they may fit a rope cutter that fits around the prop shaft and rotates with the propeller. These cutters clear the debris and obviate the need for divers to attend manually to the fouling. Several forms of rope cutters are available:\nPropeller variations.\nA cleaver is a type of propeller design especially used for boat racing. Its leading edge is formed round, while the trailing edge is cut straight. It provides little bow lift, so that it can be used on boats that do not need much bow lift, for instance hydroplanes, that naturally have enough hydrodynamic bow lift. To compensate for the lack of bow lift, a hydrofoil may be installed on the lower unit. Hydrofoils reduce bow lift and help to get a boat out of the hole and onto plane.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23739", "revid": "50151310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23739", "title": "Peter Duesberg", "text": "German-American molecular biologist (born 1936)\nPeter Heinz Hermann Duesberg (born December 2, 1936) is a German-American molecular biologist and a professor of molecular and cell biology at the University of California, Berkeley. He is known for his early research into the genetic aspects of cancer. He is a proponent of AIDS denialism, the claim that HIV does not cause AIDS.\nDuesberg received acclaim early in his career for research on oncogenes and cancer. With Peter K. Vogt, he reported in 1970 that a cancer-causing virus of birds had extra genetic material compared with non-cancer-causing viruses, hypothesizing that this material contributed to cancer. \nInformation about his career.\nAt the age of 36, Duesberg was awarded tenure at the University of California, Berkeley, and at 49, he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences. He received an Outstanding Investigator Grant from the National Institutes of Health in 1986, and from 1986 to 1987 was a Fogarty scholar-in-residence at the NIH laboratories in Bethesda, Maryland.\nLong considered a contrarian by his scientific colleagues, Duesberg began to gain public notoriety with a March 1987 article in \"Cancer Research\" entitled \"Retroviruses as Carcinogens and Pathogens: Expectations and Reality\". In this and subsequent writings, Duesberg proposed his hypothesis that AIDS is caused by long-term consumption of recreational drugs or antiretroviral drugs, and that the retrovirus known as 'HIV' is a harmless passenger virus. In contrast, the scientific consensus is that HIV infection causes AIDS; Duesberg's HIV/AIDS claims have been addressed and rejected as erroneous by the scientific community. Reviews of his opinions in \"Nature\" and \"Science\" asserted that they were unpersuasive and based on selective reading of the literature, and that although Duesberg had a right to a dissenting opinion, his failure to fairly review evidence that HIV causes AIDS meant that his opinion lacked credibility.\nDuesberg's views are cited as major influences on South African HIV/AIDS policy under the administration of Thabo Mbeki, which embraced AIDS denialism. Duesberg served on an advisory panel to Mbeki convened in 2000. The Mbeki administration's failure to provide antiretroviral drugs in a timely manner, due in part to the influence of AIDS denialism, is thought to be responsible for hundreds of thousands of preventable AIDS deaths and HIV infections in South Africa. Duesberg disputed these findings in an article in the journal \"Medical Hypotheses\", but the journal's publisher, Elsevier, later retracted Duesberg's article over accuracy and ethics concerns as well as its rejection during peer review. The incident prompted several complaints to Duesberg's institution, the University of California, Berkeley, which began a misconduct investigation of Duesberg in 2009. The investigation was dropped in 2010, with university officials finding \"insufficient evidence ... to support a recommendation for disciplinary action.\"\nIn 2021, Peter Duesberg had a stroke that left him with severe aphasia affecting speaking, reading, and writing, according to his partner.\nEarly life.\nDuesberg grew up during World War II, raised as a Catholic in Germany. He moved to the US in 1964 to work at the University of California, Berkeley, following completion of a Ph.D. in chemistry at the University of Frankfurt.\nHis work with diseases.\nCancer.\nIn the 1970s, Duesberg won international acclaim for his groundbreaking work on cancer. Duesberg's early work on cancer included being the first to identify the oncogene \"v-src\" from the genome of Rous sarcoma virus, a chicken virus believed to trigger tumor growth. Duesberg disputes the importance of oncogenes and retroviruses in cancer. He supports the aneuploidy hypothesis of cancer that was first proposed in 1914 by Theodor Heinrich Boveri.\nDespite having discovered an oncogene, Duesberg rejects the importance of mutations, oncogenes, and anti-oncogenes entirely. In 1998, Duesberg co-authored a paper reporting a correlation between chromosome number and the genetic instability of cancer cells, which they dubbed \"the ploidy factor,\" confirming earlier research by other groups that demonstrated an association between degree of aneuploidy and metastasis.\nAlthough unwilling to concur with Duesberg in throwing out a role for cancer genes, many researchers support exploration of alternative hypotheses. In 2007, \"Scientific American\" published an article by Duesberg on his aneuploidy cancer theory. In an editorial explaining their decision to publish this article, the editors of \"Scientific American\" wrote: \"Thus, as wrong as Duesberg surely is about HIV, there is at least a chance that he is significantly right about cancer.\" \nA consequence of Duesberg's aneuploidy theory of cancer is his opposition to the HPV vaccine (against the virus that causes genital warts), as the idea that a virus could cause most cases of cervical cancer is inconsistent with his claims about what causes cancer. Although Duesberg generally favors vaccination, he vehemently opposed the rollout of the HPV vaccine, saying the vaccine was \"all risk and no benefit\".\nAIDS.\nIn his 1996 book, \"Inventing the AIDS Virus\", published by Regnery Publishing, a politically conservative book publisher based in Washington, D.C., and in numerous journal articles and letters to the editor, Duesberg asserts that HIV is harmless and that recreational and pharmaceutical drug use, especially of zidovudine (AZT, a drug used in the treatment of AIDS) are the causes of AIDS outside Africa (the so-called Duesberg hypothesis). He considers AIDS diseases as markers for drug use, e.g., use of poppers (alkyl nitrites) among some homosexuals, asserting a correlation between AIDS and recreational drug use. This correlation hypothesis has been disproven by evidence showing that only HIV infection, not homosexuality or recreational/pharmaceutical drug use, predicts who will develop AIDS.\nDuesberg asserts that AIDS in Africa is misdiagnosed and the epidemic a \"myth\", claiming incorrectly that the diagnostic criteria for AIDS are different in Africa than elsewhere, and that the breakdown of the immune system in African AIDS patients can be explained exclusively by factors such as malnutrition, tainted drinking water, and various infections that he presumes are common to AIDS patients in Africa. Duesberg also argues that retroviruses like HIV must be harmless to survive, and that the normal mode of retroviral propagation is mother-to-child transmission by infection in utero.\nSince Duesberg published his first paper on the subject in 1987, scientists have examined and criticized the accuracy of his hypotheses on AIDS causation. Duesberg entered a long dispute with John Maddox, then-editor of the scientific journal \"Nature\", demanding the right to rebut articles that HIV caused AIDS. For several years Maddox consented to this demand but ultimately refused to continue to publish Duesberg's criticisms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Duesberg] forfeited the right to expect answers by his rhetorical technique. Questions left unanswered for more than about ten minutes he takes as further proof that HIV is not the cause of AIDS. Evidence that contradicts his alternative drug hypothesis is on the other hand brushed aside...Duesberg will not be alone in protesting that this is merely a recipe for suppressing challenges to received wisdom. So it can be. But Nature will not so use it. Instead, what Duesberg continues to say about the causation of AIDS will be reported in the general interest. When he offers a text for publication that can be authenticated, it will if possible be published.\nA number of scientific criticisms of Duesberg's hypothesis were summarized in a review article in the journal \"Science\" in 1994, which presented the results of a 3-month scientific investigation into some of Duesberg's claims. In the \"Science\" article, science writer Jon Cohen interviewed both HIV researchers and AIDS denialists (including Duesberg himself) and examined the AIDS literature in addition to review articles written by Duesberg. The article said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...although the Berkeley virologist raises provocative questions, few researchers find his basic contention that HIV is not the cause of AIDS persuasive. Mainstream AIDS researchers argue that Duesberg's arguments are constructed by a selective reading of the scientific literature, dismissing evidence that contradicts his theses, requiring impossibly definitive proof, and dismissing outright studies marked by inconsequential weaknesses.\nThe article also said that Duesberg and the AIDS denialist movement have garnered support from some prominent scientists, including Nobel Prize winner Kary Mullis, while others are cited as \"equally, if not more, concerned about the treatment Duesberg has received at the hands of the establishment\", rather than support of his specific claim that HIV does not cause AIDS. Duesberg has been described as \"the individual who has done the most damage\" regarding denialism, due to the apparent scientific legitimacy his scientific credentials give to his statements.\nIn a 2010 article on conspiracy theories in science, Ted Goertzel highlights Duesberg's opposition to the HIV/AIDS connection as an example in which scientific findings are disputed on irrational grounds, relying on rhetoric, appeal to fairness and the right to a dissenting opinion rather than on evidence. Goertzel said that Duesberg, along with many other denialists frequently invoke the meme of a \"courageous independent scientist resisting orthodoxy\", invoking the name of persecuted physicist and astronomer Galileo Galilei. Regarding this comparison, Goertzel wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...being a dissenter from orthodoxy is not difficult; the hard part is actually having a better theory. Publishing dissenting theories is important when they are backed by plausible evidence, but this does not mean giving critics 'equal time' to dissent from every finding by a mainstream scientist.\nDuesberg's advocacy of AIDS denialism has, by all accounts, effectively made him a pariah to the worldwide scientific community.\nConsequences of AIDS denialism.\nIn 2000, Duesberg was the most prominent AIDS denialist to sit on a 44-member Presidential Advisory Panel on HIV and AIDS convened by then-president Thabo Mbeki of South Africa. The panel was scheduled to meet concurrently with the 2000 International AIDS Conference in Durban and to convey the impression that Mbeki's doubts about HIV/AIDS science were valid and actively discussed in the scientific community.\nThe views of the denialists on the panel, aired during the AIDS conference, received renewed attention. Mbeki later suffered substantial political fallout for his support for AIDS denialism and for opposing the treatment of pregnant HIV-positive South African women with antiretroviral medication. Mbeki partly attenuated his ties with denialists in 2002, asking them to stop associating their names with his.\nIn response to the inclusion of AIDS denialists on Mbeki's panel, the Durban Declaration was drafted and signed by over 5,000 scientists and physicians, describing the evidence that HIV causes AIDS as \"clear-cut, exhaustive and unambiguous\".\nTwo independent studies have concluded that the public health policies of Thabo Mbeki's government, shaped in part by Duesberg's writings and advice, were responsible for over 330,000 excess AIDS deaths and many preventable infections, including those of infants.\nA 2008 feature story on Duesberg in \"Discover\" addresses Duesberg's role in anti-HIV drug-preventable deaths in South Africa. Jeanne Lenzer interviews prominent HIV/AIDS expert Max Essex, who suggests that,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAcademic misconduct investigation.\nIn 2009, Duesberg and co-authors including David Rasnick published an article in \"Medical Hypotheses\", an unconventionally peer reviewed journal. The article, \"HIV-AIDS hypothesis out of touch with South African AIDS \u2013 A new perspective\", had been rejected previously by the journal \"JAIDS\", and a peer reviewer had warned that the authors could face scientific misconduct charges if the paper were published.\nThe reviewers claimed that Duesberg and his co-authors cherry-picked data, cited favorable results while ignoring unfavorable results, and quoted statements out of context. The article was not revised in response to these criticisms. Moreover, the reviewers claim that Duesberg, though he included in the article that neither he nor his co-authors had financial conflicts of interest, \"[committed] a serious breach of professional ethics\" by failing to state a possible conflict of interest: That co-author Rasnick previously worked for Matthias Rath, a vitamin entrepreneur who sold vitamin pills as AIDS remedies.\nIn the article, Duesberg questioned research reporting that drug policies implemented by the South African government on the advice of Duesberg, Rasnick and others had led to excess AIDS deaths. Observing that the overall population of South Africa has increased, Duesberg claimed that HIV must be a harmless \"passenger virus\" that has not caused deaths in South Africa or elsewhere. Duesberg said that HIV does not replicate in the body and that antiviral drugs, which he calls \"inevitably toxic,\" do not inhibit HIV.\nScientists expressed concerns to Elsevier, the publisher of \"Medical Hypotheses\", about unsupported assertions and incorrect statements by Duesberg. After an internal review and with a unanimous recommendation of rejection by five \"Lancet\" reviewers, Elsevier said that the article was flawed and of potential danger to global public health. Elsevier permanently withdrew the Duesberg article and another AIDS denialist publication and asked that the editor of the journal implement a conventional peer review process.\nLetters of complaint to the University of California, Berkeley, including one from Nathan Geffen of the South African Treatment Action Campaign (TAC), prompted university officials to open an inquiry into possible academic misconduct related to false statements and failure to disclose potential conflicts of interest. The investigation was dropped in 2010, with university officials finding \"insufficient evidence...to support a recommendation for disciplinary action.\" The investigation did not evaluate the merits of the research but found that publishing the article was protected by the principle of academic freedom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23740", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23740", "title": "Toxin", "text": "Naturally occurring organic poison\nA toxin is a naturally occurring poison produced by metabolic activities of living cells or organisms. They occur especially as proteins, often conjugated. The term was first used by organic chemist Ludwig Brieger (1849\u20131919), derived from \"toxic\".\nToxins can be small molecules, peptides, or proteins that are capable of causing disease on contact with or absorption by body tissues interacting with biological macromolecules such as enzymes or cellular receptors. They vary greatly in their toxicity, ranging from usually minor (such as a bee sting) to potentially fatal even at extremely low doses (such as botulinum toxin).\nTerminology.\nToxins are often distinguished from other chemical agents strictly based on their biological origin.\nLess strict understandings embrace naturally occurring inorganic toxins, such as arsenic. Other understandings embrace synthetic analogs of naturally occurring organic poisons as toxins, and may or may not embrace naturally occurring inorganic poisons. It is important to confirm usage if a common understanding is critical.\nToxins are a subset of toxicants. The term toxicant is preferred when the poison is man-made and therefore artificial. The human and scientific genetic assembly of a natural-based toxin should be considered a toxin as it is identical to its natural counterpart. The debate is one of linguistic semantics.\nThe word toxin does not specify method of delivery (as opposed to venom, a toxin delivered via a bite, sting, etc.). Poison is a related but broader term that encompasses both toxins and toxicants; poisons may enter the body through any means - typically inhalation, ingestion, or skin absorption. Toxin, toxicant, and poison are often used interchangeably despite these subtle differences in definition. The term toxungen has also been proposed to refer to toxins that are delivered onto the body surface of another organism without an accompanying wound.&lt;ref name=\"10.1111/brv.12062\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nA rather informal terminology of individual toxins relates them to the anatomical location where their effects are most notable:\nOn a broader scale, toxins may be classified as either exotoxins, excreted by an organism, or endotoxins, which are released mainly when bacteria are lysed.\nBiological.\nThe term \"biotoxin\" is sometimes used to explicitly confirm the biological origin as opposed to environmental or anthropogenic origins. Biotoxins can be classified by their mechanism of delivery as poisons (passively transferred via ingestion, inhalation, or absorption across the skin), toxungens (actively transferred to the target's surface by spitting, spraying, or smearing), or venoms (delivered through a wound generated by a bite, sting, or other such action). They can also be classified by their source, such as fungal biotoxins, microbial toxins, plant biotoxins, or animal biotoxins.\nToxins produced by microorganisms are important virulence determinants responsible for microbial pathogenicity and/or evasion of the host immune response.\nBiotoxins vary greatly in purpose and mechanism, and can be highly complex (the venom of the cone snail can contain over 100 unique peptides, which target specific nerve channels or receptors).\nBiotoxins in nature have two primary functions:\nSome of the more well known types of biotoxins include:\nWeaponry.\nMany living organisms employ toxins offensively or defensively. A relatively small number of toxins are known to have the potential to cause widespread sickness or casualties. They are often inexpensive and easily available, and in some cases it is possible to refine them outside the laboratory. As biotoxins act quickly, and are highly toxic even at low doses, they can be more efficient than chemical agents. \nDue to these factors, it is vital to raise awareness of the clinical symptoms of biotoxin poisoning, and to develop effective countermeasures including rapid investigation, response, and treatment.\nEnvironmental.\nThe term \"environmental toxin\" can sometimes explicitly include synthetic contaminants such as industrial pollutants and other artificially made toxic substances. As this contradicts most formal definitions of the term \"toxin\", it is important to confirm what the researcher means when encountering the term outside of microbiological contexts.\nEnvironmental toxins from food chains that may be dangerous to human health include:\nResearch.\nIn general, when scientists determine the amount of a substance that may be hazardous for humans, animals and/or the environment they determine the amount of the substance likely to trigger effects and if possible establish a safe level. In Europe, the European Food Safety Authority produced risk assessments for more than 4,000 substances in over 1,600 scientific opinions and they provide open access summaries of human health, animal health and ecological hazard assessments in their OpenFoodTox database. The OpenFoodTox database can be used to screen potential new foods for toxicity.\nThe Toxicology and Environmental Health Information Program (TEHIP) at the United States National Library of Medicine (NLM) maintains a comprehensive toxicology and environmental health web site that includes access to toxins-related resources produced by TEHIP and by other government agencies and organizations. This web site includes links to databases, bibliographies, tutorials, and other scientific and consumer-oriented resources. TEHIP also is responsible for the Toxicology Data Network (TOXNET), an integrated system of toxicology and environmental health databases that are available free of charge on the web.\nTOXMAP is a Geographic Information System (GIS) that is part of TOXNET. TOXMAP uses maps of the United States to help users visually explore data from the United States Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Toxics Release Inventory and Superfund Basic Research Programs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23741", "revid": "206667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23741", "title": "Philadelphia Phillies", "text": "American Major League Baseball team\nThe Philadelphia Phillies are an American professional baseball team based in Philadelphia. The Phillies compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) East Division. Since 2004, the team's home stadium has been Citizens Bank Park, located in the South Philadelphia Sports Complex.\nThe National League approved a new franchise for Philadelphia to begin play in 1883, at its annual meeting in Providence on December 7, 1882. The Phillies are the oldest, continuous, one-name, one-city franchise in American professional sports and one of the most storied teams in Major League Baseball. Since their founding, the Phillies have won two World Series championships (against the Kansas City Royals in 1980 and the Tampa Bay Rays in 2008) and eight National League pennants (the first of which came in 1915). The team has played 122 consecutive seasons since the first modern World Series and 142 seasons since its inaugural 1883 campaign. As of the end of the 2025 season, the Phillies have played 21,810 games, with a regular season record of 10,303\u201311,392\u2013115 ().\nThe resignation of the Worcester and Troy franchises from the National League after the 1882 season created openings in the eight-team circuit for two new franchises, which were granted to New York and Philadelphia. The team has played at several stadiums in the city, including Recreation Park (1883\u20131886), the Baker Bowl (1887\u20131938), Shibe Park (later renamed Connie Mack Stadium in 1953, in honor of longtime Philadelphia Athletics manager Connie Mack) (1938\u20131970), Veterans Stadium (1971\u20132003), and now at Citizens Bank Park (2004\u2013present). Partly because of the team's longevity, the Phillies were the first American sports franchise to amass over 10,000 losses. A plurality of those losses came in a 31-year period from 1918 to 1948 in which they managed only one winning season. Yet, the Phillies are one of only nine teams to also have won over 10,000 games in their history.\nWith their first championship in 1980, the Phillies were the last of the 16 pre-expansion teams to win a World Series. Since the start of the Divisional Era in 1969, however, the Phillies have emerged as one of MLB's most successful teams, making 16 playoff appearances and winning 13 division titles (including five consecutive divisional titles between 2007 and 2011), six National League pennants, and two World Series championships.\nOver the team's history since 1883, 33 Phillies players have been inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame. Hall of Fame third baseman Mike Schmidt is widely considered the franchise's greatest player of all time.\nThe Philadelphia Phillies' Triple-A affiliate is the Lehigh Valley IronPigs, who play at Coca-Cola Park in Allentown, Pennsylvania. The Double-A affiliate is the Reading Fightin Phils, who play in Reading, Pennsylvania. The Class-A affiliates are the Jersey Shore BlueClaws, who play in Lakewood Township, New Jersey; and the Clearwater Threshers, who play in Clearwater, Florida.\nThe team's spring training facilities are at BayCare Ballpark in Clearwater, Florida.\nHistory.\nPhiladelphia Phillies (1883\u20131889).\nIn 1883, sporting goods manufacturer Al Reach, a pioneering professional baseball player, and attorney John Rogers won an expansion National League franchise for Philadelphia, one of what is now known as the \"Classic Eight\" of the National League. They were awarded a spot in the league to replace the Worcester baseball team, a franchise that had folded in 1882. The new team was nicknamed the \"Phillies\" from the start, and immediately compiled a .173 winning percentage, which stands as the worst in franchise history. Although many sources (including the Phillies themselves) claim that Reach and Rogers bought the Brown Stockings and moved them to Philadelphia, all available evidence suggests this is not the case. Significantly, no players from Worcester ended up with the 1883 Quakers.\nIn 1884, Harry Wright, the former manager of baseball's first openly professional team, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, was recruited as a manager in hopes of reversing the team's fortunes.\nIn 1887, the team began to play at the newly constructed Philadelphia Base Ball Grounds, later renamed National League Park. The stadium would become known as the Baker Bowl in 1923. Despite a general improvement from their dismal beginnings, they never seriously contended for the title.\nBecoming the Phillies (1890\u20131917).\nThe nickname \"Phillies\" first appeared in \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\" on April 3, 1883, in the paper's coverage of an exhibition game by the new National League club and was the team's accepted nickname from the start. This name is one of the longest continually used nicknames in professional sports by a team in the same city.\nThe franchise's standout players in the era were Billy Hamilton, Sam Thompson, and Ed Delahanty, who in 1896 tied the major-league record (since tied by several others) with four home runs in a single game. Due to growing disagreements about the direction of the team, Reach sold his interest to Rogers in 1899.\nWith the birth of the more lucrative American League (AL) in 1901, the Phillies saw many of their better players defect to the upstart, including a number of players who ended up playing for their crosstown rivals, the Athletics, owned by former Phillies minority owner Benjamin Shibe. While their former teammates would thrive (the AL's first five batting champions were former Phillies), the remaining squad fared dismally, finishing 46 games out of first place in 1902\u2014the first of three straight years finishing either seventh or eighth.\nTo add tragedy to folly, a balcony collapsed during a game at the Baker Bowl in 1903, killing 12 and injuring hundreds. Rogers was forced to sell the Phillies to avoid being ruined by an avalanche of lawsuits. In 1904, the team finished with a record of 52\u2013100, making them the first team in franchise history to have lost 100 games.\nThe Phillies won their first pennant in 1915 thanks to the pitching of Grover Cleveland Alexander and the batting prowess of Gavvy Cravath, who set the 20th century single-season record for home runs with 24. They finished the season with a record of 90\u201362, seven games ahead of the Boston Braves. The Phillies went up against the Boston Red Sox in the World Series, opening the series at home with a victory. The Phillies struggled against a strong Red Sox pitching lineup and surrendered the next four games, losing the series four games to one.\nThe team continued to dominate the National League in 1916 but fell short of capturing a second consecutive pennant. The team finished two and a half games out of first place with a record of 91\u201362. Alexander won his second consecutive triple crown and posted 16 shutouts, tying the single-season major league record.\nIn 1917, Alexander had been traded to the Chicago Cubs for pitcher Mike Prendegrast and catcher Pickles Dillhoefer, when owner William Baker refused to increase his salary. Baker was known for running the Phillies very cheaply; for instance, during much of his tenure, there was only one scout in the entire organization. The Phillies finished the 1917 season in second place with a record of 87\u201365, ten games behind the New York Giants.\nThree decades of struggle (1918\u20131948).\nThe effect of the Alexander trade was immediate. In 1918, only three years after winning the pennant, the Phillies finished sixth, 13 games under .500. It was the start of one of the longest streaks of futility in baseball history. From 1918 to 1948, the Phillies had only one winning record, which came in 1932. The team finished higher than sixth only twice, and were never a serious factor past June. During this stretch, they finished eighth (last place) a total of 17 times and seventh seven times, with 12 seasons in which they lost at least 100 games. This saddled the franchise with a reputation for failure that dogged it for many years. The team's primary stars during the 1920s and 1930s were outfielders Cy Williams, Lefty O'Doul, and Chuck Klein, who won the Triple Crown in 1933.\nBaker died in 1930. He left half his estate to his wife and the other half to longtime team secretary Mae Mallen. Five years earlier, Mallen had married a leather goods and shoe dealer, Gerald Nugent. With the support of Baker's widow, Nugent became team president. Baker's widow died in 1932, leaving Nugent in complete control. Unlike Baker, Nugent badly wanted to build a winning team, however, he did not have the financial means to do so. He was forced to trade what little talent the team had to make ends meet, and often had to use some creative financial methods to field a team at all.\nPhiladelphia's Baker Bowl proved to be a fertile hitting ground for Phillies opponents as well, and in 1930, the team surrendered 1199 runs, a major-league record still standing today. Once considered one of the finest parks in baseball, it was not well maintained from the 1910s onward. For instance, until 1925, the Phillies used a flock of sheep to trim the grass. Fans were often showered with rust whenever one of Klein's home runs hit girders. The entire right field grandstand collapsed in 1926, forcing the Phillies to move to the A's Shibe Park (five blocks west on Lehigh Avenue from Baker Bowl) for 1927.\nThe Phillies tried to move to Shibe Park on a permanent basis as tenants of the A's. However, Baker Bowl's owner, Charles W. Murphy, at first refused to let the Phillies out of their lease. He finally relented in 1938, and only then because the city threatened to condemn the dilapidated park. Despite the move, attendance rarely topped 3,000 a game.\nThe lowest point came in 1941, when the Phillies finished with a 43\u2013111 record, setting a franchise record for losses in a season. A year later, they needed an advance from the league just to go to spring training. Nugent realized he did not have enough money to operate the team in 1943, and put it up for sale.\nAfter lumber baron William D. Cox purchased the team with a group of investors for $190,000 and a $50,000 note on March 15, 1943, the Phillies rose out of last place for the first time in five years. As a result, the fan base and attendance at home games increased. Eventually, Cox revealed that he had been betting on the Phillies, and he was banned from baseball by baseball Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis on November 23, 1943. The new owner, Bob Carpenter Sr., scion of the Delaware-based duPont family, bought the team with his son for an estimated $400,000 that same day \u2013 November 23, 1943. The Carpenters tried to polish the team's image and way of doing business. Carpenter Sr. named his son, Bob Carpenter, Jr., team president. They wanted to shed the image of failure by changing the team's nickname.\nPhiladelphia Blue Jays.\nBefore the 1944 season, the team held a fan contest soliciting a new team nickname. Management chose \"Blue Jays\", the fan submission of Elizabeth Crooks, who received a $100 war bond as compensation. The Phillies would later claim in the 2000s that the Blue Jays moniker was never official, however news reports in 1944 note that Phillies management said that the Blue Jays name was as an official \"additional nickname\", meaning that the team had two official nicknames simultaneously, the Phillies and the Blue Jays.\nThe Phillies' official adoption of Blue Jays as a second official nickname led to a dispute with Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, whose nickname is and was Blue Jays. Wilson Shaffer, the school's athletic director, criticized the Philadelphia team for adopting his university's moniker, and said that Philadelphia should use the blue jay's scientific name instead and be known as the Philadelphia Cyanocitta Cristata. Similarly, the university's student council, citing the Philadelphia team's long track record of failure, passed a resolution demanding \"suitable satisfaction\" for what they perceived as theft and sullying of the Blue Jays name. Carpenter, Jr., responded by criticizing Johns Hopkins' baseball record and promised to make the students proud of the Blue Jays name by having his Philadelphia baseball team win many games.\nThe Philadelphia team added three minor league clubs before the start of the 1946 season and named them all Blue Jays: the Class C Salina Blue Jays, Class C Schenectady Blue Jays and Class D Green Bay Blue Jays.\nHowever, the new Blue Jays moniker was ultimately unpopular, and although the team in the 2000s claimed that it was quietly dropped by 1949, news reports at the time indicate that the nickname, which \"never caught on anyway\", was not officially dropped by the team until January 1950.\nThe Blue Jays moniker would be used by Toronto's MLB club when it started play in 1977. Coincidentally, those Blue Jays would go on to defeat the Phillies in six games in the 1993 World Series nearly 50 years later.\nFightin' Phils (1949\u20131970).\nLike Cox, Bob Carpenter Jr. was not afraid to spend the money it took to build a contender. He immediately started signing young players and invested even more money in the farm system, and the Phillies quickly developed a solid core of young players that included future Hall of Famers Richie Ashburn and Robin Roberts. This coincided with the final collapse of the A's. Philadelphia had been an \"A's town\" for most of the first half of the 20th century. Even though the A's had fielded teams as bad or worse than the Phillies for most years since the 1930s, the A's continued to trounce the Phillies at the gate. However, a series of poor baseball and business decisions on the A's part allowed the Phillies to win the hearts of Philadelphia's long-suffering fans.\nThings started coming together for the Phillies in 1949, when they rocketed up the standings to third place with an 81\u201373 record. Although the season had essentially been a two-team race between Brooklyn and St. Louis, it was still the Phillies' first appearance in the first division in 31 years. It was also a fitting tribute to Bob Carpenter Sr., who had died in June and left Bob Jr. in full control of the team.\nThe 1950 Phillies led the National League standings for most of the season and were dubbed the \"Whiz Kids\". In the final months of the season, a tailspin (triggered by the loss of starting pitcher Curt Simmons to National Guard service) caused the team to lose the next eight of ten games. On the last day of the season, the Phillies hung on to a one-game lead when Dick Sisler's dramatic tenth inning home run against the Brooklyn Dodgers clinched the Phillies' first pennant in 35 years. In the World Series, exhausted from their late-season plunge and victims of poor luck, the Phillies were swept by the New York Yankees in four straight games. Nonetheless, this appearance cemented the Phillies' status as the city's favorite team.\nIn contrast, the Philadelphia Athletics finished last in 1950, and longtime manager Connie Mack retired. The team struggled for four more years with only one winning season before abandoning Philadelphia under the Johnson brothers, who bought out Mack. They began to play in Kansas City in 1955. As part of the deal selling that team to the Johnson brothers, the Phillies bought Shibe Park, where both teams had played since 1938. Many thought that the \"Whiz Kids\", with a young core of talented players, would be a force in the league for years to come. However, the team finished with a 73\u201381 record in 1951 and finished nine and a half games out of first place in 1952, with an 87\u201367 record. The Phillies managed to end up in third place in 1953 with an 83\u201371 record, however, they would fail to break .500 from 1954 to 1957.\nIt became apparent that the flash and determination of the Whiz Kids would not return when the team finished last place in the National League from 1958 to 1961. Manager Eddie Sawyer abruptly quit the team after the season opener in 1960, and was replaced by Gene Mauch.\nThe team's competitive futility was highlighted by a record that still stands: in 1961, the Phillies lost 23 games in a row, the worst losing streak in the majors since 1900. Things started to turn around for the team in 1962, when the team finished above .500 for the first time in five years. Gene Mauch was named National League Manager of the Year that season and won it again in 1964. The team improved in 1963, when the team finished the season with an 87\u201375 record. There was confidence that the team would soon become contenders for a return to the World Series. Though Ashburn and Roberts were gone, the 1964 Phillies still had younger pitchers Art Mahaffey, Chris Short, and rookie Ray Culp; veterans Jim Bunning and screwballer Jack Baldschun; and fan favorites Cookie Rojas, Johnny Callison, and NL Rookie of the Year Dick Allen. The team was 90\u201360 on September 20, good enough for a lead of 6.5 games in the pennant race with 12 games to play. However, the Phillies lost 10 games in a row and finished one game out of first, losing the pennant to the St. Louis Cardinals. The \"Phold of '64\" is frequently mentioned as the worst collapse in sports history.\nOne highlight of the 1964 season occurred on Father's Day, when Jim Bunning pitched a perfect game against the New York Mets, the first in Phillies' history.\nFor the rest of the decade, the team finished no higher than fourth place in the NL standings which came during the 1966 season. In the 1969 season, the Phillies finished fifth in the newly created NL East Division, with a record of 63\u201399.\nBy the late 1950s, Carpenter decided the Phillies needed a new home. He never wanted to buy Connie Mack Stadium in the first place, and was now convinced there was no way he could make money playing there. He sold the park to Philadelphia Eagles' owner Jerry Wolman in 1964, taking a $1\u00a0million loss on his purchase of just 10 years earlier. The stadium was deteriorating and there was inadequate parking. Attendance began to drop by 1967 and the team started to plan for a new stadium.\nThe Phillies remained at Connie Mack Stadium until 1970. In the last game played there, the Phillies avoided last place by beating the Expos 2\u20131. When the game was finished several fans in attendance began to remove items from the ballpark, such as chairs, outfield panels and baseball equipment from the dugouts.\nGlory days (1971\u20131984).\nThe Phillies opened the new Veterans Stadium in 1971. The team wore new maroon uniforms to accentuate the change. The stadium was built in South Philadelphia, making it the first time the team was not located in North Philadelphia. The new stadium, along with nearby John F. Kennedy Stadium and the Spectrum, established the South Philadelphia Sports Complex.\nPitcher Rick Wise hurled a no-hitter and in the same game hit two home runs against the Cincinnati Reds in 1971. That same season, Harry Kalas joined the Phillies broadcasting team.\nIn 1972, the Phillies were the worst team in baseball, but newly acquired Steve Carlton won nearly half their games (27 of 59 team wins) and was awarded his first NL Cy Young Award and won it again in 1977. Bob Carpenter Jr. retired in 1972 and passed the team ownership to his son Ruly.\nThe Phillies achieved some success in the mid-1970s. With players such as Carlton, third baseman Mike Schmidt, shortstop Larry Bowa, catcher Bob Boone, and outfielder Greg Luzinski, the Phillies won three straight division titles (1976\u201378). However, they fell short in the NLCS, against the Reds in 1976 and the Dodgers in 1977 and 1978. In 1979, the Phillies acquired Pete Rose, the spark that would put them over the top.\n1980 World Series champions.\nThe Phillies won the National League East in 1980, but to win the league championship, they had to defeat the Houston Astros. In a memorable NLCS, with four of the five games needing extra innings, they fell behind 2\u20131 but battled back to squeeze past the Astros on a 10th-inning game-winning hit by center fielder Garry Maddox, and the city celebrated its first NL pennant in 30 years. The entire series saw only one home run hit, a game-winning two-run home run by Phillies slugger Greg Luzinski in the Phillies' opening 3\u20131 win in Game 1 at Philadelphia.\nFacing the Kansas City Royals in the 1980 World Series, the Phillies won their first World Series championship ever in six games thanks to the timely hitting of Mike Schmidt and Pete Rose. Schmidt, who won the National League Most Valuable Player Award in 1980, also won the World Series Most Valuable Player award on the strength of his 8-for-21 hitting (.381 average), including game-winning hits in Game 2 and the clinching Game 6. This final game was also significant because it remains \"the most-watched game in World Series history\" with a television audience of 54.9\u00a0million viewers. Thus, the Phillies became the last of the 16 teams that made up the Major Leagues from 1903 to 1960 to win a World Series. Carlton captured his third NL Cy Young Award with a record of 24\u20139.\nAfter their series win, Ruly Carpenter, who had been given control of the team in 1972 when his father stepped down as team president, sold the team for $32.5\u00a0million in 1981 to a group that was headed by longtime Phillies executive William Yale Giles.\nThe Phillies returned to the playoffs in 1981. In five games, they were defeated in the first-ever National League Division Series by the Montreal Expos. Mike Schmidt won his second consecutive NL Most Valuable Player award that year. In 1982, the team finished three games behind the St. Louis Cardinals in the East Division, narrowly missing the playoffs. Carlton captured his fourth career NL Cy Young Award that year with 23 wins. \nFor the 1983 season, the Phillies returned to the playoffs and beat the Los Angeles Dodgers. They won this series in four games to capture their fourth NL pennant; however, they lost to the Baltimore Orioles in the World Series in five games. John Denny was named the 1983 NL Cy Young Award winner. Because of the numerous veterans on the 1983 team, \"Philadelphia Daily News\" sportswriter Stan Hochman gave them the nickname, the \"Wheeze Kids\".\nIn 1984, the team finished fourth in the NL East with a record of 81\u201381. Mike Schmidt still remained a dominant force on the team by leading the National League in both home runs and runs batted in.\nYears of struggle (1985\u20131991).\nThe 1985 season was the first time the team finished below .500 since 1974. The team had some success in 1986 despite having released star pitcher Steve Carlton due to injuries. They went on to finish second in the division with a record of 86\u201375. Mike Schmidt led the National League in home runs and runs batted in that year and also won his third National League Most Valuable Player award, sixth Silver Slugger award and tenth Gold Glove.\nIn 1987, closer Steve Bedrosian was named the NL Cy Young Award winner.\nInjuries caused Mike Schmidt to miss most of the 1988 season and he retired from baseball after playing in only 42 games in 1989, thus, the last member of the 1980 championship team was gone.\nIn 1990, Terry Mulholland lost a perfect game in the seventh inning when a San Francisco Giants' batter reached base on a throwing error. The next batter grounded into a double play. Thus, Mulholland faced the perfect-game maximum of 27 batters, but did not qualify for a perfect game. He was credited, however, with a no-hitter.\nDuring this time, the Phillies often struggled to attract more than 25,000 people to Veterans Stadium, the biggest in the National League at the time (at over 62,000 seats). Even crowds of 40,000 were swallowed up by the cavernous environment.\nMacho Row (1992\u20131995).\nBefore the 1992 season, the organization decided to shed the maroon uniform and logo and use colors similar to those used during the days of the \"Whiz Kids\". The season ended with the Phillies at the bottom of the standings\u2014last place in the National League East. However, their fortunes were about to change.\nThe 1993 Phillies were led by stars such as Darren Daulton, John Kruk, Lenny Dykstra, and Curt Schilling. The team was dubbed \"Macho Row\" for their shaggy, unkempt, and dirty look. Their character endeared them to fans, and attendance reached a record high the following season.\nThe team powered their way to a 97\u201365 record and an NL East division title, all thanks to a big April in which the Phillies went 17\u20135. The Phillies' major contributors on offense were Dykstra, Kruk, Kevin Stocker (a rookie who led the team in batting average, hitting .324), and Jim Eisenreich, all of whom hit over .300 for the season. Their pitching staff was led by 16-game winners Curt Schilling and Tommy Greene. Each member of the rotation posted at least 10 wins, while the bullpen was led by elder statesman Larry Andersen and closer Mitch \"Wild Thing\" Williams, who notched 43 saves and a 3.34 ERA.\nThey beat the Atlanta Braves in the 1993 National League Championship Series, four games to two, to earn the fifth NL pennant in franchise history, only to be defeated by the defending World Series champion Toronto Blue Jays in the 1993 World Series. Toronto's Joe Carter hit a walk-off home run in Game 6 to clinch another Phillies' loss.\nThe 1994\u201395 Major League Baseball strike was a blow to attendance and on-field success, as was the arrival of the Atlanta Braves in the division due to league realignment. Several players from the 1993 team were either traded or left the team soon after.\nRebuilding years (1996\u20132005).\nThe team drafted third baseman Scott Rolen in the second round of the 1993 amateur draft. He had reached the majors by 1996 and was named National League Rookie of the Year in 1997. After becoming frustrated with management he demanded a trade and was dealt to the St. Louis Cardinals in 2002.\nFormer Phillie Larry Bowa was hired as manager for the 2001 season, and led the Phillies to an 86\u201376 record, their first winning season since the 1993 World Series year. They spent most of the first half of the season in first place, and traded first place with the Braves for most of the second half. In the end, they finished two games out of first. Bowa was named National League Manager of the Year.\nThe Phillies continued to contend for the next few years under Bowa, with the only blemish being an 80\u201381 season in 2002. On December 6, 2002, Jim Thome, a free agent, signed a six-year, $85\u00a0million contract with the team.\nBetween 1996 and 2002, the team drafted players who would soon become the core of the team including Jimmy Rollins, Pat Burrell, Chase Utley, Ryan Howard, and Cole Hamels. In 2004, the Phillies moved to their new home, Citizens Bank Park, across the street from Veterans Stadium.\nCharlie Manuel took over the club's reins from Bowa after the 2004 season, and general manager Ed Wade was replaced by Pat Gillick in November 2005. Gillick reshaped the club as his own, bringing in players such as Shane Victorino, Jayson Werth, and Jamie Moyer.\nThe Golden era (2006\u20132012).\nRyan Howard won the NL Most Valuable Player Award for the 2006 season and Jimmy Rollins won the award the following year. After the franchise lost its 10,000th game in 2007, its core of young players responded by winning the National League East division title, but they were swept by the Colorado Rockies in the Division Series. After the 2007 season, they acquired closer Brad Lidge through a trade with the Houston Astros.\n2008 World Series champions.\nThe Phillies were named by some media as favorites to repeat as division champions in 2008, but they did not get off to the blazing April start that many had hoped for. Still, they managed their first winning opening month since 2003, and only their fourth since their last World Series appearance.\nChase Utley and Brad Lidge represented the team at the 2008 Major League Baseball All-Star Game, with Utley garnering the most votes of all National League players. In a move to bolster their starting rotation in preparation for the pennant race, the Phillies traded three minor league players to the Athletics for starting pitcher Joe Blanton on July 17.\nOn September 27, the Phillies clinched the National League East for the second year in a row. They won the NLDS three games to one against the Milwaukee Brewers, and they defeated the Dodgers in Los Angeles as well, 4\u20131. As the National League champions, the Phillies advanced to the 2008 World Series to play the Tampa Bay Rays, winning the series 4 games to 1. Game 5 began on Monday, October 27, and was suspended after the top of the 6th inning, with the score tied 2\u20132. The game resumed Wednesday, October 29, with the Phillies winning the game 4\u20133 and capturing their second world series in franchise history. Prior to this, there had never been a rain-shortened game in World Series history, and this was the first suspension. Cole Hamels won the Most Valuable Player Award for both the NLCS and the World Series.\nPat Gillick retired as general manager after the 2008 season and was succeeded by one of his assistants, Rub\u00e9n Amaro Jr. After adding outfielder Ra\u00fal Iba\u00f1ez to replace the departed Pat Burrell, the Phillies retained the majority of their core players for the 2009 season. In July, they signed three-time Cy Young Award winner Pedro Mart\u00ednez and acquired 2008 American League Cy Young winner Cliff Lee before the trade deadline. On September 30, 2009, they clinched a third consecutive National League East Division title for the first time since the 1976\u201378 seasons.\nThe team beat the Colorado Rockies in the NLDS and the Los Angeles Dodgers in the NLCS to become the first Phillies team to win back-to-back pennants and the first National League team since the 1996 Atlanta Braves to have an opportunity to defend their World Series title. However, the Phillies were unable to repeat the 2008 World Series victory; they were defeated in the 2009 series by the New York Yankees, four games to two. In recognition of the team's recent accomplishments, \"Baseball America\" named the Phillies its Organization of the Year.\nOn December 16, 2009, the Phillies acquired starting pitcher Roy Halladay from the Toronto Blue Jays for three minor-league prospects, and traded Cliff Lee to the Seattle Mariners for three prospects.\nOn May 29, 2010, Halladay pitched a perfect game against the Florida Marlins.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[d] In June 2010, the team's scheduled series against the Toronto Blue Jays at Rogers Centre was moved to Philadelphia, because of security concerns for the G-20 Summit. The Blue Jays wore their home white uniforms and batted last as the home team, and the designated hitter was used. The game was the first occasion of the use of a designated hitter in a National League ballpark in a regular-season game; Ryan Howard was the first player to fill the role.\nThe 2010 Phillies won their fourth consecutive NL East Division championship despite a rash of significant injuries to key players. After dropping seven games behind the Atlanta Braves on July 21, Philadelphia finished with an MLB-best record of 97\u201365. The streak included a 20\u20135 record in September, the Phillies' best September since winning 22 games that month in 1983, and an 11\u20130 run in the middle of the month. The acquisition of pitcher Roy Oswalt in early August was a key step, as Oswalt won seven consecutive games in just over five weeks from August 11 through September 17. The Phillies clinched the division on September 27, behind a two-hit shutout by Halladay.\nIn Game 1 of the 2010 National League Division Series, Halladay threw the second no-hitter in Major League Baseball postseason history, leading the Phillies over the Cincinnati Reds, 4\u20130. (The first was New York Yankees pitcher Don Larsen's perfect game in the 1956 World Series.) Halladay's no-hitter was the fifth time a pitcher has thrown two no-hitters in the same season, and was also the first time that one of the two occurred in the postseason. The Phillies went on to sweep the Reds in three straight games.\nIn the 2010 National League Championship Series, the Phillies fell to the eventual World Series champion San Francisco Giants in six games. Halladay was named the 2010 NL Cy Young Award winner.\nBefore the start of the 2011 season, the Phillies signed pitcher Cliff Lee to a five-year deal, bringing him back to the team and forming a formidable rotation of Halladay, Lee, Hamels, Oswalt, and Blanton. Including Vance Worley, who replaced Joe Blanton due to injury. The rotation combined for a win\u2013loss record of 71\u201338, and an earned run average of 2.86, the best in the majors that year. Commentators called it one of the best rotations ever assembled. Halladay, Oswalt, Lee, and Hamels were dubbed two nicknames by fans and media: the \"Phantastic Phour\" and \"The Four Aces\". On September 17, 2011, the Phillies won their fifth consecutive East Division championship, and on September 28, during the final game of the season, the team set a franchise record for victories in a season with 102 by beating the Atlanta Braves in 13 innings, denying their division rivals a potential wild card berth. Yet the Phillies lost in the NLDS to the St. Louis Cardinals\u2014the team that won the National League Wild Card as a result of the Phillies beating the Braves. The Cardinals subsequently beat the Brewers in the NLCS and won the 2011 World Series in seven games over the Texas Rangers.\nThe 2012 Phillies experienced an up and down season. They played .500 ball through the first two months, but then slumped through a 9\u201319 stretch in June where they ended up at the bottom of the NL East by mid-season. With any hope dimming, the Phillies traded key players Shane Victorino and Joe Blanton to the Los Angeles Dodgers, and Hunter Pence to the San Francisco Giants before the trade deadline. A hot start in the second half of the season put the Phillies back on the postseason hunt, but any hope was eventually extinguished with a loss to the Washington Nationals on September 28, costing the Phillies the postseason for the first time since 2006.\nThe Phillies' win\u2013loss record never went below .500 during this time; and the team won the NL East five years in a row from 2007 to 2011.\nEnd of an era (2013\u20132018).\nDuring the 2013 season, the team struggled again and was unable to consistently play well for the majority of the season. On August 16, 2013, with the team's record at 53\u201368, the Phillies fired manager Charlie Manuel, who had managed the team since 2005, and promoted third-base coach Ryne Sandberg to interim manager. Manuel had spent over nine years as manager, leading Philadelphia to its first World Series victory in nearly 30 years and amassing an overall record of 780\u2013636 to become the manager with the most wins in the franchise's history. The 2013 Phillies ended up with a record of 73\u201389, their first losing season since 2002. In the off-season, pitcher Roy Halladay retired from baseball.\nIn the 2014 season, one of the few bright spots was the September 1 game against a division rival, the Atlanta Braves, when starter Cole Hamels and relievers Jake Diekman, Ken Giles, and Jonathan Papelbon combined for a no-hitter at Turner Field and a 7\u20130 victory over Atlanta. In the first round of the 2014 MLB Draft the Phillies selected pitcher Aaron Nola with the 7th overall pick. The team could not gain momentum during the season and finished last in the NL East, the first time they had done so since 2000. During the off-season, Jimmy Rollins waived his no-trade clause and was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers, while Cliff Lee pitched his last game and was sidelined for the entire 2015 season due to injury.\nIn 2015, attendance began to drop as the team showed little improvement and it was clear that the remnants of the 2008 World Series team would soon be departing. Sandberg resigned as manager and bench coach Pete Mackanin was brought in as interim manager. Cole Hamels no-hit the Chicago Cubs 5\u20130 at Wrigley Field, on July 25, striking out 13 and giving up only two walks. It was the first no-hitter against the Cubs since Sandy Koufax's perfect game in 1965, and first at Wrigley Field since the Cubs' Milt Pappas in 1972. Hamels was dealt to the Texas Rangers, six days later. The following month saw the departure of Chase Utley who was traded to the Dodgers. In September, general manager Rub\u00e9n Amaro Jr. was fired and Andy MacPhail was brought in as the interim general manager. The team once again finished last in the NL East with a record of 63\u201399. McPhail was officially named the organization's President of Baseball Operations during the off season. The team then hired Matt Klentak as the new general manager.\nIn 2016, the team finished fourth in the NL East, only winning eight more games than they had the previous year, with a 71\u201391 record. The 2016 season was the last for both Ryan Howard and Carlos Ruiz in a Phillies' uniform. Ruiz was traded to the Dodgers in late August, reuniting him with Chase Utley. The team decided to not exercise their club option on Howard, thus making him a free agent.\nOn September 29, 2017, Pete Mackanin was fired as manager. The Phillies announced Gabe Kapler as their new manager on October 30, 2017. Kapler had been the Director of Player Development for the Los Angeles Dodgers since November 2014. He led the Phillies in the right direction in the first half of the 2018 season, as they had a 59\u201348 record at the July 31 trade deadline and were leading the NL East division by 1.5 games over the Atlanta Braves. However, a late-season collapse where they went 21\u201334 from August to the end of the season led to the Phillies finishing with an 80\u201382 record and third in the division. Aaron Nola amassed a record of 17\u20136 with a 2.37 earned run average and 0.975 WHIP. He finished third in the National League Cy Young race, behind the Nationals' Max Scherzer and the winner, the Mets' Jacob DeGrom.\nBuilding a winning team (2019\u20132022).\nThe Phillies intended to start targeting valuable free agents as soon as the 2018 season was over. Owner John Middleton said they were willing to \"spend stupid money\". During the off-season, the Phillies signed Andrew McCutchen, David Robertson, and made the splash of the offseason by signing Bryce Harper to a 13-year, $330\u00a0million deal, taking him away from the division rival Washington Nationals. The team also made many trades, including trading for the Mariners' shortstop Jean Segura and the Marlins' catcher J.T. Realmuto. The Phillies got off to a hot start the first two months, going 33\u201322 but collapsed from there. They were eliminated from the playoffs on September 24 in the first game of a day-night double-header against Harper's former team and the eventual World Series champions, the Nationals, on their way to finishing with a record of 81\u201381. Owner John Middleton fired Manager Gabe Kapler on October 10, 2019, after ten days of intense deliberations with insiders and outsiders alike.\nOn October 24, 2019, the Philadelphia Phillies announced Joe Girardi as their 55th manager of the team, signing a three-year deal with the Phillies with an option for the 2023 season.\nIn the COVID-shortened 2020 season, the Phillies had a record of 27-25 through their first 52 games and only needed to win 2 of their final 8 games to secure a spot in the expanded playoffs. The team collapsed, however, finishing 1-7 to end the season with a losing record of 28\u201332. On October 3, 2020, Matt Klentak was relieved as General Manager. On December 11, 2020, the Phillies hired Dave Dombrowski as the President Of Baseball Operations. On December 22, 2020, Dombrowski hired Sam Fuld as the General Manager.\nIn 2021, the Phillies finished the season with an 82\u201380 record, their first winning season since 2011, but failed to make the playoffs. On the heels of a strong second half, Bryce Harper won the NL Most Valuable Player Award and a Silver Slugger Award. Other season highlights included Aaron Nola tying an MLB record for consecutive strikeouts by striking out 10 Mets in a row on June 25 and Zack Wheeler finishing second in NL Cy Young voting to Corbin Burnes of the Milwaukee Brewers. The team targeted high-profile free agents during the offseason and improved their lineup by signing outfielders Kyle Schwarber and Nick Castellanos.\nThe Phillies got off to a sluggish 22\u201329 start to the 2022 season. On June 3, the Phillies fired manager Joe Girardi and replaced him with bench coach Rob Thomson, who was named the team's interim manager. The Phillies ended the 2022 season 87\u201375, reaching the playoffs for the first time since 2011.\nIn the postseason, the Phillies traveled to St. Louis to face the St. Louis Cardinals in the National League Wild Card Series for a best of three series, winning in two games. They went on to eliminate the defending World Champion Atlanta Braves three games to one in the National League Division Series, advancing to the National League Championship Series where they would face the San Diego Padres. The Phillies won the series four games to one and would advance to the 2022 World Series. Bryce Harper was named MVP of the NLCS. On October 10, the Phillies also removed the interim role of Thomson and named him the team's manager.\nThe Phillies faced the American League champion Houston Astros in a best of seven World Series that began October 28 at Minute Maid Park in Houston. The Astros entered the series as the top seeded team in the American League and with an undefeated record in the postseason of 7\u20130. Game 1 ended with the Phillies winning the game in extra innings by a score of 6\u20135, with catcher J.T. Realmuto hitting the game-winning home run in the top of the 10th inning. The Astros would even the series at 1\u20131 in Game 2, with the series going to Philadelphia for the first time since 2009. Game 3 at Citizens Bank Park was originally scheduled to take place on October 31, but was postponed until the following day due to rain, which also moved the rest of the series games back by a day. The Phillies would take Game 3 by a score of 7\u20130, which was a result of the team hitting five home runs in the first five innings of the game, the first time this had occurred in World Series history. All five home runs were given up by Astros pitcher Lance McCullers Jr., which became a record for most home runs surrendered by a pitcher in a World Series game. In Game 4, the Astros answered back by winning the game 5\u20130 and throwing a combined no-hitter, the first combined no-hitter in postseason history, and just the second no-hitter of any type in a World Series after Don Larsen's perfect game in 1956. The Astros won the next two games, winning the series four games to two. The Phillies' game six loss, coming shortly after the Philadelphia Union fell in the championship game of the MLS Cup, made Philadelphia the first American city to lose two major professional sports championship title games in the same day. Later, the Philadelphia Eagles would also lose Super Bowl LVII when they lost to the Kansas City Chiefs, thus making the first time three teams in the same city lost three consecutive finals in history.\nTeam uniforms.\nCurrent uniforms.\nThe current team colors, uniform, and logo date back to 1992. The main team colors are red and white, with blue serving as a prominent accent. The team name is written in red with a blue star serving as the dot over the \"i\"s, and blue piping is often found in Phillies' branded apparel and materials. The team's home uniform is white with red pinstripes, lettering and numbering. The road uniform is traditional grey with red lettering/numbering. Both bear a script-lettered \"Phillies\" logo, with the aforementioned star dotting the \"i\"s across the chest, and the player name and number on the back. The uniform's front script has undergone minor changes over the years. Hats are red with a single stylized \"P\". The uniforms and logo are very similar to those used during the \"Whiz Kids\" era from 1950 to 1969.\nPrior to 2024, the Phillies were the one of two MLB teams to use chain stitching in their chest emblems, along with the St. Louis Cardinals. However, when Nike controversially changed the league's uniforms to the Vapor Premier uniform, the Phillies' wordmark crest was changed to a tackle twill patch style.\nIn 2008, the Phillies introduced an alternate, cream-colored uniform during home day games\u2014a tribute to their 125th anniversary. The uniforms are similar to those worn from 1946 through 1949, featuring red lettering bordered with blue piping and lacking pinstripes. The accompanying cap is blue with a red bill and a red stylized \"P\". The uniforms were announced on November 29, 2007, when shortstop Jimmy Rollins, pitcher Cole Hamels, and Hall of Fame pitcher Robin Roberts modeled the new uniforms.\nIn 2016, the Phillies added a red alternate uniform, similar to their spring training uniforms, to be used for mid-week afternoon games. It was unofficially retired following the 2017 season, after which the Phillies revived their powder blue throwbacks as an alternate uniform to be used on select Thursday home games. The red alternates were brought back for select road games in 2021, and became the team's preferred uniform during \"getaway day\" road games. After the 2023 season, the Phillies retired the red alternates in anticipation of a new City Connect uniform, unveiled in 2024. The primarily light blue/midnight blue gradient uniform with yellow trim was heavily inspired by the flag of Philadelphia's colors of light blue and yellow, with \"Philly\" emblazoned on the chest. The cap has Liberty Bell silhouette with a light blue sky and midnight blue skyline, centered alongside two yellow stars. For the 2024 season, the Phillies wore their City Connect uniforms for 12 Friday night home games.\nThe Phillies are one of four teams in Major League Baseball that do not display the name of their city, state, or region on their road jerseys, joining the Los Angeles Angels, St. Louis Cardinals, and the Tampa Bay Rays. Until 2022, the Phillies were the only team that also displayed the player's number on one sleeve, except on the alternate jersey, in addition to the usual placement on the back of the jersey. Since 2023, the sleeves on the Phillies' primary uniforms were left blank in anticipation of a future uniform advertisement. In 2024, the Phillies unveiled Independence Blue Cross (IBX) as the team's first uniform advertiser.\nPatches.\nFrom Opening Day through July 26, 2009, the Phillies wore 2008 World Champions patches on the right sleeve of their home uniforms to celebrate their World Series victory the season prior.\nThe Phillies have worn the following memorial patches:\nBatting practice.\nThe Phillies were an early adopter of the batting practice jersey in 1977, wearing a maroon v-necked top with the \"Phillies\" script name across the chest, as well as the player name and number on the back and a player number on the left sleeve, all in white. Pete Rose wore this maroon batting jersey in place of the road jersey during the 1979 All-Star Game. Currently, during spring training, the Phillies wear solid red practice jerseys with pinstriped pants for Grapefruit League home games. The red jerseys are worn with grey pants on the road.\nFormer uniforms.\nFrom 1970 to 1991, the Phillies sported colors, uniforms, and a logo that were noticeably different from what had come before, or since, but that were widely embraced by even traditionally minded fans. A dark burgundy was adopted as the main team color, with a classic pinstripe style for home uniforms. Blue was almost entirely dropped as part of the team's official color scheme, except in one area; a pale blue (as opposed to traditional grey) was used as the base-color for away game uniforms from 1972 to 1988. Yet the most important aspect of the 1970 uniform change was the adoption of one of the more distinctive logos in sports; a Phillies \"P\" that, thanks to its unique shape and \"baseball stitched\" center swirl, remained instantly recognizable and admired, long after its regular use had ended. It was while wearing this uniform style and color motif that the club achieved its most enduring success, including a World Series title in 1980 and another World Series appearance in 1983. Its continued popularity with fans is still evident. Even today, Phillies' home games can contain many fans sporting caps, shirts or jackets emblazoned with the iconic \"P\" and burgundy color scheme. The current team has worn the burgundy and powder blue throwbacks whenever their opponents are wearing throwback uniforms from that era. Additionally, this uniform also marked the first appearance of \"racing stripes\" on a baseball uniform (striping going down the jersey shoulders, the side of the pants and up to the sides of the jersey up to the armpit), which would be seen on several other MLB teams for the next quarter-century.\nControversial uniform changes.\nIn 1979, the Phillies' front office modified the uniform into an all-burgundy version with white trimmings, to be worn for Saturday games. They were called \"Saturday Night Specials\" and were worn for the first and last time on May 19, 1979, a 10\u20135 loss to the Montreal Expos. The immediate reaction of the media, fans, and players alike was negative, with many describing the despised uniforms as pajama-like. As such, the idea was hastily abandoned. Mike Schmidt did wear the uniform during the MLB All-Star Tour of Japan following the 1979 season. During the closing ceremonies at Veterans Stadium on September 28, 2003, there was a procession of former players during the post-game ceremony, most in uniform. Larry Christenson, the starting pitcher in the original game, came out wearing this old burgundy uniform and was the only one to do so. The Phillies wore this jersey again for the 40th anniversary of the original game on July 27, 2019. Christenson threw out the ceremonial first pitch. They lost to the Atlanta Braves 15\u20137.\nAnother uniform controversy arose in 1994, when the Phillies introduced all-blue caps on Opening Day that were to be worn for home day games only. The caps were unpopular with the players, who considered them bad luck after two losses and wanted them discontinued. Management wanted to keep using the caps as planned, as they sold well to fans. A compromise was reached: the players agreed to wear them for weekday games while returning to the customary red caps for Sunday afternoon games. In all, the Phillies wore the \"unlucky\" blue caps for seven games in 1994, losing six (the lone victory a 5\u20132 triumph over the Florida Marlins on June 29). A slightly different blue cap (with a red bill) was introduced in 2008 as part of the alternate home uniform for day games, a throwback to the late 1940s.\nRivalries.\nThe Phillies had several notable rivalries through history as they often clashed frequently against the Atlanta Braves, Los Angeles Dodgers, and the New York Mets during the 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, and the 2000s. The Phillies often faced heated matchups against all three teams. Against the Dodgers and the Braves, those matchups have happened in the postseason, the Dodgers five times in the NLCS, the Braves twice in the NLDS and once in the NLCS. The fierceness of their matchups against the Mets are due to the geographic New York-Philadelphia rivalry, which is also seen in other sports.\nNew York Mets.\nThe rivalry between the New York Mets and the Phillies has been said to be among the \"hottest\" rivalries in the National League. The two National League East divisional rivals have met each other recently in playoff, division, and wild card races.\nAside from several brawls in the 1980s, the rivalry remained low-key before the 2006 season, as the teams had seldom been equally good at the same time. Since 2006, the teams have battled for playoff position. The Mets won the division in 2006 and contended in 2007 and 2008, while the Phillies won five consecutive division titles from 2007 to 2011. The Phillies' 2007 Eastern Division Title was won on the last day of the season as the Mets lost a seven-game lead with 17 games remaining. The two teams had their first playoff meeting in the 2024 National League Division Series, where the Mets won the series 3-1, while Nick Castellanos had a walk off base hit to win game two for the Phillies at home.\nThere is a long-standing bitter rivalry between the sports fans from New York City and Philadelphia, which are approximately two hours apart by car, seen also between the New York Giants and the Philadelphia Eagles in the National Football League, and the New York Rangers and the Philadelphia Flyers in National Hockey League. Games between the two teams at Citi Field and Citizens Bank Park are often very intense, hard-hitting affairs, as each home crowd does its best to create an unfriendly, sometimes volatile atmosphere for any visiting-team fans.\nPittsburgh Pirates.\nThe rivalry between the Phillies and the Pittsburgh Pirates was considered by some to be one of the best rivalries in the National League. The rivalry started when the Pittsburgh Pirates entered National League play in their fifth season of 1887, four years after the Phillies.\nThe Phillies and the Pirates had remained together after the National League split into two divisions in 1969. During the period of two-division play (1969\u20131993), the two National League East division rivals won the two highest numbers of division championships, reigning exclusively as NL East champions in the 1970s and again in the early 1990s, the Pirates nine, the Phillies six; together, the teams' 15 championships accounted for more than half of the 25 NL East championships during that span.\nAfter the Pirates moved to the National League Central in 1994, the teams face each other in only two series each year and the rivalry has diminished. However, many fans, especially older ones, retain their dislike for the other team and regional differences between Eastern and Western Pennsylvania still fuel the rivalry. The rivalry between the Philadelphia Flyers and the Pittsburgh Penguins in the National Hockey League is also fiercely contested.\nWashington Nationals/Montreal Expos.\nThe Phillies' rivalry with the Washington Nationals extends back during their original tenure as the Montreal Expos. The two teams repeatedly battled for control of the division in the early 1980s and mid 1990s. Following the franchise's relocation to Washington DC in 2005; the rivalry increased in geographic tension due to Washington's proximity to Philadelphia. The rivalry quickly spiked in intensity during the 2010s after Nationals team management introduced a campaign to block Phillies fans from overtaking home games. In 2019; star-outfielder Bryce Harper further fueled tensions after signing a 13-year $330 million contract with the Phillies as a free agent. The Nationals later managed to win the 2019 World Series during the first year of Harper's absence. The Phillies currently lead the series 482\u2013445, but the Nationals lead the postseason series; when the Expos managed a 3\u20132 victory over the Phillies during the 1981 NLDS.\nThe rivalry is also mirrored in the Philadelphia-Washington rivalry, which is also seen in other sports, like between the Philadelphia Eagles and the Washington Commanders and the Philadelphia Flyers and the Washington Capitals. The two cities are approximately two and a half hours apart by car.\nHistorical rivalries.\nCity Series: Philadelphia Athletics.\nThe City Series was the name of a series of baseball games played between the Philadelphia Athletics of the American League and the Phillies that ran from 1903 through 1955. After the A's move to Kansas City, Missouri in 1955, the City Series rivalry came to an end. The teams have since faced each other in Interleague play (since its introduction in 1997) but the rivalry has effectively died in the intervening years since the A's left Philadelphia. In 2014, when the A's faced the Phillies in inter-league play at Oakland Coliseum, the Athletics did not bother to mark the historical connection, going so far as to have a Connie Mack promotion the day before the series while the Texas Rangers were in Oakland.\nThe first City Series was held in 1883 between the Phillies and the American Association's Athletics. When the Athletics first joined the American League, the two teams played each other in a spring and fall series. No City Series was held in 1901 and 1902 due to legal warring between the National and American Leagues.\nTeam managers.\nOver 126 seasons, the Phillies' franchise has employed 55\u00a0managers. The duties of the team manager include team strategy and leadership on and off the field. Seven managers have taken the Phillies to the postseason, with Danny Ozark, Charlie Manuel and Rob Thomson each leading the team to at least three playoff appearances. Manuel and Dallas Green are the only Phillies' managers to win a World Series: Green in 1980 against the Kansas City Royals; and Manuel in 2008 against the Tampa Bay Rays. Charlie Manuel is the longest-tenured manager in franchise history, with 1,416 games of service in parts of nine seasons (2005\u20132013).\nAchievements.\nAwards.\nSix Phillies have won Most Valuable Player Awards during their career with the team. Mike Schmidt leads with three wins, with back-to-back MVPs in 1980 and 1981, and in 1986 as well. Chuck Klein (1932), Jim Konstanty (1950), Ryan Howard (2006), Jimmy Rollins (2007), and Bryce Harper (2021) all have one. Pitcher Steve Carlton leads the team in Cy Young Award wins with four (1972, 1977, 1980, and 1982), while John Denny (1983), Steve Bedrosian (1987), and Roy Halladay (2010) each have one. Four Phillies have won Rookie of the Year honors as well. Jack Sanford won in 1957, Dick Allen in 1964. Third baseman Scott Rolen brought home the honors in 1997, while Howard was the most recent Phillies' winner in 2005. In doing so, Howard became only the second player in MLB history to win Rookie of the Year and Most Valuable Player in consecutive years, Cal Ripken Jr. of the Baltimore Orioles being the first.\nOf the 18 players who have hit four home runs in one game, three were Phillies at the time (more than any other team). Ed Delahanty was the first, hitting his four in Chicago's West Side Park on July 13, 1896. Chuck Klein repeated the feat nearly 40 years later to the day, on July 10, 1936, at Pittsburgh's Forbes Field. Forty years later, on April 17, 1976, Mike Schmidt became the third, with his hits in Chicago at Wrigley Field.\n\"See footnote\"\nHall of Famers.\nPhiladelphia Phillies Hall of Famers\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\nPhiladelphia Phillies\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFord C. Frick Award recipients.\nPhiladelphia Phillies Ford C. Frick Award recipients\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRetired numbers and other honors.\nThe Phillies have retired eight numbers, and honored five additional players with the letter \"P\" which stands for the team's name. Grover Cleveland Alexander, Ed Delahanty, Billy Hamilton, and Sam Thompson played with the team in the era before Major League Baseball used uniform numbers, and Chuck Klein wore a variety of numbers with the team during his career. Of the eight players with retired numbers, seven were retired for their play with the Phillies and one, 42, was universally retired by Major League Baseball when they honored the 50th anniversary of Jackie Robinson's breaking the color barrier.\nWall of Fame.\nThe Wall of Fame was located in Ashburn Alley at Citizens Bank Park from the stadium's opening in 2004 to 2017. In 2018, the exhibit was moved to a new plaza between the left-field scoreboard and the left-field entrance of the stadium.\nThe Phillies Wall of Fame was started in 1978 as the Philadelphia Baseball Wall of Fame. Until 2004, the Phillies inducted one former Phillie and one former member of the Philadelphia Athletics per year. Since 2004, they have only inducted one Phillie annually (with the exception of 2022 and 2023, when they inducted two and three Phillies, respectively). Eligible players must be retired and must have played at least four years with the Phillies. The Phillies' inductees to the Wall of Fame are listed below (note that there was no inductee for the 2017 season, as Pete Rose was planned to be inducted, but was not due to controversial allegations):\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nCentennial Team.\nIn 1983, rather than inducting a player into the Wall of Fame, the Phillies selected their Centennial Team, commemorating the best players of the first 100 years in franchise history.\nMinor league affiliations.\nThe Philadelphia Phillies farm system consists of seven minor league affiliates.\nRadio and television.\nAs of 2024, the Phillies' flagship radio stations is WIP-FM (94.1 FM), formerly owned by CBS Radio, but since November 2017, is owned by Philadelphia-area company Audacy. The broadcasts were discontinued on the former AM flagship station WPHT 1210 in 2016. Scott Franzke provides play-by-play on the radio, with Larry Andersen and Kevin Stocker as color commentators. Meanwhile, NBCUniversal (a unit of Philadelphia-based Comcast) handles local television/streaming broadcasts through its properties NBC Sports Philadelphia/Peacock and WCAU (NBC Channel 10). WCAU broadcasts are syndicated to WHP-DT2 in Harrisburg and WQMY-TV in Wilkes-Barre. Tom McCarthy calls play-by-play for the television broadcasts, with John Kruk, Rub\u00e9n Amaro Jr., Ben Davis, Cole Hamels, and Mike Schmidt providing color commentary.\nSpanish language broadcasts are on WTTM (1680 AM) with Oscar Budejen or Angel Castillo on play-by-play, and Bill Kulik on color commentary.\nOther popular Phillies broadcasters through the years include By Saam (1939\u20131975), Bill Campbell (1962\u20131970), Richie Ashburn (1963\u20131997), and Harry Kalas (1971\u20132009). Kalas, a 2002 recipient of the Ford Frick Award and an icon in the Philadelphia area, called play-by-play in the first three and last three innings on television and the fourth inning on the radio until his death on April 13, 2009.\nAt Citizens Bank Park, the restaurant built into the base of the main scoreboard is named \"Harry the K's\" in Kalas' honor. After his death, the Phillies' TV broadcast booth was renamed \"The Harry Kalas Broadcast Booth\". It is directly next to the radio-broadcast booth, which is named \"The Richie 'Whitey' Ashburn Broadcast Booth.\" When the Phillies win at home, Kalas' rendition of the song \"High Hopes,\" which he would sing when the Phillies had clinched a playoff berth or advanced in the playoffs, is played as fans file out of the stadium. In addition, when a Phillies player hits a home run, a recording of Kalas' famous \"That ball is outta here!\" home run call is played. The sole exception is Chase Utley, once the subject of another famous Kalas call, \"Chase Utley, you are The Man!\", which was played when Utley hit a homer.\nIn 2011, the Phillies unveiled a statue of Harry Kalas at Citizens Bank Park. It was funded by Phillies' fans and designed and constructed by a Phillies' fan.\nThe Phillies' public-address (PA) announcer is Dan Baker, who started in the 1972 season. He is the longest tenured PA announcer in Major League Baseball\nIn 2011, the Phillies spent $10\u00a0million to upgrade the video system at Citizens Bank Park, including a new display screen in left field, making it the largest in the National League at 76 feet high and 97 feet wide. In 2023, the Phillies once again upgraded their left field display screen by installing a 4K HDR screen that is 77% larger than the previous one, measuring at 86 feet high and 152 feet wide.\nCommunity.\nCharitable contributions.\nSince 1984, the Phillies have supported research related to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease) with the \"Phillies Phestival\". The team raised over US$750,000 for ALS research at their 2008 festival, compared with approximately $4,500 at the inaugural event in 1984; the event has raised over $10\u00a0million in its history. The ALS Association of Philadelphia is the Phillies' primary charity, and the hospitals they support include Pennsylvania Hospital, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, and Hahnemann University Hospital. Former Phillies' pitchers Geoff Geary, who lost a friend to the disease, and Curt Schilling, who retired with the Boston Red Sox, are still involved with the Phillies' cause.\nEducation and anti-drug programs.\nThe Phillies have a reading incentive program called Phanatic About Reading, which is designed to encourage students from kindergarten to eighth grade to read for a minimum of 15 minutes a night. This reading program is designed to help students with their literacy skills and comprehension. Phillies Phundamentals is another educational program, offered through after-school and summer camps, that is designed to make learning fun and support academic skills by using baseball.\nThe Phillies celebrate teachers during their annual Teacher Appreciation Night.\nThe \"Cut Out Overdoses\" anti-drug campaign, sponsored by Mothers Against Prescription Drug Abuse (MAPDA) and Emergent Biosolutions, manufacturer of the overdose antagonist Narcan, highlights the drug overdose problem through special communications programs at Citizens Bank Park, home of the Phillies. (There are identical programs supported by both the Boston Red Sox and Cincinnati Reds.) In 2020, the stadium, fan-empty due to the coronavirus pandemic, featured \"cut-out\" cardboard figures of fans filling the stands. Clicking on one of the silhouettes leads to the anguished story of the overdose death of an individual, written by family members. The story also encourages readers to take a stand by learning more about opioid-reversal medication and making a donation to MAPDA. The site reports that an American dies from an accidental opioid overdose every 15 minutes, over 35,000 people annually.\nFan support and reputation.\nPhillies' fans have earned a reputation over the years for their occasional unruly behavior. In the 1960s, radio announcers for visiting teams would frequently report on the numerous fights breaking out in Connie Mack Stadium. Immediately after the final game at the old park, many fans ran onto the field or dislodged parts of the ballpark to take home with them. Later, at Veterans Stadium, the 700 Level gained a reputation for its \"hostile taunting, fighting, public urination and general strangeness\". Phillies fans are famously known for their reputation for being the \"Meanest Fans in America\".\nPhillies' fans are known for harsh criticism of their own stars such the 1964 Rookie of the Year Dick Allen and Hall of Fame third baseman Mike Schmidt. The fans, however, are just as well known for heckling the visiting team. Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Burt Hooton's poor performance during game three of the 1977 NLCS has often been attributed to the crowd's taunting. J. D. Drew, the Phillies' first overall draft pick in the amateur draft of 1997, never signed with the Phillies following a contract dispute with the team, instead re-entering the draft the next year to be drafted by the St. Louis Cardinals. Phillies fans were angered over this disrespect and hurled debris, including two D batteries, at Drew during an August 1999 game.\nMany sportswriters have noted the passionate presence of Phillies fans. Allen Barra wrote that the biggest roar he ever heard from Philadelphia fans was in 1980 when Tug McGraw, in the victory parade after the World Series, told New York fans they could \"take this championship and shove it.\"\nWhen the Phillies moved to Veterans Stadium, they hired a group of young ladies to serve as ushers. These women wore maroon-colored outfits featuring hot pants and were called the Hot Pants Patrol. The team also introduced a pair of mascots attired in colonial garb, named Philadelphia Phil and Phyllis. In addition to costumed characters, animated Phil and Phyllis figures mounted on the center-field facade would \"hit\" the Liberty Bell after a Phillies home run. This pair of mascots never achieved any significant level of popularity with fans and were eventually discontinued. In 1978, the team introduced a new mascot, the Phillie Phanatic, who has been called \"baseball's best mascot\", which has been much more successful and has become closely associated with the marketing of the team.\nAt a game in the 1970s, the Phillies had an Easter Day promotion known as the \"highest-jumping Easter Bunny.\" The plan was for the Easter Bunny, who was given $1,000 and placed in a hot air balloon, to be flown out of Veterans Stadium before the Phillies game. The first fan to find the balloon would get the cash prize. However, the balloon only went three feet in the air before crashing to the ground. As he left the field, the Phillies' fans booed the Easter Bunny.\nIn Phillies' fan culture, it is also not unusual to replace an \"f\" with a \"ph\" in words, such as the Phillie Phanatic.\nThe club surpassed 100 consecutive sellouts on August 19, 2010, selling out over 50% of their home games and averaging an annual attendance of over 3.1\u00a0million fans since moving to Citizens Bank Park; on April 3, 2011, the team broke the three-game series attendance record at the ballpark, having 136,254 fans attend the opening weekend against the Houston Astros.\nIn 2011 and 2012, the Phillies led the league in attendance with 3,680,718 and 3,565,718 fans, respectively, coming out to watch Phillies baseball.\nDuring the 2020 season, Citizens Bank Park was closed to fans due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Fans organized a group, the \"Phandemic Krew\", which gathered behind the center field gate for every game with ladders propped against the gates. The fans' drums, cheers, live applause, and air horns could be heard on live broadcasts and by the players in the empty ballpark.\nThe Phillies now boast active international support groups on social media, with a Philadelphia Phillies' UK Facebook group starting in August 2015 and UK Phillies' Twitter account created in May 2017. In March 2018 a Phillies' France account launched in French.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23742", "revid": "0", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23742", "title": "Polypeptide", "text": ""}
{"id": "23743", "revid": "46275428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23743", "title": "Phanerozoic", "text": "Fourth and current eon of the geological timescale\nThe Phanerozoic is the current and the latest of the four geologic eons in the Earth's geologic time scale, covering the time period from million years ago to the present. It is the eon during which abundant animal and plant life has proliferated, diversified and colonized various niches on the Earth's surface, beginning with the Cambrian period when animals first developed hard shells that can be clearly preserved in the fossil record. The time before the Phanerozoic, collectively called the \"Precambrian\", is now divided into the Hadean, Archaean and Proterozoic eons.\nThe time span of the Phanerozoic starts with the sudden appearance of fossilised evidence of a number of animal phyla; the evolution of those phyla into diverse forms; the evolution of plants; the evolution of fish, arthropods and molluscs; the terrestrial colonization and evolution of insects, chelicerates, myriapods and tetrapods; and the development of modern flora dominated by vascular plants. During this time span, tectonic forces which move the continents had collected them into a single landmass known as Pangaea (the most recent supercontinent), which then separated into the current continental landmasses.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Phanerozoic\" was coined in 1930 by the American geologist George Halcott Chadwick (1876\u20131953), deriving from the Ancient Greek words (), meaning \"visible\"; and (), meaning \"life\". This is because it was once believed that life began in the Cambrian, the first period of this eon, due to the lack of Precambrian fossil record back then. However, trace fossils of booming complex life from the Ediacaran period (Avalon explosion) of the preceding Proterozoic eon have since been discovered, and the modern scientific consensus now agrees that complex life (in the form of placozoans and primitive sponges such as \"Otavia\") has existed at least since the Tonian period and the earliest known life forms (in the form of simple prokaryotic microbial mats) started in the ocean floor during the earlier Archean eon.\nProterozoic\u2013Phanerozoic boundary.\nThe Proterozoic\u2013Phanerozoic boundary is at 538.8\u00a0million years ago. In the 19th century, the boundary was set at time of appearance of the first abundant animal (metazoan) fossils, but trace fossils of several hundred groups (taxa) of complex soft-bodied metazoa from the preceding Ediacaran period of the Proterozoic eon, known as the Avalon Explosion, have been identified since the systematic study of those forms started in the 1950s. The transition from the largely sessile Precambrian biota to the active mobile Cambrian biota occurred early in the Phanerozoic.\nEras of the Phanerozoic.\nThe Phanerozoic is divided into three eras: the Paleozoic, Mesozoic and Cenozoic, which are further subdivided into 12 periods. The Paleozoic features the evolution of the three most prominent animal phyla, arthropods, molluscs and chordates, the last of which includes fish, amphibians and the fully terrestrial amniotes (synapsids and sauropsids). The Mesozoic features the evolution of crocodilians, turtles, dinosaurs (including birds), lepidosaurs (lizards and snakes) and mammals. The Cenozoic begins with the extinction of all non-avian dinosaurs, pterosaurs and marine reptiles, and features the great diversification in birds and mammals. Humans appeared and evolved during the most recent part of the Cenozoic.\nPaleozoic Era.\nThe Paleozoic is a time in Earth's history when active complex life forms evolved, took their first foothold on dry land, and when the forerunners of all multicellular life on Earth began to diversify. There are six periods in the Paleozoic era: Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian, Devonian, Carboniferous and Permian.\nCambrian Period.\nThe Cambrian is the first period of the Paleozoic Era and ran from 539 million to 485\u00a0million years ago. The Cambrian sparked a rapid expansion in the diversity of animals, in an event known as the Cambrian explosion, during which the greatest number of animal body plans evolved in a single period in the history of Earth. Complex algae evolved, and the fauna was dominated by armoured arthropods (such as trilobites and radiodontids) and to a lesser extent shelled cephalopods (such as orthocones). Almost all phyla of marine animals evolved in this period. During this time, the super-continent Pannotia began to break up, most of which later recombined into the super-continent Gondwana.\nOrdovician Period.\nThe Ordovician spans from 485 million to 444\u00a0million years ago. The Ordovician was a time in Earth's history in which many groups still prevalent today evolved or diversified, such as primitive nautiloids, vertebrates (then only jawless fish) and corals. This process is known as the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event or GOBE. Trilobites began to be replaced by articulate brachiopods, and crinoids also became an increasingly important part of the fauna. The first arthropods crept ashore to colonise Gondwana, a continent empty of animal life. A group of freshwater green algae, the streptophytes, also survived being washed ashore and began to colonize the flood plains and riparian zones, giving rise to primitive land plants.\nBy the end of the Ordovician, Gondwana had moved from the equator to the South Pole, and Laurentia had collided with Baltica, closing the Iapetus Ocean. The glaciation of Gondwana resulted in a major drop in sea level, killing off all life that had established along its coast. Glaciation caused an icehouse Earth, leading to the Ordovician\u2013Silurian extinction, during which 60% of marine invertebrates and 25% of families became extinct. Though one of the deadliest mass extinctions in earth's history, the O\u2013S extinction did not cause profound ecological changes between the periods.\nSilurian Period.\nThe Silurian spans from 444 million to 419\u00a0million years ago, which saw a warming from an icehouse Earth. This period saw the mass diversification of fish, as jawless fish became more numerous, and early jawed fish and freshwater species appeared in the fossil record. Arthropods remained abundant, and some groups, such as eurypterids, became apex predators in the ocean. Fully terrestrial life established itself on land, including early fungi, arachnids, hexapods and myriapods. The evolution of vascular plants (mainly spore-producing ferns such as \"Cooksonia\") allowed land plants to gain a foothold further inland as well. During this time, there were four continents: Gondwana (Africa, South America, Australia, Antarctica, India), Laurentia (North America with parts of Europe), Baltica (the rest of Europe), and Siberia (Northern Asia).\nDevonian Period.\nThe Devonian spans from 419 million to 359\u00a0million years ago. Also informally known as the \"Age of the Fish\", the Devonian features a huge diversification in fish such as the jawless conodonts and ostracoderms, as well as jawed fish such as the armored placoderms (e.g. \"Dunkleosteus\"), the spiny acanthodians and early bony fish. The Devonian also saw the primitive appearance of modern fish groups such as chondricthyans (cartilaginous fish) and osteichthyans (bony fish), the latter of which include two clades \u2014 the actinopterygians (ray-finned fish) and sarcopterygians (lobe-finned fish). One lineage of sarcopterygians, Rhipidistia, evolved the first four-limbed vertebrates, which would eventually become tetrapods. On land, plant groups diversified after the Silurian-Devonian Terrestrial Revolution; the first woody ferns and the earliest seed plants evolved during this period. By the Middle Devonian, shrub-like forests existed: lycophytes, horsetails and progymnosperm. This greening event also allowed the diversification of arthropods as they took advantage of the new habitat. Near the end of the Devonian, 70% of all species became extinct in a sequence of mass extinction events, collectively known as the Late Devonian extinction.\nCarboniferous Period.\nThe Carboniferous spans from 359 million to 299\u00a0million years ago. Tropical swamps dominated the Earth, and the large amounts of trees sequestered much of the carbon that became coal deposits (hence the name Carboniferous and the term \"coal forest\"). About 90% of all coal beds were deposited in the Carboniferous and Permian periods, which represent just 2% of the Earth's geologic history. The high oxygen levels caused by these wetland rainforests allowed arthropods, normally limited in size by their respiratory systems, to proliferate and increase in size. Tetrapods also diversified during the Carboniferous as semiaquatic amphibians such as the temnospondyls, and one lineage developed extraembryonic membranes that allowed their eggs to survive outside of the water. These tetrapods, the amniotes, included the first sauropsids (which evolved the reptiles, dinosaurs and birds) and synapsids (the ancestors of mammals). Throughout the Carboniferous, there was a cooling pattern, which eventually led to the glaciation of Gondwana as much of it was situated around the South Pole. This event was known as the Permo-Carboniferous Glaciation and resulted in a major loss of coal forests, known as the Carboniferous rainforest collapse.\nPermian Period.\nThe Permian spans from 299 million to 251\u00a0million years ago and was the last period of the Paleozoic era. At its beginning, all landmasses came together to form the supercontinent Pangaea, surrounded by one expansive ocean called Panthalassa. The Earth was relatively dry compared to the Carboniferous, with harsh seasons, as the climate of the interior of Pangaea was not moderated by large bodies of water. Amniotes still flourished and diversified in the new dry climate, particularly synapsids such as \"Dimetrodon,\" \"Edaphosaurus\" and therapsids, which gave rise to the ancestors of modern mammals. The first conifers evolved during this period, then dominated the terrestrial landscape. The Permian ended with at least one mass extinction, an event sometimes known as \"the Great Dying\", caused by large floods of lava (the Siberian Traps in Russia and the Emeishan Traps in China). This extinction was the largest in Earth's history and led to the loss of 95% of all species of life.\nMesozoic Era.\nThe Mesozoic ranges from 252 million to 66\u00a0million years ago. Also referred to as the Age of Reptiles, Age of Dinosaurs or Age of Conifers, the Mesozoic featured the first time the sauropsids ascended to ecological dominance over the synapsids, as well as the diversification of many modern ray-finned fish, insects, molluscs (particularly the coleoids), tetrapods and plants. The Mesozoic is subdivided into three periods: the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous.\nTriassic Period.\nThe Triassic ranges from 252 million to 201\u00a0million years ago. The Triassic is mostly a transitional recovery period between the desolate aftermath of the Permian Extinction and the lush Jurassic Period. It has three major epochs: Early Triassic, Middle Triassic, and Late Triassic.\nThe Early Triassic lasted between 252 million to 247\u00a0million years ago, and was a hot and arid epoch in the aftermath of the Permian Extinction. Many tetrapods during this epoch represented a disaster fauna, a group of survivor animals with low diversity and cosmopolitanism (wide geographic ranges). Temnospondyli recovered first and evolved into large aquatic predators during the Triassic. Other reptiles also diversified rapidly, with aquatic reptiles such as ichthyosaurs and sauropterygians proliferating in the seas. On land, the first true archosaurs appeared, including pseudosuchians (crocodile relatives) and avemetatarsalians (bird/dinosaur relatives).\nThe Middle Triassic spans from 247 million to 237\u00a0million years ago. The Middle Triassic featured the beginnings of the break-up of Pangaea as rifting commenced in north Pangaea. The northern part of the Tethys Ocean, the Paleotethys Ocean, had become a passive basin, but a spreading center was active in the southern part of the Tethys Ocean, the Neotethys Ocean. Phytoplankton, coral, crustaceans and many other marine invertebrates recovered from the Permian extinction by the end of the Middle Triassic. Meanwhile, on land, reptiles continued to diversify, conifer forests flourished, as well as the first flies.\nThe Late Triassic spans from 237 million to 201\u00a0million years ago. Following the bloom of the Middle Triassic, the Late Triassic was initially warm and arid with a strong monsoon climate and with most precipitation limited to coastal regions and high latitudes. This changed late in the Carnian period with a 2 million years-long wet season which transformed the arid continental interior into lush alluvial forests. The first true dinosaurs appeared early in the Late Triassic, and pterosaurs evolved a bit later. Other large reptilian competitors to the dinosaurs were wiped out by the Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction event, in which most archosaurs (excluding crocodylomorphs, pterosaurs and dinosaurs), most therapsids (except cynodonts) and almost all large amphibians became extinct, as well as 34% of marine life in the fourth mass extinction event. The cause of the extinction is debated, but likely resulted from eruptions of the CAMP large igneous province.\nJurassic Period.\nThe Jurassic ranges from 201 million to 145\u00a0million years ago, and features three major epochs: Early Jurassic, Middle Jurassic and Late Jurassic.\nThe Early Jurassic epoch spans from 201 million to 174\u00a0million years ago. The climate was much more humid than during the Triassic, and as a result, the world was warm and partially tropical, though possibly with short colder intervals. Plesiosaurs, ichthyosaurs and ammonites dominated the seas, while dinosaurs, pterysaurs and other reptiles dominated the land, with species such as \"Dilophosaurus\" at the apex. Crocodylomorphs evolved into aquatic forms, pushing the remaining large amphibians to near extinction. True mammals were present during the Jurassic but remained small, with average body masses of less than until the end of the Cretaceous.\nThe Middle and Late Jurassic Epochs span from 174 million to 145\u00a0million years ago. Conifer savannahs made up a large portion of the world's forests. In the oceans, plesiosaurs were quite common, and ichthyosaurs were flourishing. The Late Jurassic Epoch spans from 163 million to 145\u00a0million years ago. The Late Jurassic featured a severe extinction of sauropods in northern continents, alongside many ichthyosaurs. However, the Jurassic-Cretaceous boundary did not strongly impact most forms of life.\nCretaceous Period.\nThe Cretaceous is the Phanerozoic's longest period and the last period of the Mesozoic. It spans from 145 million to 66\u00a0million years ago, and is divided into two epochs: Early Cretaceous, and Late Cretaceous.\nThe Early Cretaceous Epoch spans from 145 million to 100\u00a0million years ago. Dinosaurs continued to be abundant, with groups such as tyrannosauroids, avialans (birds), marginocephalians, and ornithopods seeing early glimpses of later success. Other tetrapods, such as stegosaurs and ichthyosaurs, declined significantly, and sauropods were restricted to southern continents.\nThe Late Cretaceous Epoch spans from 100 million to 66\u00a0million years ago. The Late Cretaceous featured a cooling trend that would continue into the Cenozoic Era. Eventually, the tropical climate was restricted to the equator and areas beyond the tropic lines featured more seasonal climates. Dinosaurs still thrived as new species such as \"Tyrannosaurus\", \"Ankylosaurus\", \"Triceratops\" and hadrosaurs dominated the food web. Whether or not pterosaurs went into a decline as birds radiated is debated; however, many families survived until the end of the Cretaceous, alongside new forms such as the gigantic \"Quetzalcoatlus\". Mammals diversified despite their small sizes, with metatherians (marsupials and kin) and eutherians (placentals and kin) coming into their own. In the oceans, mosasaurs diversified to fill the role of the now-extinct ichthyosaurs, alongside huge plesiosaurs such as \"Elasmosaurus\". Also, the first flowering plants evolved. At the end of the Cretaceous, the Deccan Traps and other volcanic eruptions were poisoning the atmosphere. As this was continued, it is thought that a large meteor smashed into Earth, creating the Chicxulub Crater and causing the event known as the K\u2013Pg extinction, the fifth and most recent mass extinction event, during which 75% of life on Earth became extinct, including all non-avian dinosaurs. Every living thing with a body mass over 10 kilograms became extinct, and the Age of Dinosaurs came to an end.\nCenozoic Era.\nThe Cenozoic featured the rise of mammals and birds as the dominant class of animals, as the end of the Age of Dinosaurs left significant open niches. There are three divisions of the Cenozoic: Paleogene, Neogene and Quaternary.\nPaleogene Period.\nThe Paleogene spans from the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs, some 66 million years ago, to the dawn of the Neogene 23\u00a0million years ago. It features three epochs: Paleocene, Eocene and Oligocene.\nThe Paleocene Epoch began with the K\u2013Pg extinction event, and the early part of the Paleocene saw the recovery of the Earth from that event. The continents began to take their modern shapes, but most continents (and India) remained separated from each other: Africa and Eurasia were separated by the Tethys Sea, and the Americas were separated by the Panamanic Seaway (as the Isthmus of Panama had not yet formed). This epoch featured a general warming trend that peaked at the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum, and the earliest modern jungles expanded, eventually reaching the poles. The oceans were dominated by sharks, as the large reptiles that had once ruled had become extinct. Mammals diversified rapidly, but most remained small. The largest tetrapod carnivores during the Paleocene were reptiles, including crocodyliforms, choristoderans and snakes. \"Titanoboa\", the largest known snake, lived in South America during the Paleocene.\nThe Eocene Epoch ranged from 56 million to 34\u00a0million years ago. In the early Eocene, most land mammals were small and living in cramped jungles, much like the Paleocene. Among them were early primates, whales and horses along with many other early forms of mammals. The climate was warm and humid, with little temperature gradient from pole to pole. In the Middle Eocene Epoch, the Antarctic Circumpolar Current formed when South America and Australia both separated from Antarctica to open up the Drake Passage and Tasmanian Passage, disrupting ocean currents worldwide, resulting in global cooling and causing the jungles to shrink. More modern forms of mammals continued to diversify with the cooling climate even as more archaic forms died out. By the end of the Eocene, whales such as \"Basilosaurus\" had become fully aquatic. The late Eocene Epoch saw the rebirth of seasons, which caused the expansion of savanna-like areas with the earliest substantial grasslands. At the transition between the Eocene and Oligocene epochs there was a significant extinction event, the cause of which is debated.\nThe Oligocene Epoch spans from 34 million to 23\u00a0million years ago. The Oligocene was an important transitional period between the tropical world of the Eocene and more modern ecosystems. This period featured a global expansion of grass which led to many new species taking advantage, including the first elephants, felines, canines, marsupials and many other species still prevalent today. Many other species of plants evolved during this epoch also, such as the evergreen trees. The long term cooling continued and seasonal rain patterns established. Mammals continued to grow larger. \"Paraceratherium\", one of the largest land mammals to ever live, evolved during this epoch, along with many other perissodactyls.\nNeogene Period.\nThe Neogene spans from 23.03\u00a0million to 2.58\u00a0million years ago. It features two epochs: the Miocene and the Pliocene.\nThe Miocene spans from 23.03\u00a0million to 5.333\u00a0million years ago and is a period in which grass spread further across, effectively dominating a large portion of the world, diminishing forests in the process. Kelp forests evolved, leading to the evolution of new species such as sea otters. During this time, perissodactyls thrived, and evolved into many different varieties. Alongside them were the apes, which evolved into 30 species. Overall, arid and mountainous land dominated most of the world, as did grazers. The Tethys Sea finally closed with the creation of the Arabian Peninsula and in its wake left the Black, Red, Mediterranean and Caspian seas. This only increased aridity. Many new plants evolved, and 95% of modern seed plants evolved in the mid-Miocene.\nThe Pliocene lasted from 5.333\u00a0million to 2.58\u00a0million years ago. The Pliocene featured dramatic climatic changes, which ultimately led to modern species and plants. The Mediterranean Sea dried up for hundreds of thousand years in the Messinian salinity crisis. Along with these major geological events, Africa saw the appearance of \"Australopithecus\", the ancestor of \"Homo\". The Isthmus of Panama formed, and animals migrated between North and South America, wreaking havoc on the local ecology. Climatic changes brought savannas that are still continuing to spread across the world, Indian monsoons, deserts in East Asia, and the beginnings of the Sahara Desert. The Earth's continents and seas moved into their present shapes. The world map has not changed much since, save for changes brought about by the Quaternary glaciation such as Lake Agassiz (precursor of the Great Lakes).\nQuaternary Period.\nThe Quaternary spans from 2.58\u00a0million years ago to present day, and is the shortest geological period in the Phanerozoic Eon. It features modern animals, and dramatic changes in the climate. It is divided into two epochs: the Pleistocene and the Holocene.\nThe Pleistocene lasted from 2.58 million to 11,700 years ago. This epoch was marked by a series of glacial periods (ice ages) as a result of the cooling trend that started in the mid-Eocene. There were numerous separate glaciation periods marked by the advance of ice caps as far south as 40 degrees N latitude in mountainous areas. Meanwhile, Africa experienced a trend of desiccation which resulted in the creation of the Sahara, Namib and Kalahari deserts. Mammoths, giant ground sloths, dire wolves, sabre-toothed cats and archaic humans such as \"Homo erectus\" were common and widespread during the Pleistocene. A more anatomically modern human, \"Homo sapiens\", began migrating out of East Africa in at least two waves, the first being as early as 270,000 years ago. After a supervolcano eruption in Sumatra 74,000 years ago caused a global population bottleneck of humans, a second wave of \"Homo sapiens \" migration successfully repopulated every continent except Antarctica. As the Pleistocene drew to a close, a major extinction wiped out much of the world's megafauna, including non-\"Homo sapiens\" human species such as \"Homo neanderthalensis\" and \"Homo floresiensis\". All the continents were affected, but Africa was impacted to a lesser extent and retained many large animals such as elephants, rhinoceros and hippopotamus. The extent to which \"Homo sapiens\" were involved in this megafaunal extinction is debated.\nThe Holocene began 11,700 years ago at the end of Younger Dryas and lasts until the present day. All recorded history and so-called \"human history\" lies within the boundaries of the Holocene epoch. Human activity is blamed for an ongoing mass extinction that began roughly 10,000 years ago, though the species becoming extinct have only been recorded since the Industrial Revolution. This is sometimes referred to as the \"Sixth Extinction\" with hundreds of species gone extinct due to human activities such as overhunting, habitat destruction and introduction of invasive species.\nBiodiversity.\nIt has been demonstrated that changes in biodiversity through the Phanerozoic correlate much better with the hyperbolic model (widely used in demography and macrosociology) than with exponential and logistic models (traditionally used in population biology and extensively applied to fossil biodiversity as well). The latter models imply that changes in diversity are guided by a first-order positive feedback (more ancestors, more descendants) or a negative feedback that arises from resource limitation, or both. The hyperbolic model implies a second-order positive feedback. The hyperbolic pattern of the human population growth arises from quadratic positive feedback, caused by the interaction of the population size and the rate of technological growth. The character of biodiversity growth in the Phanerozoic Eon can be similarly accounted for by a feedback between the diversity and community structure complexity. It has been suggested that the similarity between the curves of biodiversity and human population probably comes from the fact that both are derived from the superposition on the hyperbolic trend of cyclical and random dynamics.\nClimate.\nAcross the Phanerozoic, the dominant driver of long-term climatic change was the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, though some studies have suggested a decoupling of carbon dioxide and palaeotemperature, particularly during cold intervals of the Phanerozoic. Phanerozoic carbon dioxide concentrations have been governed partially by a 26 million year oceanic crustal cycle. Since the Devonian, large swings in carbon dioxide of 2,000 ppm or more were uncommon over short timescales. Variations in global temperature were limited by negative feedbacks in the phosphorus cycle, wherein increased phosphorus input into the ocean would increase surficial biological productivity that would in turn enhance iron redox cycling and thus remove phosphorus from seawater; this maintained a relatively stable rate of removal of carbon from the atmosphere and ocean via organic carbon burial. The climate also controlled the availability of phosphate through its regulation of rates of continental and seafloor weathering. Major global temperature variations of &gt;7\u00a0\u00b0C during the Phanerozoic were strongly associated with mass extinctions.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23744", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23744", "title": "Propeller wind generator", "text": ""}
{"id": "23745", "revid": "891894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23745", "title": "Pok\u00e9mon", "text": "Japanese media franchise\n is a Japanese media franchise consisting of video games, animated series and films, a trading card game, and other related media. The franchise takes place in a shared universe in which humans co-exist with creatures known as Pok\u00e9mon, a large variety of species endowed with special powers. The franchise's primary target audience is children aged 5 to 12, but it is known to attract people of all ages. \"Pok\u00e9mon\" is estimated to be the world's highest-grossing media franchise and is one of the best-selling video game franchises.\nThe franchise originated as a pair of role-playing games developed by Game Freak, from an original concept by its founder, Satoshi Tajiri. Released on the Game Boy on 27 February 1996, the games became sleeper hits and were followed by manga series, a trading card game, and anime series and films. From 1998 to 2000, \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was exported to the rest of the world, creating an unprecedented global phenomenon dubbed \"Pok\u00e9mania\". By 2002, the craze had ended, after which \"Pok\u00e9mon\" became a fixture in popular culture, with new products releasing to this day. In the summer of 2016, the franchise spawned a second craze with the release of \"Pok\u00e9mon Go\", an augmented reality game developed by Niantic.\nUnlike most IPs, which are owned by one company, \"Pok\u00e9mon\" is jointly owned by three: Nintendo, Game Freak, and Creatures. Game Freak develops the core series RPGs, which are published by Nintendo exclusively for their consoles, while Creatures manages the trading card game and related merchandise, occasionally developing spin-off titles. The three companies established The Pok\u00e9mon Company (TPC) in 1998 to manage the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" property within Asia. The \"Pok\u00e9mon\" anime series and films are co-owned by Shogakukan. Since 2009, The Pok\u00e9mon Company International (TPCi), a subsidiary of TPC, has managed the franchise in all regions outside Asia.\nName.\nThe original full name of the franchise is , which has been commonly abbreviated to since its launch. When the franchise was released internationally, the short form of the title was used, with an acute accent (\u00b4) over the \"e\" to aid in pronunciation. As a Japanese word derived from English loanwords, the term \"Pok\u00e9mon\" is an example of a \"wasei-eigo\".\n\"Pok\u00e9mon\" refers to both the franchise itself and the creatures within its fictional universe. As a noun, it is identical in both the singular and plural, as is every individual species name. Thus, it is grammatically correct to say \"one Pok\u00e9mon\" and \"many Pok\u00e9mon\", as well as \"one Pikachu\" and \"many Pikachu\".\nGeneral concept.\nThe \"Pok\u00e9mon\" franchise takes place in a shared universe in which humans co-exist with creatures known as Pok\u00e9mon. The original pair of games feature 151 Pok\u00e9mon species, with new ones being added in subsequent games; as of January 2024, 1,025 Pok\u00e9mon species have been introduced. Most Pok\u00e9mon are based on real-life animals or mythical creatures from folklore. For example, Pikachu are a yellow, mouse-like species with tails shaped as lightning bolts, able to blast powerful electric jolts through the air.\nThe player character takes the role of a Pok\u00e9mon Trainer. The Trainer has three primary goals: travel and explore the Pok\u00e9mon world; discover and catch a specimen of each Pok\u00e9mon species in order to complete their Pok\u00e9dex; and train a team of Pok\u00e9mon and have them engage in battles. Most Pok\u00e9mon can be caught with spherical devices known as Pok\u00e9 Balls. Once the opposing Pok\u00e9mon is sufficiently weakened, the Trainer throws the Pok\u00e9 Ball against the Pok\u00e9mon, which is then transformed into a form of energy and transported into the device. If the catch is successful, the Pok\u00e9mon is tamed and under the Trainer's command from then on. If the Pok\u00e9 Ball is thrown again, the Pok\u00e9mon re-materializes into its original state. The Trainer's Pok\u00e9mon can engage in battles against opposing Pok\u00e9mon, including those in the wild or owned by other Trainers. Because the franchise is aimed at children, these battles are never presented as overtly violent and contain no blood or gore. Pok\u00e9mon never die in battle \u2013 they faint upon being defeated, and can then be rejuvenated at a Pok\u00e9mon Center.\nWhen a Pok\u00e9mon wins a battle, it gains experience points. After gaining a certain amount of them, the Pok\u00e9mon levels up, and its statistics rise. As its level increases, the Pok\u00e9mon learns new offensive and defensive moves to use in battle. Furthermore, many species can undergo a form of spontaneous metamorphosis called Pok\u00e9mon evolution, and transform into stronger forms. Most Pok\u00e9mon will evolve at a certain level, while others evolve through different means, such as exposure to a certain item or trading with another trainer.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe main idea behind \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was conceived by Satoshi Tajiri. Tajiri was born on 28 August 1965, and grew up in Machida, a suburb of Tokyo. As a child, he enjoyed discovering and catching insects and other small creatures in the various ponds and fields that surrounded his town. During Japan's economic miracle, many cities, including Machida, were significantly expanded. As a consequence, Machida's nature was largely destroyed. In his second year of junior high school, an arcade hall opened in Tajiri's neighborhood, introducing him to video games. While studying electrical engineering at Tokyo College of Technology, Tajiri began publishing a \"doujinshi\" magazine titled \"Game Freak\". The title was inspired by the 1932 film \"Freaks\", which Tajiri was fascinated with at the time. He self-published the first issue of the magazine in March 1983, at the age of 17. At the time, magazines specializing in video games did not yet exist in Japan, allowing \"Game Freak\" to fill a gap in the market. Sometime later, Tajiri was contacted by aspiring manga artist Ken Sugimori, who became \"Game Freak\"'s illustrator. \"Game Freak\" folded in the late 1980s, by which point Tajiri had become a respected game journalist in Japan's fledgling video game industry.\nTajiri's knowledge of video games brought him into contact with Tsunekazu Ishihara. Ishihara had studied Arts and Science at Tsukuba University, and was trained in CGI. After working in advertising for two years, Ishihara joined a company named Sedic in 1983, which created video graphics and software, including one video game, \"Otocky\" (1987). As video games grew in popularity, Sedic also produced a number of game-related television shows for Fuji Television's late-night slot. In his job as a TV producer, Ishihara befriended Tajiri, as well as Shigesato Itoi, who would later become CEO of Ape, Inc. Ishihara was also the general director of the world's first gaming encyclopedia: . Journalist Kenji Hatakeyama wrote that, at the time, Ishihara was probably the most well-connected man in the industry. Masakazu Kubo, who would later play a vital role in \"Pokemon\", wrote that Ishihara possessed a knowledge of games that was \"beyond comparison\". Ishihara was also interested in playing cards, and contributed to the development of at least three simple card games designed by Itoi and published by Ape.\nIn 1986, Tajiri, Sugimori, and a few other enthusiasts started an informal development team called Game Freak, named after the magazine it grew out of. Over the next few years, they independently developed the puzzle game \"Quinty\", working on it alongside school or their regular jobs. However, no one within the group knew how to make the game's music. After consulting all his contacts, Tajiri got in touch with Junichi Masuda, who became the group's composer. \"Quinty\" was finished in 1989, and published by Namco. Tajiri officially incorporated Game Freak Co., Ltd. on 26 April 1989.\n1989\u20131995: Development of \"Red\" and \"Green\".\nTajiri started to think of what was to become \"Pok\u00e9mon\" while completing \"Quinty\", and before he officially founded Game Freak. Around this time, Nintendo announced the upcoming release of the Game Boy, a handheld console that would revolutionize the gaming industry. Tajiri learned that the device would have a link port, and with the corresponding Game Link Cable, two Game Boys could be linked together. Sometime later, Tajiri remembered an incident while playing \"Dragon Quest II\" (1987), a role-playing game (RPG) for the Famicom (NES). The game features randomly appearing items of varying rarity, including an extremely rare item called Mysterious Hat. Tajiri did not encounter any, while Ken Sugimori, who was also playing the game, encountered two. Upon recalling this experience, Tajiri realized that the cable now made it possible to transfer things from one cartridge to another. He noted that, until then, the Game Link Cable was only used for competing, but not for something else. Combining this inspiration with his memories of catching insects and other small species, Tajiri's idea would eventually evolve into a virtual recreation of his boyhood experiences, and an attempt to \"regain the world that he had lost\". He would later state that the game represents \"the story of a boy's summer day\".\nTajiri and his Game Freak staff began pondering over a game centered on capturing creatures of differing rarity. Since the Game Boy is a portable device, these creatures could then be exchanged with other players in real life using the link cable. Once the player has caught a creature in-game, it was to be stored in miniaturized form in a special capsule. This facet of the game was inspired by \"Ultraseven\", a \"tokusatsu\" show that Tajiri had enjoyed as a child. The series' titular character owns a number of capsules containing miniaturized \"kaiju\" (monsters), which come out and return to their original sizes when the capsule is thrown into mid-air. \"Kaiju\" media in general were an important influence on \"Pokemon\", as many Game Freak staff members had grown up with them. Other influences that have been cited by Tajiri include: \"gashapon\", capsules with toy figures in them that can be drawn from vending machines; collectible cards, such as baseball cards, \"Ultraman\" cards and \"menko\"; \"The Final Fantasy Legend\" (1989), the first RPG for the Game Boy; and petting in Japan, with Tajiri noting that having Pokemon is similar to having pets. Tajiri initially named his project \"Capsule Monsters\", which GF's staff commonly shortened to \"Capumon\". However, it later turned out that the term \"Capsule Monsters\" could not be trademarked, and it was subsequently decided to call the game \"Pocket Monsters\", which became \"Pokemon\". Former GF staff member Akihito Tomisawa wrote that the phrase \"Capsule Monsters\" was already registered. According to journalist Kenji Hatakeyama, the word \"capsule\" could not be used in the trademark. Tomisawa wrote that the Game Freak staff then came up with several alternatives, before someone within the team suggested \"Pocket Monsters\".\nIn March 1989, Nintendo co-founded Ape, Inc. with Itoi. Ape's principal work was \"Mother\" (1989), a role-playing game written by Itoi, but it was also founded with the intent to give outside talent a chance to pitch new, innovative games. At the time, Ape was housed in the same Kanda-Sudach\u014d office building as Nintendo, located in Tokyo. Ishihara, a friend of both Itoi and Tajiri, was involved with Ape's management (and would become its vice-president in 1991). Tajiri's relationship with Ishihara prompted Tajiri to present his idea for \"Pocket Monsters\" at Ape's office. Present during Tajiri's pitch was Takashi Kawaguchi, who worked at Nintendo's General Affairs Department and was also a manager at Ape. Kawaguchi brought the idea to Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi, who reportedly said: \"This is it. This is the idea I've been waiting for.\" By pure coincidence, Ishihara had come up with an idea for a game similar to that of Tajiri, and around the same time was discussing it with Ape. This game, \"Toto\", involved \"using the Game Boy as an insect cage\". Ishihara emphasized, however, that the idea of trading creatures with the link cable was Tajiri's. GF and Ape agreed to merge their projects together. According to Tajiri, the two teams initially collaborated on the game, but the work proved difficult, one of the reasons being that Ape was busy developing \"EarthBound\". Tajiri eventually figured that \"rather than working with Ape, we had to do something on our own, or the project would never get finished\". Ape, Inc. is not credited on the final product.\nThe development contract was signed at the beginning of 1990, with a planned delivery of the game in October. Tajiri directed the project, working under Ishihara. Ishihara was the producer \u2013 he managed the budget, staff, and work schedule, monitored the game's overall progress, and served as a liaison between Game Freak and Nintendo. Ishihara also contributed ideas to the development, and helped with debugging. Sugimori was in charge of the graphics and character design. Masuda created all music and sound effects, and did part of the programming. The budget that Nintendo granted to Game Freak was low; thus, \"Pocket Monsters\" was initially planned as a small, compact game, based primarily around Tajiri's core idea of exchanging. However, as development progressed, GF's ideas and ambitions for \"Pokemon\" grew. They soon realized that the game they were beginning to envision would not be easy to make. Sugimori admitted that, at the time, no one at GF had much knowledge of RPGs. \"We thought we could handle it, but as we began working, we realized it was going to be tough\", he acknowledged. \"Pocket Monsters\" was suspended indefinitely, and GF turned their focus on other titles (see ).\nAfter the game's initial development phase in 1990 and 1991, the staff \"tinkered with it from time to time\", as Sugimori put it. For instance, by October 1992, a large number of Pokemon had been designed, and a poll was held that month among all staff members to gauge the popularity of the different species. Several more such votes followed to determine collectively which Pokemon should be included. Still, development had mostly come to a halt until the summer of 1994, after the release of the platform game \"Pulseman\", upon which Tajiri decided it was time to make a serious effort towards finishing \"Pocket Monsters\". By this point, Game Freak's experience had grown considerably. Over the years, a number of new staff members had been added to the company. One of them was Atsuko Nishida, a graphic artist who created Pikachu, among others. Ishihara used his knowledge of card games to add more depth to the battle system, and among other things suggested Pokemon types. Ishihara also came up with the idea of the Pokedex, a portable encyclopedic device which players can use to keep track of the Pokemon they caught. Throughout the years, Tajiri had several conversations with Shigeru Miyamoto, Nintendo's top game designer who Tajiri described as a mentor figure. Although, in a 2018 retrospect, Miyamoto downplayed his role in advising Tajiri, and stated that his contributions to \"Pokemon\" were in fact limited. Miyamoto did, however, suggest the use of different colored cartridges for the game, in response to Tajiri's and Ishihara's musings about making each playthrough slightly different, as to 'individualize' the player's experience. According to Tajiri, \"five or seven colors\" were considered, but they eventually settled on two versions of the game: a \"Red\" version and a \"Green\" version. Otherwise identical, each had Pokemon not found in the other, encouraging players to socialize and trade to complete their collection.\nIshihara aspired to create video games of his own. As \"Pocket Monsters Red\" and \"Green\" were nearing completion, Ishihara founded Creatures, Inc. on 8 November 1995. Upon founding, the company was housed in the same office building as Nintendo in Tokyo. Co-ownership of the \"Pokemon\" property, which Ishihara helped create, was subsequently assigned to Creatures. This resulted in \"Pokemon\" having three legal owners: Game Freak, the main developer; Creatures, representing producer Ishihara; and Nintendo, the publisher. Anne Allison wrote that Nintendo also bought the property after \"Red\" and \"Green\" were finished. Kenji Hatakeyama noted that the ownership structure of \"Pokemon\" is uncommon. He wrote that \"Pokemon is probably the only property in the world today for which the original rights are not concentrated in a single company\", like The Walt Disney Company does with their IPs. Tajiri and Ishihara did consider merging Game Freak and Creatures at one point. However, Tajiri decided against it because he feared it would erase what he had built up since he was a teenager. \"I felt threatened by the idea of changing how Game Freak was operating, and starting back over with Mr. Ishihara\", he said. \"It was an identity problem. If Game Freak ceased to exist, then so would I\". Tajiri noted that, since Game Freak and Creatures both focus on \"Pokemon\", it sometimes felt more like different departments than different companies.\n\"Pocket Monsters Red\" and \"Green\" were finally finished in December 1995. A release date of 21 December that year was announced, but missed. After sufficient cartridges, manuals and packages had been manufactured, the pair of games ended up being published on 27 February 1996. However, the property was copyrighted in 1995, and \"\u00a91995\" is shown on the title screens and cartridges. This year is since used on the copyright notice seen on many \"Pokemon\" products, even though no actual \"Pokemon\" product was released in 1995.\n1996\u20131998: Rise in Japan.\nRelease of \"Red\" and \"Green\".\nNintendo had no high expectations of \"Pocket Monsters Red\" and \"Green\", and media largely ignored the game(s). By 1996, the seven-year-old Game Boy console was considered yesterday's news and near the end of its lifecycle. On the other hand, new Game Boys continued to be manufactured and sold. The console was widespread and, due to its age, affordable to children. Also, the Game Boy had experienced a small revival in Japan in 1995 due to the success of \"Mario's Picross\". Coincidentally, this game was directed by Ishihara, and co-developed by Ape. The popularity of \"Mario's Picross\" incited Nintendo to develop the Game Boy Pocket, a slimmer and improved version of the Game Boy, released in Japan on 21 July 1996. Because of the timing and naming, some were under the impression that the Game Boy \"Pocket\" was made to promote \"Pocket Monsters\", but this was in fact a coincidence that would end up benefiting both.\n\"CoroCoro\" manga, Mew lottery.\nTwo media channels that would play important roles in the \"Pokemon\" franchise were the \"CoroCoro Comic\", released monthly, and its sister magazine \"Bessatsu CoroCoro Comic\", released bi-monthly. Both manga magazines are published by Shogakukan, a long-time business partner of Nintendo, and have featured manga based on Nintendo properties (e.g. \"Super Mario-kun\", ', \"Donkey Kong\"). At the time of \"Pokemon\"'s release, the main \"CoroCoro\" magazine was read by one in four elementary school students. \"CoroCoros deputy editor-in-chief was Masakazu Kubo. On Ishihara's suggestion, Kubo commissioned the creation of a manga adaptation. Written and illustrated by Kosaku Anakubo, its first chapter was featured in the March/April issue of \"Bessatsu CoroCoro Comic\", released on 28 February 1996, the day after \"Red\" and \"Green\"'s release. Shogakukan, which frequently surveys their target groups, determined that the \"Pocket Monsters\" manga was well received.\nTo further promote \"Red\" and \"Green\", the May issue of \"CoroCoro\", released on 15 April 1996, announced the \"Legendary Pokemon Offer\", centered around a mysterious, secret Pokemon called Mew. Mew was a last-minute addition to \"Red &amp; Green\". It is unobtainable in the game(s) through usual means, and was intended to be used at a later point in some post-launch activity. To participate in the promotion, \"CoroCoro\" readers had to send in a postcard, and from the entrants, 20 were selected at random. The winners then had to send in their cartridge so that Mew could be uploaded onto it. The lottery was a success and increased word-of-mouth. By September, sales of \"Red\" and \"Green\" had surpassed 1 million units.\n\"Pokemon Blue\".\nEven after the release of \"Pokemon Red\" and \"Green\", Game Freak continued testing their game(s) for the purpose of bug fixing and training new staff members. Trainees were also tasked with creating new sprites for the game. The resulting new version was dubbed \"Pokemon Blue\". It was originally not meant to be sold. Only a small number of handmade copies were made, intended as a special gift to \"20 to 100 people\". After Kubo learned of it, he encouraged Tajiri and Ishihara to allow an official release of \"Blue\". President Hiroshi Yamauchi initially rejected this, fearing it would confuse people into believing it was an entirely new \"Pokemon\" game. Kawaguchi then suggested an alternative, which Yamauchi agreed with: \"Blue\" would not receive a normal retail release, but would instead be made available only through mail order for a limited time as a special offer. It was announced in the November issue of \"CoroCoro\", which explicitly stated that \"Blue\" was not a new game, but rather a special, limited edition to celebrate 1 million sales of \"Red\" and \"Green\". The offer was a surprisingly big success: 300,000 units were expected to be sold, but more than double that amount was ordered.\nTrading Card Game.\nThe \"Pokemon Trading Card Game\" was one of the first collectible card games (CCGs) developed in Japan. Its creation was influenced by \"\", the first CCG in history. Indeed, the \"Pokemon Trading Card Game\" can be considered a simplified version of \"Magic\". First released in the United States in 1993, \"Magic\" had gained popularity not just in North America and Europe, but also in Asia. Ishihara was fond of playing cards, and had contributed to the development of at least three simple card games designed by Shigesato Itoi and released through Ape, Inc. At the time, Ishihara was particularly interested in \"Magic: The Gathering\". While developing the \"Pokemon\" RPG, he realized that the concept behind it could be adapted into a \"Magic\"-like CCG. The \"Pokemon Trading Card Game\" was designed by Ishihara, Akihiko Miura, K\u014dichi \u014cyama, and Takumi Akabane. All were former staff members of Ape and had previously worked on \"EarthBound\" (1994): Miura was the game's main designer, \u014cyama was its art director, and Akabane was one of its chief debuggers.\nWhile card games have a long history in Japan, a collectible card game was a relatively new concept there, and at the time not widely known. Because of this, Ishihara had difficulties finding distributors. Sometime in 1995, Ishihara pitched the card game to Nintendo. They agreed to have the cards manufactured, subcontracting an unidentified printing company. However, Nintendo did not want the hassle of having to develop a distribution system from the ground up, i.e. finding retailers willing to sell a CCG. Ishihara was then contacted by Satoshi Kayama, director of a small firm called Media Factory. Like Ishihara, Kayama was a fan of card games. He felt that CCGs would soon rise to prominence in Japan, and had been gathering information on the possibility of developing such a game in some form. When Kayama heard that Creatures had developed a CCG, he contacted Ishihara and offered to distribute it, signing the contract near the end of 1995.\n\"CoroCoro\" again proved a valuable information channel. The \"Trading Card Game\" was first announced in the November issue, the same one that announced \"Pokemon Blue\". The issue came bundled with two promo cards: one of Purin (Jigglypuff) and one of Pikachu. Surveys showed that they were respectively the most and second-most popular Pokemon at the time. On 20 October 1996, the first card set was released. Booster packs were launched the same day, containing 10 randomly inserted cards. In the West, the booster packs would contain 11 cards. The original set would be titled the Base Set in English. Many more sets would follow. Despite being ignored by the media, except for \"CoroCoro\", the cards became an instant success upon release. 87 million \"Pokemon\" cards were shipped by the end of March 1997, six months after its launch, and one month before the debut of the next big installment of the franchise: the \"Pokemon\" anime. The success of the TV series would cause the cards' sales figure to explode: by March 1998, a total of 499 million cards had been produced in Japan.\nAnime production and premiere.\nBy August 1996, Kubo had become convinced of \"Pokemon\"'s potential, and believed Shogakukan should create an anime adaptation. Nintendo felt reluctant, believing that the property had developed enough as it had over the course of six months. At that time, they did not consider such a significant expansion to be necessary. Nintendo also noted that if the anime would flop, it would negatively affect future \"Pokemon\" games. Ishihara initially opposed the idea, because he thought it would overly hasten the 'consumption' of the property: he feared that if the series would end, people would assume that \"Pokemon\" has ended, and move on to the next thing. At the time, Creatures and Game Freak were planning the sequel(s) to \"Red\" and \"Green\", \"Pokemon Gold\" and \"Silver\", and Ishihara did not want the anime to end before they could release their new games. Kubo was ultimately able to resolve the concerns of all parties involved. An important aspect of Kubo's bargaining power was the then-ongoing Mini 4WD craze and its accompanying hit series \"Bakus\u014d Ky\u014ddai Let's &amp; Go!!\". Kubo had an important role in the creation of both, which impressed the stakeholders. To appease Ishihara, Kubo promised him that the anime would last for at least a year and a half. This was unusually long for a debuting anime, and required a big investment. Kubo's proposal for \"Pocket Monsters\" was officially approved on 26 September 1996. For Nintendo of Japan, it was the first time they licensed a TV series. Kubo assigned independent producer Choji Yoshikawa to lead the project.\nShogakukan Productions, commonly called ShoPro, was Shogakukan's production company. The animation company they commissioned was OLM, Inc. (Oriental Light and Magic), on Kubo's suggestion. Kunihiko Yuyama, one of OLM's founding members, became the anime's director. ShoPro assembled a team of five writers, plus two supporting writers. All key people involved with the production of \"Pokemon\" were well-experienced and had proven track records within Japan's anime industry. Yoshikawa felt that the team got lucky. \"The probability of so many great people coming together at the same time is very low\", he said. Per Tajiri's explicit condition, every anime team member had to play the game extensively, including the illustrators and voice actors. The anime staff \"unanimously agreed that the game was interesting\" and \"felt connected with each other through the world of \"Pokemon\"\", feeling positively challenged to make an anime that would match the game's quality.\nA production council was formed to produce the anime. Different people appeared at different meetings, but four individuals usually present were Ishihara of Creatures, Sugimori of Game Freak, Yuyama of OLM, and independent producer Yoshikawa. Yoshikawa had the final say. The council decided on the anime's worldview, characters, general storyline, and various important details. The early meetings, which were also attended by Tajiri, usually started with a Q&amp;A session in which Tajiri and Ishihara were asked about the Pokemon universe. The council was careful to have the anime be in concordance with the video game. Inevitably, there had to be differences between the two, but all agreed that the overall worldview as envisioned by Tajiri should not be disturbed. At the start of the video game, the player has to choose one of three starter Pokemon: Fushigidane, Hitokage, or Zenigame (Bulbasaur, Charmander, or Squirtle). The council didn't want to unfairly popularize any of them, and wanted the protagonist to start out with a different Pokemon. Kenji Hatakeyama, who interviewed various people involved with the creation of \"Pokemon\", wrote that, by coincidence, three people independently suggested to the council that a Pikachu should be a main character in the anime: Kubo, Yuyama, and Keisuke Iwata of TV Tokyo's Film Department. In the end, all council members agreed that Pikachu should be one of \"Pocket Monsters\"' central icons, as they expected Pikachu to appeal to both boys and girls, as well as their mothers. This would expand the franchise's audience, which was considered a core objective of the anime.\nDuring the council's first meeting, Yoshikawa brought up the issue on whether the Pokemon in the anime could talk, and if not, how they could communicate. In the video games, each has a specific cry. In Anakubo's \"CoroCoro\" manga, most could speak. At first, the council believed there should be a mixture of Pokemon that could talk and some that could not. However, this idea was eventually discarded: the Pokemon had to make a specific cry. The council agreed that Pokemon were like animals, and while they and humans should be able to understand each other in the series, they should not speak each other's language. It was decided that Pikachu would repeatedly say its own name in various intonations. The role of Pikachu was given to Ikue Otani. During try-outs, Yuyama had Otani voice Pikachu in normal Japanese, as well as in 'Pikachu talk', in which it only said the syllables of its name. Yuyama realized that, even in the latter style of limited communication, Otani was experienced enough to still convey the messages and emotions needed.\nShoPro paid half of the production cost of \"Pokemon\". TV Tokyo paid the other half and was granted co-ownership of the anime. The ads during the show's commercial breaks were managed by advertisement agency JR Kikaku, which was in turn paid by sponsors buying advertisement space. In negotiating with TV Tokyo, Kubo managed to secure the 19:00 \u2013 19:30 timeslot on Tuesdays. \"Pocket Monsters\" premiered on 1 April 1997. By November, it had become the highest-rated program on TV Tokyo. The anime succeeded in its goal of widening \"Pokemon\"'s audience. Although the video games and the cards remained mostly of interest to boys, the anime also got more girls interested in the franchise, and girls' purchases of \"Pokemon\" products increased. This has been partly credited to Pikachu, who gained widespread popularity among both boys and girls. The success of this character would later lead to the game \"Pocket Monsters Pikachu\" (\"Pok\u00e9mon Yellow: Special Pikachu Edition\"), released in Japan on 12 September 1998. An adaptation of \"Pokemon Blue\", this version was made to resemble the TV series more.\nCopyright council formed, merchandising expands.\nIn the early months of the franchise, Nintendo was the contractual representative for \"Pokemon\", and thus the central contact point for all \"Pokemon\"-related licensing (the approval of branded products). Around the time that planning of the anime begun, licensing requests for \"Pokemon\" started to increase, which Nintendo had difficulties handling due to a lack of (experienced) staff. Nintendo consequently granted ShoPro exclusive licensor rights. This was the first time that Nintendo of Japan (NoJ) granted licensor rights to another company, aside from its overseas subsidiaries Nintendo of America (NoA) and Nintendo of Europe (NoE).\nA copyright council was formed, headed by Ishihara. Beginning in April 1997, the council met every Tuesday, in the conference room of Creatures' office, at the Nintendo Kanda Building in Sudach\u014d, Tokyo. Attendees usually included Ishihara and his secretary, representatives of Nintendo, Game Freak, ShoPro, TV Tokyo, and JR Kikaku, as well as head of the anime Yoshikawa. Broadly put, every meeting had three types of agenda items: discussing \"Pokemon\"-related events and basic policies in Japan, discussing Shogakukan publication plans, and considering merchandise proposals. For merchandising, the council set the bar high. Fiercely protective of \"Pokemon\"'s brand equity, Ishihara was unwilling to greenlit an item just because it had a picture of a Pokemon printed on it. To avoid the market being flooded with low-quality goods, Ishihara put very specific demands on the products he evaluated. Furthermore, in most cases, the council opted to contract one company for each product category. Because of this, most merchandise proposals were rejected: of the approximately 7,500 applications submitted in 1997, only about 5% was approved.\nBy March 1998, 35 companies offered licensed \"Pokemon\" goods, and there were approximately 700 \"Pokemon\" products. Tomy manufactured \"Pokemon\" toy figures and plush dolls. Bandai made \"Pokemon\" \"gashapon\", dolls and \"ramune\"-flavored candy in a plastic box in the shape of a Game Boy. Meiji Seika produced \"Pokemon\" chocolate snacks and pudding. The lucrative franchise provided a much-needed boost to Japan's economy, which was stagnating in what would later be called the Lost Decade. An example of a firm that benefited greatly from \"Pokemon\" was food manufacturer Nagatanien. From May 1997, the company began selling \"Pokemon\"-branded curry, \"furikake\", and baking mixes. In December 1997, Nagatanien was hit hard by the collapse of one of its biggest sales channels, , in what was then the third-largest bankruptcy in Japan's postwar history. Nonetheless, due to their \"Pokemon\"-licensed products, Nagatanien reported net profits in fiscal years '97 and '98, despite having forecasted losses.\n\"Denn\u014d Senshi Porygon\" incident.\nIn the evening of 16 December 1997, the \"Pokemon\" franchise was hit by a crisis related to the broadcast of the anime's 38th episode, \"Denn\u014d Senshi Porygon\" (Computer Warrior Porygon). It was watched by approximately 4.6\u00a0million households. In the episode, the cast is transported into a virtual world, accompanied by a Porygon, an artificially-made Pokemon. While flying through cyberspace, they are attacked by an anti-virus program which mistakes them for viruses, shooting \"vaccine missiles\" at them resulting in explosions of bright, rapidly swapping red and blue flashes.\nThe intense stimuli brought about by the episode triggered a variety of adverse health effects in more than 10,000 viewers, primarily irritated eyes, headaches, dizziness, and nausea. A small part suffered a photosensitive epileptic seizure, manifested in loss of conscious and/or convulsions. Hundreds of children were brought to hospitals, although some had recovered enough upon arrival and did not need to be hospitalized. No one died. Broadcasting of \"Pokemon\" was halted, and new guidelines were implemented to help prevent similar events from happening. With the show on hiatus, ShoPro and OLM worked on a feature \"Pokemon\" film. By the time the incident occurred, its script was already written and storyboards were being made. In mid-January, the staff resumed creating new episodes. The anime series returned on 16 April 1998. The film, titled \"Pocket Monsters the Movie: Mewtwo Strikes Back\" (\"\"), premiered on 18 July 1998, becoming the fourth highest grossing film of the year in Japan.\nUltimately, the incident did not damage the \"Pokemon\" franchise \u2013 it in fact grew further during and after the anime's hiatus. While video rental tapes were removed from shelves, all other \"Pokemon\" products continued to be sold as usual, and customer demand for them remained high. Helping matters was a general understanding among businesses that the anime was not canceled, but rather suspended, and many executives (correctly) expected the show to be resumed after precautions had been taken. Supermarkets and other distribution outlets responded calmly to the crisis, and did not remove \"Pokemon\" products from their sales floors.\n1998\u20132000: International expansion.\nNorth America.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"When we started this project in Japan, one of the first things I was told was that this kind of thing would never appeal to American audiences. They said, 'Because the characters are in a very Japanese style, you cannot sell them to Americans'. So from the very beginning, I never thought there would be an English version. Now, it's just as popular in the United States [as in Japan], and I realized that we shouldn't always believe the opinions of conservative marketers.\"\n Shigeru Miyamoto\n , August 1999\nPossibly the first official to show interest in a North American launch of \"Pokemon\" was Minoru Arakawa, founder and then-president of Nintendo of America (NoA). Arakawa visited Japan to participate in Shoshinkai 1996, held 22\u201324 November. It was around this time when he first played one of the three \"Pokemon\" titles released at the time. He thought the games were promising, but Nintendo of Japan (NoJ) had no plans at the time to release them elsewhere. He returned to America with a few cartridges and tested the game on his employees \u2013 they did not believe it would work in the US. At the time, role-playing games (RPGs) were not very popular outside Japan, and NoA executives believed that American children did not have the attention span for such a complex title. Americans were said to be more interested in sport- and action-oriented games, preferably with realistic graphics. Japanese people, by contrast, were alleged to care more about characters and plot. Up to that point, few Japanese properties had been successfully mainstreamed in the US, and if they were, it was alleged to be on account of having been properly Americanized: \"Mighty Morphin Power Rangers\" was considered a prime example of this. Visually, \"Pokemon\" was believed to be too \"kawaii\", or cute. It was assumed that \"Pokemon\" could not succeed on cute alone \u2013 it must also be cool. In an effort to enhance the franchise's coolness, NoA considered a graphical redesign and contracted a few external artists to create some test-designs for the American market. The mockups they proposed included 'graffiti style' drawings, 'beefed-up' and more muscular looking Pokemon, and a new Pikachu that looked like \"a tiger with huge breasts\". Arakawa concluded that it \"didn't work\", and by that time, the anime had begun its production in Japan, leading NoA to conclude it was too late for a graphical revamp anyway.\nOf pivotal importance to \"Pokemon\"'s global expansion was Alfred R. Kahn, CEO of US-based 4Kids Entertainment, NoA's licensing agent since 1987. Convinced of the franchise's potential, Kahn agreed to invest an undisclosed sum in return for both the anime and licensing rights. \"Pokemon\" became one of the first Japanese media franchises in which both the localization of the anime and the licensing of merchandise was handled by a single company, as well as a non-Japanese company. Kahn suggested to use the short version of the name, \"Pok\u00e9mon\", adding an acute accent (\u00b4) over the \"e\" to assist with pronunciation and \"give it a little flair\". NoJ president Hiroshi Yamauchi officially approved the project in late November, and subsequently announced it at Space World 1997. However, three weeks later, the \"Denn\u014d Senshi Porygon\" incident happened, which Kubo felt made even more people resistant to the idea of an overseas introduction.\nMarket research turned back negative: American kids reportedly did not like \"Pok\u00e9mon\". Arakawa ignored the study and, convinced of the franchise's potential, allocated an enormous budget to \"Pok\u00e9mon\"'s launch. The exact amount was not disclosed, but was reportedly equal to or more than $50\u00a0million (c. $ million in 2024), approximately the same amount as the launch budget of the Nintendo Entertainment System in 1985. Arakawa admitted that it was \"quite a bit of money\", but NoA \"had been doing well for several years, so we had a lot of money to spare\". He opined that if \"Pok\u00e9mon\" would be as successful in the US as it had been in Japan, \"an investment of 1 would turn into 100\". NoA and 4Kids proceeded to devise a strategy on how to localize \"Pok\u00e9mon\" for the United States. Arakawa appointed Gail Tilden to lead the project, prompting her to leave her position at \"Nintendo Power\" magazine. Tilden said that they \"decided to make an all-out effort to repeat the phenomenon in the Western world\". In two press releases, NoA self-described \"Pok\u00e9mon\"'s marketing campaign as \"aggressive\".\nThe localization of the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" anime was done by 4Kids, and directed by Norman J. Grossfeld. Grossfeld strongly believed that the anime should be Americanized. At NATPE 1998, he asked ShoPro for a \"kind of , to let me change the show as I think would work for this market\", to which ShoPro agreed. However, no national TV station was interested in buying the anime or financing its localization. Kahn then decided to self-finance \"Pok\u00e9mon\"'s production costs, despite realizing this \"could very well bring down 4Kids\" if the show would fail. According to Kahn, they \"spend a fortune\" on the localization. To have it broadcast in syndication, 4Kids offered the show for free to local TV stations across the country, in exchange for a portion of the advertising revenue. NoA assisted, persuading dozens of stations to carry the series by offering to buy some of their advertisement space, spending a total of $5\u00a0million (c. $ million in 2024). Despite all this, most broadcasters were still reluctant to carry \"Pok\u00e9mon\", with Grossfeld experiencing difficulties getting through their \"preconceived notions or their snobbery for Western-produced animation over something from Asia\". At the time, anime had not yet found mainstream popularity in the West. Contemporary news reports cited \"Sailor Moon\" as an example of an anime that had failed to catch on with American youth. Still, with NoA's help, 4Kids ultimately succeeded in contracting 112 broadcasters for \"Pok\u00e9mon\", reaching \"about 85 to 90 percent\" of television households. However, many broadcasters gave it off-peak time slots, with starting times like 06:00 or 06:30. Prior to the late 1990s, this was the case for many anime in the US.\nGrossfeld came up with the advertising slogan \"Gotta catch 'em all!\" as the English equivalent to the Japanese . The phrase \"miraculously managed to gain approval\" by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which normally prohibits the use of injunctions in ads directed at children (e.g. \"You must buy this!\"). While the tagline may sound commanding, the FCC reasoned that the act of \"catching\" is at the core of \"Pok\u00e9mon\"'s play. Therefore, the phrase was allowed. The series' theme song was written by John Loeffler and John Siegler, and performed by Jason Paige. In commissioning the track, Grossfeld specifically requested the song's chorus to be written around the \"Gotta catch 'em all\" phrase, firmly embedding the slogan into the theme.\nWhile NoA and 4Kids were allowed a fair degree of liberty in their localization of \"Pok\u00e9mon\", the Japanese copyright council, headed by Ishihara, had the last say over it. All decisions regarding adjustments and promotion had to gain final approval of the Japan side. This included all of the merchandise, for which a 'two-step system' was created. All (aspiring) licensees in North America were to send their merchandise proposals to 4Kids. Staff of both 4Kids and NoA then made a pre-selection and send the approved proposals to Japan, where the council made the final decision. Many submissions were bounced at the US stage, and thus never got sent to Japan. Tilden noted that processing all license applications, and mailing all approved prototypes and their documentation to Japan, was a lot of work. Arakawa did consider streamlining the process by moving someone from Japan to the US, but no person could be found who was as competent as Ishihara.\nThe \"Pok\u00e9mon\" anime was first broadcast on 7 September 1998. \"Pok\u00e9mon Red Version\" and \"Blue Version\" were released three weeks later, on 28 September 1998. To localize the card game, Nintendo contracted Wizards of the Coast, the creator of \"\". The \"Pok\u00e9mon Trading Card Game\" was officially launched nationwide on 9 January 1999, although pre-sold in select stores in December. Coinciding with the North American launch of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was the release of the Game Boy Color on 23 November 1998.\nOther regions.\nThe American version of the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" anime started broadcasting in Australia and New Zealand on 28 September 1998. \"Red\" and \"Blue\" were subsequently released there on 23 October. Various territories in Asia followed: the anime series debuted in Hong Kong on 16 November, in Taiwan on 23 November, in Shanghai on 24 November, in Beijing on 10 January 1999, and in South Korea on 14 July 1999.\nOutside North America, 4Kids distributed the anime in cooperation with Brian Lacey of Lacey Entertainment. The series was presented at MIP TV, in Cannes, France, from 3\u20138 April 1998. Broadcasters were initially not interested due to its Japanese origins, and preferred to wait and see how the anime would fare in the US. After its American success, Lacey received inquiries about the series throughout 1999 from multiple international broadcasters. Lacey noted that, in Europe, this was a stark contrast compared to previous years: \"I was trying to sell this sort of stuff for years and buyers would tell me they were moving away from Japanese animation shows\", he said. In October 1999, the franchise was launched in the European key markets of Germany, the United Kingdom, France, and Spain. The anime started broadcasting in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden in December 1999. In 2000, broadcasting rights for the first season were secured by TV stations in South Africa, Russia, Iceland, and Finland. In Israel, the anime debuted in February 2000. For unclear reasons, \"Red\" and \"Blue\" were not officially released there. Thriving only on the strength of the TV series, \"The First Movie\", the cards, and imported video games, the Israeli \"Pok\u00e9mon\" still became a success.\nBy the end of 2000, \"Pok\u00e9mon\" games had been released in 70 countries, the anime was broadcast in 51 countries, the films were released in 33 countries, and the cards had been translated into 11 languages.\n1999\u20132000: Pok\u00e9mania.\nIn North America, the debuting \"Pok\u00e9mon\" franchise quickly rose to success. \"Red\" and \"Blue\" sold 200,000 copies in its first month. By December 1998, the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" anime had become the highest-rated syndicated children's show during the weekdays. This attracted the attention of two media companies: Warner Bros., co-owner of The WB channel; and Saban Entertainment/Fox Family Worldwide, owners of the Fox Kids channel. A bidding war ensued between the parties, which was won by Warner Bros. On 13 February 1999, \"Pok\u00e9mon\" launched on the Kids' WB national television block. The debut episode became the most watched premiere in Kids' WB's history. In European countries, the anime received similar levels of success. For example, in Germany, \"a highly competitive kids market\", \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was purchased by RTL 2. The show's popularity bolstered the entire program block, more than tripling its viewers. Andrea Lang, RTL 2's editor of cartoons and children's programs, said: \"We were speechless. We've never had a comparable success\". By March 1998, half a year before \"Pok\u00e9mon\"'s overseas launch, 499 million \"Pok\u00e9mon\" cards had been produced. By March 1999, the total number of cards shipped reached 764 million. By March 2000, this figure would grow further to 4.255 billion cards, manufactured in both Japanese and American factories.\nBy April 1999, there was a general consensus in the US that \"Pok\u00e9mon\" had become a phenomenon and the newest children's fad. By some, the fad was referred to as \"Pok\u00e9mania\", including journalists of \"Time\" and \"USA Today\". In the US, severe scarcity occurred of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" goods, especially \"Pok\u00e9mon\" cards, causing companies to miss profits. A \"Milwaukee Journal Sentinel\" article, published on 3 August 1999, cited a Toys \"R\" Us manager as saying that a supply of 600 booster packs would last 24 hours. The CEO of one card distributor stated that they were \"thousands of boxes behind\" on orders. In the same article, a Wizards spokeswoman stated that more employees and printers had been hired to increase card production. However, near the end of the month, a different Wizards spokeswoman told \"The Washington Post\" that they had \"exhausted most of the card-printing capacity of the United States\". Similarly, \"USA Today\" reported in November 1999 that factories making Hasbro's \"Pok\u00e9mon\" toys had expanded production by 20 times, but demand still exceeded supply. In Europe, scarcity of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" merchandise also occurred.\nIn part due to the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" craze, Nintendo saw a 250% increase in profits in 1999 compared to the previous year, reaching a six-year high. The \"Pok\u00e9mon\" franchise accounted for over 30% of Nintendo's revenue that year. \"Pok\u00e9mon\"'s popularity also caused a sharp increase in sales of the Game Boy line. The financial windfalls came at a time when Nintendo lost dominance in the home console market, with the Nintendo 64 being outsold by Sony's PlayStation. The global success of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" compensated this loss somewhat. Scholars David Buckingham and Julian Sefton-Green went even further, writing in 2004: \"while Nintendo is now among Japan's most profitable corporations, it could be argued that the company would have struggled to survive without Pok\u00e9mon\".\n4Kids, initially a little-known firm, expanded thirty times in revenues, and was named the fastest-growing company in America in the 4 September 2000, issue of \"Fortune\" magazine. Many businesses that timely obtained a \"Pok\u00e9mon\" license reaped considerable profits. In the summer of 1999, a massive run on stocks of publicly traded \"Pok\u00e9mon\" licensees caused their value to increase dramatically. However, by November, most investors were shorting their shares. Realizing that \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was a fad that would peak and fall at some point, investors were bearish about its prospects.\n\"\" premiered in North America on 12 November 1999, and in Europe the following year. Despite being negatively received by many Western critics, it became one of the most successful Japanese animated films of all time. In the United States, November 1999 was estimated to have been the peak of Pok\u00e9mania. Supporting the American release of \"The First Movie\" was a promotional action with Burger King, one of the largest in the history of the fast-food industry. The success of the promotion resulted in supply issues; restaurants often ran out of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" toys to include with their meals. On 27 December, Burger King recalled its Pok\u00e9 Ball toy after a 13-month-old girl died suffocating on one.\n\"Pok\u00e9mon Gold\" and \"Silver\", the successors to \"Red/Green/Blue\", were released in North America on 15 October 2000. In Europe, they were released on 6 April 2001.\nThe Pok\u00e9mon Company and Pok\u00e9mon USA established.\nOn 23 April 1998, Pok\u00e9mon Center Co. Ltd. was founded as a joint venture by Nintendo, Creatures, and Game Freak. It was initially formed for the management of specialized merchandise stores called Pokemon Centers, of which the first location opened in Nihonbashi, Tokyo, on 18 July 1998. Throughout the years, multiple Japanese Pok\u00e9mon Centers would open and close. As of September\u00a02025[ [update]], a total of 23 Pok\u00e9mon merchandise shops exist in Japan. An American Pok\u00e9mon Center also existed in New York City from 2001 to 2005. It was then remodelled into Nintendo World, later renamed Nintendo New York.\nAfter the release of \"Gold\" and \"Silver\", Tsunekazu Ishihara began setting out a number of long-term goals for the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" franchise, which included releasing a movie every year. As part of Ishihara's plan, the Pokemon Center Co. Ltd. was reformatted into The Pok\u00e9mon Company (TPC), and officially renamed in October 2000. The goal of TPC is to centralize and streamline the global management of Pok\u00e9mon. Satoru Iwata, who had joined Nintendo of Japan in June, was involved with the company's creation, which was one of his first jobs at Nintendo.\nIn February 2001, Pok\u00e9mon USA (PUSA) was established, an affiliated firm of The Pok\u00e9mon Company. The company's first president was Tatsumi Kimishima (who would later become president of NoA, and subsequently president of NoJ). In 2002, Kimishima was succeeded by Akira Chiba.\n2001\u20132006: End of the craze, business reforms.\nIn North America, Pok\u00e9mania peaked in 1999, slowing down throughout the next year. On 29 April 2000, the anime was bumped off Kids' WB's No. 1 spot after holding it for 54 weeks. Around the same time, \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was surpassed at Fox Kids by its rival \"Digimon\". In Europe, the craze peaked in 2000. On 20 January 2001, \"The New York Times\" reported that \"Pok\u00e9mon\"'s trading card market had collapsed in the US. A June 2001 survey in the United Kingdom confirmed that \"Pok\u00e9mon\"'s popularity was waning there. Joseph Tobin wrote: \"By the summer of 2001, Pok\u00e9mon's shelf space in Japanese and U.S. toy stores was but a fraction of what it enjoyed in the fall of 1999\". By the end of 2001, Pok\u00e9mania was fading globally, and by 2002, the fad was largely over.\nFrom 2000 to 2002, Game Freak developed \"Pok\u00e9mon Ruby\" and \"Sapphire\", the successors to \"Gold\" and \"Silver\", for the newly released Game Boy Advance. Masuda, who was appointed to assistant director during \"Gold\" and \"Silver\", was promoted to director for \"Ruby\" and \"Sapphire\", with Tajiri making himself executive director. Masuda was concerned that the end of Pok\u00e9mania indicated the end of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" as a whole: \"After Gold and Silver came out, it was a huge hit around the world, but shortly after everyone was saying, 'That's it. The Pok\u00e9mon fad is over! It's dead!'.\" Determined to keep the franchise going, GF not only wanted to \"prove people wrong\" with \"Ruby\" and \"Sapphire\", but already started planning their sequels: \"Diamond\" and \"Pearl\" (2006). They also began planning remakes of older installments, starting with \"FireRed\" and \"LeafGreen\" (2004), remakes of the original \"Red\" and \"Green\".\n\"Ruby\" and \"Sapphire\" were released in Japan on 21 November 2002, and in the rest of the world the next year. The games introduced 135 new Pok\u00e9mon, bringing the total amount to 386. Because of this, Golin Harris, NoA's ad agency, advised them to move away from the \"Gotta catch 'em all!\" slogan. They reasoned that if new, younger players were drawn into the franchise with \"Ruby/Sapphire\", they would find the concept of \"catching them all\" to be a daunting if not impossible task if they didn't also have \"Red/Blue/Yellow\" and \"Gold/Silver/Crystal\". Author Daniel Dockery noted that \"from both a marketing perspective and, really, a legal perspective, it would not be to the company's advantage to keep pushing that slogan\".\nBy 2002, the relationship between Pok\u00e9mon USA (PUSA) and Wizards of the Coast had deteriorated. That year, at least seven high-profile employees were poached from Wizards by PUSA: Wizard's former art director, senior graphic designer, business manager, events marketing director, project management director, and two vice presidents. All employees had signed NDAs. In March 2003, PUSA told Wizards that their contract would not be renewed, and that Wizards would not be distributing the new \"Ruby &amp; Sapphire\" card set. Later, Wizards was also prohibited from releasing the sets \"Jamboree\" and \"Legendary Collection II\". Notably, \"Jamboree\" was the first set containing cards designed by Wizards themselves. As considerable time and money was invested into creating them, Wizards was upset when they were barred from putting them out. On 1 October 2003, the day after their agreement expired, Wizards filed suit against Pok\u00e9mon USA, alleging that the defendant had seized their intellectual property and trade secrets, and illegally tried to gain advantage over them in the competitive trading card market. The case was settled out of court. \"Jamboree\" and \"Legendary Collection II\" have remained unreleased.\nIn October 2001, 4Kids Entertainment signed a new contract with PUSA, continuing to serve as \"Pok\u00e9mon\"'s exclusive licensing agent and anime localizer. On 23 December 2005, it was announced that the agreement would not be renewed and would expire on 31 December, with PUSA moving all licensing in-house. The localization of the anime would be done by PUSA in cooperation with TAJ Productions. PUSA proceeded to replace almost all of the original English voice actors, who were still under contract with 4Kids. This decision \"raised the ire of fans and the actors themselves\". According to Stuart Zagnit, who voiced Professor Oak, the recasting was done to cut back on costs.\nIn March 2003, Pok\u00e9mon UK was established in London as a British representative of The Pok\u00e9mon Company.\n2006\u20132012: Generation IV\u2013V, TPCi established.\nFollowing \"Ruby and Sapphire\", \"Pok\u00e9mon Diamond\" and \"Pearl\" were released for the Nintendo DS on 28 September 2006, in Japan and on 22 April 2007, in North America. A third version, \"Pok\u00e9mon Platinum\", was released on 28 September 2008, in Japan and on 22 March 2009, in North America. They form the fourth generation (Generation IV) in the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" video game series. \"Diamond and Pearl\" were designed based on the DS's various features such as its Wi-Fi capabilities and slot for Game Boy Advance cartridge. Pok\u00e9mon president Tsunekazu Ishihara dubbed the games as the \"ultimate\" Pok\u00e9mon titles because they allowed the player to trade and battle Pok\u00e9mon including every Pok\u00e9mon from previous iterations globally through WiFi, as opposed to previously only able to do so locally and with fewer Pok\u00e9mon. The games' characters are 2D and the environments are rendered in 3D, and it is considerably difficult to differentiate them because Game Freak designed them this way to innovate the graphics while also retaining the traditional game style and feel.\nIn \"Platinum,\" the developers focused on changing the most essential elements from \"Diamond\" and \"Pearl\" to maintain continuity with the previous games. Director Junichi Masuda stated that since they designed \"Diamond and Pearl\" as the \"ultimate\" \"Pok\u00e9mon\" titles, it was only necessary to make \"Platinum\" \"even stronger\" than them. They approached this by designing the \"Origin Forme\" for the legendary Pok\u00e9mon Giratina, ensuring that the design would appear significantly different from its regular form in \"Diamond\" and \"Pearl\" and to express the games' core antimatter and Distortion World concepts. The title Platinum was chosen to reflect a precious material that \"shines\" and is different from diamond and pearl and their associations of \"love\" and \"happiness\" respectively.\n\"Pok\u00e9mon HeartGold\" and \"SoulSilver\" were released on 12 September 2009, in Japan and on 14 March 2010, in North America as part of Generation IV. They are remakes of \"Gold\" and \"Silver,\" aiming to balance familiarity for the original games' players and new content for newcomers. The titles reflected the theme of the bond between trainers and their Pok\u00e9mon. The developers faithfully recreated the original story and added elements from the Generation IV games and \"Yellow\", the latter of which was released concurrently with \"Gold\" and \"Silver.\"\nIn 2009, Pok\u00e9mon USA and Pok\u00e9mon UK merged to form The Pok\u00e9mon Company International (TPCi). This subsidiary of The Pok\u00e9mon Company (TPC) has since managed the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" franchise outside of Asia.\nIn Generation V, \"Pok\u00e9mon Black\" and \"White\" were released on 18 September 2010, in Japan for the DS and on 6 March 2011, in North America. The games feature enhanced visual effects and increased use of 3D graphics. The developers excluded old Pok\u00e9mon and strategies, while introducing over 150 new Pok\u00e9mon to evoke a sense of novelty and to provide new players a more \"leveled playing field\" against old players. The games seek to attract both new players and returning players through its detailed walkthrough and the addition of C-Gear (a real-time communication tool to improve the trade and battle experiences), respectively.\nThe games were followed by \"Pok\u00e9mon Black 2\" and \"White 2\"\",\" which were released on 23 June 2012, in Japan and on 7 October 2012, in North America. The games were developed for the DS rather than the more powerful Nintendo 3DS to maintain continuity with the game world in \"Black\" and \"White\" and they were presented from a different perspective in the storyline. Since the games are their first sequels, director Masuda explained that they have strived to find a \"fine balance\" to appeal to both newcomers and returning players by implementing introductory explanations, and by placing a Pok\u00e9mon Center in the first in-game city, they were able to further this approach by providing newcomers with a detailed walkthrough and also returning players with new updates. During development phase, director Takao Unno revealed that they had experimented with a 100-player multiplayer experience via their communication feature Entralink drawing from their vision of players \"sharing the same space, same time and same game\" but this feature was never implemented due to technical limitations.\n2013\u20132018: 3D, Generation VI\u2013VII, \"Pok\u00e9mon Go\".\nIn Generation VI, \"Pok\u00e9mon X\" and \"Y\" were released worldwide for the 3DS on 12 October 2013, and they are the first games to be released in this way. The developers focused on the themes of \"beauty\", \"bond\", and \"evolution\", and it is based on these themes that they created the games' core mechanic where Pok\u00e9mon could achieve a higher form of evolution by strengthening their bonds with trainers; however, to maintain game balance, they limited this feature to a special, temporary phenomenon. The games' shift to fully 3D graphics allowed the player to freely manipulate the camera angles although due to technical limitations objects far away are rendered in lower polygon models, and producer Hitoshi Yamagami addressed to 2D players that \"Game Freak [developers are also] big fans of 2D graphics... So there are some elements in there that I [Yamagami] think fans of 2D will appreciate as well.\" When asked about the Horde battle and Sky battle types, he stated that Horde battles are to supplant the roles of \"really strong pokemon [\"sic\"]\" to help the player more easily progress through the games and also to add \"more excitement to the battles and a sense of danger\", and that they added the Sky battles to take advantage of the games' 3D camera angels capabilities.\n\"Pok\u00e9mon Omega Ruby\" and \"Alpha Sapphire\" were released worldwide for the 3DS on 21 November 2014 and on 28 November 2014, in Europe as part of Generation VI. They are remakes of \"Ruby\" and \"Sapphire\". The developers adopted \"X\" and \"Y\"'s core game mechanic and added enhanced 3D graphics. According to director Masuda, they reviewed the original mechanic and concept and expressed them using modern hardware, such as replacing the original Pok\u00e9Gear feature for the enhanced versions BuzzNav and DexNav to more effectively provide information enabled by the games' hardware capabilities. They seek to explore the concept of Pok\u00e9mon coexisting with humans and nature, revisiting the concept behind original games' setting, which translated to \"richness or abundance in nature and bonds between people and nature\" in Japanese. To appeal to the newer audience in \"X\" and \"Y\", the developers decided to connect the story with \"X\" and \"Y\" by further exploring their core mechanic.\nIn Generation VII, \"Pok\u00e9mon Sun\" and \"Moon\" were released worldwide for the 3DS on 18 November 2016, and on 23 November 2016, in Europe. The developers chose Hawaii for inspiration due to its distinctive warm sunlight and clear moonlight and unique biomes that helped support the games' regional Pok\u00e9mon variance concept. Ohmori said, as director, he aimed to focus on the concept of \"Pok\u00e9mon as these living creatures, [and really focus] on them being alive.\" Having the release date on the 20th anniversary of Pok\u00e9mon in mind, he treated this project as a \"celebration of that life, and to really express this respect for life\". As he contemplated about life and its origins, Ohmori considered the significance of the Sun, enabling life with its light, and the Moon's impact on certain species' reproduction. He explained how the Sun, the Moon, and the Earth \"work [together] to influence [one another], and life as a result grows and flourishes based on [this] relationship.\"\nOhmori stated that with the innovation to 3D in \"X\" and \"Y\" the designers decided to examine more minor aspects concerning with the Pok\u00e9mon themselves such as their motions, such as when they designed the games' first starter Pok\u00e9mon to capitalize on its owl-like characteristics with its head \"twists round and round\". With the 3DS technologies, the developers are able to design the characters to be more expressive as themselves including different facial expressions and reactions. In addition to portraying Pok\u00e9mon harmoniously coexisting with people and vice versa in the games, the developers replaced the traditional Gym mechanic with Island Trials, deepening the players' connection with the story and their Pok\u00e9mon. The enhanced versions \"Pok\u00e9mon Ultra Sun\" and \"Ultra Moon\" were released worldwide on 17 November 2017. The games added an alternate storyline and additional characters, Pok\u00e9mon, and other features. Developer Shigeki Morimoto revealed that they were developed by the younger staff members and veterans so the more veterans can prioritized on developing more important titles, and the developers considered them to be their culmination with the 3DS.\n2016: Release of \"Pok\u00e9mon Go\".\nIn 2016, the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" franchise spawned a second worldwide fad with the release of \"Pok\u00e9mon Go\", a mobile augmented reality game. The app originated as a Google April Fools' Day joke in 2014: the \"Google Maps Pok\u00e9mon Challenge\". The prank was conceived by Tsunekazu Ishihara and Satoru Iwata. On Ishihara's initiation, the hoax was turned into an actual video game developed by Niantic. Ishihara was a fan of Niantic's previous transreality game, \"Ingress\", and saw the game's concept as a perfect match for \"Pok\u00e9mon\".\nThrough in-game purchases, the game generated more than $ by the end of July 2016, with App Annie reporting that \"Pok\u00e9mon Go\" had generated around $ in revenue every day that month. The same month, Sensor Tower reported that the game had passed more than $ in worldwide revenue, beating every existing record set by \"Clash of Clans\" and \"Candy Crush\" by a wide margin. The average daily usage of the app on Android devices in July 2016 exceeded that of Snapchat, Tinder, Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook. By 2 September 2016, \"Pok\u00e9mon Go\" had generated more than $440\u00a0million in worldwide revenue, according to Sensor Tower. By 30 September, it had received 500 million downloads and grossed $ in 80 days, according to market research firm Newzoo. \"Pok\u00e9mon Go\" reached the milestone of $600\u00a0million in revenue after only 90 days on the market, becoming the fastest mobile game ever to do so.\n were released for the Nintendo Switch on 16 November 2018. They are part of Generation VII. Inspired by \"Pok\u00e9mon Yellow,\" the games seek to introduce newcomers and a new generation of players (particularly \"Pok\u00e9mon Go\" players) to the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" series in addition to catering old players. As such, the games feature similar capture mechanics to \"Go\" where the player throws Pok\u00e9 Balls to catch wild Pok\u00e9mon rather than battling them like traditional \"Pok\u00e9mon\" games. In addition, the games feature the same setting and characters as the first generation of games and the original animated series, and include exclusively the original 151 Pok\u00e9mon to further appeal to their targeted audience. The only new Pok\u00e9mon featured are Meltan and Melmetal.\n2019\u2013present: Generation VIII\u2013IX, open-world gameplay.\nGeneration VIII debuted with the release of \"Pok\u00e9mon Sword\" and \"Shield\" on 15 November 2019, for the Switch. Director Shigeru Ohmori stated that they designed the games based on what they believed of the biggest \"Pok\u00e9mon\" theme of becoming/being \"the greatest or strongest\", which was expressed in the games' Dynamax / Gigantamax Pok\u00e9mon core mechanic and the games' increasingly powerful software and hardware capabilities. Ohmori further revealed that through developing the \"Let's Go\" games as research projects for the Switch, they were able to gain valuable experiences and knowledge to develop \"Sword\" and \"Shield\". He noted that they took advantage of the Switch's high resolution and TV connectivity to implement the games' gigantic-size core Pok\u00e9mon mechanic. They envisioned the games' setting to be a \"wide-open space\" that is different from the traditional route systems and is constantly changing where the player can meet and explore with other players.\nMany pre-existing Pok\u00e9mon are not available in \"Sword\" and \"Shield\". This \"Dexit\", as it was called, led to fan backlash. \"Sword\" and \"Shield\" were the first \"Pok\u00e9mon\" games to receive DLC expansions: Part 1\u2014, and Part 2\u2014; they were released on 17 June 2020, and 22 October 2020, respectively. They include additional storylines, places, Pok\u00e9mon, characters, and other features.\nIn 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic broke out. The resulting widespread ennui and excessive leisure time inspired a resurgence in popularity and interest of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" cards, which was further popularized by various YouTubers and other influencers, such as Logan Paul. The craze resulted in severe supply shortages, and customers' inappropriate and obsessive behavior raised safety concerns in many retail outlets. \"Pok\u00e9mon\" cards' values skyrocketed, prompting collectors to submit cards and overwhelm card grading agencies. The Pok\u00e9mon Company responded by reprinting impacted products at maximum capacity to ensure price stabilization and general accessibility.\nRemakes of \"Diamond\" and \"Pearl\", \"Pok\u00e9mon Brilliant Diamond\" and \"Shining Pearl\" were released on 19 November 2021, for the Switch as part of Generation VIII. They are the first core series games to be developed by a third-party developer, ILCA, rather than Game Freak. The developers revealed that the games would not assume the anticipated style of the \"Let's Go\" Games and feature traditional game mechanics. \"Pok\u00e9mon\" intends to celebrate their 25th anniversary with the release of the remakes by revisiting old games and mechanics, which they faithfully reproduced with enhanced 3D graphics.\n' was released on 28 January 2022, for the Switch as a prequel to \"Diamond\" and \"Pearl\". It is part of Generation VIII. The game \"represents a new approach for the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" video game series\" as it transitions from traditional RPG mechanics to add real-time elements in their games. Unlike traditional \"Pok\u00e9mon\" games, the player can catch Pok\u00e9mon by throwing a Pok\u00e9 Ball in real-time rather than triggering a battle; however, they can still choose the latter to weaken it for capture. Many in-game aspects, particularly its landscape, heavily resemble those of '.\nGeneration IX was introduced with the release of \"Pok\u00e9mon Scarlet\" and \"Violet\" for the Switch on 18 November 2022. The games are the first \"Pok\u00e9mon\" games to feature an entirely open-world experience as opposed to the partially open-world experience in previous \"Pok\u00e9mon\" games such as \"Sword and Shield,\" and it also departed from the traditional gym mechanics and the elite four battles to opt for unique road quests. The games' improved multiplayer experience allowed for up to four players to travel together. Their DLC, , consists of two parts, \"The Teal Mask\" and \"The Indigo Disk\"; \"The Teal Mask\" was released on 12\u201313 September 2023 and \"The Indigo Disk\" was released on 14 December 2023. An epilogue to \"The Hidden Treasure of Area Zero\" was released on 11 January 2024.\n\"\" was released on 16 October 2025 for the Nintendo Switch and Nintendo Switch 2. It is part of Generation IX. A successor to \"Legends: Arceus\", this game returns to the Kalos region seen in \"X\" and \"Y\". A DLC, \"Mega Dimension\", is planned for release on 10 December 2025.\nMedia.\nVideo games.\n\"Pok\u00e9mon\" video games have been released in a wide variety of genres. The role-playing games (RPGs) developed by Game Freak are considered the core series of the franchise. Various spin-off games also exist, such as \"Pok\u00e9mon Mystery Dungeon\", a roguelike RPG series, \"Pok\u00e9mon Ranger\", an action RPG series, and \"Detective Pikachu\" (2018), an adventure game. \"Pok\u00e9mon\" games, in particular the core RPGs, are commonly classified in generations. For example, Junichi Masuda referred to \"Diamond\" and \"Pearl\" (2006) as Gen 4, and \"X\" and \"Y\" (2013) as the 6th generation.\nUntil 2011, \"Pok\u00e9mon\" games were released exclusively on Nintendo's consoles. With the rise of the smartphone during the 2010s, The Pok\u00e9mon Company also began developing, publishing, and licensing \"Pok\u00e9mon\" titles for the mobile phone market, most notably \"Pok\u00e9mon Go\" (2016), an augmented reality game developed by Niantic that spawned a worldwide craze in the summer of 2016.\nAccording to the official website of The Pok\u00e9mon Company, as of March\u00a02025[ [update]], over 489 million \"Pok\u00e9mon\" game units have been sold worldwide.\nTrading card game.\nThe \"Pok\u00e9mon Trading Card Game\" (PTCG) was one of the first collectable card games (CCGs) in Japan. It was inspired by \"\". In the card game, the players use a 60-card deck featuring Basic and evolved Pok\u00e9mon, Energy cards, and Trainer cards to help them knock out the opponent's Pok\u00e9mon, drawing prize cards and winning the game. Cards are classified into various levels of rarity, ranging from Common to Rare Holofoil with a holographic illustration. Rare cards, including limited edition, exclusive cards, and older cards, are highly valued among collectors due to their scarcity.\nAccording to the official website of The Pok\u00e9mon Company, over 75\u00a0billion cards have been printed as of March\u00a02025[ [update]].\nAnime.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" anime consists of over 1,300 episodes across 28 seasons. Its current season, \"Pok\u00e9mon Horizons \u2013 Rising Hope\", started airing on 11 April 2025. The anime originally focused on Ash Ketchum and his travels across the Pok\u00e9mon world with his partner, Pikachu. They were retired as protagonists at the end of season 25. The 26th season, ', introduced two new protagonists, Liko and Roy. A total of 23 anime films have been released, the most recent being ' (2020).\nSpin-off series from the anime have also been produced, including a variety show titled , which aired on TV Tokyo from 2002 to 2004 and aired in English as part of \"Pok\u00e9mon Chronicles\". Several television specials have been released. 27 short films starring Pikachu were produced, primarily preceding the films. Various animated mini-series also exist.\nLive-action.\n\"Detective Pikachu\", a live-action/animated film based on the video game of the same name, was released in 2019. A sequel was announced even before the original premiered. However, despite a number of updates over the next few years, the film did not materialize. As of 2025[ [update]], the status of the sequel is not known.\nA live-action television drama produced by The Pok\u00e9mon Company and TV Tokyo, titled \"\" (\"A Pocketful of Adventures\"), premiered on TV Tokyo on 20 October 2023.\nReaction to Pok\u00e9mania (1999\u20132000).\nIn 1999 and 2000, \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was an unprecedented, ubiquitous fad in the Western world. \"Time\" magazine described it as \"a multimedia and interactive barrage like no other before it\". The franchise, primarily aimed at children, elicited mixed responses from parents and teachers, some of them critical. In a 2004 essay, anthropologist Christine R. Yano even claimed that the reactions at one point constituted a moral panic.\nThe bulk of the criticism on \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was directed at the trading cards, in particular the booster packs, sealed packages of 11 randomly inserted cards that were sold separately from the main sets. The cards are of varying scarcity, the most valuable being the \"holofoil cards\" (also called \"holographic\" or \"foil cards\"), in which the illustrations of the Pok\u00e9mon have a shiny overlay effect. The rare cards can only be found in booster packs, and the rarest ones are very infrequently included. Joseph Tobin noted that rarity in this case is \"artificially created\", and \"effectively a form of gambling\" in which children need to repeatedly purchase booster packs to get more rare cards. Gilles Broug\u00e8re described a cynicism among adults that corporations could apparently, \"out of thin air\", ascribe value to cards which they saw as valueless, thereby \"deceiving vulnerable young consumers and garnering excessive profits\".\nAs the franchise's popularity grew, children began taking their \"Pok\u00e9mon\" cards to school for trading and playing. Soon, the cards were alleged to be \"disrupting learning, poisoning playground friendships and causing such distraction that some children forget their homework, tune out in class and even miss school buses as they scramble to acquire one more card\". The cards were \"turning the playground into a black market\", with card swaps sometimes inciting conflicts. Certain children engaged in \"aggressive trading\", tricking other (often younger) kids into unfair deals, forcing teachers to arbitrate. Some parents expressed their concerns about the craze, but feared that their children would be ostracized if they were to deny them \"Pok\u00e9mon\" products. In the US, the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" cards ended up \"almost universally banned\" from school grounds. Similar bans occurred in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and European countries. In September 1999, US-based law firm Milberg filed a class-action lawsuit against Nintendo of America, Wizards of the Coast, and 4Kids. The suit claimed that the booster packs constitute a form of lottery and promote gambling in kids. Susan Estrich noted that similar lawsuits had been filed against trading-card makers in the US, without success. The \"Pok\u00e9mon\" card suit is not known to have gone to court, and is believed to have been settled.\nThe \"Pok\u00e9mon\" anime series was criticized by some as \"cheap Japanese animation\" that is \"violent\" and has \"little educational value\". Michelle Orecklin of \"Time\" dismissed the TV series as \"less a cartoon than a half-hour exercise in Pok\u00e9mon product placement\". Anne Allison wrote that even those within Pok\u00e9mon's US marketing team agreed that the anime's visuals were \"not especially sophisticated\" compared to Disney cartoons. \"\" premiered in the United States on 12 November 1999, and in European countries in February 2000. While a huge box-office success, the film was received negatively by several Western film critics. \"The Guardian\" decried it as a \"contemptuously cheap animated cash-in on the monster kids' craze\". The American adult animated series \"South Park\" satirized \"Pok\u00e9mon\" in the episode \"Chinpokomon\", aired on 3 November 1999. In the episode, the titular media franchise is portrayed as a low-quality line of products that is part of an evil plan by the Japanese government to invade the US. \"South Park\" co-creator Matt Stone commented that, at the time, \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was \"scary huge\".\nAuthor Chris Kohler wrote that \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was considered \"ruthlessly commercial\", and that it \"program[med] children to be consumers of anything and everything Pok\u00e9mon\". CNN quoted child psychiatrist John Lochridge as worrying that \"Pok\u00e9mon's creators and marketers deliberately set out to create a fantasy world so compelling that children would quickly become obsessed\". He believed that kids were being \"brainwashed\", and said: \"I have had parents tell me that they cannot get their kids to do anything except Pok\u00e9mon, so this stuff seems to really capture their minds, in a way\". These concerns were countered by psychologist William Damon, who told \"Newsweek\" that obsessing is in fact a normal part of a child's neurological development. It should concern parents only when the obsession gets dangerous or excessive. An op-ed in the New Zealander newspaper \"The Dominion Post\" claimed that the anti-Pok\u00e9mon sentiment was particularly American: \"The backlash, which seems largely confined to the United States, may be no more than the sound of the world's leading cultural imperialist gagging on a taste of its own medicine\".\nAs Pok\u00e9mania built, Western media started reporting on several crimes associated with \"Pok\u00e9mon\". These included violence (including two reported stabbings), burglaries, robberies (some at knifepoint), and shoplifting. Almost all these incidents were connected to the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" cards, and the individuals involved were almost always underage. In the US, the incidents peaked in November 1999. In England, \"Pok\u00e9mon\"-related delinquency reached a head in April 2000. High prices on the grey market were a motive behind some of the crimes, \"posing a great temptation for older kids and bullies to take advantage of weaker children\". At specialty shops and online auctions, a rare \"Pok\u00e9mon\" card could be bought and sold for $50 or more (c. $ in 2024).\nAside from the negative reactions, many media also cited alleged beneficial effects of \"Pok\u00e9mon\". It was noted that the video games and the cards require children to read, memorize, calculate, and plan out a strategy. Both encourage socialization, and trading Pok\u00e9mon requires negotiating skills. Stephanie Strom wrote in \"The New York Times\" that the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" anime taught children \"traditional Japanese values \u2013 responsibility, empathy, cooperation, obedience, respect for elders, humility\". Anne Allison interviewed various American parents during Pok\u00e9mania. She found that while most of them were \"utterly mystified\" about \"Pok\u00e9mon\", few were overly worried about it, instead meeting the craze with \"befuddled acceptance\". Allison also notes that the Columbine High School massacre occurred during Pok\u00e9mania (on 20 April 1999), causing violent television, music, and games to be scrutinized. Compared to these media, she notes, \"Pok\u00e9mon\" is in fact rather tame.\nIn contrast, \"Pok\u00e9mon\" received far less criticism in its native country of Japan. Anthropologist Christine R. Yano attributes this to cultural differences, which includes: 1) greater acceptance of exuberant consumerism \u2013 to buy is to be a good citizen; 2) less focus on media influence \u2013 instead, Japan's educational system, bullying, and dysfunctional families are more often the target of attention; 3) less separation between child- and adulthood \u2013 what is suitable for adults is not necessarily considered unsuitable for kids; 4) Pok\u00e9mon being permeated with \"kawaisa\" (cuteness), a hallmark of Japanese culture; 5) Japan's core religions, Buddhism and Shinto, are less moralizing in nature. However, Oliver Burkeman wrote in \"The Guardian\" that the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" cards were also banned from some Japanese schools.\nLegacy and influences.\nAfter World War II, Japan experienced a period of unprecedented growth and became well-known in the Western world for its consumer products, such as radios (e.g. Panasonic, Toshiba), cars (e.g. Toyota, Mitsubishi), and Sony's Walkman. From 1991 onwards, its economy stagnated, causing the country to lose its status as an economic superpower. However, during the 1990s and 2000s, Japan re-emerged as a source of 'cool' cultural goods, embraced by a growing international audience interested in Japanese culture. Nintendo, Sega, and Sony launched several popular video game consoles and franchises. In terms of children's properties, the success of \"Mighty Morphin Power Rangers\" changed perceptions on the viability of such Japanese imports in the West. The Tamagotchi fad (1997\u201398), centered around a portable digital pet device, was said to have \"paved the way for Pok\u00e9mon\".\nAnne Allison wrote that, before the 1990s, Japan figured little in the face of the worldwide hegemony of Euro-American cultural industries, in particular that of the US. \"Hollywood has been hostile to imports\", she wrote, \"and foreignness has largely been, and been seen as, an impediment to mass popularization in the United States\". The surprise success of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was \"an undeniable breakthrough in the homeland of Disney\" that \"changed preexisting assumptions about the US marketplace at the same time that it was constantly resisted for deviating from them\". \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was a welcomed boon to Japan's faltering economy, and positively influenced the country's soft power. Sociologist Yoshinori Kamo interviewed various American children and found that kids who thought \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was cool, were more likely to believe that Japan was a cool nation. Anne Allison gave a similar finding: all the children she interviewed knew where \"Pok\u00e9mon\" originated, and \"many said that, as a result of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" and other 'cool' Japanese goods, they had developed an interest in Japan. A number said that they now wanted to study Japanese and travel there one day\". Author Chris Kohler wrote: \"Japanese are proud of \"Pok\u00e9mon\", the most successful export of Japanese popular culture ever\". Although, sociologist Koichi Iwabuchi questioned to what extent \"Pok\u00e9mon\" really is 'Japanese', and to what extent it is simply a good property with universal appeal. He noted that Japanese nationalist commentators celebrated \"Pok\u00e9mon\"'s global success and retrospectively attributed this to its \"Japanese cultural power\", while ignoring the localization of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" overseas, as well as decades of increasing cooperation and cultural exchange between countries (globalization).\nIn the 20th century, anime found niche popularity in North America and Europe in series (\"Astro Boy\", \"Kimba the White Lion\", \"Speed Racer\") and films (\"Akira\", \"Ghost in the Shell\"). The \"Pok\u00e9mon\" TV series and films marked a breakthrough for anime, contributing to its growing worldwide success at the turn of the 21st century. For some children, \"Pok\u00e9mon\" was their introduction to 'Japanimation', serving as a \"gateway\" to other anime, manga, and Japanese culture in general. \"\" became one of the most successful Japanese animated films in history. After \"Princess Mononoke\", \"Pok\u00e9mon: The First Movie\" became the second anime film to open at mainstream cinemas in the West, as opposed to the usual art house venues. Pioneering anime importer John Ledford noted that \"Pok\u00e9mon\" underscored the commercial potential of anime, thus making it interesting from a business perspective.\nIn the field of video games, the main \"Pok\u00e9mon\" series became the paradigm of the monster-taming game. While not the first to use this concept, the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" games became so synonymous with it that later titles involving catching and training monsters, RPGs or not, were inevitably compared to \"Pok\u00e9mon\". Examples of this include \"Dragon Warrior Monsters\" (1998), \"Robopon Sun\" and \"Star\" (1998), \"Spectrobes\" (2007), \"Invizimals\" (2009), \"Monster Crown\" (2021), and \"Palworld\" (2024).\nThe success of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" encouraged companies to look for other popular Japanese properties that might be localized for Western markets. The importing of at least three similar franchises were confirmed by business executives to have been (partly) inspired by \"Pok\u00e9mon\": \"Yu-Gi-Oh!\", \"Digimon\", and \"Monster Rancher\". The import of \"Cardcaptor Sakura\" (as \"Cardcaptors\") might also have been prompted by \"Pok\u00e9mon\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMulti-reference notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23746", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23746", "title": "Paul the Deacon", "text": "8th-century Benedictine monk, scribe and historian\nPaul the Deacon (c. 720s \u2013 13 April 799) was a Lombard monk, historian, and scholar whose works were widely used throughout the early Middle Ages. Best known for the \"Historia Langobardorum\", a narrative of Lombard origins and migrations, he is one of the most significant early medieval historians of Italy. Paul was educated in the Lombard kingdom and later became active within the intellectual circles of Charlemagne\u2019s court, where he contributed to the broader scholarly activity associated with the Carolingian Renaissance.\nIn addition to his historical writings, Paul produced a continuation of Eutropius\u2019s \"Breviarium\", a collection of homilies for the Frankish church, a history of the bishops of Metz, poems and epitaphs, and an epitome of Festus\u2019s \"De verborum significatu\". His works drew on a wide range of classical, patristic, and early medieval sources and circulated extensively in monastic and ecclesiastical settings. Through both his Lombard identity and his Carolingian patronage, Paul played an important role in shaping the historical and literary culture of the eighth and ninth centuries.\nEarly Life and Background.\nPaul was born in the Duchy of Friuli in the early eighth century, likely into a family of local Lombard nobility. His birth name was Winfrid, and later sources suggest that he received the monastic name Paulus after entering religious life. Although details about his early years are limited, the surviving accounts indicate that he benefited from a high level of education, which may have been connected to the Lombard royal court at Pavia. He studied grammar, literature, and some Greek, and his training introduced him to both classical authors and Christian writers, influences that remained visible in his later works.\nService in the Lombard Kingdom.\nMuch of Paul\u2019s early career unfolded under the later Lombard kings. He is believed to have served at the court of King Desiderius, possibly in an administrative or secretarial capacity. Paul\u2019s literary talents attracted the attention of Desiderius\u2019s daughter Adelperga, for whom he composed a continuation of Eutropius\u2019s \"Breviarium\". His presence in Benevento and his association with the ducal court there reflect the mobility of Lombard elites in the final decades of the kingdom.\nTransition to Carolingian Rule.\nThe Frankish conquest of the Lombard kingdom in 774 marked a turning point in Paul\u2019s life. He appears to have left Pavia around the time of Charlemagne\u2019s capture of the city, and his family was directly affected by the political upheaval. His brother Arichis was taken to Francia as a prisoner following unrest in Friuli. Paul later appealed to Charlemagne for his brother\u2019s release, which was eventually granted. These events brought Paul into contact with the emerging intellectual networks surrounding the Carolingian court.\nMonte Cassino and Later Years.\nPaul entered monastic life sometime before 782 and became a monk at Monte Cassino, one of the most important Benedictine centers in early medieval Italy. His reputation as a scholar and writer reached Charlemagne, who invited him to participate in ecclesiastical and literary projects associated with the Carolingian Renaissance. Paul contributed to the compilation of a homiliary for the Frankish church and produced historical, grammatical, and liturgical works that circulated widely. He spent his final years at Monte Cassino, where he continued to write and revise his texts until his death on 13 April, probably in 799.\nWorks.\nHistoria Langobardorum.\nPaul\u2019s most famous work is the \"Historia Langobardorum\", a six-book narrative written near the end of his life. It traces the legendary origins of the Lombards, their migrations, and their settlement in Italy, and extends to the reign of King Liutprand (d. 744). Although unfinished, it is one of the principal sources for Lombard history. The work reflects both Paul\u2019s Lombard heritage and his exposure to Carolingian historical interests, and it draws on a wide range of written and oral materials, including the \"Origo gentis Langobardorum\", the \"Liber pontificalis\", the lost history of Secundus of Trent, and Beneventan annals. Its descriptions of political life, regional identities, and relations with the Franks make it a key text for understanding the transition from Late Antiquity to the early Middle Ages.\nHistoria Romana.\nPaul composed a continuation of Eutropius\u2019s \"Breviarium\" while associated with the ducal court at Benevento between 766 and 771. At the request of Adelperga, he expanded the original Roman history by integrating material from Scripture, patristic writers, and other Christian sources. His six added books carry the narrative to the mid-sixth century and were widely copied during the Middle Ages. The work became a standard school text and influenced how later medieval scholars understood the end of the western Roman Empire.\nHomiliary.\nAt Charlemagne\u2019s request, Paul compiled a collection of homilies for use in the Frankish church. Drawing on patristic and early medieval authors, the compilation was intended to provide suitable readings for the liturgical year and played a role in Carolingian efforts to standardize preaching and ecclesiastical instruction. The homiliary circulated across the Carolingian world and contributed to the broader program of religious and educational reform.\nLiber de episcopis Mettensibus.\nPaul wrote a short history of the bishops of Metz at the request of Bishop Angilram. Completed before 766, it is the earliest surviving example of an episcopal catalogue north of the Alps. The text reflects growing Carolingian interest in documenting the history of local churches and was later copied in monastic and cathedral settings. A modern English translation was published in 2013.\nPoetry and Other Works.\nPaul composed numerous poems, epitaphs, and occasional verses, many of which survive in early medieval manuscript collections. These include verses written for members of the Carolingian family and an epitaph for Arichis II of Benevento. His poetic corpus was edited in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, with later scholarship revising some earlier attributions. He also produced an epitome of Sextus Pompeius Festus\u2019s \"De verborum significatu\", which he dedicated to Charlemagne, as well as other grammatical and hagiographical works attributed to him in medieval sources.\n= Historiography and Legacy =\nModern scholarship views Paul the Deacon as one of the most influential historians of early medieval Europe. Although deeply shaped by his Lombard background, Paul wrote during a period when Lombard, Roman, and Frankish identities were being redefined under Carolingian rule. His works therefore occupy a complex position within the cultural and political landscape of the eighth century.\nHistorical Method and Use of Sources.\nScholars have emphasized Paul\u2019s careful engagement with earlier texts, including classical authors, patristic writers, and earlier Lombard and Roman histories. His combination of oral traditions, regional annals, and written authorities reflects a hybrid historical method characteristic of the early Middle Ages. Modern studies highlight Paul\u2019s selective use of sources to shape a coherent historical narrative, particularly in the \"Historia Langobardorum\", where his interpretation of Lombard origins and migration adopts elements of ethnographic storytelling alongside Christian universal history.\nIdentity and Political Context.\nPaul\u2019s position as a Lombard writing within the orbit of Carolingian power has been a major focus of recent scholarship. Historians have noted the tension between Lombard cultural memory and the new political structures that followed the Frankish conquest of Italy. His works balance pride in Lombard tradition with an awareness of shifting political realities, and some scholars interpret his narratives as efforts to preserve Lombard identity within a Carolingian framework. This dual perspective also shaped his portrayal of rulers, regional allegiances, and the historical relationship between the Lombards and the Franks.\nReception and Influence.\nPaul\u2019s writings circulated widely during the Middle Ages and played a significant role in shaping the historical imagination of later medieval authors. The \"Historia Langobardorum\" became a standard reference for Lombard history, and the \"Historia Romana\" continued to be used in educational settings. His homiliary contributed to Carolingian liturgical reform and remained influential in monastic communities. Medieval scholars, including those in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, drew upon his narratives when constructing accounts of early medieval Italy and its peoples.\nModern Scholarship.\nContemporary historians have reassessed Paul\u2019s works within broader debates about ethnicity, memory, and the construction of historical narratives in the early Middle Ages. Studies by Walter Goffart, Christopher Heath, Rosamond McKitterick, and others situate Paul within the intellectual networks of his time and emphasize his role in mediating between classical traditions and Carolingian reform. His writings are now recognized not only as sources for Lombard history but also as important contributions to the development of historiography in medieval Europe.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "23747", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23747", "title": "Peroxide", "text": "Chemical compounds with the structure R\u2013O\u2013O\u2013R'\nPeroxides are a group of molecules with the structure , where each R represents a radical (a portion of a complete molecule; not a free radical) and the O's are single oxygen atoms. Oxygen atoms are joined to each other and to adjacent elements through single covalent bonds, denoted by dashes or lines. The group in a peroxide is often called the peroxide group, though some nomenclature discrepancies exist. This linkage is recognized as a common polyatomic ion, and exists in many molecules.\nGeneral structure.\nThe characteristic structure of any regular peroxide is the oxygen\u2013oxygen covalent single bond, which connects the two main atoms together. Each oxygen atom has a oxidation state of negative one, as 5 of its valence electrons remain in the outermost orbital shell whilst one is occupied in the covalent bond. Because of the nature of the covalent bond, this arrangement results in each atom having the equivalent of 7 valence electrons, reducing the oxygens and giving them a negative charge. This charge is affected by the addition of other elements, with the properties and structure changing depending on the added group(s).\nCommon forms.\nThe most common peroxide is hydrogen peroxide (), colloquially known simply as \"peroxide\". Many organic peroxides are known as well.\nIn addition to hydrogen peroxide, some other major classes of peroxides are:\nNomenclature.\nThe linkage between the oxygen molecules is known as a peroxy group (sometimes called peroxo group, peroxyl group, of peroxy linkage). The nomenclature of the peroxy group is somewhat variable, and exists as an exception to the rules of naming polyatomic ions. This is because, when it was discovered, it was believed to be monatomic. The term was introduced by Thomas Thomson in 1804 for a compound combined with as much oxygen as possible, or the oxide with the greatest quantity of oxygen. "}
{"id": "23748", "revid": "46602339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23748", "title": "Photolithography", "text": "Process in microfabrication\nPhotolithography (also known as optical lithography) is a process used in the manufacturing of integrated circuits. It involves using light to transfer a pattern onto a photoresist layer deposited on a sample, typically a silicon wafer.\nThe process begins with a photosensitive material, called a photoresist, being applied to the substrate. A photomask that contains the desired pattern is then placed over the photoresist. Light is shone through the photomask, exposing the photoresist in certain areas. The exposed areas undergo a chemical change, making them either soluble or insoluble in a developer solution. After development, the pattern is transferred onto the sample through etching, chemical vapor deposition, or ion implantation processes.\nUltraviolet (UV) light is typically used.\nPhotolithography processes can be classified according to the type of light used, including ultraviolet lithography, deep ultraviolet lithography, extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUVL), and X-ray lithography. The wavelength of light used determines the minimum feature size that can be formed in the photoresist.\nPhotolithography is the most common method for the semiconductor fabrication of integrated circuits (\"ICs\" or \"chips\"), such as solid-state memories and microprocessors. It can create extremely small patterns, down to a few nanometers in size. It provides precise control of the shape and size of the objects it creates. It can create patterns over an entire wafer in a single step, quickly and with relatively low cost. In complex integrated circuits, a wafer may go through the photolithographic cycle as many as 50 times. It is also an important technique for microfabrication in general, such as the fabrication of microelectromechanical systems. However, photolithography cannot be used to produce masks on surfaces that are not perfectly flat. And, like all chip manufacturing processes, it requires extremely clean operating conditions.\nPhotolithography is a subclass of microlithography, the general term for processes that generate patterned thin films. Other technologies in this broader class include the use of steerable electron beams, or more rarely, nanoimprinting, interference, magnetic fields, or scanning probes. On a broader level, it may compete with directed self-assembly of micro- and nanostructures.\nPhotolithography shares some fundamental principles with photography in that the pattern in the photoresist is created by exposing it to light \u2014 either directly by projection through a lens, or by illuminating a mask placed directly over the substrate, as in contact printing. The technique can also be seen as a high precision version of the method used to make printed circuit boards. The name originated from a loose analogy with the traditional photographic method of producing plates for lithographic printing on paper; however, subsequent stages in the process have more in common with etching than with traditional lithography.\nConventional photoresists typically consist of three components: resin, sensitizer, and solvent.\nEtymology.\nThe root words \"photo\", \"litho\", and \"graphy\" all have Greek origins, with the meanings 'light', 'stone' and 'writing' respectively. As suggested by the name compounded from them, \"photolithography\" is a printing method (originally based on the use of limestone printing plates) in which light plays an essential role.\nHistory.\nIn the 1820s, Nicephore Niepce invented a photographic process that used Bitumen of Judea, a natural asphalt, as the first photoresist. A thin coating of the bitumen on a sheet of metal, glass or stone became less soluble where it was exposed to light; the unexposed parts could then be rinsed away with a suitable solvent, baring the material beneath, which was then chemically etched in an acid bath to produce a printing plate. The light-sensitivity of bitumen was very poor and very long exposures were required, but despite the later introduction of more sensitive alternatives, its low cost and superb resistance to strong acids prolonged its commercial life into the early 20th century.\nIn 1940, Oskar S\u00fc\u00df created a \"positive\" photoresist by using diazonaphthoquinone, which worked in the opposite manner: the coating was initially insoluble and was rendered soluble where it was exposed to light. In 1954, Louis Plambeck Jr. developed the Dycryl polymeric letterpress plate, which made the platemaking process faster. Development of photoresists used to be carried out in batches of wafers (batch processing) dipped into a bath of developer, but modern process offerings do development one wafer at a time (single wafer processing) to improve process control.\nIn 1957 Jules Andrus patented a photolithographic process for semiconductor fabrication, while working at Bell Labs. At the same time Moe Abramson and Stanislaus Danko of the US Army Signal Corps developed a technique for printing circuits.\nIn 1952, the U.S. military assigned Jay W. Lathrop and James R. Nall at the National Bureau of Standards (later the U.S. Army Diamond Ordnance Fuze Laboratory, which eventually merged to form the now-present Army Research Laboratory) with the task of finding a way to reduce the size of electronic circuits in order to better fit the necessary circuitry in the limited space available inside a proximity fuze. Inspired by the application of photoresist, a photosensitive liquid used to mark the boundaries of rivet holes in metal aircraft wings, Nall determined that a similar process can be used to protect the germanium in the transistors and even pattern the surface with light. During development, Lathrop and Nall were successful in creating a 2D miniaturized hybrid integrated circuit with transistors using this technique. In 1958, during the IRE Professional Group on Electron Devices (PGED) conference in Washington, D.C., they presented the first paper to describe the fabrication of transistors using photographic techniques and adopted the term \"photolithography\" to describe the process, marking the first published use of the term to describe semiconductor device patterning.\nDespite the fact that photolithography of electronic components concerns etching metal duplicates, rather than etching stone to produce a \"master\" as in conventional lithographic printing, Lathrop and Nall chose the term \"photolithography\" over \"photoetching\" because the former sounded \"high tech.\" A year after the conference, Lathrop and Nall's patent on photolithography was formally approved on June 9, 1959. Photolithography would later contribute to the development of the first semiconductor ICs as well as the first microchips.\nProcess.\nA single iteration of photolithography combines several steps in sequence. Modern cleanrooms use automated, robotic wafer track systems to coordinate the process. The procedure described here omits some advanced treatments, such as thinning agents. The photolithography process is carried out by the wafer track and stepper/scanner, and the wafer track system and the stepper/scanner are installed side by side. Wafer track systems are also known as wafer coater/developer systems, which perform the same functions. Wafer tracks are named after the \"tracks\" used to carry wafers inside the machine, but modern machines do not use tracks.\nCleaning.\nIf organic or inorganic contaminations are present on the wafer surface, they are usually removed by wet chemical treatment, e.g. the RCA clean procedure based on solutions containing hydrogen peroxide. Other solutions made with trichloroethylene, acetone or methanol can also be used to clean.\nPreparation.\nThe wafer is initially heated to a temperature sufficient to drive off any moisture that may be present on the wafer surface; 150\u00a0\u00b0C for ten minutes is sufficient. Wafers that have been in storage must be chemically cleaned to remove contamination. A liquid or gaseous \"adhesion promoter\", such as Bis(trimethylsilyl)amine (\"hexamethyldisilazane\", HMDS), is applied to promote adhesion of the photoresist to the wafer. The surface layer of silicon dioxide on the wafer reacts with HMDS to form tri-methylated silicon-dioxide, a highly water repellent layer not unlike the layer of wax on a car's paint. This water repellent layer prevents the aqueous developer from penetrating between the photoresist layer and the wafer's surface, thus preventing so-called lifting of small photoresist structures in the (developing) pattern. In order to ensure the development of the image, it is best covered and placed over a hot plate and let it dry while stabilizing the temperature at 120\u00a0\u00b0C.\nPhotoresist application.\nThe wafer is covered with photoresist liquid by spin coating. Thus, the top layer of resist is quickly ejected from the wafer's edge while the bottom layer still creeps slowly radially along the wafer. In this way, any 'bump' or 'ridge' of resist is removed, leaving a very flat layer. However, viscous films may result in large edge beads which are areas at the edges of the wafer or photomask with increased resist thickness whose planarization has physical limits. Often, Edge bead removal (EBR) is carried out, usually with a nozzle, to remove this extra resist as it could otherwise cause particulate contamination.\nFinal thickness is also determined by the evaporation of liquid solvents from the resist. For very small, dense features (&lt; 125 or so nm), lower resist thicknesses (&lt; 0.5 microns) are needed to overcome collapse effects at high aspect ratios; typical aspect ratios are &lt; 4:1.\nThe photoresist-coated wafer is then prebaked to drive off excess photoresist solvent, typically at 90 to 100\u00a0\u00b0C for 30 to 60 seconds on a hotplate. A BARC coating (Bottom Anti-Reflectant Coating) may be applied before the photoresist is applied, to avoid reflections from occurring under the photoresist and to improve the photoresist's performance at smaller semiconductor nodes such as 45\u00a0nm and below. Top Anti-Reflectant Coatings (TARCs) also exist. EUV lithography is unique in the sense it allows for the use of photoresists with metal oxides.\nExposure and developing.\nAfter prebaking, the photoresist is exposed to a pattern of intense light. The exposure to light causes a chemical change that allows some of the photoresist to be removed by a special solution, called \"developer\" by analogy with photographic developer. Positive photoresist, the most common type, becomes soluble in the developer when exposed; with negative photoresist, unexposed regions are soluble in the developer.\nA post-exposure bake (PEB) is performed before developing, typically to help reduce standing wave phenomena caused by the destructive and constructive interference patterns of the incident light. In deep ultraviolet lithography, chemically amplified resist (CAR) chemistry is used. This resist is much more sensitive to PEB time, temperature, and delay, as the resist works by creating acid when it is hit by photons, and then undergoes an \"exposure\" reaction (creating acid, making the polymer soluble in the basic developer, and performing a chemical reaction catalyzed by acid) which mostly occurs in the PEB.\nThe develop chemistry is delivered on a spinner, much like photoresist. Developers originally often contained sodium hydroxide (NaOH). However, sodium is considered an extremely undesirable contaminant in MOSFET fabrication because it degrades the insulating properties of gate oxides (specifically, sodium ions can migrate in and out of the gate, changing the threshold voltage of the transistor and making it harder or easier to turn the transistor on over time). Metal-ion-free developers such as tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) are now used. The temperature of the developer might be tightly controlled using jacketed (dual walled) hoses to within 0.2\u00a0\u00b0C. The nozzle that coats the wafer with developer may influence the amount of developer that is necessary.\nThe resulting wafer is then \"hard-baked\" if a non-chemically amplified resist was used, typically at 120 to 180\u00a0\u00b0C for 20 to 30 minutes. The hard bake solidifies the remaining photoresist, to make a more durable protecting layer in future ion implantation, wet chemical etching, or plasma etching.\nFrom preparation until this step, the photolithography procedure has been carried out by two machines: the photolithography stepper or scanner, and the coater/developer. The two machines are usually installed side by side, and are \"linked\" together.\nEtching, implantation.\nIn etching, a liquid (\"wet\") or plasma (\"dry\") chemical agent removes the uppermost layer of the substrate in the areas that are not protected by photoresist. In semiconductor fabrication, dry etching techniques are generally used, as they can be made anisotropic, in order to avoid significant undercutting of the photoresist pattern. This is essential when the width of the features to be defined is similar to or less than the thickness of the material being etched (i.e. when the aspect ratio approaches unity). Wet etch processes are generally isotropic in nature, which is often indispensable for microelectromechanical systems, where suspended structures must be \"released\" from the underlying layer.\nThe development of low-defectivity anisotropic dry-etch process has enabled the ever-smaller features defined photolithographically in the resist to be transferred to the substrate material.\nPhotoresist removal.\nAfter a photoresist is no longer needed, it must be removed from the substrate. This usually requires a liquid \"resist stripper\", which chemically alters the resist so that it no longer adheres to the substrate. Alternatively, the photoresist may be removed by a plasma containing oxygen, which oxidizes it. This process is called plasma ashing and resembles dry etching. The use of 1-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent for photoresist is another method used to remove an image. When the resist has been dissolved, the solvent can be removed by heating to 80\u00a0\u00b0C without leaving any residue.\nExposure (\"printing\") systems.\nExposure systems typically produce an image on the wafer using a photomask. The photomask blocks light in some areas and lets it pass in others. (Maskless lithography projects a precise beam directly onto the wafer without using a mask, but it is not widely used in commercial processes.) Exposure systems may be classified by the optics that transfer the image from the mask to the wafer.\nPhotolithography produces better thin film transistor structures than printed electronics, due to smoother printed layers, less wavy patterns, and more accurate drain-source electrode registration.\nContact and proximity.\nA contact aligner, the simplest exposure system, puts a photomask in direct contact with the wafer and exposes it to a uniform light. A proximity aligner puts a small gap of around 5 microns between the photomask and wafer. In both cases, the mask covers the entire wafer, and simultaneously patterns every die.\nContact printing/lithography is liable to damage both the mask and the wafer, and this was the primary reason it was abandoned for high volume production. Both contact and proximity lithography require the light intensity to be uniform across an entire wafer, and the mask to align precisely to features already on the wafer. As modern processes use increasingly large wafers, these conditions become increasingly difficult.\nResearch and prototyping processes often use contact or proximity lithography, because it uses inexpensive hardware and can achieve high optical resolution. The resolution in proximity lithography is approximately the square root of the product of the wavelength and the gap distance. Hence, except for projection lithography (see below), contact printing offers the best resolution, because its gap distance is approximately zero (neglecting the thickness of the photoresist itself). In addition, nanoimprint lithography may revive interest in this familiar technique, especially since the cost of ownership is expected to be low; however, the shortcomings of contact printing discussed above remain as challenges.\nProjection.\nVery-large-scale integration (VLSI) lithography uses projection systems. Unlike contact or proximity masks, which cover an entire wafer, projection masks (known as \"reticles\") show only one die or an array of dies (known as a \"field\") in a portion of the wafer at a time. Projection exposure systems (steppers or scanners) project the mask onto the wafer many times, changing the position of the wafer with every projection, to create the complete pattern, fully patterning the wafer. The difference between steppers and scanners is that, during exposure, a scanner moves the photomask and the wafer simultaneously, while a stepper only moves the wafer. Contact, proximity and projection Mask aligners preceded steppers\n and do not move the photomask nor the wafer during exposure and use masks that cover the entire wafer. Immersion lithography scanners use a layer of Ultrapure water between the lens and the wafer to increase resolution. An alternative to photolithography is nanoimprint lithography. The maximum size of the image that can be projected onto a wafer is known as the reticle limit.\nPhotomasks.\nThe image for the mask originates from a computerized data file. This data file is converted to a series of polygons and written onto a square of fused quartz substrate covered with a layer of chromium using a photolithographic process. A laser beam (laser writer) or a beam of electrons (e-beam writer) is used to expose the pattern defined by the data file and travels over the surface of the substrate in either a vector or raster scan manner. Where the photoresist on the mask is exposed, the chrome can be etched away, leaving a clear path for the illumination light in the stepper/scanner system to travel through.\nResolution in projection systems.\nThe ability to project a clear image of a small feature onto the wafer is limited by the wavelength of the light that is used, and the ability of the reduction lens system to capture enough diffraction orders from the illuminated mask. Current state-of-the-art photolithography tools use deep ultraviolet (DUV) light from excimer lasers with wavelengths of 248 (KrF) and\n193 (ArF) nm (the dominant lithography technology today is thus also called \"excimer laser lithography\"), which allow minimum feature sizes down to 50\u00a0nm. Excimer laser lithography has thus played a critical role in the continued advance of the Moore's Law for the last 20 years (see below).\nThe minimum feature size that a projection system can print is given approximately by:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the minimum feature size (also called the critical dimension, target design rule, or \"half-pitch\"), formula_3 is the wavelength of light used, and formula_4 is the numerical aperture of the lens as seen from the wafer.\nformula_5 (commonly called \"k1 factor\") is a coefficient that encapsulates process-related factors and typically equals 0.4 for production. (formula_5 is actually a function of process factors such as the angle of incident light on a reticle and the incident light intensity distribution. It is fixed per process.) The minimum feature size can be reduced by decreasing this coefficient through computational lithography.\nAccording to this equation, minimum feature sizes can be decreased by decreasing the wavelength, and increasing the numerical aperture (to achieve a tighter focused beam and a smaller spot size). However, this design method runs into a competing constraint. In modern systems, the depth of focus is also a concern:\nformula_7\nHere, formula_8 is another process-related coefficient. The depth of focus restricts the thickness of the photoresist and the depth of the topography on the wafer. Chemical mechanical polishing is often used to flatten topography before high-resolution lithographic steps.\nFrom classical optics, k1=0.61 by the Rayleigh criterion. The image of two points separated by less than 1.22 wavelength/NA will not maintain that separation but will be larger due to the interference between the Airy discs of the two points. It must also be remembered, though, that the distance between two features can also change with defocus.\nResolution is also nontrivial in a two-dimensional context. For example, a tighter line pitch results in wider gaps (in the perpendicular direction) between the ends of the lines. More fundamentally, straight edges become rounded for shortened rectangular features, where both x and y pitches are near the resolution limit.\nFor advanced nodes, blur, rather than wavelength, becomes the key resolution-limiting factor. Minimum pitch is given by blur sigma/0.14. Blur is affected by dose as well as quantum yield, leading to a tradeoff with stochastic defects, in the case of EUV.\nStochastic effects.\nAs light consists of photons, at low doses the image quality ultimately depends on the photon number. This affects the use of extreme ultraviolet lithography or EUVL, which is limited to the use of low doses on the order of 20 photons/nm2.\nThis is due to fewer photons for the same energy dose for a shorter wavelength (higher energy per photon). With fewer photons making up the image, there is noise in the edge placement.\nThe stochastic effects would become more complicated with larger pitch patterns with more diffraction orders and using more illumination source points.\nSecondary electrons in EUV lithography aggravate the stochastic characteristics.\nLight sources.\nHistorically, photolithography has used ultraviolet light from gas-discharge lamps using mercury, sometimes in combination with noble gases such as xenon. These lamps produce light across a broad spectrum with several strong peaks in the ultraviolet range. This spectrum is filtered to select a single spectral line. From the early 1960s through the mid-1980s, Hg lamps had been used in lithography for their spectral lines at 436\u00a0nm (\"g-line\"), 405\u00a0nm (\"h-line\") and 365\u00a0nm (\"i-line\"). However, with the semiconductor industry's need for both higher resolution (to produce denser and faster chips) and higher throughput (for lower costs), lamp-based lithography tools were no longer able to meet the industry's high-end requirements.\nThis challenge was overcome in 1982 when excimer laser lithography was proposed and demonstrated at IBM by Kanti Jain. Excimer laser lithography machines (steppers and scanners) became the primary tools in microelectronics production, and has enabled minimum features sizes in chip manufacturing to shrink from 800 nanometers in 1990 to 7 nanometers in 2018. From an even broader scientific and technological perspective, in the 50-year history of the laser since its first demonstration in 1960, the invention and development of excimer laser lithography has been recognized as a major milestone.\nThe commonly used deep ultraviolet excimer lasers in lithography systems are the krypton fluoride (KrF) laser at 248\u00a0nm wavelength and the argon fluoride laser (ArF) at 193\u00a0nm wavelength. The primary manufacturers of excimer laser light sources in the 1980s were Lambda Physik (now part of Coherent, Inc.) and Lumonics. Since the mid-1990s Cymer Inc. has become the dominant supplier of excimer laser sources to the lithography equipment manufacturers, with Gigaphoton Inc. as their closest rival. Generally, an excimer laser is designed to operate with a specific gas mixture; therefore, changing wavelength is not a trivial matter, as the method of generating the new wavelength is completely different, and the absorption characteristics of materials change. For example, air begins to absorb significantly around the 193\u00a0nm wavelength; moving to sub-193\u00a0nm wavelengths would require installing vacuum pump and purge equipment on the lithography tools (a significant challenge). An inert gas atmosphere can sometimes be used as a substitute for a vacuum, to avoid the need for hard plumbing. Furthermore, insulating materials such as silicon dioxide, when exposed to photons with energy greater than the band gap, release free electrons and holes which subsequently cause adverse charging.\nOptical lithography has been extended to feature sizes below 50\u00a0nm using the 193\u00a0nm ArF excimer laser and liquid immersion techniques. Also termed immersion lithography, this enables the use of optics with numerical apertures exceeding 1.0. The liquid used is typically ultra-pure, deionised water, which provides for a refractive index above that of the usual air gap between the lens and the wafer surface. The water is continually circulated to eliminate thermally-induced distortions. Water will only allow \"NA\"'s of up to ~1.4, but fluids with higher refractive indices would allow the effective \"NA\" to be increased further.\nExperimental tools using the 157\u00a0nm wavelength from the F2 excimer laser in a manner similar to current exposure systems have been built. These were once targeted to succeed 193\u00a0nm lithography at the 65\u00a0nm feature size node but have now all but been eliminated by the introduction of immersion lithography. This was due to persistent technical problems with the 157\u00a0nm technology and economic considerations that provided strong incentives for the continued use of 193\u00a0nm excimer laser lithography technology. High-index immersion lithography is the newest extension of 193\u00a0nm lithography to be considered. In 2006, features less than 30\u00a0nm were demonstrated by IBM using this technique. These systems used CaF2 calcium fluoride lenses. Immersion lithography at 157\u00a0nm was explored.\nUV excimer lasers have been demonstrated to about 126\u00a0nm (for Ar2*). Mercury arc lamps are designed to maintain a steady DC current of 50 to 150 Volts, however excimer lasers have a higher resolution. Excimer lasers are gas-based light systems that are usually filled with inert and halide gases (Kr, Ar, Xe, F and Cl) that are charged by an electric field. The higher the frequency, the greater the resolution of the image. KrF lasers are able to function at a frequency of 4\u00a0kHz . In addition to running at a higher frequency, excimer lasers are compatible with more advanced machines than mercury arc lamps are. They are also able to operate from greater distances (up to 25 meters) and are able to maintain their accuracy with a series of mirrors and antireflective-coated lenses. By setting up multiple lasers and mirrors, the amount of energy loss is minimized, also since the lenses are coated with antireflective material, the light intensity remains relatively the same from when it left the laser to when it hits the wafer.\nLasers have been used to indirectly generate non-coherent extreme UV (EUV) light at 13.5\u00a0nm for extreme ultraviolet lithography. The EUV light is not emitted by the laser, but rather by a tin or xenon plasma which is excited by an excimer or CO2 laser. This technique does not require a synchrotron, and EUV sources, as noted, do not produce coherent light. However vacuum systems and a number of novel technologies (including much higher EUV energies than are now produced) are needed to work with UV at the edge of the X-ray spectrum (which begins at 10\u00a0nm). As of 2020, EUV is in mass production use by leading edge foundries such as TSMC and Samsung.\nTheoretically, an alternative light source for photolithography, especially if and when wavelengths continue to decrease to extreme UV or X-ray, is the free-electron laser (or one might say xaser for an X-ray device). Free-electron lasers can produce high quality beams at arbitrary wavelengths.\nVisible and infrared femtosecond lasers were also applied for lithography. In that case photochemical reactions are initiated by multiphoton absorption. Usage of these light sources have a lot of benefits, including possibility to manufacture true 3D objects and process non-photosensitized (pure) glass-like materials with superb optical resiliency.\nExperimental methods.\nPhotolithography has been defeating predictions of its demise for many years. For instance, by the early 1980s, many in the semiconductor industry had come to believe that features smaller than 1 micron could not be printed optically. Modern techniques using excimer laser lithography already print features with dimensions a fraction of the wavelength of light used \u2013 an amazing optical feat. New techniques such as immersion lithography, dual-tone resist and multiple patterning continue to improve the resolution of 193\u00a0nm lithography. Meanwhile, current research is exploring alternatives to conventional UV, such as electron beam lithography, X-ray lithography, extreme ultraviolet lithography and ion projection lithography. Extreme ultraviolet lithography has entered mass production use, as of 2018 by Samsung and other manufacturers have followed suit.\nMassively parallel electron beam lithography has been explored as an alternative to photolithography, and was tested by TSMC, but it did not succeed and the technology from the main developer of the technique, MAPPER, was purchased by ASML, although electron beam lithography was at one point used in chip production by IBM. Electron beam lithography is only used in niche applications such as photomask production.\nEconomy.\nIn 2001 NIST publication has reported that photolithography process constituted about 35% of total cost of a wafer processing costs.\nIn 2021, the photolithography industry was valued over 8 billion USD.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23749", "revid": "2003421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23749", "title": "Platypus", "text": "Species of mammal\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe platypus (Ornithorhynchus anatinus), sometimes referred to as the duck-billed platypus, is a semiaquatic, egg-laying mammal endemic to eastern Australia, including Tasmania. The platypus is the sole living representative of its family Ornithorhynchidae and genus Ornithorhynchus, though a number of related species appear in the fossil record. Together with the four species of echidna, it is one of the five extant species of monotremes, mammals that lay eggs instead of giving birth to live young. Like other monotremes, the platypus has a sense of electrolocation, which it uses to detect prey in water while its eyes, ears and nostrils are closed. It is one of the few species of venomous mammals, as the male platypus has a spur on each hind foot that delivers an extremely painful venom.\nThe unusual appearance of this egg-laying, duck-billed, beaver-tailed mammal at first baffled European naturalists. In 1799, the first scientists to examine a preserved platypus body judged it a fake made of several animals sewn together. The unique features of the platypus make it important in the study of evolutionary biology, and a recognisable and iconic symbol of Australia. It is culturally significant to several Aboriginal peoples, who also used to hunt it for food, and has appeared on stamps and currency.\nThe platypus was hunted for its fur, but it has been a legally protected species in all states where it occurs since 1912. Captive breeding programs have had slight success, and it is vulnerable to pollution, bycatching and climate change. It is classified as a near-threatened species by the IUCN, but a November 2020 report has recommended that it be upgraded to threatened species under the federal \"EPBC Act\", due to habitat destruction and declining numbers in all states.\nTaxonomy and naming.\nAustralian Aboriginal people have referred to the platypus in various ways depending on Australian indigenous languages and dialects. Among the names found: \"boondaburra\", \"mallingong\", \"tambreet\", \"watjarang\" (names in Yass, Murrumbidgee, and Tumut), \"tohunbuck\" (region of Goomburra, Darling Downs), \"dulaiwarrung\" or \"dulai warrung\" (Woiwurrung language, Wurundjeri, Victoria), \"djanbang\" (Bundjalung, Queensland), \"djumulung\" (Yuin language, Yuin, New South Wales), \"malu\u014bga\u014b\" (ngunnawal language, Ngunnawal, Australian Capital Territory), \"biladurang\", \"wamul\", \"dyiimalung\", \"oornie\", \"dungidany\" (Wiradjuri language, Wiradjuri, Vic, NSW), \"oonah\", etc. The name chosen and approved in Palawa kani (reconstructed Tasmanian language) is \"larila\". \nWhen the platypus was first encountered by Europeans in 1798, a pelt and sketch were sent back to Great Britain by Captain John Hunter, the second Governor of New South Wales. British scientists' initial hunch was that the attributes were a hoax. George Shaw, who produced the first description of the animal in the \"Naturalist's Miscellany\" in 1799, stated it was impossible not to entertain doubts as to its genuine nature, and Robert Knox believed\u2014because it arrived in England via the Indian Ocean\u2014that it might have been created by Chinese sailors. It was thought somebody had sewn a duck's beak onto the body of a beaver-like animal. Shaw used a pair of scissors to check for stitches.\nThe common name \"platypus\" means 'flat-foot', deriving from the Greek word (), from ( 'broad, wide, flat') and ( 'foot'). Shaw initially assigned the species the Linnaean name \"Platypus anatinus\" when he described it, but the genus term was quickly discovered to already be in use as the name of a beetle genus \"Platypus\". It was independently described as \"Ornithorhynchus paradoxus\" by Johann Blumenbach in 1800 (from a specimen given to him by Sir Joseph Banks) and following the rules of priority of nomenclature, it was later officially recognised as \"Ornithorhynchus anatinus\".\nVarious dictionaries list \"platypuses\" or simply \"platypus\" as the plural. Alternatively, the term \"platypi\" is also used for the plural, although this is a form of pseudo-Latin; going by the word's Greek roots the plural would be \"platypodes\". Early European settlers called it by many names, such as \"watermole\", \"duckbill\", and \"duckmole\". Occasionally it is specifically called the \"duck-billed platypus\". There is no official term for platypus young, but the term \"platypup\" sees unofficial use, as does \"puggle\".\nThe scientific name \"Ornithorhynchus anatinus\" literally means 'duck-like bird-snout', deriving its genus name from the Greek root ( \"ornith\" or \"\u00f3rn\u012bs\" 'bird') and the word ( 'snout', 'beak'). Its species name is derived from Latin ('duck-like') from 'duck'. The platypus is the sole living representative or monotypic taxon of its family (Ornithorhynchidae).\nDescription.\nMost of the platypus' small streamlined body is covered with short, dense, brown, fur that traps a layer of insulating air to keep the animal warm, both in and out of water. The fur coat is waterproof and consists of flattened guard hairs and curvy underfur hairs. It is one of the most densely furred mammals, behind only otters. It is also biofluorescent and glows cyan and green when under ultraviolet light; this may serve to camouflage it in low lighting from UV-sensitive predators. The duck-like bill consists of a long snout and lower jaw which is covered in soft skin. The nostrils are located near the tip of the snout's dorsal surface, while the eyes and ears are just behind the snout in a groove which closes underwater. It has cheek pouches for storing food. The platypus's wide, flat tail is compared to a beaver's but is furry rather than scaly; it stores fat reserves and can act as a rudder during swimming. The legs are short and have a sprawling stance. Webbing is more significant on the front feet. While walking on land, the feet are folded up in knuckle-walking to protect the webbing. \nThe platypus has an interclavicle in the shoulder girdle, a trait which they share in common with reptiles. As in many other aquatic and semiaquatic vertebrates, the bones show osteosclerosis, increasing their density to reduce buoyancy. Adult platypuses lack teeth and instead have heavily keratinised food-grinding pads. Young platypuses have one premolar tooth and two molars on each maxillae, and three molars on the dentaries. The first upper and third lower cheek teeth have only one major cusp, while the rest have two. They lose their teeth around the time they leave their natal burrow.\nMale platypuses have an average length of and weight of , while females are smaller with an average length of and weight of . The species follows Bergmann's rule, with individuals being larger the farther south they are, due to colder climates; there are local variations, however. The platypus has an average body temperature of about , lower than the typical of placental mammals. Research suggests this has been a gradual adaptation to harsh environmental conditions among the few marginal surviving monotreme species, rather than a general characteristic of past monotremes.\nThe platypus has a single opening, called a cloaca, for both the reproductive and waste systems. The male platypus has penile spines and an asymmetrical glans penis that is larger on the left side. The female has two ovaries, with the right one being non-functional, and teats are absent.\nSenses.\nMonotremes are the only mammals (apart from the Guiana dolphin) known to have a sense of electroreception. The playtpus relies on electrolocation when feeding, as the eyes, ears, and nose are closed while underwater. Digging in the bottom of streams with its bill, its electroreceptors detect tiny electric currents generated by the muscular contractions of its prey. Experiments have shown the platypus will even react to an \"artificial shrimp\" if a small electric current is passed through it.\nThe 40,000 electroreceptors are arranged in rows in the skin of the bill from front to back, while mechanoreceptors for touch are uniformly distributed across the bill. The electrosensory area of the cerebral cortex is in the tactile somatosensory area, and some cortical cells receive input from both electroreceptors and mechanoreceptors, suggesting the platypus feels electric fields as touches. These receptors in the bill dominate the somatotopic map of the platypus brain, in the same way human hands dominate the Penfield homunculus map. The platypus can feel the direction of an electric source, perhaps by comparing differences in signal strength across the array of electroreceptors, enhanced by the characteristic side-to-side motion of the animal's head while hunting. It may also be able to determine the distance of moving prey via the timing difference between electrical and mechanical pressure sensations. Monotreme electrolocation for hunting in murky waters may be tied to their tooth loss. The extinct \"Obdurodon\" was electroreceptive, but unlike the modern platypus it foraged in open water.\nThe eyes of the platypus have basal traits also found in lungfish and amphibians, such as scleral cartilage, double cones, and droplets. The platypus's eyes are small and shut under water, though several features indicate its ancestors relied on vision. As with other aquatic mammals, the eye has a flattened cornea and surrounding lens, while the posterior surface of the lens is sharply inclined. A temporal (ear side) concentration of retinal ganglion cells, important for binocular vision, indicates a vestigial role in predation, though the actual visual acuity is insufficient for such activities. Limited acuity is matched by low cortical magnification, a small lateral geniculate nucleus, and a large optic tectum, suggesting that the visual midbrain plays a more important role than the visual cortex, as in some rodents. These features suggest that the platypus has adapted to an aquatic and nocturnal lifestyle, developing its electrosensory system at the cost of its visual system. This contrasts with the small number of electroreceptors in the short-beaked echidna, which dwells in dry environments, while the long-beaked echidna, which lives in wetter habitats is intermediate between the other two monotremes.\nThe ears of the platypus are adapted for hearing while out of water. As in all true mammals, it has three middle ear bones, though the cochlea lacks spirals, but is described as \"well organised\". Within the cochlea, there are rows of inner and outer hair cells. As in placental mammals, the outer hair cells of the platypus are adapted for hearing high frequencies, suggesting it is an ancestral mammalian trait. However it also possesses more rows of inner hair cells. The olfactory (smelling) systems of the platypus and the echidna independently evolved from an ancestor with less advanced smelling. The main olfactory bulb of the platypus lacks the complex layers of the echidna, while both the piriform cortex and flaps (lamella) are simpler. Monotremes differ from placental mammals in that their mitral cells are distributed throughout the outer plexiform layer of the olfactory bulb rather than packed as a monolayer.\nVenom.\nWhile both male and female platypuses are born with back ankle spurs, only the males retain them into adulthood. Similar spurs are found on many archaic mammal groups, indicating that this was an ancient general characteristic among mammals. The spurs of the male inject venom, which is powerful enough to inflict pain in humans. Starting from the wounded area, the affect limb develops edema (swelling via fluid buildup) which can lead to an excruciating hyperalgesia (heightened sensitivity to pain) that can last as long as months. \nThe venom is composed largely of defensin-like proteins (DLPs) produced by the immune system, some of which are unique to the species. It is produced in kidney-shaped alveolar glands located in each of the thighs of the hind limbs and connected to the spur. The venomous spurs of male platypuses serve as weapons in battles with other males for breeding.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe platypus is native to the freshwaters of eastern Australia, from Queenland to Tasmania (including King Island but not the Furneaux Group). It was believed to be extinct on the South Australian mainland, with the last sighting recorded at Renmark in 1975. Platypuses were captively bred at Warrawong Sanctuary in 1990-91. In October 2020 a nesting platypus was filmed in the wild after the previously abandoned Sanctuary reopened. There is a population on Kangaroo Island introduced in the 1920s, said to stand at 150 individuals in the Rocky River region of Flinders Chase National Park. In the 2019\u201320 Australian bushfire season, large portions of the island burned, decimating wildlife. However, SA Department for Environment and Water recovery teams worked to restore their habitat, with a number of sightings reported by April 2020. The platypus has almost disappeared from the Murray\u2013Darling Basin, possibly due to poor water management. Platypuses can be found in a variety of freshwater habitats including rivers, streams, lakes and lagoon-like pools. The surrounding terrestrial environment includes tropical rainforests and colder alpine areas.\nEcology and behaviour.\nThe platypus is semiaquatic and requires permanent freshwater habitat. Its swimming style is unique among mammals, propelling itself by alternating strokes of each front foot, while the webbed hind feet and tail are used for steering. It can maintain its relatively low body temperature when feeding in colder depths of below . In one study, dives lasted on average thirty-five seconds, with surfacing intervals averaging thirteen seconds. The species is mainly nocturnal but is also active at dusk during the summer and daytime during winter. A platypus may spend half the day in water and then retreat into its burrow, which is constructed by digging into the bank. These vary between simple resting banks and complex nesting/breeding burrows. It may have a range of up to , with a male's home range overlapping those of three or four females. Platypuses are not very vocal; they have been recorded to growl when disturbed and squeak when feeling pain.\nThe platypus is a carnivore and forages by probing along the bottom. It feeds on insect larvae, annelid worms, shrimp, crayfish, bivalves, tadpoles and fish eggs. It stores food in its cheek pouches for later consumption. In captivity, platypuses have survived up to thirty years, and wild specimens have been recaptured at twenty-four years old. They are preyed upon by eels, snakes, goannas, birds of prey, crocodiles, feral cats and foxes. Parasites and viruses also affect their mortality, though platypuses appear to have a high tolerance for them. Externally, platypuses may carry fleas, mites, and ticks, the latter being more prominent in young. The platypus is a common host for the tick species \"Ixodes ornithorhynchi\". Internally, the platypus may host protozoans, trematodes, and nematodes. The fungus \"Mucor amphibiorum\" has been reported in Tasmanian platypuses, which causes the disease mucormycosis, symptoms of which include skin lesions and ulcers along the body. \nReproduction.\nPlatypuses are seasonal breeders, with the more southerly populations breeding later in the year than those further north; those in New South Wales mate during fall and winter. Research has found both resident and transient platypuses, and suggest a polygynous mating system. Females are believed to become sexually mature at two years of age and continue to breed beyond nine years. During copulation, the male swims behind the female and grabs the tail with his bill, positioning his own tail under her from the side, then grips her neck or shoulder. The female retreats into a nesting/breeding burrow made of grass, which can be long, to lay eggs and raise young. Early European naturalists did not believe that the female platypus lays eggs, but this was confirmed by William Hay Caldwell in 1884.\nMost mammal zygotes go through holoblastic cleavage, splitting into several divisible daughter cells. However, monotremes such as the platypus, along with reptiles and birds, undergo meroblastic cleavage, in which the ovum does not split completely. The cells at the edge of the yolk remain continuous with the egg's cytoplasm, allowing the yolk and embryo to exchange waste and nutrients with the egg through the cytoplasm. The female normally lays two small, leathery eggs about long. The eggs develop \"in utero\" for about twenty-eight days, followed by a ten day external incubation. The female curls around the incubating eggs, as the embryo continues to develop. Newly hatched platypuses are vulnerable; blind and hairless, they are fed by the mother's milk, which is thicker than in placental mammals and provides all the requirements for growth and development. With no teats, the milk is released through pores in the skin from which the young lap it up in her fur. The offspring are milk-fed for around four months; a minority of young are weaned after they exit the burrow but usually within five days. Hatched young also have a remnant yolk sac which disappears within four days.\nDuring incubation and weaning, the mother initially leaves the burrow only for short periods to forage. She leaves behind her a number of thin soil plugs along the length of the burrow; pushing past these on her return squeezes water from her fur and allows the burrow to remain dry. The female spends less time with her offspring after five weeks, who emerge from the burrow around four months. By then, they are fully covered in fur and may be around 67% the weight of an adult and 80% the length. Juvenile males disperse further than females. They are fully grown at around two years.\nEvolution.\nIn separate publications in 1934, 1947, and 1951, William King Gregory theorised that placental mammals and marsupials may have diverged earlier, and a subsequent branching divided the monotremes and marsupials. Later research and fossil discoveries have suggested this is incorrect. Modern monotremes are the survivors of an early branching of the mammal tree, and a later branching is thought to have led to the marsupial and placental groups. Both molecular clock and fossil dating suggest that the platypus split from echidnas around 19\u201348million years ago.\nThe oldest discovered fossil of the modern platypus dates back to about 100,000 years ago during the Quaternary period, though a limb bone of \"Ornithorhynchus\" is known from Pliocene-epoch strata. The extinct monotremes \"Teinolophos\", \"Steropodon\" and \"Kollikodon\" from the Cretaceous period are considered to be basal to the platypus and echidnas. The remains of \"Steropodon\" were discovered in New South Wales, composed of an opalised lower jawbone with three molar teeth (whereas the adult contemporary platypus is toothless). The molar teeth were initially thought to be tribosphenic, which would have supported a variation of Gregory's theory, but later research has suggested that, while they have three cusps, they evolved under a separate process. The fossil jaw of \"Teinolophos\" is elongated but unlike the modern platypus (and echidnas), lacks a beak.\nIn 2024, Late Cretaceous (Cenomanian)-aged fossil specimens of early platypus relatives were recovered from the same rocks as \"Steropodon\", including the basal \"Opalios\" and the more derived \"Dharragarra\", the latter of which may be the oldest member of the platypus family Ornithorhynchidae, as it retains the same dental formula found in Cenozoic platypus relatives. \"Monotrematum\" and \"Patagorhynchus\", also fossil relatives of the platypus, are known from the latest Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) and the mid-Paleocene of Argentina, indicating that some monotremes managed to colonize South America from Australia when the two continents were connected via Antarctica. These are also considered potential members of the platypus Ornithorhynchidae. The closest fossil relative of the platypus is \"Obdurodon\", known from the late Oligocene to the Miocene of Australia. It closely resembled the modern platypus, aside from the presence of molar teeth. A fossilised tooth of the giant platypus \"Obdurodon tharalkooschild\" was dated 5\u201315million years ago. Judging by the tooth, the animal measured 1.3 metres long, making it the largest platypus known.\nThe loss of teeth in the modern platypus has long been enigmatic, as a distinctive lower molar tooth row was present in its lineage for over 95 million years. Even its closest relative, \"Obdurodon\", which otherwise closely resembles the platypus, retained this tooth row. More recent studies indicate that this tooth loss was geologically a very recent event, occurring only around the Plio-Pleistocene about 2.5 million years ago, when the rakali, a large semiaquatic rodent, colonized Australia from New Guinea. The platypus, which previously fed on a wide array of hard and soft-bodied prey, was outcompeted by the rakali for hard-bodied prey such as crayfish and mussels. This competition may have selected for the loss of teeth in the platypus and their replacement by horny pads, as a way of specializing for softer-bodied prey, over which the rakali did not compete.\nGenome.\nBecause of the early divergence from the therian mammals and the low numbers of extant monotreme species, the platypus is a frequent subject of research in evolutionary biology. In 2004, researchers at the Australian National University discovered that the platypus has ten sex chromosomes, compared with two (XY) in most other mammals. These ten chromosomes form five unique pairs of XY in males and XX in females, i.e. males are X1Y1X2Y2X3Y3X4Y4X5Y5. One of the X chromosomes of the platypus has close homology to the bird Z chromosome. The platypus genome also has both reptilian and mammalian genes associated with egg fertilisation. Though the platypus lacks the mammalian sex-determining gene SRY, a study found that the mechanism of sex determination is the AMH gene on the oldest Y chromosome. A draft version of the platypus genome sequence was published in \"Nature\" in May 2008, revealing both reptilian and mammalian elements, as well as two genes previously found only in non-mammalian vertebrates. More than 80% of the platypus's genes exist in other amniotes whose genomes have been compared. An updated genome, the most complete on record, was published in 2021, together with the genome of the short-beaked echidna.\nConservation.\nThe International Union for Conservation of Nature categorised the platypus as \"near threatened\" in 2016, based on estimates that numbers had fallen by about thirty percent on average since European settlement. Other biologists have shown concern that the estimates of the 2016 baseline numbers could be wrong, and numbers may have been reduced by as much as fifty percent. The species was hunted for its fur until the early years of the 20th century. Although the species gained legal protections beginning in Victoria in 1890 and throughout Australia by 1912, it continues to drown in the nets of inland fisheries. The use of \"opera house traps\" by recreational fishers for catching yabbies is banned in the ACT, South Australia, Tasmania and Victoria, and restricted in NSW and Queensland, due to the traps drowning non-targeted species including platypuses. The platypus was listed as endangered is South Australia, under the \"National Parks and Wildlife Act 1972\". In November 2020 a recommendation was made to list the platypus as a vulnerable species across all states. In January 2021, Victoria officially adopted the vulnerable species designation, under the state's \"Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988\". The platypus is not covered under the federal \"EPBC Act\".\nThe platypus continues to be adversely affected by habitat disruption caused by dams, pollution, urban expansion, and urban runoff. Droughts and the demands for water for human use are also considered threats. In January 2020, researchers from the University of New South Wales presented evidence that the platypus is at risk of extinction, due to factors such as water extraction, land clearing, climate change, and invasive species. The study predicted that, considering current threats, the animals' abundance would drop by 47\u201366% and metapopulation occupancy by 22\u201332% over fifty years, causing \"extinction of local populations across about 40% of the range\". Using climate change projections to 2070, reduced habitat due to drought would lead to 51\u201373% lower abundance and 36\u201356% lower metapopulation occupancy after at least fifty years. These predictions suggested that the species would fall under the \"Vulnerable\" classification. The authors stressed the need for national conservation efforts to ensure healthy platypus habitat, which may include conducting more surveys and tracking trends, as well as better river management while reducing threats.\nA November 2020 report by scientists from the University of New South Wales, funded by a research grant from the Australian Conservation Foundation in collaboration with the World Wildlife Fund Australia and the Humane Society International Australia revealed that over the past thirty years platypus habitat in Australia has dropped by 22%, and supported listing the platypus as a threatened species under the \"EPBC Act\", as the declines have been mostly in the Murray\u2013Darling basin and NSW in general.\nSanctuaries and captivity.\nFew platypuses have been successfully raised and bred by humans. One notable example is at Healesville Sanctuary in Victoria under David Fleay, where breeding was successful in 1943. More platypuses were successfully bred and raised in 1998 and again in 2000 using a stream tank. Between 2008 and 2012, platypuses were bred regularly at Healesville, including twins. In 1990-91, there was successful breeding of platypuses at Warrawong Sanctuary. Taronga Zoo in Sydney bred twins in 2003, and the facility has since bred more platypuses to be released into the wild in NSW. As of 2019[ [update]], the only platypuses in captivity outside of Australia are in the San Diego Zoo Safari Park in the U.S. state of California. Three platypuses were given to the Bronx Zoo in 1947, two females and a male. One of the females; Penelope had a false proto-pregnancy.\nHuman interactions.\nUsage.\nAboriginal Australians hunted and ate platypuses, particularly for their fatty nutritious tails, while, after colonisation, Europeans killed them for fur from the late 19th century until 1912, when it was prohibited by law. In addition, European researchers captured and killed platypus or removed their eggs, partly in order to increase scientific knowledge, but also to gain prestige and outcompete rivals from different countries. During the Second World War, in spite of an export ban, Australia gave live platypuses as diplomatic gifts to Allied nations as part of an initiative to increase military assistance. One of which was intended as a gift to Winston Churchill died from neglect while en route.\nCultural references.\nThe platypus has been a subject in the Dreamtime stories of Aboriginal Australians, some of whom believed the animal was a hybrid of a duck and a water rat. Aboriginals from the upper Darling River region have a story of a large water-rat called Biggoon who kidnaps a duck what wandered too far from its tribe. After managing to escape, she returned and laid two eggs which hatched the first platypuses. They were all exiled and went to live in the mountains. In another story from the upper Darling, the major animal groups, the land animals, water animals and birds, all competed for the platypus to join their respective groups, but the platypus ultimately decided to not join any of them, feeling that he did not need to be part of a group to be special, and wished to remain friends with all of those groups.\nThe platypus is also featured as a totem for some Aboriginal peoples, which is to them \"a natural object, plant or animal that is inherited by members of a clan or family as their spiritual emblem\", and the animal holds special meaning for the Wadi Wadi people at the Murray River. Because of their cultural significance and importance in connection to country, the platypus is protected and conserved by these Indigenous peoples. The platypus has often represented Australia's cultural identity and its image has also been used for stamps and currency and as a mascot in the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney. \nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "23750", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23750", "title": "Paramagnetism", "text": "Weak, attractive magnetism possessed by most elements and some compounds\nParamagnetism is a form of magnetism whereby some materials are weakly attracted by an externally applied magnetic field, and form internal, induced magnetic fields in the direction of the applied magnetic field. In contrast with this behavior, diamagnetic materials are repelled by magnetic fields and form induced magnetic fields in the direction opposite to that of the applied magnetic field. Paramagnetic materials include most chemical elements and some compounds; they have a relative magnetic permeability slightly greater than 1 (i.e., a small positive magnetic susceptibility) and hence are attracted to magnetic fields. The magnetic moment induced by the applied field is linear in the field strength and rather weak. It typically requires a sensitive analytical balance to detect the effect and modern measurements on paramagnetic materials are often conducted with a SQUID magnetometer.\nParamagnetism is due to the presence of unpaired electrons in the material, so most atoms with incompletely filled atomic orbitals are paramagnetic, although exceptions such as copper exist. Due to their spin, unpaired electrons have a magnetic dipole moment and act like tiny magnets. An external magnetic field causes the electrons' spins to align parallel to the field, causing a net attraction. Paramagnetic materials include aluminium, oxygen, titanium, and iron oxide (FeO). Therefore, a simple rule of thumb is used in chemistry to determine whether a particle (atom, ion, or molecule) is paramagnetic or diamagnetic: if all electrons in the particle are paired, then the substance made of this particle is diamagnetic; if it has unpaired electrons, then the substance is paramagnetic.\nUnlike ferromagnets, paramagnets do not retain any magnetization in the absence of an externally applied magnetic field because thermal motion randomizes the spin orientations. (Some paramagnetic materials retain spin disorder even at absolute zero, meaning they are paramagnetic in the ground state, i.e. in the absence of thermal motion.) Thus the total magnetization drops to zero when the applied field is removed. Even in the presence of the field there is only a small induced magnetization because only a small fraction of the spins will be oriented by the field. This fraction is proportional to the field strength and this explains the linear dependency. The attraction experienced by ferromagnetic materials is non-linear and much stronger, so that it is easily observed, for instance, in the attraction between a refrigerator magnet and the iron of the refrigerator itself.\nRelation to electron spins.\nConstituent atoms or molecules of paramagnetic materials have permanent magnetic moments (dipoles), even in the absence of an applied field. The permanent moment generally is due to the spin of unpaired electrons in atomic or molecular electron orbitals (see \"Magnetic moment\"). In pure paramagnetism, the dipoles do not interact with one another and are randomly oriented in the absence of an external field due to thermal agitation, resulting in zero net magnetic moment. When a magnetic field is applied, the dipoles will tend to align with the applied field, resulting in a net magnetic moment in the direction of the applied field. In the classical description, this alignment can be understood to occur due to a torque being provided on the magnetic moments by an applied field, which tries to align the dipoles parallel to the applied field. However, the true origins of the alignment can only be understood via the quantum-mechanical properties of spin and angular momentum.\nIf there is sufficient energy exchange between neighbouring dipoles, they will interact, and may spontaneously align or anti-align and form magnetic domains, resulting in ferromagnetism (permanent magnets) or antiferromagnetism, respectively. Paramagnetic behavior can also be observed in ferromagnetic materials that are above their Curie temperature, and in antiferromagnets above their N\u00e9el temperature. At these temperatures, the available thermal energy simply overcomes the interaction energy between the spins.\nIn general, paramagnetic effects are quite small: the magnetic susceptibility is of the order of 10\u22123 to 10\u22125 for most paramagnets, but may be as high as 10\u22121 for synthetic paramagnets such as ferrofluids.\nDelocalization.\nIn conductive materials, the electrons are delocalized, that is, they travel through the solid more or less as free electrons. Conductivity can be understood in a band structure picture as arising from the incomplete filling of energy bands.\nIn an ordinary nonmagnetic conductor the conduction band is identical for both spin-up and spin-down electrons. When a magnetic field is applied, the conduction band splits apart into a spin-up and a spin-down band due to the difference in magnetic potential energy for spin-up and spin-down electrons.\nSince the Fermi level must be identical for both bands, this means that there will be a small surplus of the type of spin in the band that moved downwards. This effect is a weak form of paramagnetism known as \"Pauli paramagnetism\".\nThe effect always competes with a diamagnetic response of opposite sign due to all the core electrons of the atoms. Stronger forms of magnetism usually require localized rather than itinerant electrons. However, in some cases a band structure can result in which there are two delocalized sub-bands with states of opposite spins that have different energies. If one subband is preferentially filled over the other, one can have itinerant ferromagnetic order. This situation usually only occurs in relatively narrow (d-)bands, which are poorly delocalized.\ns and p electrons.\nGenerally, strong delocalization in a solid due to large overlap with neighboring wave functions means that there will be a large Fermi velocity; this means that the number of electrons in a band is less sensitive to shifts in that band's energy, implying a weak magnetism. This is why s- and p-type metals are typically either Pauli-paramagnetic or as in the case of gold even diamagnetic. In the latter case the diamagnetic contribution from the closed shell inner electrons simply wins over the weak paramagnetic term of the almost free electrons.\nd and f electrons.\nStronger magnetic effects are typically only observed when d or f electrons are involved. Particularly the latter are usually strongly localized. Moreover, the size of the magnetic moment on a lanthanide atom can be quite large as it can carry up to 7 unpaired electrons in the case of gadolinium(III) (hence its use in MRI). The high magnetic moments associated with lanthanides is one reason why superstrong magnets are typically based on elements like neodymium or samarium.\nMolecular localization.\nThe above picture is a \"generalization\" as it pertains to materials with an extended lattice rather than a molecular structure. Molecular structure can also lead to localization of electrons. Although there are usually energetic reasons why a molecular structure results such that it does not exhibit partly filled orbitals (i.e. unpaired spins), some non-closed shell moieties do occur in nature. Molecular oxygen is a good example. Even in the frozen solid it contains di-radical molecules resulting in paramagnetic behavior. The unpaired spins reside in orbitals derived from oxygen p wave functions, but the overlap is limited to the one neighbor in the O2 molecules. The distances to other oxygen atoms in the lattice remain too large to lead to delocalization and the magnetic moments remain unpaired.\nTheory.\nThe Bohr\u2013Van Leeuwen theorem proves that there cannot be any diamagnetism or paramagnetism in a purely classical system. The paramagnetic response has then two possible quantum origins, either coming from permanent magnetic moments of the ions or from the spatial motion of the conduction electrons inside the material. Both descriptions are given below.\nCurie's law.\nFor low levels of magnetization, the magnetization of paramagnets follows what is known as Curie's law, at least approximately. This law indicates that the susceptibility, formula_1, of paramagnetic materials is inversely proportional to their temperature, i.e. that materials become more magnetic at lower temperatures. The mathematical expression is:\nformula_2\nwhere:\nCurie's law is valid under the commonly encountered conditions of low magnetization (\"\u03bc\"B\"H\" \u2272 \"k\"B\"T\"), but does not apply in the high-field/low-temperature regime where saturation of magnetization occurs (\"\u03bc\"B\"H\" \u2273 \"k\"B\"T\") and magnetic dipoles are all aligned with the applied field. When the dipoles are aligned, increasing the external field will not increase the total magnetization since there can be no further alignment.\nFor a paramagnetic ion with noninteracting magnetic moments with angular momentum \"J\", the Curie constant is related to the individual ions' magnetic moments,\nformula_8\nwhere \"n\" is the number of atoms per unit volume. The parameter \"\u03bc\"eff is interpreted as the effective magnetic moment per paramagnetic ion. If one uses a classical treatment with molecular magnetic moments represented as discrete magnetic dipoles, \"\u03bc\", a Curie Law expression of the same form will emerge with \"\u03bc\" appearing in place of \"\u03bc\"eff.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Derivation\nCurie's Law can be derived by considering a substance with noninteracting magnetic moments with angular momentum \"J\". If orbital contributions to the magnetic moment are negligible (a common case), then in what follows \"J\" = \"S\". If we apply a magnetic field along what we choose to call the \"z\"-axis, the energy levels of each paramagnetic center will experience Zeeman splitting of its energy levels, each with a \"z\"-component labeled by \"MJ\" (or just \"MS\" for the spin-only magnetic case). Applying semiclassical Boltzmann statistics, the magnetization of such a substance is\nformula_9\nWhere formula_10 is the \"z\"-component of the magnetic moment for each Zeeman level, so formula_11 is called the Bohr magneton and \"g\"\"J\" is the Land\u00e9 g-factor, which reduces to the free-electron g-factor, \"g\"\"S\" when\u00a0\"J\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"S\". (in this treatment, we assume that the \"x\"- and \"y\"-components of the magnetization, averaged over all molecules, cancel out because the field applied along the \"z\"-axis leave them randomly oriented.) The energy of each Zeeman level is formula_12. For temperatures over a few \"K\", formula_13, and we can apply the approximation formula_14:\nformula_15\nwhich yields:\nformula_16\nThe bulk magnetization is then formula_17 and the susceptibility is given by\nformula_18\nWhen orbital angular momentum contributions to the magnetic moment are small, as occurs for most organic radicals or for octahedral transition metal complexes with d3 or high-spin d5 configurations, the effective magnetic moment takes the form ( with g-factor \"g\"e = 2.0023... \u2248 2),\nformula_19\nwhere \"N\"u is the number of unpaired electrons. In other transition metal complexes this yields a useful, if somewhat cruder, estimate.\nWhen Curie constant is null, second order effects that couple the ground state with the excited states can also lead to a paramagnetic susceptibility independent of the temperature, known as Van Vleck susceptibility.\nPauli paramagnetism.\nFor some alkali metals and noble metals, conduction electrons are weakly interacting and delocalized in space forming a Fermi gas. For these materials one contribution to the magnetic response comes from the interaction between the electron spins and the magnetic field known as Pauli paramagnetism. For a small magnetic field formula_20, the additional energy per electron from the interaction between an electron spin and the magnetic field is given by:\n formula_21\nwhere formula_22 is the vacuum permeability, formula_23 is the electron magnetic moment, formula_24 is the Bohr magneton, formula_25 is the reduced Planck constant, and the \"g\"-factor cancels with the spin formula_26. The formula_27 indicates that the sign is positive (negative) when the electron spin component in the direction of formula_20 is parallel (antiparallel) to the magnetic field.\nFor low temperatures with respect to the Fermi temperature formula_29 (around for metals), the number density of electrons formula_30 (formula_31) pointing parallel (antiparallel) to the magnetic field can be written as:\n formula_32\nwith formula_33 the total free-electron density and formula_34 the electronic density of states (number of states per energy per volume) at the Fermi energy formula_35.\nIn this approximation the magnetization is given as the magnetic moment of one electron times the difference in densities:\n formula_36\nwhich yields a positive paramagnetic susceptibility independent of temperature:\n formula_37\nThe Pauli paramagnetic susceptibility is a macroscopic effect and has to be contrasted with Landau diamagnetic susceptibility which is equal to minus one third of Pauli's and also comes from delocalized electrons. The Pauli susceptibility comes from the spin interaction with the magnetic field while the Landau susceptibility comes from the spatial motion of the electrons and it is independent of the spin. In doped semiconductors the ratio between Landau's and Pauli's susceptibilities changes as the effective mass of the charge carriers formula_38 can differ from the electron mass formula_39.\nThe magnetic response calculated for a gas of electrons is not the full picture as the magnetic susceptibility coming from the ions has to be included. Additionally, these formulas may break down for confined systems that differ from the bulk, like quantum dots, or for high fields, as demonstrated in the De Haas-Van Alphen effect.\nPauli paramagnetism is named after the physicist Wolfgang Pauli. Before Pauli's theory, the lack of a strong Curie paramagnetism in metals was an open problem as the leading Drude model could not account for this contribution without the use of quantum statistics.\nPauli paramagnetism and Landau diamagnetism are essentially applications of the spin and the free electron model, the first is due to intrinsic spin of electrons; the second is due to their orbital motion.\nExamples of paramagnets.\nMaterials that are called \"paramagnets\" are most often those that exhibit, at least over an appreciable temperature range, magnetic susceptibilities that adhere to the Curie or Curie\u2013Weiss laws. In principle any system that contains atoms, ions, or molecules with unpaired spins can be called a paramagnet, but the interactions between them need to be carefully considered.\nSystems with minimal interactions.\nThe narrowest definition would be: a system with unpaired spins that \"do not interact\" with each other. In this narrowest sense, the only pure paramagnet is a dilute gas of monatomic hydrogen atoms. Each atom has one non-interacting unpaired electron.\nA gas of lithium atoms already possess two paired core electrons that produce a diamagnetic response of opposite sign. Strictly speaking Li is a mixed system therefore, although admittedly the diamagnetic component is weak and often neglected. In the case of heavier elements the diamagnetic contribution becomes more important and in the case of metallic gold it dominates the properties. The element hydrogen is virtually never called 'paramagnetic' because the monatomic gas is stable only at extremely high temperature; H atoms combine to form molecular H2 and in so doing, the magnetic moments are lost (\"quenched\"), because of the spins pair. Hydrogen is therefore \"diamagnetic\" and the same holds true for many other elements. Although the electronic configuration of the individual atoms (and ions) of most elements contain unpaired spins, they are not necessarily paramagnetic, because at ambient temperature quenching is very much the rule rather than the exception. The quenching tendency is weakest for f-electrons because f (especially 4f) orbitals are radially contracted and they overlap only weakly with orbitals on adjacent atoms. Consequently, the lanthanide elements with incompletely filled 4f-orbitals are paramagnetic or magnetically ordered.\nThus, condensed phase paramagnets are only possible if the interactions of the spins that lead either to quenching or to ordering are kept at bay by structural isolation of the magnetic centers. There are two classes of materials for which this holds:\nSystems with interactions.\nAs stated above, many materials that contain d- or f-elements do retain unquenched spins. Salts of such elements often show paramagnetic behavior but at low enough temperatures the magnetic moments may order. It is not uncommon to call such materials 'paramagnets', when referring to their paramagnetic behavior above their Curie or N\u00e9el-points, particularly if such temperatures are very low or have never been properly measured. Even for iron it is not uncommon to say that \"iron becomes a paramagnet\" above its relatively high Curie-point. In that case the Curie-point is seen as a phase transition between a ferromagnet and a 'paramagnet'. The word paramagnet now merely refers to the linear response of the system to an applied field, the temperature dependence of which requires an amended version of Curie's law, known as the Curie\u2013Weiss law:\n formula_40\nThis amended law includes a term \u03b8 that describes the exchange interaction that is present albeit overcome by thermal motion. The sign of \u03b8 depends on whether ferro- or antiferromagnetic interactions dominate and it is seldom exactly zero, except in the dilute, isolated cases mentioned above.\nObviously, the paramagnetic Curie\u2013Weiss description above \"T\"N or \"T\"C is a rather different interpretation of the word \"paramagnet\" as it does \"not\" imply the \"absence\" of interactions, but rather that the magnetic structure is random in the absence of an external field at these sufficiently high temperatures. Even if \"\u03b8\" is close to zero this does not mean that there are no interactions, just that the aligning ferro- and the anti-aligning antiferromagnetic ones cancel. An additional complication is that the interactions are often different in different directions of the crystalline lattice (anisotropy), leading to complicated magnetic structures once ordered.\nRandomness of the structure also applies to the many metals that show a net paramagnetic response over a broad temperature range. They do not follow a Curie type law as function of temperature however; often they are more or less temperature-independent. This type of behavior is of an itinerant nature and better called Pauli-paramagnetism, but it is not unusual to see, for example, the metal aluminium being called a \"paramagnet\", even though interactions are strong enough to give this element very good electrical conductivity.\nSuperparamagnets.\nSome materials show induced magnetic behavior that follows a Curie type law but with exceptionally large values for the Curie constants. These materials are known as superparamagnets. They are characterized by a strong ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic type of coupling into domains of a limited size that behave independently from one another. The bulk properties of such a system resembles that of a paramagnet, but on a microscopic level they are ordered. The materials do show an ordering temperature above which the behavior reverts to ordinary paramagnetism (with interaction). Ferrofluids are a good example, but the phenomenon can also occur inside solids, e.g., when dilute paramagnetic centers are introduced in a strong itinerant medium of ferromagnetic coupling such as when Fe is substituted in TlCu2Se2 or the alloy AuFe. Such systems contain ferromagnetically coupled clusters that freeze out at lower temperatures. They are also called mictomagnets."}
{"id": "23751", "revid": "48734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23751", "title": "Paramagnetic", "text": ""}
{"id": "23754", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23754", "title": "Parapsychology", "text": "Study of paranormal and psychic phenomena\nParapsychology is the study of alleged psychic phenomena (extrasensory perception, telepathy, teleportation, precognition, clairvoyance, psychokinesis (also called telekinesis), and psychometry) and other paranormal claims, for example, those related to near-death experiences, synchronicity, apparitional experiences, etc. Criticized as being a pseudoscience, the majority of mainstream scientists reject it. Parapsychology has been criticized for continuing investigation despite being unable to provide reproducible evidence for the existence of any psychic phenomena after more than a century of research.\nParapsychology research rarely appears in mainstream scientific journals; a few niche journals publish most papers about parapsychology.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"parapsychology\" was coined in 1889 by philosopher Max Dessoir as the German . It was adopted by J. B. Rhine in the 1930s as a replacement for the term \"psychical research\" to indicate a significant shift toward experimental methodology and academic discipline. The term originates from the meaning \"alongside\", and psychology.\nIn parapsychology, psi is the unknown factor in extrasensory perception and psychokinesis experiences that is not explained by known physical or biological mechanisms. The term is derived from \u03c8 \"psi,\" the 23rd letter of the Greek alphabet and the initial letter of the , \"mind, soul\". The term was coined by biologist Bertold Wiesner, and first used by psychologist Robert Thouless in a 1942 article published in the \"British Journal of Psychology\".\nThe Parapsychological Association divides psi into two main categories: psi-gamma for extrasensory perception and psi-kappa for psychokinesis. In popular culture, \"psi\" has become more and more synonymous with extraordinary psychic, mental, and \"psionic\" abilities and powers.\nHistory.\nEarly psychical research.\nIn 1853, chemist Robert Hare conducted experiments with mediums and reported positive results. Other researchers such as Frank Podmore highlighted flaws in his experiments, such as lack of controls to prevent trickery. Agenor de Gasparin conducted early experiments into table-tipping. For five months in 1853, he declared the experiments a success, being the result of an \"ectenic force\". Critics noted that the conditions were insufficient to prevent trickery. For example, the sitters may have moved the table with their knees, and no experimenter was simultaneously watching above and below the table.\nThe German astrophysicist Johann Karl Friedrich Z\u00f6llner tested the medium Henry Slade in 1877. According to Z\u00f6llner, some of the experiments were successful. However, flaws in the experiments were discovered, and critics have suggested that Slade was a fraud who performed trickery in the experiments.\nThe Society for Psychical Research (SPR) was founded in London in 1882. Its formation was the first systematic effort to organize scientists and scholars to investigate paranormal phenomena. Early membership included philosophers, scholars, scientists, educators and politicians, such as Henry Sidgwick, Arthur Balfour, William Crookes, Rufus Osgood Mason, and Nobel Laureate Charles Richet. Presidents of the Society included, in addition to Richet, Eleanor Sidgwick and William James, and subsequently Nobel Laureates Henri Bergson and Lord Rayleigh, and philosopher C. D. Broad.\nAreas of study included telepathy, hypnotism, Reichenbach's phenomena, apparitions, hauntings, and the physical aspects of Spiritualism such as table-tilting, materialization, and apportation. In the 1880s, the Society investigated apparitional experiences and hallucinations in the sane. Among the first important works was the two-volume publication in 1886, \"Phantasms of the Living\", which was largely criticized by scholars. In 1894, the \"Census of Hallucinations\" was published which sampled 17,000 people. Out of these, 1,684 persons admitted to having experienced a hallucination of an apparition. The SPR became the model for similar societies in other European countries and the United States during the late 19th century.\nEarly clairvoyance experiments were reported in 1884 by Charles Richet. Playing cards were enclosed in envelopes, and a subject was put under hypnosis to identify them. The subject was reported to have succeeded in a series of 133 trials, but the results dropped to the chance level when performed before a group of scientists in Cambridge. J. M. Peirce and E. C. Pickering reported a similar experiment in which they tested 36 subjects over 23,384 trials, which did not obtain above-chance scores.\nIn 1881, Eleanor Sidgwick revealed the fraudulent methods that spirit photographers such as \u00c9douard Isidore Buguet, Frederic Hudson, and William H. Mumler had utilized. During the late nineteenth century, many fraudulent mediums were exposed by SPR investigators.\nLargely due to the support of psychologist William James, the American Society for Psychical Research (ASPR) opened its doors in Boston in 1885, moving to New York City in 1905 under the leadership of James H. Hyslop. Notable cases investigated by Walter Franklin Prince of the ASPR in the early 20th century included Pierre L. O. A. Keeler, the Great Amherst Mystery and Patience Worth.\nRhine era.\nIn 1911, Stanford University became the first academic institution in the United States to study extrasensory perception (ESP) and psychokinesis (PK) in a laboratory setting. The effort was headed by psychologist John Edgar Coover and funded by Thomas Welton Stanford, brother of the university's founder. After conducting approximately 10,000 experiments, Coover concluded that \"statistical treatments of the data fail to reveal any cause beyond chance.\"\nIn 1930, Duke University became the second major U.S. academic institution to engage in the critical study of ESP and psychokinesis in the laboratory. Under the guidance of psychologist William McDougall, and with the help of others in the department\u2014including psychologists Karl Zener, Joseph B. Rhine, and Louisa E. Rhine\u2014laboratory ESP experiments using volunteer subjects from the undergraduate student body began. As opposed to the approaches of psychical research, which generally sought qualitative evidence for paranormal phenomena, the experiments at Duke University proffered a quantitative, statistical approach using cards and dice. As a consequence of the ESP experiments at Duke, standard laboratory procedures for the testing of ESP were developed and adopted by interested researchers worldwide.\nGeorge Estabrooks conducted an ESP experiment using cards in 1927. Harvard students were used as the subjects. Estabrooks acted as the sender, with the guesser in an adjoining room. Estabrooks conducted a total of 2,300 trials. When Estabrooks sent the subjects to a distant room with insulation, the scores dropped to chance level. Attempts to repeat the experiment also failed.\nThe publication of J. B. Rhine's book, \"New Frontiers of the Mind\" (1937), brought the laboratory's findings to the general public. In his book, Rhine popularized the word \"parapsychology\", coined by psychologist Max Dessoir over 40 years earlier, to describe the research conducted at Duke. Rhine also founded an autonomous Parapsychology Laboratory within Duke and started the \"Journal of Parapsychology\", which he co-edited with McDougall.\nRhine, along with associate Karl Zener, had developed a statistical system of testing for ESP that involved subjects guessing what symbol, out of five possible symbols, would appear when going through a special deck of cards designed for this purpose. A percentage of correct guesses (or hits) significantly above 20% was perceived as higher than chance and indicative of psychic ability. Rhine stated in his first book, \"Extrasensory Perception\" (1934), that after 90,000 trials, he felt ESP is \"an actual and demonstrable occurrence\".\nIrish medium and parapsychologist Eileen J. Garrett was tested by Rhine at Duke University in 1933 with Zener cards. Rhine placed certain symbols on the cards, sealed them in an envelope, and asked Garrett to guess their contents. She performed poorly and later criticized the tests by claiming the cards lacked a psychic energy called \"energy stimulus\" and that she could not perform clairvoyance to order. The parapsychologist Samuel Soal and his colleagues tested Garrett in May 1937. Soal conducted most experiments in the Psychological Laboratory at University College London. Soal recorded over 12,000 guesses, but Garrett failed to produce above chance level. In his report Soal wrote \"In the case of Mrs. Eileen Garrett we fail to find the slightest confirmation of J. B. Rhine's remarkable claims relating to her alleged powers of extra-sensory perception. Not only did she fail when I took charge of the experiments, but she failed equally when four other carefully trained experimenters took my place.\"\nThe parapsychology experiments at Duke evoked much criticism from academics and others who challenged the concepts and evidence of ESP. Many psychological departments attempted to repeat Rhine's experiments with failure. W. S. Cox (1936) from Princeton University, with 132 subjects, produced 25,064 trials in a playing card ESP experiment. Cox concluded, \"There is no evidence of extrasensory perception either in the 'average man' or of the group investigated or in any particular individual of that group. The discrepancy between these results and those obtained by Rhine is due either to uncontrollable factors in experimental procedure or to the difference in the subjects.\" Four other psychological departments failed to replicate Rhine's results. After thousands of card runs, James Charles Crumbaugh failed to duplicate the results of Rhine.\nIn 1938, the psychologist Joseph Jastrow wrote that much of the evidence for extrasensory perception collected by Rhine and other parapsychologists was anecdotal, biased, dubious and the result of \"faulty observation and familiar human frailties\". Rhine's experiments were discredited due to the discovery that sensory leakage or cheating could account for all his results, such as the subject being able to read the symbols from the back of the cards and being able to see and hear the experimenter to note subtle clues.\nIllusionist Milbourne Christopher wrote years later that he felt \"there are at least a dozen ways a subject who wished to cheat under the conditions Rhine described could deceive the investigator\". When Rhine took precautions in response to criticisms of his methods, he failed to find any high-scoring subjects. Another criticism, made by chemist Irving Langmuir, among others, was one of selective reporting. Langmuir stated that Rhine did not report scores of subjects that he suspected were intentionally guessing wrong and that this, he felt, biased the statistical results higher than they should have been.\nRhine and his colleagues attempted to address these criticisms through new experiments described in the book \"Extrasensory Perception After Sixty Years\" (1940). Rhine described three experiments: the Pearce-Pratt experiment, the Pratt-Woodruff experiment, and the Ownbey-Zirkle series, which he believed demonstrated ESP. However, C. E. M. Hansel wrote, \"It is now known that each experiment contained serious flaws that escaped notice in the examination made by the authors of \"Extra-Sensory Perception After Sixty Years\"\". Joseph Gaither Pratt was the co-experimenter in the Pearce-Pratt and Pratt-Woodruff experiments at the Duke campus. Hansel visited the campus where the experiments took place and discovered the results could have originated through a trick, so they could not supply evidence for ESP.\nIn 1957, Rhine and Joseph Gaither Pratt wrote \"\". Because of the methodological problems, parapsychologists no longer utilize card-guessing studies. Rhine's experiments into psychokinesis (PK) were also criticized. John Sladek wrote:\nHis research used dice, with subjects 'willing' them to fall a certain way. Not only can dice be drilled, shaved, falsely numbered and manipulated, but even straight dice often show bias in the long run. Casinos for this reason retire dice often, but at Duke, subjects continued to try for the same effect on the same dice over long experimental runs. Not surprisingly, PK appeared at Duke and nowhere else.\nParapsychologists and skeptics criticized the Ownbey-Zirkle ESP experiment at Duke. Ownbey would attempt to send ESP symbols to Zirkle, who would guess what they were. The pair were placed in adjacent rooms, unable to see each other, and an electric fan was used to prevent the pair from communicating by sensory cues. Ownbey tapped a telegraph key to Zirkle to inform him when she was trying to send him a symbol. The door separating the two rooms was open during the experiment, and after each guess, Zirkle would call out his guess to Ownbey, who recorded his choice. Critics pointed out the experiment was flawed as Ownbey acted as both the sender and the experimenter; nobody controlled the experiment, so Ownbey could have cheated by communicating with Zirkle or made recording mistakes.\nThe Turner-Ownbey long-distance telepathy experiment was also flawed. May Frances Turner positioned herself in the Duke Parapsychology Laboratory, while Sara Ownbey claimed to receive transmissions 250 miles away. For the experiment, Turner would think of a symbol and write it down, while Ownbey would write her guesses. The scores were highly successful and both records were supposed to be sent to J. B. Rhine, however, Ownbey sent them to Turner. Critics pointed out this invalidated the results as she could have simply written her own record to agree with the other. When the experiment was repeated and the records were sent to Rhine, the scores dropped to average.\nLucien Warner and Mildred Raible performed a famous ESP experiment at Duke University. Warner and Raible locked a subject in a room with a switch controlling a signal light elsewhere, which she could signal to guess the card. Ten runs with ESP packs of cards were used, and she achieved 93 hits (43 more than chance). Weaknesses with the experiment were later discovered. The duration of the light signal could be varied so that the subject could call for specific symbols. Certain symbols in the experiment appeared far more often than others, indicating poor shuffling or card manipulation. The experiment was not repeated.\nDuke's administration grew less sympathetic to parapsychology, and after Rhine's retirement in 1965, parapsychological links with the university were broken. Rhine later established the Foundation for Research on the Nature of Man (FRNM) and the Institute for Parapsychology as a successor to the Duke laboratory. In 1995, the centenary of Rhine's birth, the FRNM was renamed the Rhine Research Center. Today, the Rhine Research Center is a parapsychology research unit, stating that it \"aims to improve the human condition by creating a scientific understanding of those abilities and sensitivities that appear to transcend the ordinary limits of space and time\".\nEstablishment of the Parapsychological Association.\nThe Parapsychological Association (PA) was created in Durham, North Carolina, on June 19, 1957. J. B. Rhine proposed its formation at a parapsychology workshop held at the Parapsychology Laboratory of Duke University. Rhine proposed that the group form itself into the nucleus of an international professional society in parapsychology. The aim of the organization, as stated in its Constitution, became \"to advance parapsychology as a science, to disseminate knowledge of the field, and to integrate the findings with those of other branches of science\".\nIn 1969, under the direction of anthropologist Margaret Mead, the Parapsychological Association became affiliated with the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), the largest general scientific society in the world. In 1979, physicist John A. Wheeler said that parapsychology is pseudoscientific and that the affiliation of the PA to the AAAS needed to be reconsidered.\nHis challenge to parapsychology's AAAS affiliation was unsuccessful. Today, the PA consists of about three hundred full, associate, and affiliated members worldwide.\nStargate Project.\nBeginning in the early 1950s, the CIA started extensive research into behavioral engineering. The findings from these experiments led to the formation of the Stargate Project, which handled ESP research for the U.S. federal government.\nThe Stargate Project was terminated in 1995 with the conclusion that it was never useful in any intelligence operation. The information was vague and included a lot of irrelevant and erroneous data. There was also reason to suspect that the research managers had adjusted their project reports to fit the known background cues.\n1970s and 1980s.\nThe affiliation of the Parapsychological Association (PA) with the American Association for the Advancement of Science, along with a general openness to psychic and occult phenomena in the 1970s, led to a decade of increased parapsychological research. During this period, other related organizations were also formed, including the Academy of Parapsychology and Medicine (1970), the Institute of Parascience (1971), the Academy of Religion and Psychical Research, the Institute of Noetic Sciences (1973), the International Kirlian Research Association (1975), and the Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratory (1979). Parapsychological work was also conducted at the Stanford Research Institute (SRI) during this time.\nThe scope of parapsychology expanded during these years. Psychiatrist Ian Stevenson conducted much of his research into reincarnation during the 1970s, and the second edition of his \"Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation\" was published in 1974. Psychologist Thelma Moss studied Kirlian photography at UCLA's parapsychology laboratory. The influx of spiritual teachers from Asia and their claims of abilities produced by meditation led to research on altered states of consciousness. American Society for Psychical Research Director of Research, Karlis Osis, conducted experiments in out of body experiences. Physicist Russell Targ coined the term remote viewing for use in some of his work at SRI in 1974.\nThe surge in paranormal research continued into the 1980s: the Parapsychological Association reported members working in more than 30 countries. For example, research was carried out and regular conferences held in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union although the word parapsychology was discarded in favor of the term psychotronics. While Soviet Psychotronics included many fantastical and ineffectual methods, much like Parapsychology, it enjoyed more comprehensive state backing and explored a wide variety of both scientific and pseudo-scientific means for influencing consciousness.\nThe main promoter of psychotronics was Czech scientist Zden\u011bk Rejd\u00e1k, who described it as a physical science, organizing conferences and presiding over the International Association for Psychotronic Research.\nIn 1985, the Department of Psychology at the University of Edinburgh established a Chair of Parapsychology, awarding it to Robert Morris, an experimental parapsychologist from the United States. Morris and his research associates and PhD students pursued research on topics related to parapsychology.\nModern era.\nSince the 1980s, contemporary parapsychological research has waned considerably in the United States. Early research was considered inconclusive, and parapsychologists faced strong skepticism from their academic colleagues. Some effects thought to be paranormal, for example, the effects of Kirlian photography (thought by some to represent a human aura), disappeared under more stringent controls, leaving those avenues of research at dead-ends. Most parapsychology research in the US is now confined to private institutions funded by private sources. After 28 years of research, Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratory (PEAR), which studied psychokinesis, closed in 2007.\nTwo universities in the United States have academic parapsychology laboratories. The Division of Perceptual Studies, a unit at the University of Virginia's Department of Psychiatric Medicine, studies the possibility of survival of consciousness after bodily death, near-death experiences, and out-of-body experiences. Gary Schwartz at the University of Arizona's \"Veritas Laboratory\" conducted laboratory investigations of mediums, criticized by scientific skeptics. Several private institutions, including the Institute of Noetic Sciences, conduct and promote parapsychological research.\nOver the last two decades, some new sources of funding for parapsychology in Europe have seen a \"substantial increase in European parapsychological research so that the center of gravity for the field has swung from the United States to Europe\". The United Kingdom has the largest number of active parapsychologists of all nations. In the UK, researchers work in conventional psychology departments and do studies in mainstream psychology to \"boost their credibility and show that their methods are sound\". It is thought that this approach could account for the relative strength of parapsychology in Britain.\nAs of 2007, parapsychology was researched in some 30 countries, and some universities worldwide continue academic parapsychology programs. Among these are the Koestler Parapsychology Unit at the University of Edinburgh; the Parapsychology Research Group at Liverpool Hope University (this closed in April 2011); the SOPHIA Project at the University of Arizona; the Consciousness and Transpersonal Psychology Research Unit of Liverpool John Moores University; the Center for the Study of Anomalous Psychological Processes at the University of Northampton; and the Anomalistic Psychology Research Unit at Goldsmiths, University of London.\nResearch and professional organizations include the Parapsychological Association; the Society for Psychical Research, publisher of the \"Journal of the Society for Psychical Research\" and \"Psi Encyclopedia\"; the American Society for Psychical Research, publisher of the \"Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research\" (last published in 2004); the Rhine Research Center and Institute for Parapsychology, publisher of the \"Journal of Parapsychology\"; the Parapsychology Foundation, which published the \"International Journal of Parapsychology\" (between 1959 and 1968 and 2000\u20132001) and the Australian Institute of Parapsychological Research, publisher of the \"Australian Journal of Parapsychology\". The \"European Journal of Parapsychology\" ceased publishing in 2010.\nParapsychological research has also included other sub-disciplines of psychology. These related fields include transpersonal psychology, which studies transcendent or spiritual aspects of the human mind, and anomalistic psychology, which examines paranormal beliefs and subjective anomalous experiences in traditional psychological terms.\nResearch.\nScope.\nParapsychologists study some ostensible paranormal phenomena, including but not limited to:\nThe definitions for the terms above may not reflect their mainstream usage nor the opinions of all parapsychologists and their critics.\nAccording to the Parapsychological Association, parapsychologists do not study all paranormal phenomena, nor are they concerned with astrology, UFOs, cryptozoology, paganism, vampires, alchemy, or witchcraft.\nJournals dealing with parapsychology include the \"Journal of Parapsychology\", \"Journal of Near-Death Studies\", \"Journal of Consciousness Studies\", \"Journal of the Society for Psychical Research\", and \"Journal of Scientific Exploration\".\nExperimental research.\nGanzfeld.\nThe Ganzfeld (German for \"whole field\") is a technique used to test individuals for telepathy. The technique\u2014a form of moderate sensory deprivation\u2014was developed to quickly quiet mental \"noise\" by providing mild, unpatterned stimuli to the visual and auditory senses. The visual sense is usually isolated by creating a soft red glow which is diffused through half ping-pong balls placed over the recipient's eyes. The auditory sense is usually blocked by playing white noise, static, or similar sounds to the recipient. The subject is also seated in a reclined, comfortable position to minimize the sense of touch.\nIn the typical Ganzfeld experiment, a \"sender\" and a \"receiver\" are isolated. The receiver is put into the Ganzfeld state, or Ganzfeld effect and the sender is shown a video clip or still picture and asked to send that image to the receiver mentally. While in the Ganzfeld, experimenters ask the receiver to continuously speak aloud all mental processes, including images, thoughts, and feelings. At the end of the sending period, typically about 20 to 40 minutes, the receiver is taken out of the Ganzfeld state and shown four images or videos, one of which is the actual target and three non-target decoys. The receiver attempts to select the target, using perceptions experienced during the Ganzfeld state as clues to what the mentally \"sent\" image might have been.\nThe Ganzfeld experiment studies that were examined by Ray Hyman and Charles Honorton had methodological problems that were well documented. Honorton reported only 36% of the studies used duplicate target sets of pictures to avoid handling cues. Hyman discovered flaws in all of the 42 Ganzfeld experiments, and to assess each experiment, he devised a set of 12 categories of flaws. Six of these concerned statistical defects, and the other six covered procedural flaws such as inadequate documentation, randomization, security, and possibilities of sensory leakage. Over half of the studies failed to safeguard against sensory leakage, and all of the studies contained at least one of the 12 flaws. Because of the flaws, Honorton agreed with Hyman the 42 Ganzfeld studies could not support the claim for the existence of psi.\nPossibilities of sensory leakage in the Ganzfeld experiments included the receivers hearing what was going on in the sender's room next door as the rooms were not soundproof and the sender's fingerprints to be visible on the target object for the receiver to see. Hyman reviewed the autoganzfeld experiments and discovered a pattern in the data that implied a visual cue may have taken place. Hyman wrote the autoganzfeld experiments were flawed because they did not preclude the possibility of sensory leakage.\nIn 2010, Lance Storm, Patrizio Tressoldi, and Lorenzo Di Risio analyzed 29 Ganzfeld studies from 1997 to 2008. Of the 1,498 trials, 483 produced hits, corresponding to a hit rate of 32.2%. This hit rate is statistically significant with p &lt; .001. Participants selected for personality traits and personal characteristics thought to be psi-conducive were found to perform significantly better than unselected participants in the Ganzfeld condition. Hyman (2010) published a rebuttal to Storm \"et al\". According to Hyman, \"Reliance on meta-analysis as the sole basis for justifying the claim that an anomaly exists and that the evidence for it is consistent and replicable is fallacious. It distorts what scientists mean by confirmatory evidence.\" Hyman wrote that the Ganzfeld studies were not independently replicated and failed to produce evidence for psi. Storm \"et al\". published a response to Hyman stating that the Ganzfeld experimental design has proved to be consistent and reliable, that parapsychology is a struggling discipline that has not received much attention, and that therefore further research on the subject is necessary. Rouder \"et al\". 2013 wrote that critical evaluation of Storm \"et al\".'s meta-analysis reveals no evidence for psi, no plausible mechanism and omitted replication failures.\nRemote viewing.\n Remote viewing is the practice of seeking impressions about a distant or unseen target using subjective means, in particular, extrasensory perception. A remote viewer is typically expected to give information about an object, event, person, or location hidden from physical view and separated at some distance. Several hundred such trials have been conducted by investigators over the past 25 years, including those by the Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratory (PEAR) and by scientists at SRI International and Science Applications International Corporation. Many of these were under contract by the U.S. government as part of the espionage program Stargate Project, which terminated in 1995 having failed to document any practical intelligence value.\nThe psychologists David Marks and Richard Kammann attempted to replicate Russell Targ and Harold Puthoff's remote viewing experiments that were carried out in the 1970s at SRI International. In a series of 35 studies, they could not replicate the results, motivating them to investigate the procedure of the original experiments. Marks and Kammann discovered that the notes given to the judges in Targ and Puthoff's experiments contained clues as to the order in which they were carried out, such as referring to yesterday's two targets or having the session date written at the top of the page. They concluded that these clues were the reason for the experiment's high hit rates. Marks was able to achieve 100 percent accuracy without visiting any of the sites himself but by using cues. James Randi wrote controlled tests in collaboration with several other researchers, eliminating several sources of cueing and extraneous evidence present in the original tests; Randi's controlled tests produced negative results. Students could also solve Puthoff and Targ's locations from the cues included in the transcripts.\nIn 1980, Charles Tart claimed that rejudging the transcripts from one of Targ and Puthoff's experiments revealed an above-chance result. Targ and Puthoff again refused to provide copies of the transcripts and it was not until July 1985 that they were made available for study, when it was discovered they still contained sensory cues. Marks and Christopher Scott (1986) wrote, \"Considering the importance for the remote viewing hypothesis of adequate cue removal, Tart's failure to perform this basic task seems beyond comprehension. As previously concluded, remote viewing has not been demonstrated in the experiments conducted by Puthoff and Targ, only the repeated failure of the investigators to remove sensory cues.\"\nPEAR closed its doors at the end of February 2007. Its founder, Robert G. Jahn, said of it, \"For 28 years, we've done what we wanted to do, and there's no reason to stay and generate more of the same data.\" Statistical flaws in his work have been proposed by others in the parapsychological and general scientific communities. The physicist Robert L. Park said of PEAR, \"It's been an embarrassment to science, and I think an embarrassment for Princeton\".\nPsychokinesis on random number generators.\nThe advent of powerful and inexpensive electronic and computer technologies has allowed the development of fully automated experiments studying possible interactions between mind and matter. In the most common experiment of this type, a random number generator (RNG), based on electronic or radioactive noise, produces a data stream that is recorded and analyzed by computer software. A subject attempts to mentally alter the distribution of the random numbers, usually in an experimental design that is functionally equivalent to getting more \"heads\" than \"tails\" while flipping a coin. In the RNG experiment, design flexibility can be combined with rigorous controls while collecting a large amount of data quickly. This technique has been used both to test individuals for psychokinesis and to test the possible influence on RNGs of large groups of people.\nMajor meta-analyses of the RNG database have been published every few years since appearing in the journal \"Foundations of Physics\" in 1986. PEAR founder Robert G. Jahn and his colleague Brenda Dunne say that the experiments produced \"a very small effect\" not significant enough to be observed over a brief experiment but over a large number of trials resulted in a tiny statistical deviation from chance. According to Massimo Pigliucci, the results from PEAR can be explained without invoking the paranormal because of two problems with the experiment: \"the difficulty of designing machines capable of generating truly random events and the fact that statistical \"significance\" is not at all a good measure of the importance or genuineness of a phenomenon.\" Pigluicci has written that the statistical analysis used by the Jahn and the PEAR group relied on a quantity called a \"p-value\", but a problem with p-values is that if the sample size (number of trials) is very large, like the PEAR tests, then one is guaranteed to find artificially low p-values indicating a statistically significant result even though nothing was occurring other than small biases in the experimental apparatus.\nTwo German independent scientific groups have failed to replicate the PEAR results. Pigliucci has written this was \"yet another indication that the simplest hypothesis is likely to be true: there was nothing to replicate.\" The most recent meta-analysis on psychokinesis was published in \"Psychological Bulletin\", along with several critical commentaries. It analyzed the results of 380 studies; the authors reported an overall positive effect size that was statistically significant but very small relative to the sample size and could, in principle, be explained by publication bias.\nDirect mental interactions with living systems.\nFormerly called bio-PK, \"direct mental interactions with living systems\" (DMILS) studies the effects of one person's intentions on a distant person's psychophysiological state. One type of DMILS experiment looks at the commonly reported \"feeling of being stared at\". The \"starer\" and the \"staree\" are isolated in different locations, and the starer is periodically asked to simply gaze at the staree via closed-circuit video links. Meanwhile, the staree's nervous system activity is automatically and continuously monitored.\nParapsychologists have interpreted the cumulative data on this and similar DMILS experiments to suggest that one person's attention directed towards a remote, isolated person can significantly activate or calm that person's nervous system. In a meta-analysis of these experiments published in the \"British Journal of Psychology\" in 2004, researchers found a small but significant overall DMILS effect. However, the study also found that the effect size was insignificant when a small number of the highest-quality studies from one laboratory were analyzed. The authors concluded that although the existence of some anomaly related to distant intentions cannot be ruled out, there was also a shortage of independent replications and theoretical concepts.\nDream telepathy.\nParapsychological studies into dream telepathy were carried out at the Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn, New York led by Stanley Krippner and Montague Ullman. They concluded the results from some of their experiments supported dream telepathy. However, the results have not been independently replicated.\nThe picture target experiments that Krippner and Ullman conducted were criticized by C. E. M. Hansel. According to Hansel, there were weaknesses in the design of the experiments in the way in which the agents became aware of their target picture. Only the agent should have known the target, and no other person should have known until the targets were judged; however, an experimenter was with the agent when the target envelope was opened. Hansel also wrote that the experiment had poor controls as the main experimenter could communicate with the subject. In 2002, Krippner denied Hansel's accusations, claiming the agent did not communicate with the experimenter.\nEdward Belvedere and David Foulkes attempted to replicate the picture-target experiments. The finding was that neither the subject nor the judges matched the targets with dreams above chance level. Results from other experiments by Belvedere and Foulkes were also negative.\nIn 2003, Simon Sherwood and Chris Roe wrote a review that claimed support for dream telepathy at Maimonides. However, James Alcock noted that their review was based on \"extreme messiness\" of data. Alcock concluded the dream telepathy experiments at Maimonides have failed to provide evidence for telepathy and \"lack of replication is rampant\".\nNear-death experiences.\n A near-death experience (NDE) is an experience reported by a person who nearly died, or who experienced clinical death and then revived. NDEs include one or more of the following experiences: a sense of being dead; an out-of-body experience; a sensation of floating above one's body and seeing the surrounding area; a sense of overwhelming love and peace; a sensation of moving upwards through a tunnel or narrow passageway; meeting deceased relatives or spiritual figures; encountering a being of light, or a light; experiencing a life review; reaching a border or boundary; and a feeling of being returned to the body, often accompanied by reluctance.\nInterest in the NDE was spurred initially by the research of psychiatrists Elisabeth K\u00fcbler-Ross, George G. Ritchie, and Raymond Moody. In 1975, Moody wrote the best-selling book \"Life After Life\" and in 1977, he wrote a second book, \"Reflections on Life After Life\". In 1998, Moody was appointed chair in \"consciousness studies\" at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. The International Association for Near-death Studies (IANDS) was founded in 1978 to meet the needs of early researchers and experiencers within this field of research. Later researchers, such as psychiatrist Bruce Greyson, psychologist Kenneth Ring, and cardiologist Michael Sabom, introduced the study of near-death experiences to the academic setting.\nReincarnation research.\nPsychiatrist Ian Stevenson, from the University of Virginia, conducted more than 2,500 case studies over 40 years and published twelve books. He wrote that childhood memories ostensibly related to reincarnation normally occurred between the ages of three and seven years and then faded shortly afterward. He compared the memories with reports of people known to the deceased, attempting to do so before any contact between the child and the deceased's family had occurred, and searched for disconfirming evidence that could provide alternative explanations for the reports aside from reincarnation.\nSome 35 percent of the subjects examined by Stevenson had birthmarks or congenital disabilities. Stevenson believed that the existence of birthmarks and deformities on children, when they occurred at the location of fatal wounds in the deceased, provided the best evidence for reincarnation. However, Stevenson has never claimed that he had proved the existence of reincarnation, and cautiously referred to his cases as being \"of the reincarnation type\" or \"suggestive of reincarnation\". Researchers who believe in the evidence for reincarnation have been unsuccessful in getting the scientific community to consider it a serious possibility.\nIan Wilson argued that a large number of Stevenson's cases consisted of poor children remembering wealthy lives or belonging to a higher caste. He speculated that such cases may represent a scheme to obtain money from the family of the alleged former incarnation. Philosopher Keith Augustine has written, \"The vast majority of Stevenson's cases come from countries where a religious belief in reincarnation is strong, and rarely elsewhere, seems to indicate that cultural conditioning (rather than reincarnation) generates claims of spontaneous past-life memories.\" Philosopher Paul Edwards wrote that reincarnation invokes logically dubious assumptions and is inconsistent with modern science.\nScientific reception.\nEvaluation.\nThe scientific consensus is that there is insufficient evidence to support the existence of psi phenomena.\nScientists critical of parapsychology state that its extraordinary claims demand extraordinary evidence if they are to be taken seriously. Scientists who have evaluated parapsychology have written the entire body of evidence is of poor quality and not adequately controlled. In support of this view, critics cite instances of fraud, flawed studies, and cognitive biases (such as clustering illusion, availability error, confirmation bias, illusion of control, magical thinking, and the bias blind spot) as ways to explain parapsychological results. Research has also shown that people's desire to believe in paranormal phenomena causes them to discount strong evidence that it does not exist.\nThe psychologists Donovan Rawcliffe (1952), C. E. M. Hansel (1980), Ray Hyman (1989), and Andrew Neher (2011) have studied the history of psi experiments from the late 19th century up until the 1980s. Flaws and weaknesses were discovered in every experiment investigated, so the possibility of sensory leakage and trickery were not ruled out. The data from the Creery sister and the Soal-Goldney experiments were proven to be fraudulent, one of the subjects from the Smith-Blackburn experiments confessed to fraud, the Brugmans experiment, the experiments by John Edgar Coover and those conducted by Joseph Gaither Pratt and Helmut Schmidt had flaws in the design of the experiments, did not rule out the possibility of sensory cues or trickery and have not been replicated.\nAccording to critics, psi is negatively defined as any effect that cannot be currently explained in terms of chance or normal causes, and this is a fallacy as it encourages parapsychologists to use any peculiarity in the data as a characteristic of psi. Parapsychologists have admitted it is impossible to eliminate the possibility of non-paranormal causes in their experiments. There is no independent method to indicate the presence or absence of psi. Persi Diaconis has written that the controls in parapsychological experiments are often loose with possibilities of subject cheating and unconscious sensory cues.\nIn 1998, physics professor Michael W. Friedlander noted that parapsychology has \"failed to produce any clear evidence for the existence of anomalous effects that require us to go beyond the known region of science.\" Philosopher and skeptic Robert Todd Carroll has written research in parapsychology has been characterized by \"deception, fraud, and incompetence in setting up properly controlled experiments and evaluating statistical data.\" The psychologist Ray Hyman has pointed out that some parapsychologists such as Dick Bierman, Walter Lucadou, J. E. Kennedy, and Robert Jahn have admitted the evidence for psi is \"inconsistent, irreproducible, and fails to meet acceptable scientific standards.\" Richard Wiseman has criticized the parapsychological community for widespread errors in research methods including cherry-picking new procedures which may produce preferred results, explaining away unsuccessful attempted replications with claims of an \"experimenter effect\", data mining, and retrospective data selection.\nIndependent evaluators and researchers dispute the existence of parapsychological phenomena and the scientific validity of parapsychological research. In 1988, the U.S. National Academy of Sciences published a report on the subject that concluded that \"no scientific justification from research conducted over a period of 130 years for the existence of parapsychological phenomena.\" No accepted theory of parapsychology currently exists, and many competing and often conflicting models have been advocated by different parapsychologists in an attempt to explain reported paranormal phenomena. Terence Hines in his book \"Pseudoscience and the Paranormal\" (2003), wrote, \"Many theories have been proposed by parapsychologists to explain how psi takes place. To skeptics, such theory building seems premature, as the phenomena to be explained by the theories have yet to be demonstrated convincingly.\" Skeptics such as Antony Flew have cited the lack of such a theory as their reason for rejecting parapsychology.\nIn a review of parapsychological reports, Hyman wrote, \"randomization is often inadequate, multiple statistical testing without adjustment for significance levels is prevalent, possibilities for sensory leakage are not uniformly prevented, errors in use of statistical tests are much too common, and documentation is typically inadequate\". Parapsychology has been criticized for making no precise predictions.\nIn 2003, James Alcock Professor of Psychology at York University published \"Give the Null Hypothesis a Chance: Reasons to Remain Doubtful about the Existence of Psi\", where he claimed that parapsychologists never seem to take seriously the possibility that psi does not exist. Because of that, they interpret null results as indicating only that they were unable to observe psi in a particular experiment rather than taking it as support for the possibility that there is no psi. The failure to take the null hypothesis as a serious alternative to their psi hypotheses leads them to rely upon many arbitrary \"effects\" to excuse failures to find predicted effects, excuse the lack of consistency in outcomes, and excuse failures to replicate.\nFundamental endemic problems in parapsychological research include, amongst others: insufficient definition of the subject matter, total reliance on negative definitions of their phenomena (e.g., psi is said to occur only when all known normal influences are ruled out); failure to produce a single phenomenon that neutral researchers can independently replicate; the invention of \"effects\" such as the psi-experimenter effect to explain away inconsistencies in the data and failures to achieve predicted outcomes; unfalsifiability of claims; the unpredictability of effects; lack of progress in over a century of formal research; methodological weaknesses; reliance on statistical procedures to determine when psi has supposedly occurred, even though statistical analysis does not in itself justify a claim that psi has occurred; and failure to jibe with other areas of science. Overall, he argues that there is nothing in parapsychological research that would ever lead parapsychologists to conclude that psi does not exist. So, even if it does not, the search will likely continue for a long time. \"I continue to believe that parapsychology is, at bottom, motivated by belief in search of data, rather than data in search of explanation.\"\nAlcock and cognitive psychologist Arthur S. Reber have criticized parapsychology broadly, writing that if psi effects were true, they would negate fundamental principles of science such as causality, time's arrow, thermodynamics, and the inverse square law. According to Alcock and Reber, \"parapsychology cannot be true unless the rest of science isn't. Moreover, if psi effects were real, they would have already fatally disrupted the rest of the body of science\".\nRichard Land has written that from what is known about human biology, it is implausible that evolution has provided humans with ESP as research has shown the recognized five senses are adequate for the evolution and survival of the species. Michael Shermer, in the article \"Psychic Drift: Why most scientists do not believe in ESP and psi phenomena\" for \"Scientific American\", wrote \"the reason for skepticism is that we need replicable data and a viable theory, both of which are missing in psi research.\"\nIn January 2008, the results of a study using neuroimaging were published. To provide what are purported to be the most favorable experimental conditions, the study included appropriate emotional stimuli and had biologically or emotionally related participants, such as twins. The experiment was designed to produce positive results if telepathy, clairvoyance or precognition occurred. Still, despite this, no distinguishable neuronal responses were found between psychic and non-psychic stimuli, while variations in the same stimuli showed anticipated effects on brain activation patterns. The researchers concluded, \"These findings are the strongest evidence yet obtained against the existence of paranormal mental phenomena.\" Other studies have attempted to test the psi hypothesis by using functional neuroimaging. A neuroscience review of the studies (Acunzo \"et al\". 2013) discovered methodological weaknesses that could account for the reported psi effects.\nA 2014 study discovered that schizophrenic patients have more belief in psi than healthy adults.\nSome researchers have become skeptical of parapsychology, such as Susan Blackmore and John Taylor, after years of study and no progress in demonstrating the existence of psi by the scientific method.\nPhysics.\nThe ideas of psi (precognition, psychokinesis and telepathy) violate well-established laws of physics. Psychokinesis violates the inverse-square law, the second law of thermodynamics, and the conservation of momentum. There is no known mechanism for psi.\nOn the subject of psychokinesis, the physicist Sean M. Carroll has written that both human brains and the spoons they try to bend are made, like all matter, of quarks and leptons; everything else they do emerges as properties of the behavior of quarks and leptons. The quarks and leptons interact through the four forces: strong, weak, electromagnetic, and gravitational. Thus, either it is one of the four known forces, or it is a new force, and any new force with a range over 1 millimeter must be at most a billionth the strength of gravity, or it will have been captured in experiments already done. This leaves no physical force that could account for psychokinesis.\nPhysicist John G. Taylor, who investigated parapsychological claims, wrote that an unknown fifth force causing psychokinesis would have to transmit a great deal of energy. The energy would have to overcome the electromagnetic forces binding the atoms together. The atoms would need to respond more strongly to the fifth force while it is operative than to electric forces. Therefore, such an additional force between atoms should exist all the time and not only during alleged paranormal occurrences. Taylor wrote there is no scientific trace of such a force in physics, down to many orders of magnitude; thus, if a scientific viewpoint is to be preserved, the idea of any fifth force must be discarded. Taylor concluded there is no possible physical mechanism for psychokinesis, and it is in complete contradiction to established science.\nFelix Planer, a professor of electrical engineering, has written that if psychokinesis were real, then it would be easy to demonstrate by getting subjects to depress a scale on a sensitive balance, raise the temperature of a water bath which could be measured with an accuracy of a hundredth of a degree Celsius or affect an element in an electrical circuit such as a resistor which could be monitored to better than a millionth of an ampere. Planer writes that such experiments are extremely sensitive and easy to monitor but are not utilized by parapsychologists as they \"do not hold out the remotest hope of demonstrating even a minute trace of PK\" because the alleged phenomenon is non-existent. Planer has written that parapsychologists fall back on studies that involve only unrepeatable statistics, owing their results to poor experimental methods, recording mistakes, and faulty statistical mathematics.\nAccording to Planer, \"all research in medicine and other sciences would become illusionary, if the existence of PK had to be taken seriously; for no experiment could be relied upon to furnish objective results, since all measurements would become falsified to a greater or lesser degree, according to his PK ability, by the experimenter's wishes.\" Planer concluded the concept of psychokinesis is absurd and has no scientific basis.\nPhilosopher and physicist Mario Bunge has written that \"psychokinesis, or PK, violates the principle that mind cannot act directly on matter. (If it did, no experimenter could trust his readings of measuring instruments.) It also violates the principles of conservation of energy and momentum. The claim that quantum mechanics allows for the possibility of mental power influencing randomizers\u2014an alleged case of micro-PK\u2014is ludicrous since that theory respects the said conservation principles, and it deals exclusively with physical things.\"\nThe physicist Robert L. Park questioned if the mind really could influence matter, then it would be easy for parapsychologists to measure such a phenomenon by using the alleged psychokinetic power to deflect a microbalance which would not require any dubious statistics but \"the reason, of course, is that the microbalance stubbornly refuses to budge.\" Park has suggested the reason statistical studies are so popular in parapsychology is because they introduce opportunities for uncertainty and error, which are used to support the biases of the experimenter. Park wrote, \"No proof of psychic phenomena is ever found. In spite of all the tests devised by parapsychologists like Jahn and Radin, and huge amounts of data collected over a period of many years, the results are no more convincing today than when they began their experiments.\"\nPseudoscience.\nParapsychological theories are viewed as pseudoscientific by the scientific community as incompatible with well-established laws of science. As there is no repeatable evidence for psi, the field is often regarded as a pseudoscience.\nThe philosopher Raimo Tuomela summarized why the majority of scientists consider parapsychology to be a pseudoscience in his essay \"Science, Protoscience, and Pseudoscience\".\nThe methods of parapsychologists are regarded by critics, including those who wrote the science standards for the California State Board of Education, to be pseudoscientific. Some of the more specific criticisms state that parapsychology does not have a clearly defined subject matter, an easily repeatable experiment that can demonstrate a psi effect on demand, nor an underlying theory to explain the paranormal transfer of information. James Alcock has stated that few of parapsychology's experimental results have prompted interdisciplinary research with more mainstream sciences such as physics or biology and that parapsychology remains an isolated science to such an extent that its very legitimacy is questionable, and as a whole is not justified in being labeled \"scientific\".\nAlcock wrote, \"Parapsychology is indistinguishable from pseudo-science, and its ideas are essentially those of magic... There is \"no\" evidence that would lead the cautious observer to believe that parapsychologists and paraphysicists are on the track of a real phenomenon, a real energy or power that has so far escaped the attention of those people engaged in \"normal\" science.\"\nThe scientific community considers parapsychology a pseudoscience because it continues to explore the hypothesis that psychic abilities exist despite a century of experimental results that fail to demonstrate that hypothesis conclusively. A panel commissioned by the United States National Research Council to study paranormal claims concluded that \"despite a 130-year record of scientific research on such matters, our committee could find no scientific justification for the existence of phenomena such as extrasensory perception, mental telepathy or 'mind over matter' exercises... Evaluation of a large body of the best available evidence simply does not support the contention that these phenomena exist.\"\nThere is also an issue of non-falsifiability associated with psi. On this subject Terence Hines has written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The most common rationale offered by parapsychologists to explain the lack of a repeatable demonstration of ESP or other psi phenomena is to say that ESP in particular and psi phenomena in general are elusive or jealous phenomena. This means the phenomena go away when a skeptic is present or when skeptical \"vibrations\" are present. This argument seems nicely to explain away some of the major problems facing parapsychology until it is realized that it is nothing more than a classic nonfalsifiable hypothesis... The use of the nonfalsifiable hypothesis is permitted in parapsychology to a degree unheard of in any scientific discipline. To the extent that investigators accept this type of hypothesis, they will be immune to having their belief in psi disproved. No matter how many experiments fail to provide evidence for psi and no matter how good those experiments are, the nonfalsifiable hypothesis will always protect the belief.\nMario Bunge has written that research in parapsychology for over a hundred years has produced no firm findings or testable predictions. All parapsychologists can do is claim alleged data is anomalous and beyond the reach of ordinary science. The aim of parapsychologists \"is not that of finding laws and systematizing them into theories in order to understand and forecast\" but to \"buttress ancient spiritualist myths or to serve as a surrogate for lost religions.\"\nThe psychologist David Marks has written that parapsychologists have failed to produce a single repeatable demonstration of the paranormal and described psychical research as a pseudoscience, an \"incoherent collection of belief systems steeped in fantasy, illusion and error.\" However, Chris French, who is not convinced that parapsychology has demonstrated evidence for psi, has argued that parapsychological experiments still adhere to the scientific method and should not be completely dismissed as pseudoscience. \"Sceptics like myself will often point out that there's been systematic research in parapsychology for well over a century, and so far the wider scientific community is not convinced.\" French has noted his position is \"the minority view among critics of parapsychology\".\nPhilosopher Bradley Dowden characterized parapsychology as a pseudoscience because parapsychologists have no valid theories to test or reproducible data from their experiments.\nFraud.\nThere have been instances of fraud in the history of parapsychology research. In the late 19th century, the Creery Sisters (Mary, Alice, Maud, Kathleen, and Emily) were tested by the Society for Psychical Research and believed them to have genuine psychic ability; however, during a later experiment they were caught utilizing signal codes and they confessed to fraud. George Albert Smith and Douglas Blackburn were claimed to be genuine psychics by the Society for Psychical Research, but Blackburn confessed to fraud:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For nearly thirty years the telepathic experiments conducted by Mr. G. A. Smith and myself have been accepted and cited as the basic evidence of the truth of thought transference...\n...the whole of those alleged experiments were bogus, and originated in the honest desire of two youths to show how easily men of scientific mind and training could be deceived when seeking for evidence in support of a theory they were wishful to establish.\nThe experiments of Samuel Soal and K. M. Goldney of 1941\u20131943 (suggesting the precognitive ability of a single participant) were long regarded as some of the best in the field because they relied upon independent checking and witnesses to prevent fraud. However, many years later, statistical evidence, uncovered and published by other parapsychologists in the field, suggested that Soal had cheated by altering some of the raw data.\nIn 1974, many experiments by Walter J. Levy, J. B. Rhine's successor as director of the Institute for Parapsychology, were exposed as fraudulent. Levy had reported on a series of successful ESP experiments involving computer-controlled manipulation of non-human subjects, including rats. His experiments showed very high positive results. However, Levy's fellow researchers became suspicious about his methods. They found that Levy interfered with data-recording equipment, manually creating fraudulent strings of positive results. Levy confessed to the fraud and resigned.\nIn 1974, Rhine published the paper \"Security versus Deception in Parapsychology\" in the Journal of Parapsychology, which documented 12 cases of fraud that he had detected from 1940 to 1950 but refused to give the names of the participants in the studies. Massimo Pigliucci has written:\nMost damning of all, Rhine admitted publicly that he had uncovered at least twelve instances of dishonesty among his researchers in a single decade, from 1940 to 1950. However, he flaunted standard academic protocol by refusing to divulge the names of the fraudsters, which means that there is unknown number of published papers in the literature that claim paranormal effects while in fact they were the result of conscious deception.\nMartin Gardner claimed to have inside information that files in Rhine's laboratory contain material suggesting fraud on the part of Hubert Pearce. Pearce was never able to obtain above-chance results when persons other than the experimenter were present during an experiment, making it more likely that he was cheating in some way. Rhine's other subjects could only obtain non-chance levels when they could shuffle the cards, which suggested they used tricks to arrange the order of the Zener cards before the experiments started.\nA researcher from Tarkio College in Missouri, James D. MacFarland, was suspected of falsifying data to achieve positive psi results. Before the fraud was discovered, MacFarland published two articles in the \"Journal of Parapsychology\" (1937 &amp; 1938) supporting the existence of ESP. Presumably speaking about MacFarland, Louisa Rhine wrote that in reviewing the data submitted to the lab in 1938, the researchers at the Duke Parapsychology Lab recognized the fraud. \"...before long they were all certain that Jim had consistently falsified his records... To produce extra hits, Jim had to resort to erasures and transpositions in the records of his call series.\" MacFarland never published another article in the Journal of Parapsychology after the fraud was discovered.\nSome instances of fraud amongst spiritualist mediums were exposed by early psychical researchers such as Richard Hodgson and Harry Price. In the 1920s, magician and escapologist Harry Houdini said that researchers and observers had not created experimental procedures that preclude fraud.\nCriticism of experimental results.\nCritical analysts, including some parapsychologists, are unsatisfied with experimental parapsychology studies. Some reviewers, such as psychologist Ray Hyman, contend that apparently successful experimental results in psi research are more likely due to sloppy procedures, poorly trained researchers, or methodological flaws rather than to genuine psi effects. Fellow psychologist Stuart Vyse hearkens back to a time of data manipulation, now recognized as \"p-hacking\", as part of the issue. Within parapsychology there are disagreements over the results and methodology as well. For example, the experiments at the PEAR laboratory were criticized in a paper published by the \"Journal of Parapsychology\" in which parapsychologists independent from the PEAR laboratory concluded that these experiments \"depart[ed] from criteria usually expected in formal scientific experimentation\" due to \"[p]roblems with regard to randomization, statistical baselines, application of statistical models, agent coding of descriptor lists, feedback to percipients, sensory cues, and precautions against cheating.\" They felt that the originally stated significance values were \"meaningless\".\nA typical measure of psi phenomena is a statistical deviation from chance expectation. However, critics point out that statistical deviation is, strictly speaking, only evidence of a statistical anomaly, and the cause of the deviation is not known. Hyman contends that even if psi experiments that regularly reproduce similar deviations from chance could be designed, they would not necessarily prove psychic functioning. Critics have coined the term \"The Psi Assumption\" to describe \"the assumption that any significant departure from the laws of chance in a test of psychic ability is evidence that something anomalous or paranormal has occurred...[in other words] assuming what they should be proving.\" These critics hold that concluding the existence of psychic phenomena based on chance deviation in inadequately designed experiments is \"affirming the consequent\" or \"begging the question.\"\nIn 1979, magician and debunker James Randi engineered a hoax, now referred to as Project Alpha to encourage a tightening of standards within the parapsychology community. Randi recruited two young magicians and sent them undercover to Washington University's McDonnell Laboratory, where they \"fooled researchers ... into believing they had paranormal powers.\" The aim was to expose poor experimental methods and the credulity thought to be common in parapsychology. Randi has stated that both of his recruits deceived experimenters for three years with demonstrations of supposedly psychic abilities: blowing electric fuses sealed in a box, causing a lightweight paper rotor perched atop a needle to turn inside a bell jar, bending metal spoons sealed in a glass bottle, etc. The hoax by Randi raised ethical concerns in the scientific and parapsychology communities, eliciting criticism even among skeptical communities such as the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal (CSICOP), which he helped found, but also positive responses from the President of the Parapsychological Association Stanley Krippner. Psychologist Ray Hyman, a CSICOP member, called the results \"counterproductive\".\nSelection bias and meta-analysis.\nSelective reporting has been offered by critics as an explanation for the positive results reported by parapsychologists. Selective reporting is sometimes called a \"file drawer\" problem, which arises when only positive study results are made public, while studies with negative or null results are not made public. Selective reporting has a compounded effect on meta-analysis, which is a statistical technique that aggregates the results of many studies to generate sufficient statistical power to demonstrate a result that the individual studies themselves could not demonstrate at a statistically significant level. For example, a recent meta-analysis combined 380 studies on psychokinesis, including data from the PEAR lab. It concluded that, although there is a statistically significant overall effect, it is inconsistent, and relatively few negative studies would cancel it out. Consequently, biased publication of positive results could be the cause.\nNumerous researchers have criticized the popularity of meta-analysis in parapsychology, and is often seen as troublesome even within parapsychology. Critics have said that parapsychologists misuse meta-analysis to create the incorrect impression that statistically significant results have been obtained that indicate the existence of psi phenomena. Physicist Robert Park states that parapsychology's reported positive results are problematic because most such findings are invariably at the margin of statistical significance and that might be explained by a number of confounding effects; Park states that such marginal results are a typical symptom of pathological science as described by Irving Langmuir.\nResearcher J. E. Kennedy has said that concerns over meta-analysis in science and medicine also apply to problems present in parapsychological meta-analysis. As a post-hoc analysis, critics emphasize the opportunity the method presents to produce biased outcomes via selecting cases chosen for study, methods employed, and other key criteria. Critics say that analogous problems with meta-analysis have been documented in medicine, where it has been shown different investigators performing meta-analyses of the same set of studies have reached contradictory conclusions.\nAnomalistic psychology.\nIn anomalistic psychology, paranormal phenomena have naturalistic explanations resulting from psychological and physical factors, which have sometimes given the impression of paranormal activity to some people when, in fact, there have been none. According to the psychologist Chris French:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The difference between anomalistic psychology and parapsychology is in terms of the aims of what each discipline is about. Parapsychologists typically are actually searching for evidence to prove the reality of paranormal forces, to prove they really do exist. So the starting assumption is that paranormal things do happen, whereas anomalistic psychologists tend to start from the position that paranormal forces probably don't exist and that therefore we should be looking for other kinds of explanations, in particular the psychological explanations for those experiences that people typically label as paranormal.\nWhile parapsychology has declined, anomalistic psychology has risen. It is now offered as an option in some psychology degree programs. It is also an option on the A2 psychology syllabus in the UK.\nSkeptic organizations.\nOrganizations that encourage a critical examination of parapsychology and parapsychological research include the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry, publisher of the \"Skeptical Inquirer\"; the James Randi Educational Foundation, founded by illusionist and skeptic James Randi, and the Occult Investigative Committee of the Society of American Magicians a society for professional magicians/illusionists that seeks \"the promotion of harmony among magicians, and the opposition of the unnecessary public exposure of magical effects.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23756", "revid": "62058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23756", "title": "Presburger arithmetic", "text": "Decidable first-order theory of the natural numbers with addition\nPresburger arithmetic is the first-order theory of the natural numbers with addition, named in honor of Moj\u017cesz Presburger, who introduced it in 1929. The signature of Presburger arithmetic contains only the addition operation and equality, omitting the multiplication operation entirely. The theory is computably axiomatizable; the axioms include a schema of induction.\nPresburger arithmetic is much weaker than Peano arithmetic, which includes both addition and multiplication operations. Unlike Peano arithmetic, Presburger arithmetic is a decidable theory. This means it is possible to algorithmically determine, for any sentence in the language of Presburger arithmetic, whether that sentence is provable from the axioms of Presburger arithmetic. The asymptotic running-time computational complexity of this algorithm is at least doubly exponential, however, as shown by .\nOverview.\nThe language of Presburger arithmetic contains constants 0 and 1 and a binary function +, interpreted as addition.\nIn this language, the axioms of Presburger arithmetic are the universal closures of the following:\n(5) is an axiom schema of induction, representing infinitely many axioms. These cannot be replaced by any finite number of axioms, that is, Presburger arithmetic is not finitely axiomatizable in first-order logic.\nPresburger arithmetic can be viewed as a first-order theory with equality containing precisely all consequences of the above axioms. Alternatively, it can be defined as the set of those sentences that are true in the intended interpretation: the structure of non-negative integers with constants 0, 1, and the addition of non-negative integers.\nPresburger arithmetic is designed to be complete and decidable. Therefore, it cannot formalize concepts such as divisibility or primality, or, more generally, any number concept leading to multiplication of variables. However, it can formulate individual instances of divisibility; for example, it proves \"for all \"x\", there exists \"y\" : (\"y\" + \"y\" = \"x\") \u2228 (\"y\" + \"y\" + 1 = \"x\")\". This states that every number is either even or odd.\nProperties.\n proved Presburger arithmetic to be:\nThe decidability of Presburger arithmetic can be shown using quantifier elimination, supplemented by reasoning about arithmetical congruence. The steps used to justify a quantifier elimination algorithm can be used to define computable axiomatizations that do not necessarily contain the axiom schema of induction.\nIn contrast, Peano arithmetic, which is Presburger arithmetic augmented with multiplication, is not decidable, as proved by Church alongside the negative answer to the Entscheidungsproblem. By G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem, Peano arithmetic is incomplete and its consistency is not internally provable (but see Gentzen's consistency proof).\nComputational complexity.\nThe decision problem for Presburger arithmetic is an interesting example in computational complexity theory and computation. Let \"n\" be the length of a statement in Presburger arithmetic. Then proved that, in the worst case, the proof of the statement in first-order logic has length at least formula_1, for some constant \"c\"&gt;0. Hence, their decision algorithm for Presburger arithmetic has runtime at least exponential. Fischer and Rabin also proved that for any reasonable axiomatization (defined precisely in their paper), there exist theorems of length \"n\" that have doubly exponential length proofs. Fischer and Rabin's work also implies that Presburger arithmetic can be used to define formulas that correctly calculate any algorithm as long as the inputs are less than relatively large bounds. The bounds can be increased, but only by using new formulas. On the other hand, a triply exponential upper bound on a decision procedure for Presburger arithmetic was proved by .\nA more tight complexity bound was shown using alternating complexity classes by . The set of true statements in Presburger arithmetic (PA) is shown complete for TimeAlternations(22nO(1), n). Thus, its complexity is between double exponential nondeterministic time (2-NEXP) and double exponential space (2-EXPSPACE). Completeness is under Karp reductions. (Also, note that while Presburger arithmetic is commonly abbreviated PA, in mathematics in general PA usually means Peano arithmetic.)\nFor a more fine-grained result, let PA(i) be the set of true \u03a3i PA statements, and PA(i, j) the set of true \u03a3i PA statements with each quantifier block limited to j variables. '&lt;' is considered to be quantifier-free; here, bounded quantifiers are counted as quantifiers.\nPA(1, j) is in P, while PA(1) is NP-complete.\nFor i &gt; 0 and j &gt; 2, PA(i + 1, j) is \u03a3iP-complete. The hardness result only needs j&gt;2 (as opposed to j=1) in the last quantifier block.\nFor i&gt;0, PA(i+1) is \u03a3iEXP-complete.\nShort formula_2 Presburger Arithmetic (formula_3) is formula_4 complete (and thus NP complete for formula_5). Here, 'short' requires bounded (i.e. formula_6) sentence size except that integer constants are unbounded (but their number of bits in binary counts against input size). Also, formula_7 two variable PA (without the restriction of being 'short') is NP-complete. Short formula_8 (and thus formula_7) PA is in P, and this extends to fixed-dimensional parametric integer linear programming.\nApplications.\nBecause Presburger arithmetic is decidable, automatic theorem provers for Presburger arithmetic exist. For example, the Rocq and Lean proof assistant systems feature the tactic \"omega\" for Presburger arithmetic and the Isabelle proof assistant contains a verified quantifier elimination procedure by . The double exponential complexity of the theory makes it infeasible to use the theorem provers on complicated formulas, but this behavior occurs only in the presence of nested quantifiers: describe an automatic theorem prover that uses the simplex algorithm on an extended Presburger arithmetic without nested quantifiers to prove some of the instances of quantifier-free Presburger arithmetic formulas. More recent satisfiability modulo theories solvers use complete integer programming techniques to handle quantifier-free fragment of Presburger arithmetic theory.\nPresburger arithmetic can be extended to include multiplication by constants, since multiplication is repeated addition. Most array subscript calculations then fall within the region of decidable problems. This approach is the basis of at least five proof-of-correctness systems for computer programs, beginning with the Stanford Pascal Verifier in the late 1970s and continuing through to Microsoft's Spec# system of 2005.\nPresburger-definable integer relation.\nSome properties are now given about integer relations definable in Presburger Arithmetic. For the sake of simplicity, all relations considered in this section are over non-negative integers.\nA relation is Presburger-definable if and only if it is a semilinear set.\nA unary integer relation formula_10, that is, a set of non-negative integers, is Presburger-definable if and only if it is ultimately periodic. That is, if there exists a threshold formula_11 and a positive period formula_12 such that, for all integer formula_13 such that formula_14, formula_15 if and only if formula_16.\nBy the Cobham\u2013Semenov theorem, a relation is Presburger-definable if and only if it is definable in B\u00fcchi arithmetic of base formula_17 for all formula_18. A relation definable in B\u00fcchi arithmetic of base formula_17 and formula_20 for formula_17 and formula_20 being multiplicatively independent integers is Presburger definable.\nAn integer relation formula_10 is Presburger-definable if and only if all sets of integers that are definable in first-order logic with addition and formula_10 (that is, Presburger arithmetic plus a predicate for formula_10) are Presburger-definable. Equivalently, for each relation formula_10 that is not Presburger-definable, there exists a first-order formula with addition and formula_10 that defines a set of integers that is not definable using only addition.\nMuchnik's characterization.\nPresburger-definable relations admit another characterization: by Muchnik's theorem. It is more complicated to state, but led to the proof of the two former characterizations. Before Muchnik's theorem can be stated, some additional definitions must be introduced.\nLet formula_28 be a set, the section formula_29 of formula_10, for formula_31 and formula_32 is defined as \nformula_33\nGiven two sets formula_34 and a formula_35-tuple of integers formula_36, the set formula_10 is called formula_38-periodic in formula_39 if, for all formula_40 such that formula_41 then formula_42 if and only if formula_43. For formula_44, the set formula_10 is said to be formula_46-periodic in formula_39 if it is formula_48-periodic for some formula_49 such that \nformula_50\nFinally, for formula_51 let \nformula_52 \ndenote the cube of size formula_17 whose lesser corner is formula_54.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMuchnik's Theorem\u2014formula_28 is Presburger-definable if and only if:\nIntuitively, the integer formula_46 represents the length of a shift, the integer formula_17 is the size of the cubes and formula_68 is the threshold before the periodicity. This result remains true when the condition \nformula_69 \nis replaced either by formula_70 or by formula_71.\nThis characterization led to the so-called \"definable criterion for definability in Presburger arithmetic\", that is: there exists a first-order formula with addition and a formula_35-ary predicate formula_10 that holds if and only if formula_10 is interpreted by a Presburger-definable relation. Muchnik's theorem also allows one to prove that it is decidable whether an automatic sequence accepts a Presburger-definable set.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23757", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23757", "title": "Purdue University", "text": "Public university in West Lafayette, Indiana, US\nPurdue University is a public land-grant research university in West Lafayette, Indiana, United States, and the flagship campus of the Purdue University system. The university was founded in 1869 after Lafayette businessman John Purdue donated land and money to establish a college of science, technology, and agriculture; the first classes were held on September 16, 1874.\nPurdue University is a member of the Association of American Universities and is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". Purdue enrolls the largest student body of any individual university campus in Indiana, as well as the ninth-largest foreign student population of any university in the United States. The university is home to the oldest computer science program and the first university-owned airport in the United States.\nPurdue is the founding member of the Big Ten Conference and sponsors 18 intercollegiate sports teams. It has been affiliated with 13 Nobel laureates, 1 Turing Award laureate, 1 Bharat Ratna recipient, 27 astronauts, 2 World Food Prize laureates, 3 Pulitzer Prize winners, 18 Olympic medalists, 3 National Medal of Technology and Innovation recipients, 2 National Medal of Science recipients, 3 Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients, 7 members of Congress, 3 U.S. governors, and 2 heads of state.\nHistory.\nIn 1865, the Indiana General Assembly voted to take advantage of the Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act of 1862 and began plans to establish an institution with a focus on agriculture and engineering with the preliminary name of the Indiana Agricultural College. Communities throughout the state offered facilities and funding in bids for the location of the new college. Popular proposals included designating Indiana University or what is now Butler University as Indiana's land-grant, as well as the addition of an agriculture department at what is now Indiana State University. By 1869, Tippecanoe County's offer included $150,000 (equivalent to $ million in 2024) from Lafayette business leader and philanthropist John Purdue; $50,000 from the county; and of land from John Purdue and local residents.\nOn May 6, 1869, the General Assembly established the institution in Tippecanoe County as Purdue University, in the name of the principal benefactor. Classes began at Purdue on September 16, 1874, with six instructors and 39 students. Professor John S. Hougham was Purdue's first faculty member and served as acting president between the administrations of presidents Shortridge and White. A campus of five buildings was completed by the end of 1874. In 1875, Sarah D. Allen Oren Haynes, the State Librarian of Indiana, was appointed professor of botany.\nPurdue issued its first degree, a Bachelor of Science in chemistry, in 1875. The first female student was admitted that autumn.\nEmerson E. White, the university's president from 1876 to 1883, followed a strict interpretation of the Morrill Act. Rather than emulate the classical universities, White believed Purdue should be an \"industrial college\" and devote its resources toward providing a broad, liberal education with an emphasis on science, technology, and agriculture.\nPart of White's plan to distinguish Purdue from classical universities included a controversial attempt to ban fraternities, which was ultimately overturned by the Indiana Supreme Court. White resigned in protest. The next president, James H. Smart, is remembered for his call in 1894 to rebuild the original Heavilon Hall \"one brick higher\" after it had been destroyed by a fire.\nBy the end of the nineteenth century, the university was organized into schools of agriculture, engineering (mechanical, civil, and electrical), and pharmacy; former U.S. President Benjamin Harrison served on the board of trustees. Purdue's engineering laboratories included testing facilities for a locomotive, and for a Corliss steam engine\u2014one of the most efficient engines of the time. Programs in education and home economics were soon established, as well as a short-lived school of medicine. By 1925, Purdue had the largest undergraduate engineering enrollment in the country, a status it would keep for half a century.\nPresident Edward C. Elliott oversaw a campus building program between the world wars. Inventor, alumnus, and trustee David E. Ross coordinated several fundraisers, donated lands to the university, and was instrumental in establishing the Purdue Research Foundation. Ross's gifts and fundraisers supported such projects as Ross\u2013Ade Stadium, the Memorial Union, a civil engineering surveying camp, and Purdue University Airport. Purdue Airport was the country's first university-owned airport and the site of the country's first college-credit flight training courses.\nAmelia Earhart joined the Purdue faculty in 1935 as a consultant for these flight courses and as a counselor on women's careers. In 1936, the Purdue Research Foundation provided the funds for the Lockheed Electra 10-E Earhart flew on her attempted round-the-world flight.\nEvery school and department at the university was involved in some type of military research or training during World War II. During a project on radar receivers, Purdue physicists discovered properties of germanium that led to the making of the first transistor. The Army and the Navy conducted training programs at Purdue and more than 17,500 students, staff, and alumni served in the armed forces. Purdue set up about a hundred centers throughout Indiana to train skilled workers for defense industries. As veterans returned to the university under the G.I. Bill, first-year classes were taught at some of these sites to alleviate the demand for campus space. Four of these sites are now degree-granting regional campuses of the Purdue University system. On-campus housing became racially desegregated in 1947.\nAfter the war, a decade-long construction program emphasized science and research. In the late 1950s and early 1960s the university established programs in veterinary medicine, industrial management, and nursing, as well as the first computer science department in the United States. Undergraduate humanities courses were strengthened, graduate-level study in these areas were slowly established. Purdue awarded its first Bachelor of Arts degrees in 1960.\nThe official seal of Purdue was officially inaugurated during the university's centennial in 1969. Consisting of elements from emblems that had been used unofficially since the 1890s, the current seal depicts a griffin, symbolizing strength, and a three-part shield, representing education, research, and service.\nIn 1975, Purdue University joined ARPANET, an early packet-switching network that would ultimately become the foundation for the modern internet.\nIn recent years, Purdue's leaders have continued to support high-tech research and international programs. In 1987, U.S. President Ronald Reagan visited the West Lafayette campus to give a speech about the influence of technological progress on job creation.\nIn the 1990s, the university added more opportunities to study abroad and expanded its course offerings in world languages and cultures. The first buildings of the Discovery Park interdisciplinary research center were dedicated in 2004.\nOn April 27, 2017, Purdue University announced plans to acquire for-profit college Kaplan University and convert it to a public university in the state of Indiana, subject to multiple levels of approval. That school now operates as Purdue University Global, and aims to serve adult learners.\nOn July 1, 2024, Purdue launched Purdue University in Indianapolis, an extension of the West Lafayette campus, after the formal split of Indiana University\u2013Purdue University Indianapolis. It conveys Purdue West Lafayette degrees and has the same academic rigor as the flagship campus. Purdue currently has a footprint in downtown Indianapolis that includes space in the existing engineering and technology buildings, and has established partnerships with companies for facilities and shared spaces throughout the metro area.\nIntegration.\nPurdue had black graduates by the 1890s, and in 1905 a Black man ran for its track team. But some time in the 1910s the teams became segregated, and remained so until a student protest in 1947. Black students were not allowed to live in the residence halls until the 1940s. Black males were able to live in cooperatives, but Black females were not allowed to live anywhere in West Lafayette. In 1946, the women's dormitories were integrated by an order of the governor of Indiana.\nHelen Williams became the first Black faculty member in 1968.\nTrump era.\nIn 2025, in response to state-level executive orders aligning with directives issued by President Donald Trump, the university terminated its Office of Diversity, Inclusion and Belonging, saying that staff who had been a part of that office would have the chance to interview for current vacancies in other areas. The university also terminated the Recruitment and Diversity Office for the Polytechnic Institute, despite diversity only being a small part of the office's function. Terminated staff members believed that it was because of the name alone that the office was terminated, as other recruitment offices for different parts of the university that did not have \"diversity\" in the name had remained untouched.\nIn June of that year, the Indiana General Assembly passed a state budget bill mandating that Indiana's public universities phase out programs that produce fewer than a certain number of graduates over a three-year period. As a result, Purdue eliminated or merged a number of master's and Ph.D. programs in areas such as microbiology, mathematics, and literature.\nCampuses.\nPurdue's campus is situated in the small city of West Lafayette, near the western bank of the Wabash River, across which sits the larger city of Lafayette. Mitch Daniels Boulevard (formerly State Street) divides the northern and southern portions of campus. Academic buildings are mostly concentrated on the eastern and southern parts of campus, with residence halls and intramural fields to the west, and athletic facilities to the north. An extensive system of underground tunnels protects pedestrians from snow, ice, wind, rain and UV during movements between buildings.\nPurdue Mall.\nThe Purdue Mall is the central quad of Purdue University and was created to connect the academic campus with Ross-Ade Stadium. It is also known as the Engineering Mall due to its proximity to several engineering buildings. The most prominent feature of the Purdue Mall is the -tall concrete Engineering Fountain.\nThe Purdue Bell Tower is between the Stadium and Centennial Malls. The Bell Tower is considered an icon of the university and can be found on many Purdue logos and those of the cities of Lafayette and West Lafayette.\nSouthwest of the Stadium Mall is the Edward C. Elliott Hall of Music, one of the largest proscenium theaters in the world. Elliott Hall of Music serves as the home of the WBAA (AM) and WBAA-FM studios, and was the base of operations for Purdue Bands and Orchestras until the completion of the Marc and Sharon Hagle Hall in 2022.\nWest of the Elliott Hall of Music is the Armory Building. The Armory Building was rebuilt in 1918 after a fire and houses the university's ROTC programs and other clubs.\nMemorial Mall.\nThe Purdue Memorial Mall, south of the Purdue Mall, is the original section of campus. It is a popular meeting place for students and is surrounded by other buildings used for academic and cultural purposes.\nNear this section of campus is Felix Haas Hall, which was constructed in 1909 as Memorial Gymnasium in memory of the 17 Purdue University football players, coaches, alumni, and fans who died in the Purdue Wreck railroad accident of 1903. The structure was renovated in 1985 to house the computer science department. In 2006, it was renamed in honor of retired Provost Felix Haas and began to also house the Statistics department. East of the Memorial Mall is the Purdue Memorial Union, Purdue's student union building, and the adjacent Union Club Hotel.\nUniversity Hall.\nUniversity Hall is the only building remaining from the original six-building campus. Construction began in 1871, when the building was known as \"The Main Building\". The building was dedicated in 1877. University Hall originally housed the office of the president, a chapel, and classrooms. At the request of John Purdue, he was buried in the Memorial Mall, directly across from the main entrance of University Hall.\nSouth Campus.\nThe area south of Mitch Daniels Boulevard is home to Purdue's agricultural, fine arts, life sciences, and veterinary buildings. This area also includes the Krannert School of Management, Horticulture Gardens, Discovery Park, Lyles Porter Hall and the Purdue Airport.\nLyles Porter Hall houses interdisciplinary healthcare facilities and classroom space within the College of Health and Human Sciences as well as the West Lafayette branch of the Indiana University School of Medicine.\nWest Campus.\nThe western portion of campus consists of student housing, dining, and recreation facilities. The C\u00f3rdova Recreational Sports Center, built in 1957, is the first building in the nation created solely to serve university student recreational needs.\nStadium Avenue.\nMuch of the northern part of campus sits on land purchased for the university by industrialist David E. Ross and author George Ade in the 1920s. Many of Purdue's athletic facilities are there, including Ross\u2013Ade Stadium (American football), Mackey Arena (basketball), and Lambert Fieldhouse (indoor track and field). This area also includes the Slayter Center of Performing Arts and Cary Quadrangle, one of the largest all-male housing units in the country.\nAcademics.\nUndergraduate admissions.\nPurdue University is ranked 43rd in the annual ranking of 2024 U.S. News &amp; World Report. The 2022 annual ranking of \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" categorizes Purdue University-West Lafayette as \"more selective\". For the Class of 2025 (enrolled fall 2021), Purdue received 59,173 applications and accepted 40,759 (68.9%). Of those accepted, 10,157 enrolled, a yield rate (the percentage of accepted students who choose to attend the university) of 24.9%. Purdue's freshman retention rate is 92%, with 81.5% going on to graduate within six years.\nThe university started test-optional admissions with the Fall 2021 incoming class in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and has extended this through Fall 2023. Of the 62% of the incoming freshman class who submitted SAT scores; the middle 50 percent Composite scores were 1190\u20131430. Of the 31% of enrolled freshmen in 2021 who submitted ACT scores; the middle 50 percent Composite score was between 26 and 33.\nPurdue University is a college-sponsor of the National Merit Scholarship Program and sponsored 88 Merit Scholarship awards in 2020. In the 2020\u20132021 academic year, 127 freshman students were National Merit Scholars.\nAcademic divisions.\nPurdue offers both undergraduate and graduate programs in over 211 major areas of study, and is well known for its competitive engineering curricula. The university has also been integral in America's history of aviation, having established the first college credit offered in flight training; the first four-year bachelor's degree in aviation; and the first university airport: Purdue University Airport. Purdue's aviation technology and aeronautical engineering programs remain among the most competitive aviation-specific programs in the world. In the mid-20th century, Purdue's aviation program expanded to encompass advanced spaceflight technology, giving rise to Purdue's nicknames \"Cradle of Astronauts\" and \"Mother of Astronauts\". Twenty-six Purdue graduates have become astronauts, including Gus Grissom, one of the original Mercury Seven astronauts; Neil Armstrong, who was the first person to walk on the Moon; and Eugene Cernan, who was the last person to walk on the Moon.\nThe English department at Purdue launched the first Online Writing Lab (OWL), in 1994. Many colleges and universities use the Purdue OWL website as an academic writing reference source for proper word usage, punctuation, grammar, and style. Professors criticized the partnership, begun in 2020, between OWL and the company Chegg, which provides AI-generated \"homework help\" that some consider to be plagiarism.\nPurdue is organized into 10 colleges and schools. In 2010, the College of Health and Human Sciences was formed, through combining existing academic units, including the School of Nursing, the School of Health Sciences, the College of Consumer and Family Sciences, and non-humanities majors psychology and hearing and speech pathology from the College of Liberal Arts.\nCollege of Agriculture.\nThe university's College of Agriculture supports the university's charge as a land-grant university for the study of agriculture throughout the state.\nCollege of Education.\nThe College of Education offers undergraduate degrees in elementary education, social studies education, science education and special education, and graduate degrees in these and many other specialty areas of education.\nCollege of Engineering.\nThe Purdue University College of Engineering was established in 1874 with programs in Civil and Mechanical Engineering. The college now offers BS, MS, and PhD degrees in more than a dozen disciplines. Purdue's engineering program has also educated 27 of America's astronauts, including Neil Armstrong and Eugene Cernan, who were the first and last astronauts to have walked on the Moon, respectively, and Gus Grissom, a member of the Mercury Seven. Many of Purdue's engineering disciplines are recognized as top-ten programs in the U.S. The college as a whole is currently ranked 4th in the U.S. of all doctorate-granting engineering schools by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\".\nExploratory Studies.\nThe university's Exploratory Studies program supports undergraduate students who enter the university without having a declared major. It was founded as a pilot program in 1995 and made a permanent program in 1999.\nCollege of Health and Human Sciences.\nThe College of Health and Human Sciences was established in 2010 and is the newest college. It offers BS, MS and PhD degrees in all 9 of its academic units.\nCollege of Liberal Arts.\nPurdue's College of Liberal Arts contains the arts, social sciences and humanities programs at the university. Liberal arts courses have been taught at Purdue since its founding in 1874. The School of Science, Education, and Humanities was formed in 1953. In 1963, the School of Humanities, Social Sciences, and Education was established, although Bachelor of Arts degrees had begun to be conferred as early as 1959. In 1989, the School of Liberal Arts was created to encompass Purdue's arts, humanities, and social sciences programs, while education programs were split off into the newly formed School of Education. The School of Liberal Arts was renamed the College of Liberal Arts in 2005.\nDaniels School of Business.\nThe Daniels School of Business offers management courses and programs at the undergraduate, master's, and doctoral levels.\nCollege of Pharmacy.\nThe university's College of Pharmacy was established in 1884 and is the 3rd oldest state-funded school of pharmacy in the United States.\nPurdue Polytechnic Institute.\nThe Purdue Polytechnic Institute, formerly known as the College of Technology, offers bachelor's, master's and PhD degrees in a wide range of technology-related disciplines. With over 30,000 living alumni, it is one of the largest technology schools in the United States. In addition to the main school in West Lafayette, Purdue Polytechnic operates nine satellite campuses in Anderson, Columbus, Indianapolis, Kokomo, Lafayette, New Albany, Richmond, Vincennes, and South Bend. These locations offer certificate, associate, and/or bachelor's degrees, some of which are ABET-accredited technical degrees.\nThe Polytechnic Institute also maintains three high school campuses (two in Indianapolis and one in South Bend) that focus on science, technology, engineering, and mathematics and feature hands-on project-based learning.\nCollege of Science.\nThe university's College of Science houses the university's science departments: Biological Sciences; Chemistry; Computer Science; Earth, Atmospheric, &amp; Planetary Sciences; Mathematics; Physics &amp; Astronomy; and Statistics. The science courses offered by the college account for about one-fourth of Purdue's one million student credit hours.\nCollege of Veterinary Medicine.\nThe College of Veterinary Medicine is accredited by the AVMA.\nHonors College.\nPurdue's John Martinson Honors College supports an honors program for undergraduate students at the university. The Honors College's mission is to \"create and foster well-rounded, well-educated global leaders,\" through their four pillars of interdisciplinary academics, undergraduate research, community and global engagement, and leadership development.\nPurdue Online.\nThrough Purdue Online, the administrative unit charged with planning and enabling the effort, Purdue has a growing online presence, in addition to Purdue Global, offering more than 200 programs through the university's four accredited institutions (Purdue West Lafayette, Purdue Northwest and Purdue Fort Wayne in Indiana and Purdue Global) including master's degree programs. Purdue Online, the unified online education initiative approved by Purdue President Mitch Daniels and the Purdue Board of Trustees in December 2018, is intended to radically expand these offerings by developing a \"coordinated, unified system-wide portfolio of online course and degree offerings for students of all types.\" Students manage their Purdue University admin account using the BrightSpace Purdue Student Portal.\nResearch.\nThe university expended $622.814 million in support of research system-wide in 2017, using funds received from the state and federal governments, industry, foundations, and individual donors. The faculty and more than 400 research laboratories put Purdue University among the leading research institutions. Purdue University is considered by the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education to have \"very high research activity\". Purdue also was rated the nation's fourth best place to work in academia, according to rankings released in November 2007 by \"The Scientist\" magazine. Purdue's researchers provide insight, knowledge, assistance, and solutions in many crucial areas. These include, but are not limited to Agriculture; Business and Economy; Education; Engineering; Environment; Healthcare; Individuals, Society, Culture; Manufacturing; Science; Technology; Veterinary Medicine.\nThe Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP), a global research consortium focused on global economic governance challenges (trade, climate, resource use) is also coordinated by the university. Purdue University generated a record $438 million in sponsored research funding during the 2009\u201310 fiscal year with participation from National Science Foundation, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the U.S. departments of Agriculture, Defense, Energy, and Health and Human Services. Purdue University was ranked fourth in Engineering research expenditures amongst all the colleges in the United States in 2017, with a research expenditure budget of 244.8 million.\nPurdue University established the Discovery Park to bring innovation through multidisciplinary action. In all of the eleven centers of Discovery Park, ranging from entrepreneurship to energy and advanced manufacturing, research projects reflect a large economic impact and address global challenges. Purdue University's nanotechnology research program, built around the new Birck Nanotechnology Center in Discovery Park, ranks among the best in the nation.\nThe Purdue Research Park which opened in 1961 was developed by Purdue Research Foundation which is a private, nonprofit foundation created to assist Purdue. The park is focused on companies operating in the arenas of life sciences, homeland security, engineering, advanced manufacturing and information technology. It provides an interactive environment for experienced Purdue researchers and for private business and high-tech industry. It currently employs more than 3,000 people in 155 companies, including 90 technology-based firms. The Purdue Research Park was ranked first by the Association of University Research Parks in 2004.\nPurdue's library system consists of fifteen locations throughout the campus, including an archives and special collections research center, an undergraduate library, and several subject-specific libraries. More than three million volumes, including one million electronic books, are held at these locations. The Library houses the Amelia Earhart Collection, a collection of notes and letters belonging to Earhart and her husband George Putnam along with records related to her disappearance and subsequent search efforts. An administrative unit of Purdue University Libraries, Purdue University Press publishes books in the areas of agriculture, health, and engineering.\nSustainability.\nPurdue's Sustainability Council, composed of university administrators and professors, meets monthly to discuss environmental issues and sustainability initiatives at Purdue. The university's first LEED Certified building was an addition to the Mechanical Engineering Building, which was completed in Fall 2011. The school is also in the process of developing an arboretum on campus. In addition, a system has been set up to display live data detailing current energy production at the campus utility plant. The school holds an annual \"Green Week\" each fall, an effort to engage the Purdue community with issues relating to environmental sustainability.\nRankings.\nPurdue University is well-regarded for the strength of its STEM programs.\nIn its 2025 edition, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked Purdue University the 7th most innovative national university, 8th best engineering school, and 18th best public university in the United States. For its graduate programs, Purdue is ranked 5th for overall engineering, 1st for biological/agricultural engineering, 5th for aerospace engineering, 9th for computer engineering, 9th for electrical engineering, 7th for mechanical engineering, 1st for analytic chemistry, 19th for computer science, 24th for applied mathematics, and 22nd for statistics.\nIn its 2025 edition, the \"Times Higher Education\" ranked Purdue University 20th among all global universities for Interdisciplinary Science (12th among universities in the United States). It also ranked Purdue 30th among all global universities for engineering (16th among universities in the United States).\nAs of April 2025, CSRankings.org ranked Purdue's computer science program 13th overall in the United States.\nCampus life.\nStudent body.\nIn 2012, 8,562 students from 126 countries around the world attended Purdue University. For international student enrollment, Purdue ranks ninth among 4,500-plus public and private institutions and ranks fourth among all U.S. public universities, based on the 2024 Open Doors Report.\nIn 2012\u201313, 19,689 out of a total of 39,256 students enrolled were Indiana residents. As of 2013[ [update]], the racial diversity of the US-resident undergraduate student body was 5.7% Asian, 4.4% Hispanic or Latino, and 4.0% black or African American. Of the undergraduate students, 42.6% were female. Domestic minorities constitute a total of 10.8% in the graduate student body population of which 37.3% are female. Twenty-two percent of the student body is international, representing 126 countries. In graduate and professional student population, non-Indiana residents occupy an overwhelming majority, about 75%. Almost all undergraduates and about 70% of the graduate student population attend full-time. The school's selectivity for admissions is \"more selective\" by USNWR: approximately 49% of applicants are admitted.\nHousing.\nAbout one-third of the single undergraduate students on the West Lafayette campus live in university-owned buildings. The rest live in fraternities, sororities, cooperatives, or private off-campus housing. School sources claim over 10,000 spaces available in seventeen separate residence halls for students on campus.\nPurdue University hosts one of the nation's largest Greek communities, with roughly 40 fraternities and 30 sororities.\nActivities and events.\nStudents at Purdue participate in more than 1,000 student organizations that cover a variety of interests. Some of the notable clubs founded by Purdue students include the Purdue Reamer Club (a school spirit organization that cares for the Boilermaker Special mascot and raises funds for scholarships) and two clubs that eventually became nationwide organizations: the National Society of Black Engineers and the Rube Goldberg Machine Contest.\nSeveral campus-wide programs are planned by the Purdue Alumni Student Experience (part of the Alumni Association), Purdue Student Union Board, Purdue Student Government (PSG), or the Purdue Graduate Student Government (PGSG). PSG and PGSG are made up of representatives from each of the university's academic colleges and give recommendations to the faculty, administration, and sometimes to the state legislature.\nAnnual campus events include Boiler Gold Rush, Purdue University Dance Marathon, Spring Fest, and Grand Prix. Boiler Gold Rush (BGR) is Purdue's annual student orientation program and a sports pep rally. Purdue University Dance Marathon (PUDM) is an 18-hour no-sitting, no-sleeping, dance marathon; over 2,000 students participate and the event raises over $1 million annually for Riley Hospital for Children in Indianapolis. Spring Fest is an annual carnival with entertaining exhibits from many academic departments. A highlight of the weekend is the Entomology Department's Bug Bowl, where the sport of cricket spitting was invented in 1997. The Purdue Grand Prix, a 50-mile, 160-lap go-kart race ends Gala Week each year. All 33 participating karts are made from scratch by student teams. The event has been raising money for student scholarships since it began in 1958.\nReligious life.\nPurdue has a number of religious organizations on and near the campus. St. Thomas Aquinas Catholic Church serves the Catholic community at Purdue and the surrounding community. There is also a non-denominational Christian church, Campus House, which is affiliated with the popular coffee-shop Greyhouse Coffee. The Purdue Hillel Foundation and Chabad at Purdue are the university's Jewish campus organizations. The Islamic Society of Greater Lafayette has an Islamic center serving the needs of the Muslim community on campus.\nMedia.\nThe \"Purdue Exponent\", an independent student newspaper, has the largest circulation of any Indiana college newspaper, with a daily circulation of 17,500 copies during the spring and fall semesters. From 1889 to 2008 Purdue published a yearbook called the \"Debris\".\nWBAA are radio station operations owned by and licensed to Metropolitan Indianapolis Public Media, with studios at the university, featuring three noncommercial stations: WBAA News, WBAA Classical, and WBAA Jazz. The stations can be heard on AM 920, 101.3 FM, and 105.9 FM. WBAA also broadcasts on HD Radio and digital platforms including wbaa.org and the WBAA app. Its studios are in the Edward C. Elliott Hall of Music on the Purdue campus, and the transmitters are in Lafayette, Indiana. WBAA is the longest continuously operating radio station in Indiana, having been licensed on April 4, 1922. WBAA is a NPR member station. Despite some public disapproval, in 2022, Purdue sold WBAA (AM) and WBAA-FM to WFYI-FM. Purdue received $700,000 in underwriting credit while agreeing to provide an investment of $250,000 annually for two years to WFYI to offset initial operating costs.\nThere are also a few campus radio stations on campus. Currently, three radio stations operate from residence halls, broadcasting via internet only; WCCR from Cary Quadrangle (not to be confused with the current WCCR FM or WCCR-LP stations in other states), WILY from Wiley Hall, and WHHR from Harrison Hall.\nW9YB is the callsign of the Amateur Radio Club at Purdue University. W9YB is the longest standing club on campus and also holds the self-declared title of having one of the largest and most active collegiate amateur radio stations in the country. W9YB actively participates in emergency management for the Tippecanoe County area and maintains ready status with its members in skills to assist. W9YB is among the longest standing amateur radio clubs in the United States, with the current callsign dating back to 1932 and the previous callsign 9YB dating back to 1920.\nThe \"Movie Tribute Show\" was created in a small television studio (now known as the Erik Mygrant Studio) on campus in 1999.\nAthletics.\nOn October 26, 1891, a newspaper in Crawfordsville, Indiana called Purdue's football team the \"Boiler Makers\" when writing about their trouncing of Wabash College. Lafayette newspapers soon picked up the name, and in October 1892, \"The Purdue Exponent\", Purdue's student newspaper, gave it the stamp of approval. In the early days of Purdue football, the team was called other names as well, including \"haymakers\", \"railsplitters\", \"sluggers\", and \"cornfield sailors\". This heritage is reflected in Purdue's official mascot: the Boilermaker Special (a truck-like vehicle that resembles a locomotive) and the athletic mascot Purdue Pete (a muscular hammer-wielding boilermaker). The school colors of old gold and black were selected by Purdue's first football team in 1887 to resemble the orange and black of Princeton's then-successful team. This made Purdue football the first sports team to ever use a black and gold color palette. The best known fight song is \"Hail Purdue!\".\nPurdue has one of the few college athletic programs not funded by student fees or subsidized by the university. It is home to 18 Division I/I-A NCAA teams including football, basketball, cross country, tennis, wrestling, golf, volleyball, ice hockey (ACHA), and others. Purdue is a founding member of the Big Ten Conference, and played a central role in its creation. Traditional rivals include Big Ten colleagues the Indiana Hoosiers (see Indiana\u2013Purdue rivalry), the Illinois Fighting Illini, and the Notre Dame Fighting Irish from the Atlantic Coast Conference (football program independent, however).\nPurdue's baseball facility was named in honor of two alumni, Anna Margaret Ross Alexander and her husband, John Arthur Alexander, when the new stadium was dedicated in 2013.\nFootball.\nThe Boilermaker football team represents Purdue University in the NCAA Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS). Purdue plays its home games at Ross-Ade Stadium on the university's campus. The Boilermakers compete in the Big Ten Conference as a member of the West Division.\nFound on a farm in southern Indiana, the Old Oaken Bucket is one of the oldest American football trophies. The winner of Purdue's annual game against the Indiana University Hoosiers gets to keep the trophy until the next face-off and add a bronze \"P\" or \"I\" link to its chain. The first competition in 1925 led to a 0\u20130 tie, resulting in the first link on the chain being an \"IP.\" As of 2024[ [update]], Purdue led the series 77\u201342\u20136.\nDuring \"Breakfast Club\", best described as a cross between a pep rally and a Halloween party, students and even some alumni dress up in costumes, from traditional Halloween garb to creative hand-made costumes, as they bar-hop before Boilermaker home football games. The Breakfast Club plays a significant role during the football season and is informally a part of Purdue tradition. Many Boilermaker fans are dedicated; getting up at 5:00\u00a0a.m. on Saturdays and lining up at the bars on Chauncey Hill and the levee by 6:00\u00a0a.m. on game days. The Breakfast Club tradition began in the 1980s during the annual Purdue Grand Prix race in April. Another tradition is Saturday morning wake-ups, where the Boilermaker Special uses its many loud horns and whistles to wake dorm students up in preparation for the day's game.\nBasketball.\nThe Purdue Boilermakers men's basketball team competes in NCAA Division I and is a member of the Big Ten Conference. Purdue won its 25th Big Ten Conference Championship and 2nd Big Ten Tournament Championship in 2023. This leads the conference, as Indiana University Bloomington is second with 22 conference championships. The Boilermakers were retroactively designated the 1932 national champions by the Helms Athletic Foundation and the Premo-Porretta Power Poll, but have not won an NCAA Championship: they were the 1969 runner-up, falling to legendary coach and former Purdue player John Wooden-led UCLA in the national championship game, the 1980 third-place finisher, falling to UCLA in the semifinals of the Final Four but defeating Iowa in the consolation game, and the 2024 runner-up, falling to Connecticut in the national championship game. The Purdue men's team has sent more than 30 players to the NBA including two overall No. 1 picks in the NBA draft. The Purdue women's basketball team were the 1999 NCAA Champions and 2001 runners-up. The Boilermakers men's and women's basketball teams have won more Big Ten Championships than any other conference school, with 32 regular-season conference titles and 11 Big Ten Tournament titles. Purdue men's basketball achieved an all-time winning record against all Big Ten Schools when it gained a winning record over Ohio State with three wins in 2023, improving that record from 91\u201392 to 94\u201392.\nPeople.\nFaculty.\nThe original faculty of six in 1874 has grown to 2,563 tenured and tenure-track faculty in the Purdue Statewide System by Fall 2007 totals. The number of faculty and staff members system-wide is 18,872. The current faculty includes scholars such as Arden L. Bement Jr. (director of the National Science Foundation), R. Graham Cooks, Douglas Comer, Louis de Branges de Bourcia (who proved the Bieberbach conjecture), Victor Raskin, David Sanders, Leah Jamieson, James L. Mohler (who has written several manuals of computer graphics), and Samuel S. Wagstaff Jr. (inventor of the Wagstaff prime).\nPurdue's tenured faculty comprises sixty Academic Deans, Associate Deans, and Assistant Deans; 63 Academic Department Heads; 753 Professors; 547 Associate Professors; and 447 Assistant Professors. Purdue employs 892 non-tenure-track faculty, Lecturers, and Postdoctoral Researchers at its West Lafayette campus. Purdue employs another 691 tenured and 1,021 Non-Tenure Track Faculty, Lecturers, and Postdoctoral Researchers at its Regional Campuses and Statewide Technology unit.\nTwo faculty members (chemists Herbert C. Brown and Ei-ichi Negishi) have been awarded Nobel Prizes while at Purdue. In all, 13 Nobel Prizes in five fields have been associated with Purdue including students, researchers, and current and previous faculty. Other notable faculty of the past have included Golden Gate Bridge designer Charles Alton Ellis, efficiency expert Lillian Gilbreth, food safety advocate Harvey Wiley, aviator Amelia Earhart, president of the National Association of Mathematicians Edray Goins, radio pioneer Reginald Fessenden, and Yeram S. Touloukian, founder of the Thermophysical Properties Research Center.\nAlumni.\nPurdue alumni have achieved recognition in a range of areas, particularly in the science, engineering, and aviation industries. The university's alumni pool collectively holds over 15,000 United States patents.\nPurdue alumni include 27 astronauts, including Gus Grissom, America's second man in space and first to fly in NASA's Gemini program, Neil Armstrong, the first to walk on the Moon, and Eugene Cernan, the last astronaut to do so. Over one-third of all of NASA's crewed space missions have had at least one Purdue graduate as a crew member.\nIn science, Purdue has also produced Nobel Prize\u2013winning physicists in Edward Mills Purcell (BS) and Ben Roy Mottelson(BS), as well as Nobel Prize\u2013winning chemist Akira Suzuki(Post-doc). Other noted Purdue alumni in science include pioneer of robotics and remote control technology Thomas B. Sheridan; Debian founder Ian Murdock; Chinese physicist Deng Jiaxian, a founding father and key contributor to the Chinese nuclear weapon programs; mathematician Yitang Zhang; chemist Lawrence Rocks; biochemist Edwin T. Mertz, credited with the discovery of high-protein corn and beans; Indian chemist CNR Rao, who has been awarded the Bharat Ratna, the highest civilian award in India; engineer Mohamed Atalla who invented the MOS transistor; physical organic chemist and advocate for women and minorities in science Nina Roscher, who received the ACS Award for Encouraging Women into Careers in the Chemical Sciences (1996) and the Presidential Award for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring (1998); and professor Reuben J. Olembo, a geneticist and environmentalist who went on to become the deputy executive director of UNEP and a UN Assistant Secretary-General, and who was recognized by Purdue in 1994 with a Distinguished Alumni Award for Agriculture.\nIn business and economics, Purdue alumni include Stephen Bechtel, Jr., owner of Bechtel Corporation; Federal Reserve Bank president Jeffrey Lacker; and popcorn specialist Orville Redenbacher. In 2010, Bloomberg also revealed Purdue was one of the universities in America with the most undergraduate alumni serving as chief executive officers of S&amp;P 500 firms. These include Gregory Wasson, president/CEO of Walgreens; Mark Miller, chairman/president/CEO of Stericycle; Charles Davidson, former chairman/CEO of Noble Energy; Samuel Allen, chairman/president/CEO of Deere &amp; Company; Don Thompson, president/COO of McDonald's; and John Martin, chairman/CEO of Gilead Sciences, Inc.; and Patti Poppe, CEO of PG&amp;E.\nIn government and culture, Purdue alumni include Pulitzer Prize\u2013winners Booth Tarkington and John T. McCutcheon, as well as Ginger Thompson, former New York Times reporter currently with ProPublica; Akinwumi Adesina, former Nigerian minister of Agriculture and Rural development and current President of the African Development Bank; Essam Sharaf, former Egyptian Prime Minister; Tom Moore, theater and television director; James Thomson, CEO of Rand Corporation; Brian Lamb, founder and CEO of C-SPAN; Harry G. Leslie, former Governor of Indiana; Kirk Fordice, former Governor of Mississippi; Earl Butz, former United States Secretary of Agriculture; Birch Bayh, former United States Senator; Herman Cain, 2012 Presidential candidate; David McKinley, current West Virginia Congressman; Sun Li-jen, former Kuomintang general; Rammohan Naidu Kinjarapu, Indian Parliament member; Dulquer Salmaan, Indian film actor; Blake Ragsdale Van Leer, former Georgia Tech president; Anthony W. Miller, former United States Deputy Secretary of Education; and Hugo F. Sonnenschein, former University of Chicago president. Richard O. Klemm, former CEO of Food Warming Equipment and Illinois state legislator, also graduated from Purdue University.\nIn sports, Purdue has produced basketball coach John Wooden; basketball Hall of Famers Stretch Murphy, Piggy Lambert, and Rick Mount; NBA Champions Paul Hoffman, Herm Gilliam, Frank Kendrick, Jerry Sichting, Glenn Robinson, and Brian Cardinal; and NBA All-Stars Glenn Robinson, Brad Miller, Terry Dischinger, and Joe Barry Carroll. Purdue has three NFL Super Bowl\u2013winning quarterbacks in Drew Brees, Bob Griese, and Len Dawson. Additionally, a total of 19 Purdue alumni have been on a Super Bowl\u2013winning team as of 2011[ [update]]. Purdue also produced Super Bowl IV winning coach Hank Stram. 2008 Daytona 500 winner Ryan Newman graduated from Purdue with a bachelor's degree in vehicle structure engineering.\nThree Purdue alumni have received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award of the United States: Neil Armstrong, Brian Lamb, and John Wooden.\nThe Dauch Alumni Center houses the Purdue for Life Foundation. The foundation was created in 2020 by uniting the Purdue Alumni Association and the University Development Office.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23758", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23758", "title": "Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite", "text": "Christian theologian\nPseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (or Dionysius the Pseudo-Areopagite) was a Greek author, Christian theologian and Neoplatonic philosopher of the late 5th to early 6th century, who wrote a set of works known as the \"Corpus Areopagiticum\" or \"Corpus Dionysiacum\". Through his writing in \"Mystical Theology\", he has been identified as the \"progenitor of apophatic or negative theology.\"\nThe author pseudepigraphically identifies himself in the corpus as \"Dionysios\", portraying himself as Dionysius the Areopagite, the Athenian convert of Paul the Apostle mentioned in Acts 17:34.\nHistorical confusion.\nIn the early sixth century, a series of writings of a mystical nature, employing Neoplatonic language to elucidate Christian theological and mystical ideas, was ascribed to the Areopagite. They have long been recognized as pseudepigrapha, and their author is now called \"Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite\".\nCorpus.\nWorks.\nThe surviving corpus comprises: \nSeven other works are mentioned repeatedly by pseudo-Dionysius in his surviving works, and are presumed either to be lost or to be fictional works mentioned by the Areopagite as a literary device to give the impression to his sixth-century readers of engaging with the surviving fragments of a much larger first-century corpus of writings. These seven other works are:\nDating.\nIn terms of the latest date for the composition of the \"Corpus\", the earliest datable reference to Dionysius' writing comes in 528, the year in which the treatise of Severus of Antioch entitled \"Adversus apologiam Juliani\" was translated into Syriac\u2014though it is possible the treatise may originally have been composed up to nine years earlier.\nAnother widely cited latest date for Dionysius' writing comes in 532, when, in a report on a colloquy held between two groups (dyophysite and miaphysite) debating the decrees of the Council of Chalcedon, Severus of Antioch and his miaphysite supporters cited Dionysius' Fourth Letter in defence of their view. It is possible that pseudo-Dionysius was himself a member of this group, though debate continues over whether his writings do in fact reveal a miaphysite understanding of Christ. It seems likely that the writer was located in Syria, as revealed, for example, by the accounts of the sacramental rites he gives in \"The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy\", which seem only to bear resemblance to Syriac rites.\nAuthorship.\nThe author pseudonymously identifies himself in the corpus as \"Dionysios\", portraying himself as the figure of Dionysius the Areopagite, the Athenian convert of Paul the Apostle mentioned in Acts 17:34.\nVarious legends existed surrounding the figure of Dionysius, who became emblematic of the spread of the gospel to the Greek world. A tradition quickly arose that he became the first bishop of Cyprus or of Milan, or that he was the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews; according to Eusebius, he was also said to be the first bishop of Athens. It is therefore not surprising that that author of these works would have chosen to adopt the name of this otherwise briefly mentioned figure.\nThe authorship of the Dionysian Corpus was initially disputed; Severus and his party affirmed its apostolic dating, largely because it seemed to agree with their Christology. This dating was disputed by Hypatius of Ephesus, who met the monophysite party during the 532 meeting with Emperor Justinian I; Hypatius denied its authenticity on the ground that none of the Fathers or Councils ever cited or referred to it. Hypatius condemned it along with the Apollinarian texts, distributed during the Nestorian controversy under the names of Pope Julius and Athanasius, which the monophysites entered as evidence supporting their position.\nThe first defense of its authenticity is undertaken by John of Scythopolis, whose commentary, the \"Scholia\" (c.\u2009540), on the Dionysian Corpus constitutes the first defense of its apostolic dating, wherein he specifically argues that the work is neither Apollinarian nor a forgery, probably in response both to monophysites and Hypatius\u2014although even he, given his unattributed citations of Plotinus in interpreting Dionysius, might have known better. Dionysius' authenticity is criticized later in the century, and defended by Theodore of Raithu; and by the 7th century, it is taken as demonstrated, affirmed by both Maximus the Confessor and the Lateran Council of 649. From that point until the Renaissance, the authorship was less questioned, though Thomas Aquinas, Peter Abelard and Nicholas of Cusa expressed suspicions about its authenticity; their concerns were generally ignored.\nThe Florentine humanist Lorenzo Valla (d. 1457), in his 1457 commentaries on the New Testament, did much to establish that the author of the \"Corpus Areopagiticum\" could not have been St. Paul's convert, though he was unable to identify the actual historical author. William Grocyn pursued Valla's lines of textual criticism, and Valla's critical viewpoint of the authorship of the highly influential \"Corpus\" was accepted and publicized by Erasmus from 1504 onward, for which he was criticized by Catholic theologians. In the Leipzig disputation with Martin Luther, in 1519, Johann Eck used the \"Corpus\", specifically the \"Angelic Hierarchy\", as argument for the apostolic origin of papal supremacy, pressing the Platonist analogy, \"as above, so below\".\nDuring the 19th century Catholic historians too came generally to accept that the author must have lived after the time of Proclus. The author became known as 'Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite' only after the philological work of J. Stiglmayr and H. Koch, whose papers, published independently in 1895, demonstrated the thoroughgoing dependence of the \"Corpus\" upon Proclus. Both showed that Dionysius had used, in his treatise on evil in Chapter 4 of \"The Divine Names\", the \"De malorum subsistentia\" of Proclus.\nDionysius' identity is still disputed. Corrigan and Harrington find pseudo-Dionysius to be most probably...\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... a pupil of Proclus, perhaps of Syrian origin, who knew enough of Platonism and the Christian tradition to transform them both. Since Proclus died in 485, and since the first clear citation of Dionysius' works is by Severus of Antioch between 518 and 528, then we can place Dionysius' authorship between 485 and 518-28. Ronald Hathaway provides a table listing most of the major identifications of Dionysius: e.g., Ammonius Saccas, Pope Dionysius of Alexandria, Peter the Fuller, Dionysius the Scholastic, Severus of Antioch, Sergius of Reshaina, unnamed Christian followers of everyone from Origen to Basil of Caesarea, Eutyches to Proclus.\nIn the past half-century, Alexander Golitzin, Georgian academician Shalva Nutsubidze and Belgian professor Ernest Honigmann have all proposed identifying pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite with Peter the Iberian. A more recent identification is with Damascius, the last scholarch of the Neoplatonic Academy of Athens. There is therefore no current scholarly consensus on the question of pseudo-Dionysius' identification.\nThe \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" claims:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It must also be recognized that \"forgery\" is a modern notion. Like Plotinus and the Cappadocian Fathers before him, Dionysius does not claim to be an innovator, but rather a communicator of a tradition. Other scholars such as Bart D. Ehrman disagree, see for example \"Forged\". While pseudo-Dionysius can be seen as a communicator of tradition, he can also be seen as a polemicist, who tried to alter Neo-Platonic tradition in a novel way for the Christian world that would make notions of complicated Divine Hierarchies more of an emphasis than notions of direct relationship with the figure of Christ as Mediator.\nSome modern scholars, including recent contributor Evangelos Nikitopoulos, Romanian professor Dumitru St\u0103niloae, and English translator John Parker, argue in favor of a traditional composition date in the late first to early second century. Their case draws upon harmonizations with alleged anachronisms, contemporary lexical parallels and idiosyncrasies, and internal literary and historical consistency. Most significant are the pre-Proclean references to the corpus by figures such as John Chrysostom and Juvenal of Jerusalem, and especially by members of the Alexandrian tradition\u2014Pantaenus, Origen, Gregory Nazianzus, and Jerome\u2014who demonstrate familiarity with the \"Corpus Dionysiacum\". Even Proclus himself, who admitted to \"summariz[ing] the observations rightly made... by some of our predecessors\" such as Origen, appears to cite an external source for the euphemism \"flowers and supersubstantial lights\"\u2014a phrase explicitly found only in Dionysius. Linguistic analyses further suggest that nearly two-thirds of Dionysius' terminology lacks precedent in any known pre-sixth-century Christian or Neoplatonic text, while another quarter can be traced to ante-Nicene philosophical sources such as Platonic dialogues. Nikitopoulos argues that this primitive theological vocabulary aligns with the intellectual profile reconstructed for another second-century Eastern convert with a pagan Greek education: Justin Martyr.\nThought.\nDionysius attributed his inspiration to pseudo-Hierotheus, professing that he was writing to popularize the teachings of his master. Pseudo-Hierotheus was the author of \"The book of Hierotheus on the hidden mysteries of the house of God\". Pseudo-Hierotheus is believed to be the fifth century Syrian monk Stephen Bar Sudhaile, a pantheistic writer.\nThe works of Dionysius are mystical, and show strong Neoplatonic influence. For example, he uses Plotinus' well-known analogy of a sculptor cutting away that which does not enhance the desired image, and shows familiarity with Proclus. He also shows influence from Clement of Alexandria, the Cappadocian Fathers, Origen, and others.\n\"Mystical Theology\".\nAccording to pseudo-Dionysius, God is better characterized and approached by negations than by affirmations. All names and theological representations must be negated. According to pseudo-Dionysius, when all names are negated, \"divine silence, darkness, and unknowing\" will follow.\nInfluence.\nEastern Christianity.\nHis thought was initially used by Miaphysites to back up parts of their arguments but his writings were eventually adopted by other church theologians, primarily due to the work of John of Scythopolis and Maximus the Confessor in producing an orthodox interpretation. Writing a single generation at most after Dionysius, perhaps between 537 and 543, John of Scythopolis composed an extensive set (c.\u2009600) of \"scholia\" (that is, marginal annotations) to the works of Dionysius.\nThese were in turn prefaced by a long prologue in which John set out his reasons for commenting on the corpus. All Greek manuscripts of the \"Corpus Areopagiticum \"surviving today stem from an early sixth-century manuscript containing John's \"Scholia \"and \"Prologue\" \u2014 so John of Scythopolis had an enormous influence on how Dionysius was read in the Greek-speaking world.\nTheologians such as John of Damascus and Germanus I of Constantinople also made ample use of Dionysius' writing.\nThe Dionysian writings and their mystical teaching were universally accepted throughout the East, amongst both Chalcedonians and non-Chalcedonians. Gregory Palamas, for example, in referring to these writings, calls the author, \"an unerring beholder of divine things\".\nThe Corpus is also present in Syriac and Armenian versions, the former of which, by Sergius of Reshaina in the early sixth century, serves as a \"terminus ante quem\" for the dating of the original Greek.\nLatin Christianity.\nThe first notice of Dionysius in the West comes from Pope Gregory I, who probably brought a codex of the \"Corpus Areopagitum\" back with him on his return from his mission as papal legate to the Emperor in Constantinople in c.\u2009585. Gregory refers occasionally in his writings to Dionysius, although Gregory's Greek was probably not adequate to fully engage with Dionysius's work. In the seventh and eighth centuries, Dionysius was not widely known in the West, aside from a few scattered references.\nThe real influence of Dionysius in the West began with the gift in 827 of a Greek copy of his works by the Byzantine emperor Michael II to the Carolingian emperor Louis the Pious. King Louis in turn gave the manuscript to the Abbey of St. Denis near Paris where, in about 838, Dionysius' works were translated into Latin for the first time by Hilduin, abbot of the monastery. It may well have been Hilduin himself who promoted his work (and his abbey) by developing the legend (which would be widely accepted during subsequent centuries), that Denis was the same person as Dionysius the Areopagite of Acts 17.34, and that he had traveled to Rome and then was commissioned by the Pope to preach in Gaul, where he was martyred. Hilduin's translation is almost unintelligible.\nAbout twenty years later, a subsequent Carolingian Emperor, Charles the Bald, requested the Irishman John Scotus Eriugena to make a fresh translation. He finished this in 862. This translation itself did not widely circulate in subsequent centuries. Moreover, although Eriugena's own works, such as the \"Homily on the Prologue of St John\", show the influence of Dionysian ideas, these works were not widely copied or read in subsequent centuries. The Benedictine monasticism that formed the standard monasticism of the eighth to eleventh centuries, therefore, in general paid little attention to Dionysius.\nIn the twelfth century, greater use gradually began to be made of Dionysius among various traditions of thought:\nDuring the thirteenth century, the Franciscan Robert Grosseteste made an important contribution by bringing out between 1240 and 1243 a translation, with commentary, of the Dionysian corpus. Soon after, the Dominican Albertus Magnus did likewise. The thirteenth-century Parisian corpus provided an important reference point by combining the \"Old Translation\" of John Scotus Eriugena with the \"New Translation\" of John Sarrazin, along with glosses and scholia by Maximus the Confessor, John of Scythopolis and others, as well as the \"Extracts\" by Thomas Gallus, and several commentaries such as John Scotus Eriugena, John Sarrazin and Hugh of Saint Victor on \"The Celestial Hierarchy\". It quickly became common to make reference to Dionysius. Thomas Aquinas wrote an explanation for several works, and cites him over 1700 times. Bonaventure called him the \"prince of mystics\".\nMartin Luther's ambiguous stance toward Dionysius was notable. The reformer at times seemed to reject him entirely, at other times to appreciate him, and the passage from \"On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church\" (1520) is well known, in which he says:\"I completely disapprove of giving so much credence to this Dionysius, whoever he was, since there is practically no solid learning to be found in him. Take, for instance, the fabrications about the angels in his Celestial Hierarchy (a book much sweated over by people of a curious or superstitious temperament). By what authority or reason, I ask, does he prove any of this? If you read and evaluate this honestly, are not all these things his own dreamlike musings? On the other hand, in his Mystical Theology (so highly praised by some of the most ignorant theologians), he is most dangerous, speaking more like a Platonist than a Christian\". Notwithstanding, in other works, he did not hesitate to cite Dionysius as a reference, such as in his commentary on Psalm 18 contained in the lectures \"Dictata super Psalterium\" (1513\u20131515), in which he states:\u201cTherefore, blessed Dionysius teaches that one must enter into anagogical darkness and ascend by way of denials. For thus God is hidden and beyond understanding.\"Thus, Luther did not reject Dionysian thought; on the contrary, being someone who so often cited Bernand of Clairvaux, Bonaventure and Johannes Tauler, he was strongly influenced by dionysianism through the German medieval mystics, as shown by Johannes Zachhuber. This influence is evident in the fact that the reformer published the mystical writing \u201c\"Theologia Germanica\"\u201d, which is clearly inspired by Dionysian thought, and it is also visible in a key concept of Luther's theology: the \"Deus absconditus\" (hidden God), an essential doctrine of negative theology, as this method is distinctly endorsed by the reformer, who, like Dionysius and the other mystics, believed in the insufficiency of human reason (philosophy and positive theology) to reach God. His criticisms, therefore, are not aimed at Dionysius\u2019s doctrine itself, but at its \u201cabuse\u201d (from Luther\u2019s perspective) by his opponents, such as Johann Eck, a Roman Catholic apologist who cited Dionysius\u2019s writings to justify the papacy and the view that ordination is a sacrament, against whom the reformer debated between 1519 and 1520, as well the Anabaptists, his adversaries in later disputes.\nIt was subsequently in the area of mysticism that Dionysius, especially his portrayal of the \"via negativa\", was particularly influential. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries his fundamental themes were hugely influential on thinkers such as Marguerite Porete, Meister Eckhart, Johannes Tauler, John of Ruusbroec, the author of \"The Cloud of Unknowing\" (who made an expanded Middle English translation of Dionysius' \"Mystical Theology\"), Jean Gerson, Nicholas of Cusa, Denis the Carthusian, Julian of Norwich, Hendrik Herp and Catherine of Genoa [\"The Mystical Element of Religion as Studied in Saint Catherine of Genoa and Her Friends (1908)]. His influence can also be traced in the Spanish Carmelite thought of the sixteenth century among Teresa of \u00c1vila and John of the Cross.\nModern appraisal.\nIn recent decades, interest has increased again in the \"Corpus Areopagiticum\", for three main reasons: because of a recovery of the huge impact of Dionysian thought in later Christian thought, because of an increasing repudiation of older criticisms that Dionysius's thought represented a fundamentally Neoplatonic approach to theology, and finally because of interest in parallels between aspects of modern linguistic theory and Dionysius's reflections on language and negative theology.\nAndrew Louth offers the following modern appraisal of the Areopagite;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dionysius/Denys' vision is remarkable because, on the one hand, his understanding of hierarchy makes possible a rich symbolic system in terms of which we can understand God and the cosmos and our place within it, and, on the other, he finds room within this strictly hierarchical society for an escape from it, beyond it, by transcending symbols and realizing directly one's relationship with God as his creature, the creature of his love. There is space within the Dionysian universe for a multitude of ways of responding to God's love. That spaciousness is worth exploring: and therein, perhaps, lies the enduring value of the vision of Dionysius/Denys the Areopagite.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nExternal links to bibliography"}
{"id": "23759", "revid": "19090830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23759", "title": "Perfect crystal", "text": "Crystal without defects\nCrystalline materials (mainly metals and alloys, but also stoichiometric salts and other materials) are made up of solid regions of ordered matter (atoms placed in one of a number of ordered formations called Bravais lattices). These regions are known as \"crystals\". A perfect crystal is a crystal that contains no point, line, or planar defects. There are a wide variety of crystallographic defects.\nThe hypothetical concept of a perfect crystal is important in the basic formulation of the third law of thermodynamics.\nIn crystallography, the phrase 'perfect crystal' can be used to mean \"no linear or planar imperfections\", as it is difficult to measure small quantities of point imperfections in an otherwise defect-free crystal.\nImperfections are created by various thermodynamic processes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23761", "revid": "12136076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23761", "title": "Pope Linus", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from c. 68 to c. 80\nPope Linus (; , \"Linos\"; died c. 80) was the bishop of Rome from c. 68 to his death in 80. He is generally regarded as the second bishop of Rome, after Saint Peter. As with all the early popes, he was canonized.\nAccording to Irenaeus, Linus is the same person as the one mentioned in the New Testament. Linus is mentioned in the valediction of the Second Epistle to Timothy (2Timothy 4:21) as being with Paul the Apostle in Rome near the end of Paul's life.\nBackground.\nThe earliest reference to the episcopate of Linus was Irenaeus, who in c. 180 wrote that \"the blessed apostles, then, having founded and built up the Church, committed into the hands of Linus the office of the episcopate\".\nAccording to the earliest succession lists of bishops of Rome, passed down by Irenaeus and Hegesippus and attested by the historian Eusebius, Linus was entrusted with his office by the apostles Peter and Paul after they had established the Christian church in Rome. By this reckoning he might be considered therefore the first pope, but from the late 2nd or early 3rd century the convention began of regarding Peter as the first pope.\nJerome described Linus as \"the first after Peter to be in charge of the Roman Church\" and Eusebius described him as \"the first to receive the episcopate of the church at Rome, after the martyrdom of Paul and Peter\". John Chrysostom wrote that \"this Linus, some say, was second bishop of the Church of Rome after Peter\", while the \"Liberian Catalogue\" described Peter as the first bishop of Rome and Linus as his successor in the same office.\nThe \"Liber Pontificalis\" also enumerated Linus as the second bishop of Rome after Peter, and stated that Peter consecrated two bishops, Linus and Anacletus, for the priestly service of the community, while devoting himself instead to prayer and preaching, and that it was Clement I to whom he entrusted the universal Church and whom he appointed as his successor. Tertullian also wrote of Clement as the successor of Peter. Jerome named Clement as \"the fourth bishop of Rome after Peter, if indeed the second was Linus and the third Anacletus, although most of the Latins think that Clement was second after the apostle\".\nThe \"Apostolic Constitutions\" note that Linus, whom Paul the Apostle consecrated, was the first bishop of Rome and that he was succeeded by Clement I, whom Peter the Apostle ordained and consecrated.\nEpiscopate.\nThe chronology of the early popes is heavily disputed. Eusebius and Jerome dated Linus' episcopate between the years 68 and 80. The \"Liberian Catalogue\" and the \"Liber Pontificalis\" date it as 56 to 67, during the reign of Nero. This is most likely a mistake, as all four sources give Peter an episcopate of 25 years in Rome, and the \"Liber Pontificalis\" even records that Peter died 38 years after Jesus' death, that is, 67\u201368. The \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" gives his years as c. 64\u201376 or c. 67\u201379.\nLinus is named in the valediction of the Second Epistle to Timothy. In that epistle, Linus is noted as being with Paul the Apostle in Rome near the end of Paul's life. Irenaeus stated that this is the same Linus who became Bishop of Rome.\nAccording to the \"Liber Pontificalis\", Linus was an Italian born in Volterra in Tuscany. His father's name was recorded as Herculanus. The \"Apostolic Constitutions\" denominated his mother Claudia; immediately after the name Linus in 2 \"Timothy\" 4:21 a Claudia is named, but the Bible does not explicitly identify Claudia as Linus' mother. According to the \"Liber Pontificalis\", Linus decreed that women should cover their heads in church, created the first 15 bishops, and died a martyr. It dated his burial as 23 September, on which date he is still commemorated. His name is included in the Roman Canon of the Mass.\nWith respect to Linus' purported decree prescribing the covering of women's heads, J.P. Kirsch commented in the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" that \"without doubt this decree is apocryphal, and copied by the author of the \"Liber Pontificalis\" from Paul's \"First Epistle to the Corinthians\" (11:5) and arbitrarily attributed to the first successor of the Apostle in Rome. The statement made in the same source, that Linus suffered martyrdom, cannot be proved and is improbable. For between Nero and Domitian there is no mention of any persecution of the Roman Church; and Irenaeus (1. c., III, iv, 3) from among the early Roman bishops designates only Telesphorus as a glorious martyr.\" The \"Roman Martyrology\" does not categorize Linus as a martyr as does the \"Liber Pontificalis\"; the current entry in the former regarding him states: \"At Rome, the commemoration of Saint Linus, Pope, to whom, as Saint Irenaeus narrates, the blessed Apostles entrusted the responsibility of the episcopate of the Church founded in the City, and whom the blessed Paul the Apostle mentions as a companion of his.\"\nLegacy.\nA tomb that Torrigio discovered in Saint Peter's Basilica in 1615 and which was inscribed with the letters LINVS was assumed to be the tomb of Pope Linus. However, a note by Torrigio records that these were merely the final five letters of some unknown longer name, such as \"Aquilinus\" or \"Anullinus\". A letter on the martyrdom of Peter and Paul was attributed to Linus, but in fact it was determined to date to the 6th century. The \"Liber Pontificalis\" asserts that Linus was buried on the Vatican Hill adjacent to Peter the Apostle in what is now known as the Vatican Necropolis beneath Saint Peter's Basilica in Vatican City.\nThe city of Saint-Lin\u2013Laurentides in Canada is named in his honour.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23762", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23762", "title": "Prolog programming language", "text": ""}
{"id": "23763", "revid": "41381414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23763", "title": "Pilgrimage", "text": "Journey or search of moral or spiritual significance\nA pilgrimage is a journey to a holy place, which can lead to a personal transformation, after which the pilgrim returns to their daily life. A pilgrim (from the Latin \"peregrinus\") is a traveler (literally, one who has come from afar) who is on a journey to a holy place. Typically, this is a physical journey (often on foot) to some place of special significance to the adherent of a particular religious belief system.\nBackground.\nPilgrimages frequently involve a journey or search of moral or spiritual significance. Typically, it is a journey to a shrine or other location of importance to a person's beliefs and faith, although sometimes it can be a metaphorical journey into someone's own beliefs.\nMany religions attach spiritual importance to particular places: the place of birth or death of founders or saints, or to the place of their \"calling\" or spiritual awakening, or of their connection (visual or verbal) with the divine, to locations where miracles were performed or witnessed, or locations where a deity is said to live or be \"housed\", or any site that is seen to have special spiritual powers. Such sites may be commemorated with shrines or temples that devotees are encouraged to visit for their own spiritual benefit: to be healed or have questions answered or to achieve some other spiritual benefit.\nA person who makes such a journey is called a pilgrim. As a common human experience, pilgrimage has been proposed as a Jungian archetype by Wallace Clift and Jean Dalby Clift. Some research has shown that people who engage in pilgrimage walks enjoy biological, psychological, social, and spiritual therapeutic benefits.\nThe Holy Land acts as a focal point for the pilgrimages of the Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. According to a Stockholm University study in 2011, these pilgrims visit the Holy Land to touch and see physical manifestations of their faith, confirm their beliefs in the holy context with collective excitation, and connect personally to the Holy Land.\nHistory.\nPilgrims and the making of pilgrimages are common in many religions, including the faiths of ancient Egypt, Persia in the Mithraic period, India, China, and Japan. The Greek and Roman customs of consulting the gods at local oracles, such as those at Dodona or Delphi, both in Greece, are widely known. In Greece, pilgrimages could either be personal or state-sponsored. The Eleusinian mysteries included a pilgrimage. The procession to Eleusis began at the Athenian cemetery Kerameikos and from there the participants walked to Eleusis, along the Sacred Way (\u1f39\u03b5\u03c1\u1f70 \u1f49\u03b4\u03cc\u03c2, \"Hier\u00e1 Hod\u00f3s\").\nIn the early period of Hebrew history, pilgrims traveled to Shiloh, Dan, Bethel, and eventually Jerusalem (see also Three Pilgrimage Festivals, a practice followed by other Abrahamic religions). These festivals, including Passover, Tabernacles, and Shavuot, often involved journeys that reflected a physical and spiritual movement, similar to the concept of \"tirtha y\u0101tr\u0101\" in Hinduism, where \"tirtha\" means \"ford\" or \"crossing,\" and \"yatra\" signifies a journey or procession. While many pilgrims travel toward a specific location, a physical destination is not always a necessity. One group of pilgrims in early Celtic Christianity were the \"Peregrinari Pro Christ\", (Pilgrims for Christ), or \"white martyrs\", who left their homes to wander in the world. This form of pilgrimage, akin to the concept of \"hajj\" in Islam, which means \"procession,\" was an ascetic religious practice, as the pilgrim left the security of home and the clan for an unknown destination, trusting completely in Divine Providence. These travels often resulted in the founding of new abbeys and the spread of Christianity among the pagan population in Britain and in continental Europe.\nIn the Middle Ages, Christian pilgrimage became a relevant economic sector, initially through facilities at popular pilgrimage destinations, but later also through organised group trips for pilgrims throughout the Mediterranean region.\nThe ceremonial center Chav\u00edn de Hu\u00e1ntar served as a gathering place for people of the pre-Inca culture Chav\u00edn to come together, to attend and participate in rituals, consult an oracle, worship or enter a cult, and collect ideas.\nPilgrimage experienced a new change with the improvement of infrastructure from the 19th century onwards.\nBah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith.\nBah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h decreed pilgrimage to two places in the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas: the House of Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h in Baghdad, Iraq, and the House of the B\u00e1b in Shiraz, Iran. Later, \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 designated the Shrine of Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h at Bahji, Israel as a site of pilgrimage. The designated sites for pilgrimage are currently not accessible to the majority of Bah\u00e1'\u00eds, as they are in Iraq and Iran respectively, and thus when Bah\u00e1'\u00eds currently refer to pilgrimage, it refers to a nine-day pilgrimage which consists of visiting the holy places at the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed World Centre in northwest Israel in Haifa, Acre, and Bahj\u00ed.\nBuddhism.\nPlaces of pilgrimage in the Buddhist world include those associated with the life of the historical Buddha: his supposed birthplace and childhood home (Lumbini and Kapilavastu in Nepal) and place of enlightenment (Bodh Gaya in northern India), other places he is believed to have visited and the place of his death (or Parinirvana), Kushinagar, India. Others include the many temples and monasteries with relics of the Buddha or Buddhist saints such as the Temple of the Tooth in Sri Lanka and the numerous sites associated with teachers and patriarchs of the various traditions.\nIn India and Nepal, there are four places of pilgrimage which are tied to the life of Gautama Buddha:\nOther pilgrimage places in India and Nepal connected Gautama Buddha's life are: Savatthi, Pataliputta, Nalanda, Gaya, Vesali, Sankasia, Kapilavastu, Kosambi, Rajagaha.\nOther famous places for Buddhist pilgrimage include:\nChristianity.\nIn the spiritual literature of Christianity, the concept of pilgrim and pilgrimage may refer to the experience of life in the world (considered as a period of exile) or to the inner path of the spiritual aspirant from a state of wretchedness to a state of beatitude.\nChristian pilgrimage was first made to sites connected with the birth, life, crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus. Aside from the early example of Origen in the third century, surviving descriptions of Christian pilgrimages to the Holy Land date from the 4th century, when pilgrimage was encouraged by church fathers including Saint Jerome, and established by Saint Helena, the mother of Constantine the Great.\nBeginning in 1894, Christian ministers under the direction of Charles Taze Russell were appointed to travel to and work with local Bible Students congregations for a few days at a time; within a few years appointments were extended internationally, formally designated as \"pilgrims\", and scheduled for twice-yearly, week-long visits at each local congregation. International Bible Students Association (IBSA) pilgrims were excellent speakers, and their local talks were typically well-publicized and well-attended. Prominent Bible Students A. H. Macmillan and J. F. Rutherford were both appointed pilgrims before they joined the board of directors of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania; the IBSA later adopted the name Jehovah's Witnesses and renamed pilgrims as \"traveling overseers\".\nThe purpose of Christian pilgrimage was summarized by Pope Benedict XVI in this way:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To go on pilgrimage is not simply to visit a place to admire its treasures of nature, art or history. To go on pilgrimage really means to step out of ourselves in order to encounter God where he has revealed himself, where his grace has shone with particular splendour and produced rich fruits of conversion and holiness among those who believe. Above all, Christians go on pilgrimage to the Holy Land, to the places associated with the Lord's passion, death and resurrection. They go to Rome, the city of the martyrdom of Peter and Paul, and also to Compostela, which, associated with the memory of Saint James, has welcomed pilgrims from throughout the world who desire to strengthen their spirit with the Apostle's witness of faith and love.\nPilgrimages were, and are, also made to Rome and other sites associated with the apostles, saints and Christian martyrs, as well as to places where there have been apparitions of the Virgin Mary. A popular pilgrimage journey is along the Way of St. James to the Santiago de Compostela Cathedral, in Galicia, Spain, where the shrine of the apostle James is located. A combined pilgrimage was held every seven years in the three nearby towns of Maastricht, Aachen and Kornelim\u00fcnster where many important relics could be seen (see: Pilgrimage of the Relics, Maastricht). Marian pilgrimages remain very popular in Latin America.\nThe Catholic priest Frank Fahey writes that a pilgrim is \"always in danger of becoming a tourist\" and vice versa, and describes pilgrimages as journeys containing \"faith expectancy\", a search for wholeness, that are often solitary and employing silence to create an internal sacred space.\nHinduism.\nAccording to Karel Werner's \"Popular Dictionary of Hinduism\", \"most Hindu places of pilgrimage are associated with legendary events from the lives of various gods... Almost any place can become a focus for pilgrimage, but in most cases they are sacred cities, rivers, lakes, and mountains.\" Hindus are encouraged to undertake pilgrimages during their lifetime, though this practice is not considered absolutely mandatory. Most Hindus visit sites within their region or locale. \nHindu pilgrimage destinations may be holy cities (Varanasi, Badrinath); rivers (the Ganges, the Yamuna); mountains (several Himalayan peaks are sacred to both Hindus and Buddhists); caves (such as the Batu Caves near Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia); temples; festivals, such as the peripatetic Kumbh Mela, in 2001 the biggest public gathering in history; or the tombs and dwelling places of saints (Alandi, Shirdi).\nIslam.\nThe \"\u1e24ajj\" (, main pilgrimage to Mecca) is one of the five pillars of Islam and a mandatory religious duty for Muslims that must be carried out at least once in their lifetime by all adult Muslims who are physically and financially capable of undertaking the journey, and can support their family during their absence. The Hajj is one of the largest annual gatherings of people in the world. Since 2014, two or three million people have participated in the \"Hajj\" annually. The mosques in Mecca and Medina were closed in February 2020 because of the COVID-19 pandemic and the \"hajj\" was permitted for only a very limited number of Saudi nationals and foreigners living in Saudi Arabia starting on 29 July.\nAnother important place for Muslims is the city of Medina, the second holiest site in Islam, in Saudi Arabia, the final resting place of Muhammad in Al-Masjid an-Nabawi (The Mosque of the Prophet).\nThe \"Ihram\" (white robe of pilgrimage) is meant to show equality of all Muslim pilgrims in the eyes of Allah. 'A white has no superiority over a black, nor a black over a white. Nor does an Arab have superiority over a non-Arab, nor a non-Arab over an Arab - except through piety' - statement of the Prophet Muhammad.\nZiyarat.\nA different form of pilgrimage is ziyarat ( \"ziy\u0101rah\", \"visit\"; , \"ziy\u0101rat\"). Ziyarat generally refers to the act of visiting holy places such as tombs or shrines, often associated with the Prophet Muhammad, his family, companions, and other revered figures like legal scholars and Sufi saints. Ziyarat is a voluntary act of pilgrimage practiced by both Sunni and Shia Muslims. Unlike Hajj, which is obligatory for Muslims who are physically and financially able, or Umrah, which is highly recommended but not mandatory, Ziyarat involves visits to a variety of sacred and historically significant locations beyond Mecca. These include mosques, tombs, battlefields, mountains, caves, and other places where important spiritual or historical events in Islamic history took place. It holds deep spiritual significance for millions of Muslims around the world.\nOne notable example is the Grand Magal of Touba, east of Dakar, Senegal. About four million pilgrims participate annually to celebrate the life and teachings of Cheikh Amadou Bamba, the founder of the Mouride brotherhood, who established the order in 1883. The pilgrimage begins on the 18th of Safar, the second month of the Islamic calendar.\nWhile ziyarat is viewed as permissible and spiritually enriching by most Sunni and Shia traditions, some fundamentalist movements, such as Salafism and Wahhabism, discourage or oppose it. These movements are characterized by a strict, literalist interpretation of Islam and opposition to practices they consider innovations, such as shrine visitation.\nZiyarat also includes the Ziyarat al-Imam, which refers specifically to the pilgrimage to the shrines of the Shia Imams, especially revered figures like Imam Ali and Imam Hussein. The Arba'in pilgrimage is the world's largest pilgrimage and largest annual public gathering in the world, where millions of Shia Muslims travel to Karbala to commemorate the martyrdom of Imam Hussein during the 40-day mourning period after Ashura.\nShia.\n\"Al-Arba\u2018\u012bn\" (, \"The Forty\"), \"Chehelom\" (, , \"the fortieth [day]\") or \"Qirkh\u012b\", \"Im\u0101m\u012bn Qirkh\u012b\" ( (), \"the fortieth of Imam\") is a Shia Muslim religious observance that occurs forty days after the Day of Ashura. It commemorates the martyrdom of Husayn ibn Ali, the grandson of Muhammad, which falls on the 20th or 21st day of the month of Safar. Imam Husayn ibn Ali and 72 companions were killed by Yazid I's army in the Battle of Karbala in 61\u00a0AH (680 CE). Arba'een or forty days is also the usual length of mourning after the death of a family member or loved one in many Muslim traditions. Arba'een is one of the largest pilgrimage gatherings on Earth, in which up to 31 million people go to the city of Karbala in Iraq.\nThe second largest holy city in the world, Mashhad, Iran, attracts more than 20 million tourists and pilgrims every year, many of whom come to pay homage to Imam Reza (the eighth Shi'ite Imam). It has been a magnet for travelers since medieval times.\nJudaism.\nWhile Solomon's Temple stood, Jerusalem was the centre of the Jewish religious life and the site of the Three Pilgrimage Festivals of Passover, Shavuot and Sukkot, and all adult men who were able were required to visit and offer sacrifices (\"korbanot\") at the Temple. After the destruction of the Temple, the obligation to visit Jerusalem and to make sacrifices no longer applied. The obligation was restored with the rebuilding of the Temple, but following its destruction in 70 CE, the obligation to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem and offer sacrifices again went into abeyance.\nThe western retaining wall of the Temple Mount, known as the Western Wall or \"Wailing\" Wall, is the remaining part of Second Jewish Temple in the Old City of Jerusalem is the most sacred and visited site for Jews. Pilgrimage to this area was off-limits to Jews from 1948 to 1967, when East Jerusalem was under Jordanian control.\nThere are numerous lesser Jewish pilgrimage destinations, mainly tombs of \"tzadikim\", throughout Israel and Palestine and all over the world, including: Hebron; Bethlehem; Mount Meron; Netivot; Uman, Ukraine; Silistra, Bulgaria; Damanhur, Egypt; and many others.\nMany rabbis claim that even today, after the destruction of the Temple, there is a mitzvah to make a pilgrimage on holidays.\nSikhism.\nSikhism does not consider pilgrimage as an act of spiritual merit. Guru Nanak went to places of pilgrimage to reclaim the fallen people, who had turned ritualists. He told them of the need to visit that temple of God, deep in the inner being of themselves. According to him: \"He performs a pilgrimage who controls the five vices.\"\nEventually, however, Amritsar and Harmandir Sahib (the Golden Temple) became the spiritual and cultural centre of the Sikh faith, and if a Sikh goes on pilgrimage it is usually to this place.\nThe Panj Takht (Punjabi: \u0a2a\u0a70\u0a1c \u0a24\u0a16\u0a3c\u0a24) are the five revered gurdwaras in India that are considered the thrones or seats of authority of Sikhism and are traditionally considered a pilgrimage.\nTaoism.\nMazu, also spelled as Matsu, is the most famous sea goddess in the Chinese southeastern sea area, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan.\nMazu Pilgrimage is more likely as an event (or temple fair), pilgrims are called as \"Xiang Deng Jiao\" (\"pinyin: xi\u0101ng d\u0113ng ji\u01ceo,\" it means \"lantern feet\" in Chinese), they would follow the Goddess's (Mazu) palanquin from her own temple to another Mazu temple. By tradition, when the village Mazu palanquin passes, the residents would offer free water and food to those pilgrims along the way.\nThere are 2 main Mazu pilgrimages in Taiwan, usually held between lunar January and April, depending on Mazu's will.\nZoroastrianism.\nZoroastrians have as their main pilgrimage destinations the city of Yazd and the temples of Pir-e Sabz and Pir-e Naraki in Iran, as well as the cities of Navsari and Udvada in India.\nIn Iran, there are pilgrimage destinations called \"pirs\" in several provinces, although the most familiar ones are in the province of Yazd. In addition to the traditional Yazdi shrines, new sites may be in the process of becoming pilgrimage destinations. The ruins are the ruins of ancient fire temples. One such site is the ruin of the Sassanian era Azargoshnasp fire temple in Iran's Azarbaijan Province. Other sites are the ruins of fire temples at Rey, south of the capital Tehran, and the Firouzabad ruins sixty kilometres south of Shiraz in the province of Pars.\nAtash Behram (\"Fire of victory\") is the highest grade of fire temple in Zoroastrianism. It has 16 different \"kinds of fire\", that is, fires gathered from 16 different sources. Currently there are 9 Atash Behram, one in Yazd, Iran and the rest in Western India. They have become a pilgrimage destination.\nIn India the cathedral fire temple that houses the Iranshah Atash Behram, located in the small town of Udvada in the west coast province of Gujarat, is a pilgrimage destination.\nCultural pilgrimage.\nA modern phenomenon is the cultural pilgrimage which, while involving a personal journey, is secular in nature. Destinations for such pilgrims can include historic sites of national or cultural importance, and can be defined as places \"of cultural significance: an artist's home, the location of a pivotal event or an iconic destination\". An example might be a devotee of the Beatles visiting Liverpool in England or anime fans visiting Akihabara in Tokyo. Destinations for cultural pilgrims include Auschwitz concentration camp, Gettysburg Battlefield or the Ernest Hemingway House. Cultural pilgrims may also travel on religious pilgrimage routes, such as the Way of St. James, with the perspective of making it a historic or architectural tour rather than \u2013 or as well as \u2013 a religious experience.\nUnder communist regimes, devout secular pilgrims visited locations such as the Mausoleum of Lenin, the Mausoleum of Mao Zedong and the Birthplace of Karl Marx. Such visits were sometimes state-sponsored. Sites such as these continue to attract visitors. The distinction between religious, cultural or political pilgrimage and tourism is not necessarily always clear or rigid. Pilgrimage could also refer symbolically to journeys, largely on foot, to places where the concerned person(s) expect(s) to find spiritual and/or personal salvation.\nOther.\nMeher Baba.\nThe main pilgrimage sites associated with the spiritual teacher Meher Baba are Meherabad, India, where Baba completed the \"major portion\" of his work and where his tomb is now located, and Meherazad, India, where Baba resided later in his life.\nYazidism religion.\nThe Yazidism has numerous pilgrimage sites and holy sites, with the most important being located in Sinjar such as Lalish.\nIn culture.\nSome prominent literary characters who were pilgrims include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23765", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23765", "title": "Patch", "text": "Patch, Patches or The Patch may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23766", "revid": "31519789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23766", "title": "Perth (disambiguation)", "text": "Perth is the capital of Western Australia.\nPerth also commonly refers to Perth, Scotland, a city and the administrative centre of the Perth and Kinross council area.\nPerth may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
