{"id": "28916", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28916", "title": "Shetland", "text": "Archipelago in Scotland\nShetland, also called the Shetland Islands, is an archipelago in Scotland lying between Orkney, the Faroe Islands, and Norway, marking the northernmost region of the United Kingdom. The islands lie about to the northeast of Orkney, from mainland Scotland, and west of Norway. \nThey form part of the border between the Atlantic Ocean to the west and the North Sea to the east. The islands' area is and the population totalled 23,190 in 2024. The islands comprise the Shetland constituency of the Scottish Parliament. The islands' administrative centre, largest settlement and only burgh is Lerwick, which has been the capital of Shetland since 1708, before which time the capital was Scalloway. Due to its location, it is accessible only by ferry or flight with an airport located in Sumburgh as well as a port and emergency airstrip in Lerwick.\nThe archipelago has an oceanic climate, complex geology, rugged coastline, and many low, rolling hills. The largest island, known as \"the Mainland\", has an area of , and is the fifth-largest island in the British Isles. It is one of 16 inhabited islands in Shetland.\nHumans have lived in Shetland since the Mesolithic period. Picts are known to have been the original inhabitants of the islands, before the Norse conquest and subsequent colonisation in the Early Middle Ages. From the 10th to 15th centuries, the islands formed part of the Kingdom of Norway. In 1472, the Parliament of Scotland absorbed the Lordship of Shetland into the Kingdom of Scotland, following the failure to pay a dowry promised to James III of Scotland by the family of his bride, Margaret of Denmark. \nAfter Scotland and England united in 1707 to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, trade between Shetland and continental Northern Europe decreased. The discovery of North Sea oil in the 1970s significantly boosted Shetland's economy, employment and public-sector revenues. Fishing has always been an important part of the islands' economy.\nThe local way of life reflects the Norse heritage of the isles, including the Up Helly Aa fire festivals and a strong musical tradition, especially the traditional fiddle style. Almost all place names in the islands have Norse origin. The islands' prose writers and poets have often written in the distinctive Shetland dialect of the Scots language. Many areas on the islands have been set aside to protect the local fauna and flora, including a number of important seabird nesting sites. The Shetland pony and Shetland Sheepdog are two well-known Shetland animal breeds. Other animals with local breeds include the Shetland sheep, cow, goose, and duck. The Shetland pig, or grice, has been extinct since about 1930.\nThe islands' motto, which appears on the Council's coat of arms, is \"\" (\"By law shall the land be built\"). The phrase is of Old Norse origin, is mentioned in \"Nj\u00e1ls saga\", and was likely borrowed from provincial Norwegian and Danish laws such as the Frostathing Law or the Law of Jutland.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Shetland\" may derive from the Old Norse words ('hilt'), and ('land'), the popular and traditional claim. Another possibility is that the first syllable is derived from the name of an ancient Celtic tribe. Andrew Jennings has suggested a link with the Caledones.\nIn AD 43, the Roman author Pomponius Mela made reference in his writing to seven islands he called the . In AD 77, Pliny the Elder called these same lands the . Scholars have inferred that both of these references are to islands in the Shetland group. Another possible early written reference to the islands is Tacitus' report in \"Agricola\" in AD 98. After he described the Roman discovery and conquest of Orkney, he added that the Roman fleet had seen \"Thule, too\". \nIn early Irish literature, Shetland is referred to as \u2014 \"the Isles of Cats\" (meaning the island inhabited by the tribe called \"Cat\"). This may have been the pre-Norse inhabitants' name for the islands. Cat was the name of a Pictish people who occupied parts of the northern Scottish mainland (see Kingdom of Cat); and their name survives in the names of the county of Caithness and in the Scottish Gaelic name for Sutherland, , which means \"among the Cats\".\nThe oldest known version of the modern name Shetland is ; this may represent \"Catland\", the Germanic language softening the \"C-\" to \"H-\" according to Grimm's law (also coinciding with Jennings' hypothesis for the early sound shift necessary for descent from \"*kalid-\" to \"*halit-\", from \"Caledones\"). It occurs in a letter written by Harald, earl of Orkney, Shetland and Caithness, in ca. 1190. By 1431, the islands were being referred to as \"Hetland\", after various intermediate transformations. It is possible that the Pictish \"cat\" sound contributed to this Norse name. In the 16th century, Shetland was called . \nGradually, the Scandinavian Norn language spoken by the inhabitants of the islands was replaced by the Shetland dialect of Scots and became . The initial letter is the Middle Scots letter, \"yogh\", the pronunciation of which is almost identical to the original Norn sound, . When the use of the letter \"yogh\" was discontinued, it was often replaced by the similar-looking letter z (which at the time was usually rendered with a curled tail: \u27e8\u0292\u27e9) hence , the form used in the name of the pre-1975 county council. This is the source of the ZE postcode used for Shetland.\nMost of the islands have Norse names, although the derivations of some may be pre-Norse, Pictish or even pre-Celtic.\nGeography and geology.\nShetland is around north of Great Britain and west of Bergen, Norway. It covers an area of and has a coastline long.\nLerwick, the capital and largest settlement, has a population of 6,958. About half of the archipelago's total population of 22,920 people live within of the town.\nScalloway on the west coast, which was the capital until 1708, has a population of fewer than 1,000 people.\nOnly 16 of about 100 islands are inhabited. The main island of the group is known as Mainland. The next largest are Yell, Unst, and Fetlar, which lie to the north, and Bressay and Whalsay, which lie to the east. East and West Burra, Muckle Roe, Papa Stour, Trondra, and Vaila are smaller islands to the west of Mainland. The other inhabited islands are Foula west of Walls, Fair Isle south-west of Sumburgh Head, and the Out Skerries to the east.\nThe uninhabited islands include Mousa, known for the Broch of Mousa, the finest preserved example of an Iron Age broch; Noss to the east of Bressay, which has been a national nature reserve since 1955; St Ninian's Isle, connected to Mainland by the largest active tombolo in the United Kingdom; and Out Stack, the northernmost point of the British Isles. Shetland's location means that it provides a number of such records: Muness is the most northerly castle in the United Kingdom and Skaw the most northerly settlement.\nThe geology of Shetland is complex, with numerous faults and fold axes. These islands are the northern outpost of the Caledonian orogeny, and there are outcrops of Lewisian, Dalradian and Moine metamorphic rocks with histories similar to their equivalents on the Scottish mainland. There are also Old Red Sandstone deposits and granite intrusions. The most distinctive feature is the ophiolite in Unst and Fetlar which is a remnant of the Iapetus Ocean floor made up of ultrabasic peridotite and gabbro.\nMuch of Shetland's economy depends on the oil-bearing sediments in the surrounding seas. Geological evidence shows that in around 6100 BC a tsunami caused by the Storegga Slide hit Shetland, as well as the west coast of Norway, and may have created a wave of up to high in the voes where modern populations are highest.\nThe highest point of Shetland is Ronas Hill at . The Pleistocene glaciations entirely covered the islands. During that period, the Stanes of Stofast, a 2000-tonne glacial erratic, came to rest on a prominent hilltop in Lunnasting.\nIt has been estimated that there are about 275 sea stacks in Scotland of which some 110 are around the coasts of Shetland. For many of them, there is no record of any attempt by rock climbers to ascend them.\nShetland is a national scenic area which, unusually, includes some discrete locations: Fair Isle, Foula, South West Mainland (including the Scalloway Islands), Muckle Roe, Esha Ness, Fethaland and Herma Ness. The total area covered by the designation is 41,833 ha, of which 26,347 ha is marine (i.e. below low tide).\nIn October 2018, legislation came into force in Scotland to prevent public bodies, without good reason, showing Shetland in a separate box in maps, as had often been the practice. The legislation requires the islands to be \"displayed in a manner that accurately and proportionately represents their geographical location in relation to the rest of Scotland\", so as make clear the islands' real distance from other areas.\nClimate.\nShetland has an oceanic temperate maritime climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"), bordering on, but very slightly above average in summer temperatures, the subpolar variety, with long, relatively mild winters and short cool summers. The climate all year round is moderate owing to the influence of the surrounding seas, with average night-time low temperatures a little above in January and February and average daytime high temperatures of near in July and August. The highest temperature on record was on 6 August 1910 at Sumburgh Head and the lowest in the Januaries of 1952 and 1959. The frost-free period may be as little as three months.\nThe general character of the climate is windy, cloudy and often wet, with at least of rain falling on more than 250 days a year. Average yearly precipitation is , with November through January the wettest months, averaging 5.6 to 5.9 inches of precipitation, mostly rain. Snowfall is usually confined to the period November to February, and snow seldom lies on the ground for more than a day. Snow generally falls in the form of cumulonimbus or towering cumulus showers produced by the resultant instability when sea-surface temperatures are warm relative to colder air aloft. Snow very rarely, if ever, falls steady for prolonged periods. Somewhat less precipitation falls from April to July, although on average, no month receives less than . Fog is common during summer due to the cooling effect of the sea on mild southerly airflows.\nBecause of the islands' latitude, on clear winter nights the northern lights can sometimes be seen in the sky, while in summer there is almost perpetual daylight, a state of affairs known locally as the \"simmer dim\". Annual bright sunshine averages 1110 hours, and overcast days are common.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSettlements.\nThere are only three settlements with a population over 500, being the town of Lerwick and the villages of Scalloway and Brae.\nFor town planning purposes, Shetland Islands Council has identified eight 'Tier 1' settlements, being areas with the greatest concentration of services and facilities. They are the three settlements in the table above, plus Aith, Baltasound, Mid Yell, Sandwick, and Symbister.\nList of inhabited islands and their populations:\nPrehistory.\nDue to the practice, dating to at least the early Neolithic, of building in stone on virtually treeless islands, Shetland is extremely rich in physical remains of the prehistoric eras and there are over 5,000 archaeological sites all told. A midden site at West Voe on the south coast of Mainland, dated to 4320\u20134030 BC, has provided the first evidence of Mesolithic human activity in Shetland. The same site provides dates for early Neolithic activity and finds at Scord of Brouster in Walls have been dated to 3400 BC. \"Shetland knives\" are stone tools that date from this period made from felsite from Northmavine.\nPottery shards found at the important site of Jarlshof also indicate that there was Neolithic activity there although the main settlement dates from the Bronze Age. This includes a smithy, a cluster of wheelhouses and a later broch. The site has provided evidence of habitation during various phases right up until Viking times. Heel-shaped cairns, are a style of chambered cairn unique to Shetland, with a particularly large example in Vementry.\nNumerous brochs were erected during the Iron Age. In addition to Mousa there are significant ruins at Clickimin, Culswick, Old Scatness and West Burrafirth, although their origin and purpose is a matter of some controversy. The later Iron Age inhabitants of the Northern Isles were probably Pictish, although the historical record is sparse. Hunter (2000) states in relation to King Bridei I of the Picts in the sixth century AD: \"As for Shetland, Orkney, Skye and the Western Isles, their inhabitants, most of whom appear to have been Pictish in culture and speech at this time, are likely to have regarded Bridei as a fairly distant presence\". In 2011, the collective site, \"The Crucible of Iron Age Shetland\", including Broch of Mousa, Old Scatness and Jarlshof, joined the UKs \"Tentative List\" of World Heritage Sites.\nHistory.\nScandinavian colonisation.\nThe expanding population of Scandinavia led to a shortage of available resources and arable land there and led to a period of Viking expansion, so the Norse gradually shifted their attention from plundering to invasion. Shetland was colonised during the late 8th and 9th centuries, the fate of the existing indigenous Pictish population being uncertain. Modern Shetlanders still retain the Norse DNA with many family trees showing the Norse patronymic system (-sson/son, -dottir/daughter). Modern DNA studies such as the Viking Health Study are severely flawed as they account for only a tiny fraction of the population.\nVikings used the islands as a base for pirate expeditions to Norway and the coasts of mainland Scotland. In response, Norwegian king Harald H\u00e5rfagre (\"Harald Fair Hair\") annexed the Northern Isles (comprising Orkney and Shetland) in 875. Rognvald Eysteinsson received the Earldom of Orkney, which then included Shetland, from Harald as reparation for the death of his son in battle in Scotland, and then passed the earldom on to his brother Sigurd the Mighty. Sigurd went on to conquer further territory; by the time of his death in 892, the earldom of Orkney stretched from Shetland down to Caithness and Sutherland on mainland Britain.\nThe islands converted to Christianity in the late 10th century. King Olaf I Tryggvason summoned the \"jarl\" Sigurd the Stout during a visit to Orkney and said, \"I order you and all your subjects to be baptised. If you refuse, I'll have you killed on the spot and I swear I will ravage every island with fire and steel\". Unsurprisingly, Sigurd agreed, and the islands became Christian at a stroke.\nThe Scottish crown claimed the overlordship of the Caithness and Sutherland area from Norway in 1098. The jarls thereafter owed allegiance to the Scottish crown for their territory on mainland Britain, which they held as the Mormaer of Caithness, but owed allegiance to the Norwegian crown for Orkney and Shetland.\nIn 1194, when Harald Maddadsson was Earl of Orkney, a rebellion broke out against King Sverre Sigurdsson of Norway. The Eyjarskeggjar (\"Island Beards\") sailed for Norway but were beaten in the Battle of Florv\u00e5g near Bergen. After his victory, King Sverre placed Shetland under direct Norwegian rule in 1195 as the 'Lordship of Shetland', removing it from the earldom of Orkney.\nIncreased Scottish interest.\nFrom the mid-13th century onwards Scottish monarchs increasingly sought to take control of the islands surrounding their seas. The process was begun in earnest by Alexander II and was continued by his successor Alexander III. This strategy eventually led to an invasion of Scotland by Haakon IV Haakonsson, King of Norway. His fleet assembled in Bressay Sound before sailing for Scotland. After the stalemate of the Battle of Largs, Haakon retreated to Orkney, where he died in December 1263, entertained on his deathbed by recitations of the sagas. His death halted any further Norwegian expansion in Scotland and following this ill-fated expedition, the Hebrides and Mann were yielded to the Kingdom of Scotland as a result of the 1266 Treaty of Perth, although the Scots recognised continuing Norwegian sovereignty over Orkney and Shetland.\nAbsorption by Scotland.\nIn the 14th century, Orkney and Shetland remained Norwegian possessions, but Scottish influence was growing. Jon Haraldsson, who was murdered in Thurso in 1231, was the last of an unbroken line of Norse jarls, and thereafter the earls were Scots noblemen of the houses of Angus and St Clair. On the death of Haakon VI in 1380, Norway formed a political union with Denmark, after which the interest of the royal house in the islands declined. In 1469, both Orkney and Shetland was pledged by Christian I, in his capacity as King of Norway, as security against the payment of the dowry of his daughter Margaret, betrothed to James III of Scotland. As the money was never paid, the connection with the Crown of Scotland became permanent. In 1470, William Sinclair, 1st Earl of Caithness, ceded his title to James III, and the following year the Northern Isles were directly absorbed by the Crown of Scotland, an action confirmed by the Parliament of Scotland in 1472. Nonetheless, Shetland's connection with Norway has proved to be enduring.\nFrom the early 15th century onward Shetlanders sold their goods through the Hanseatic League of German merchantmen. The Hansa would buy shiploads of salted fish, wool and butter, and import salt, cloth, beer and other goods. The late 16th century and early 17th century were dominated by the influence of the despotic Robert Stewart, Earl of Orkney, who was granted the islands by his half-sister Mary Queen of Scots, and his son Patrick. The latter commenced the building of Scalloway Castle, but after his imprisonment in 1609, the Crown annexed Orkney and Shetland again until 1643, when Charles I granted them to William Douglas, 7th Earl of Morton. These rights were held on and off by the Mortons until 1766, when they were sold by James Douglas, 14th Earl of Morton to Laurence Dundas.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nThe trade with the North German towns lasted until the Act of Union 1707, after which high salt duties prevented the German merchants from trading with Shetland. Shetland then went into an economic depression, as the local traders were not as skilled in trading salted fish. However, some local merchant-lairds took up where the German merchants had left off, and fitted out their own ships to export fish from Shetland to the Continent. For the independent farmers of Shetland this had negative consequences, as they now had to fish for these merchant-lairds.\nPopulation increased to a maximum of 31,670 in 1861. However, British rule came at a price for many ordinary people as well as traders. The Shetlanders' nautical skills were sought by the Royal Navy. Some 3,000 served during the Napoleonic Wars from 1800 to 1815 and press gangs were rife. During this period 120 men were taken from Fetlar alone, and only 20 of them returned home. By the late 19th century 90% of all Shetland was owned by just 32 people, and between 1861 and 1881 more than 8,000 Shetlanders emigrated. With the passing of the Crofters' Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886 the Liberal prime minister William Gladstone emancipated crofters from the rule of the landlords. The Act enabled those who had effectively been landowners' serfs to become owner-occupiers of their own small farms. By this time fishermen from Holland, who had traditionally gathered each year off the coast of Shetland to fish for herring, triggered an industry in the islands that boomed from around 1880 until the 1920s when stocks of the fish began to dwindle. The production peaked in 1905 at more than a million barrels, of which 708,000 were exported.\n20th century.\nDuring World War I, many Shetlanders served in the Gordon Highlanders, a further 3,000 served in the Merchant Navy, and more than 1,500 in a special local naval reserve. The 10th Cruiser Squadron was stationed at Swarbacks Minn (the stretch of water to the south of Muckle Roe), and during a single year from March 1917 more than 4,500 ships sailed from Lerwick as part of an escorted convoy system. In total, Shetland lost more than 500 men, a higher proportion than any other part of Britain, and there were further waves of emigration in the 1920s and 1930s.\nDuring World War II, a Norwegian naval unit nicknamed the \"Shetland bus\" was established by the Special Operations Executive in the autumn of 1940 with a base first at Lunna and later in Scalloway to conduct operations around the coast of Norway. About 30 fishing vessels used by Norwegian refugees were gathered and the Shetland Bus conducted covert operations, carrying intelligence agents, refugees, instructors for the resistance, and military supplies. It made over 200 trips across the sea, and Leif Larsen, the most highly decorated allied naval officer of the war, made 52 of them. Several RAF airfields and sites were also established at Sullom Voe and several lighthouses suffered enemy air attacks.\nOil reserves discovered in the later 20th century in the seas both east and west of Shetland have provided a much-needed alternative source of income for the islands. The East Shetland Basin is one of Europe's prolific petroleum provinces. As a result of the oil revenue and the cultural links with Norway, a small Home Rule movement developed briefly to recast the constitutional position of Shetland. It saw as its models the Isle of Man, as well as Shetland's closest neighbour, the Faroe Islands, an autonomous dependency of Denmark.\nThe population stood at 17,814 in 1961.\nEconomy.\nToday, the main revenue producers in Shetland are agriculture, aquaculture, fishing, renewable energy, the petroleum industry (crude oil and natural gas production), the creative industries and tourism. Unst also has a rocket launch site called SaxaVord Spaceport (previously known as Shetland Space Centre). A February 2021 news item indicated that a rocket manufacturer from Germany, HyImpulse Technologies, planned to launch spacecraft powered by hydrogen from the Spaceport, starting in 2023. During the previous month, the Space Centre had filed plans with Council for a \"satellite launch facility and associated infrastructure\".\nAs of February 2021, information on the Promote Shetland Web site indicated that \"Shetland is less reliant on tourism than many Scottish islands\" and that oil was an important sector of the economy. The \"process of gradually transitioning from oil to clean renewable energy ... production of clean hydrogen\" was also emphasized. Fishing remained the primary sector and was expected to grow.\nFishing.\nFishing is central to the islands' economy today, with the total catch being in 2009, valued at over \u00a373.2 million. Atlantic mackerel makes up more than half of the catch in Shetland by weight and value, and there are significant landings of haddock, cod, herring, whiting, monkfish and shellfish.\nA report published in October 2020 was optimistic about the future of this sector in: \"With new fish markets in Lerwick and Scalloway, and plans to expand its aquaculture offerings in Yell, Shetland is preparing for more growth in its biggest industry\".\nAs of February 2021, the Promote Shetland website stated that \"more fish is landed in Shetland than in England, Wales and Northern Ireland combined', that \"Shetland harvests 40,000 tonnes of salmon a year, worth \u00a3180 million\" and that \"6,500 tonnes of mussels are grown in Shetland, more than 80 per cent of the total Scottish production\".\nEnergy and fossil fuels.\nOil and gas were first landed in 1978 at Sullom Voe, which has subsequently become one of the largest terminals in Europe. Taxes from the oil have increased public sector spending on social welfare, art, sport, environmental measures and financial development. Three-quarters of the islands' workforce is employed in the service sector, and the Shetland Islands Council alone accounted for 27.9% of output in 2003. Shetland's access to oil revenues has funded the Shetland Charitable Trust, which in turn funds a wide variety of local programmes. The balance of the fund in 2011 was \u00a3217\u00a0million, i.e., about \u00a39,500 per head.\nIn January 2007, the Shetland Islands Council signed a partnership agreement with Scottish and Southern Energy for the Viking Wind Farm, a 200-turbine wind farm and subsea cable. This renewable energy project would produce about 600 megawatts and contribute about \u00a320\u00a0million to the Shetland economy per year. The plan met with significant opposition within the islands, primarily resulting from the anticipated visual impact of the development. However, in August 2024 the completion of the first part of the project saw Shetland connected to the mainland National Grid for the first time via a 600 MW HVDC link.\nThe PURE project in Unst is a research centre which uses a combination of wind power and fuel cells to create a wind-hydrogen system. The project is run by the Unst Partnership, the local community's development trust.\nA status report on hydrogen production in Shetland, published in September 2020, stated that Shetland Islands Council (SIC) had \"joined a number of organisations and projects to drive forward plans to establish hydrogen as a future energy source for the isles and beyond\". For example, it was a member of the Scottish Hydrogen Fuel Cell Association (SHFCA). The ORION project, previously named the Shetland Energy Hub, was underway; the plan was to create an energy hub that would use clean electricity in the development of \"new technologies such as blue and green hydrogen generation\".\nIn December 2020 the Scottish government released a hydrogen policy statement with plans for incorporating both blue and green hydrogen for use in heating, transportation and industry. The government also planned an investment of \u00a3100\u00a0million in the hydrogen sector \"for the \u00a3180 million Emerging Energy Technologies Fund\". Shetland Islands Council planned to obtain further specifics about the availability of funding. The government had already agreed that the production of \"green\" hydrogen from wind power near Sullom Voe Terminal was a valid plan. A December 2020 report stated that \"the extensive terminal could also be used for direct refuelling of hydrogen-powered ships\" and suggested that the fourth jetty at Sullom Voe \"could be suitable for ammonia export\".\nFarming and textiles.\nFarming is mostly concerned with the raising of Shetland sheep, known for their unusually fine wool. Knitwear is important both to the economy and culture of Shetland, and the Fair Isle design is well known. However, the industry faces challenges due to plagiarism of the word \"Shetland\" by manufacturers operating elsewhere; a certification trademark, \"The Shetland Lady\", has been registered.\nCrofting, the farming of small plots of land on a legally restricted tenancy basis, is still practised and is viewed as a key Shetland tradition as well as an important source of income. Crops raised include oats and barley; however, the cold, windswept islands make for a harsh environment for most plants.\nMedia.\nTelevision signals in Shetland are received from the Bressay TV transmitter. Shetland is served by a weekly local newspaper, \"The Shetland Times\" and the online \"Shetland News\" with radio service being provided by BBC Radio Shetland and the commercial radio station SIBC.\nTourism.\nShetland is a popular destination for cruise ships, and in 2010 the Lonely Planet guide named Shetland as the sixth best region in the world for tourists seeking unspoilt destinations. The islands were described as \"beautiful and rewarding\" and the Shetlanders as \"a fiercely independent and self-reliant bunch\". Overall visitor expenditure was \u00a316.4 million in 2006, in which year just under 26,000 cruise liner passengers arrived at Lerwick Harbour. This business has grown substantially with 109 cruise ships booked in for 2019, representing over 107,000 passenger visits. In 2009, the most popular visitor attractions were the Shetland Museum, the RSPB reserve at Sumburgh Head, Bonhoga Gallery at Weisdale Mill and Jarlshof. Geopark Shetland (now Shetland UNESCO Global Geopark) was established by the Amenity Trust in 2009 to boost sustainable tourism to the islands.\nAccording to the Promote Shetland organisation's website, tourism increased \"by \u00a312.6 million between 2017 and 2019 with more than half of visitors giving their trip a perfect rating\".\nAn October 2018 report stated that 91,000 passengers from cruise ships arrived that year (a record high), an increase over the 70,000 in 2017. There was a drop in 2019 to \"over 76,000 cruise ship passengers\".\nEffect of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nTourism dropped significantly in 2020 (and into 2021) due to restrictions necessitated by the COVID-19 pandemic and the major decline in the number of cruise ships that continued to operate worldwide.\nAs of early February 2021, the Promote Shetland website was still stating this information: \"At present, nobody should travel to Shetland from a Level 3 or Level 4 local authority area in Scotland, unless it's for essential purposes\". That page reiterated the government recommendation \"that people avoid any unnecessary travel between Scotland and England, Wales, or Northern Ireland\".\nA September 2020 report stated that \"The Highlands and Islands region has been disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic to date, when compared to Scotland and the UK as a whole\". The tourism industry required short-term support for \"business survival and recovery\" and that was expected to continue as the sector was \"severely impacted for as long as physical distancing and travel restrictions\" remained in place. As of 31 December 2020, the usage of ferries and buses was restricted to those travelling for essential purposes. The Island Equivalent scheme was introduced in early 2021 by the Scottish government to financially assist hospitality and retail businesses \"affected by Level 3 coronavirus restrictions\". Previous schemes in 2020 included the Strategic Framework Business Fund and the Coronavirus Business Support Fund.\nTransport.\nTransport between islands is primarily by ferry, and Shetland Islands Council operates various inter-island services. Shetland is also served by a domestic connection from Lerwick to Aberdeen on mainland Scotland. This service, which takes about 12 hours, is operated by NorthLink Ferries. Some services also call at Kirkwall, Orkney, which increases the journey time between Aberdeen and Lerwick by 2 hours. There are plans for road tunnels to some of the islands, especially Bressay and Whalsay; however, it is hard to convince the mainland government to finance them.\nSumburgh Airport, the main airport in Shetland, is located close to Sumburgh Head, south of Lerwick. Loganair operates flights to other parts of Scotland up to ten times a day, the destinations being Kirkwall, Aberdeen, Inverness, Glasgow and Edinburgh. Lerwick/Tingwall Airport is located west of Lerwick. Operated by Directflight in partnership with Shetland Islands Council, it is devoted to inter-island flights from the Shetland Mainland to Fair Isle and Foula.\nPublic bus services are operated in Mainland, Trondra, Burra, Unst and Yell, with scheduled dial-a-ride services available in Bressay and Fetlar. Buses also connect with ferries leading to Foula, Papa Stour, and Whalsay.\nGiven that the archipelago is exposed to wind and tide, there are numerous sites of wrecked ships. Lighthouses are sited as an aid to navigation at various locations.\nGovernance.\nThe local authority is the Shetland Islands Council, based in Lerwick. It meets at the former St Ringan's Church and has its main offices at 8 North Ness, overlooking the harbour.\nAdministrative history.\nOn its absorption into Scotland in 1472, the landholdings and jurisdictions of the old lordship of Shetland passed to the Scottish crown. The separate earldom of Orkney was absorbed into Scotland at the same time. More typically Scottish forms of administration were gradually introduced to the Northern Isles. The position of Sheriff of Orkney and Shetland was created in 1541. Shetland and Orkney retained their own legal systems until 1612, when the general laws of Scotland were applied.\nCommissioners of Supply were established in 1667 for each shire across Scotland. Unusually, despite being one shire, Shetland and Orkney were given separate bodies of commissioners. More local government functions were gradually given to the commissioners over time. At a court case in 1829, the Court of Session declined to rule on whether Shetland and Orkney were one county or two. They operated as one county for the purposes of the administration of justice, lieutenancy, and parliamentary constituencies, but operated as two counties for local government functions.\nElected county councils were created in 1890 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889, taking most of the functions of the commissioners (which were eventually abolished in 1930). The 1889 Act also directed that Shetland and Orkney were to be separate counties (with the act using the then-prevalent spelling of 'Zetland' for Shetland). Zetland County Council held its first meeting on 22 May 1890 at the County Buildings, Lerwick, which had been built in 1875 and served as Shetland's main courthouse and also served as the meeting place for the commissioners of supply.\nLocal government was reformed in 1975 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which replaced Scotland's counties, burghs and landward districts. In most of Scotland a two-tier structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts was used, but a single-tier structure of island areas was used for Shetland, Orkney and the Western Isles. Further local government reform in 1996 introduced single-tier council areas across all of Scotland. The councils of the three island areas created in 1975 continued to provide the same services after 1996, but their areas were re-designated as council areas.\nParishes and communities.\nParishes existed from medieval times. From 1845 to 1894 they had parish boards and from 1894 to 1930 they had parish councils. They have had no administrative functions since 1930, but continue to be used for the presentation of statistics.\nShetland's civil parishes are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunity councils.\nCommunity councils were created in 1975 as part of the wider reforms that year. They have no statutory powers, but serve as a representative body for their communities. Shetland Islands Council designates community council areas, but a community council is only formed if there is sufficient interest from the residents. Shetland comprises the following communities, all of which have community councils operating as at 2024:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nAs of early 2021, Shetland had 22 primary schools, five junior high schools, and two high schools: Anderson High School and Brae High School. Shetland College UHI is a partner of the University of the Highlands and Islands (UHI). UHI's Centre for Rural Creativity partners with Shetland Arts Development Agency to provide courses on film, music and media up to Masters level at Mareel. The North Atlantic Fisheries College (NAFC) also operates in partnership with UHI offering \"a range of training courses relevant to the maritime industries\".\nSport.\nThe Shetland Football Association oversees two divisions \u2013 a Premier League and a Reserve League \u2013 which are affiliated with the Scottish Amateur Football Association.\nChurches and religion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Reformation reached the archipelago in 1560. This was an apparently peaceful transition and there is little evidence of religious intolerance in Shetland's recorded history. In the 2011 census, Shetland registered a higher proportion of people with no religion than the Scottish average. Nevertheless, the Methodist Church has a relatively high membership in Shetland, which is a District of the Methodist Church (with the rest of Scotland comprising a separate District). The Church of Scotland had a Presbytery of Shetland that includes St. Columba's Church in Lerwick. \nOn 1 June 2020 the Presbytery of Shetland merged with the Presbytery of Aberdeen becoming the Presbytery of Aberdeen and Shetland. All 13 parishes in Shetland have been merged into one.\nPolitics.\nShetland is represented in the House of Commons as part of the Orkney and Shetland constituency, which elects one Member of Parliament (MP). As of May 2023, and since 2001, the MP is Alistair Carmichael, a Liberal Democrat. This seat has been held by the Liberal Democrats or their predecessors the Liberal Party since 1950, longer than any other seat in the United Kingdom.\nIn the Scottish Parliament the Shetland constituency elects one Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) by the first past the post system. Tavish Scott of the Scottish Liberal Democrats had held the seat since the creation of the Scottish Parliament in 1999. Beatrice Wishart MSP, also of the Scottish Liberal Democrats, was elected to replace Tavish Scott in August 2019. Shetland is within the Highlands and Islands electoral region.\nThe political composition of the Shetland Islands Council is 21 Independents and 1 Scottish National Party.\nThe Wir Shetland movement was set up in 2015 to campaign for greater autonomy. In September 2020, the Shetland Islands Council voted 18\u20132 to explore replacing the council with a new system of government which controls a fairer share of the islands revenue streams and has a greater influence over their own affairs, which could include very lucrative oil fields and fishing waters.\nIn 2022, as part of the Levelling Up White Paper, an \"Island Forum\" was proposed, which would allow local policymakers and residents in Shetland to work alongside their counterparts in Orkney, the Western Isles, Anglesey and the Isle of Wight on common issues, such as broadband connectivity, and provide a platform for them to communicate directly with the government on the challenges island communities face in terms of levelling up.\nLocal culture and the arts.\nAfter the islands were officially transferred from Norway to Scotland in 1472, several Scots families from the Scottish Lowlands emigrated to Shetland in the 16th and 17th centuries. Studies of the genetic makeup of the islands' population, however, indicate that Shetlanders are just under half Scandinavian in origin, and sizeable amounts of Scandinavian ancestry, both patrilineal and matrilineal, have been reported in Orkney (55%) and Shetland (68%). This combination is reflected in many aspects of local life. For example, almost every place name in use can be traced back to the Vikings. \nThe Lerwick Up Helly Aa is one of several fire festivals held in Shetland annually in the middle of winter, starting on the last Tuesday of January. The festival is just over 100 years old in its present, highly organised form. Originally held to break up the long nights of winter and mark the end of Yule, the festival has become one celebrating the isles' heritage and includes a procession of men dressed as Vikings and the burning of a replica longship.\nShetland also competes in the biennial International Island Games, which it hosted in 2005.\nThe cuisine of Shetland is based on locally produced lamb, beef and seafood, some of it organic. The real ale-producing Valhalla Brewery is the most northerly in Britain. The Shetland Black is a variety of blue potato with a dark skin and indigo-coloured flesh markings.\nLanguage.\nThe Norn language was a form of Old Norse spoken in the Northern Isles, and continued to be spoken until the 18th century. It was gradually replaced in Shetland by an insular dialect of Scots, known as Shetlandic, which is in turn being replaced by Scottish English. Although Norn was spoken for hundreds of years, it is now extinct and few written sources remain, although influences remain in the Insular Scots dialects. The Shetland dialect is used in local radio and dialect writing, and is kept alive by organisations such as Shetland Forwirds, and the Shetland Folk Society.\nThe 2022 Scottish Census reported that out of 22,406 residents aged three and over, 9,179 (41%) considered themselves able to speak or read the Scots language. \nThe 2022 Scottish Census reported that out of 22,403 residents aged three and over, 137 (0.6%) considered themselves able to speak or read Gaelic. \nMusic.\nShetland's culture and landscapes have inspired a variety of musicians, writers and film-makers. The Forty Fiddlers was formed in the 1950s to promote the traditional fiddle style, which is a vibrant part of local culture today. Notable exponents of Shetland folk music include Aly Bain, Jenna Reid, Fiddlers' Bid, and the late Tom Anderson and Peerie Willie Johnson. Thomas Fraser was a country musician who never released a commercial recording during his life, but whose work has become popular more than 20 years after his death in 1978.\nThe annual Shetland Folk Festival began in 1981 and is hosted on the first weekend of May.\nWriters.\nWalter Scott's 1822 novel \"The Pirate\" is set in \"a remote part of Shetland\", and was inspired by his 1814 visit to the islands. The name \"Jarlshof\" meaning \"Earl's Mansion\" is a coinage of his. Robert Cowie, a doctor born in Lerwick published the 1874 work entitled \nHugh MacDiarmid, the Scots poet and writer, lived in Whalsay from the mid-1930s through 1942, and wrote many poems there, including a number that directly address or reflect the Shetland environment, such as \"On A Raised Beach\", which was inspired by a visit to West Linga. The 1975 novel \"North Star\" by Hammond Innes is largely set in Shetland and Raman Mundair's 2007 book of poetry \"A Choreographer's Cartography\" offers a British Asian perspective on the landscape. The \"Shetland Quartet\" by Ann Cleeves, who previously lived in Fair Isle, is a series of crime novels set around the islands. In 2013, her novel \"Red Bones\" became the basis of BBC crime drama television series \"Shetland\".\nVagaland, who grew up in Walls, was arguably Shetland's finest poet of the 20th century. Haldane Burgess was a Shetland historian, poet, novelist, violinist, linguist and socialist, and Rhoda Bulter (1929\u20131994) is one of the best-known Shetland poets of recent times. Other 20th- and 21st-century poets and novelists include Christine De Luca, Robert Alan Jamieson who grew up in Sandness, the late Lollie Graham of Veensgarth, Stella Sutherland of Bressay, the late William J. Tait from Yell, Laureen Johnson, and Roseanne Watt.\nThere is one monthly magazine in production: \"Shetland\". The quarterly \"The New Shetlander\", founded in 1947, is said to be Scotland's longest-running literary magazine. For much of the later 20th century, it was the major vehicle for the work of local writers \u2013 and of others, including early work by George Mackay Brown.\nFilms and television.\nMichael Powell made \"The Edge of the World\" in 1937, a dramatisation based on the true story of the evacuation of the last 36 inhabitants of the remote island of St Kilda in 1930. Other films on or about Shetland include \"A Crofter's Life in Shetland\" (1932), \"A Shetland Lyric\" (1934), and \"It's Nice Up North\" (2006), a comedy documentary by Graham Fellows. The Screenplay film festival takes place annually in Mareel, a cinema, music and education venue.\nThe BBC One television series \"Shetland\", a crime drama, is set in the islands and is based on the book series by Ann Cleeves. The programme is filmed partly in Shetland and partly on the Scottish mainland.\nWildlife.\nShetland has three national nature reserves, at the seabird colonies of Hermaness and Noss, and at Keen of Hamar to preserve the serpentine flora. There are a further 81 SSSIs, which cover 66% or more of the land surfaces of Fair Isle, Papa Stour, Fetlar, Noss, and Foula. Mainland has 45 separate sites.\nFlora.\nThe landscape in Shetland is marked by the grazing of sheep and the harsh conditions have limited the total number of plant species to about 400. Native trees such as rowan and crab apple are only found in a few isolated places such as cliffs and loch islands. The flora is dominated by Arctic-alpine plants, wild flowers, moss and lichen. Spring squill, buck's-horn plantain, Scots lovage, roseroot and sea campion are abundant, especially in sheltered places. Shetland mouse-ear (\"Cerastium nigrescens\") is an endemic flowering plant found only in Shetland. It was first recorded in 1837 by botanist Thomas Edmondston. Although reported from two other sites in the nineteenth century, it currently grows only on two serpentine hills in the island of Unst. The nationally scarce oysterplant is found in several islands and the British Red Listed bryophyte \"Thamnobryum alopecurum\" has also been recorded. Listed marine algae include: \"Polysiphonia fibrillosa\" (Dillwyn) Sprengel and \"Polysiphonia atlantica\" Kapraun and J.Norris, \"Polysiphonia brodiaei\" (Dillwyn) Sprengel, \"Polysiphonia elongata\" (Hudson) Sprengel, \"Polysiphonia elongella\", Harvey. The Shetland Monkeyflower is unique to Shetland and is a mutation of the Monkeyflower \"(mimulus guttatus\") introduced to Shetland in the 19th century.\nFauna.\nShetland has numerous seabird colonies. Birds found in the islands include Atlantic puffin, storm-petrel, red-throated diver, northern gannet and great skua (locally called \"bonxie\"). Numerous rarities have also been recorded including black-browed albatross and snow goose. A single pair of snowy owls bred in Fetlar from 1967 to 1975. The Shetland wren, Fair Isle wren, and Shetland starling are subspecies endemic to Shetland. There are populations of various birds such as curlew, lapwing, snipe and golden plover.\nAn early ornithologist who wrote about the wealth of birdlife in Shetland was Edmund Selous (1857\u20131934) in his book \"The Bird Watcher in the Shetlands\" (1905).\nThe geographical isolation and recent glacial history of Shetland have resulted in a depleted mammalian fauna and the brown rat and house mouse are two of only three species of rodent present in the islands. The Shetland field mouse is the third and the archipelago's fourth endemic subspecies, of which there are three varieties in Yell, Foula, and Fair Isle. They are variants of \"Apodemus sylvaticus\" and archaeological evidence suggests that this species was present during the Middle Iron Age (around 200 BC to 400 CE). It is possible that \"Apodemus\" was introduced from Orkney where a population has existed since at the least the Bronze Age.\nDomesticated animals.\nThere is a variety of indigenous breeds, of which the diminutive Shetland pony is probably the best known, as well as being an important part of the Shetland farming tradition. The first written record of the pony was in 1603 in the Court Books of Shetland and, for its size, it is the strongest of all the horse breeds. Others are the Shetland Sheepdog or \"Sheltie\", the endangered Shetland cattle and Shetland goose and the Shetland sheep which is believed to have originated prior to 1000 AD. The Grice was a breed of semi-domesticated pig that had a habit of attacking lambs. It became extinct sometime between the middle of the nineteenth century and the 1930s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28917", "revid": "2259739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28917", "title": "Soay, Inner Hebrides", "text": "Island of the Inner Hebrides, Highland Scotland\nSoay (, ) is an island just off the coast of Skye, in the Inner Hebrides of Scotland.\nGeography.\nSoay lies to the west of Loch Scavaig on the south-west coast of Skye, from which it is separated by Soay Sound. Unlike its neighbours Skye and R\u00f9m, Soay is low-lying, reaching at Beinn Bhreac. The dumb-bell shaped island is virtually cut in half by inlets that form Soay Harbour (north) and the main bay, Camas nan Gall (to the south). The main settlement, Mol-chlach, is on the shore of Camas nan Gall. It is normally reached by boat from Elgol. The island is part of the Cuillin Hills National Scenic Area, one of 40 in Scotland.\nHistory.\nThe name derives from Old Norse \"Sau\u00f0a-ey\" meaning \"Sheep Island\". Camas nan Gall (G: \"Bay of Foreigners\") is probably named after the Norse invaders, after whom the Hebrides (\"Na h-Innse Gall\") are also named.\nThe population peaked at 158 in 1851, following eviction of crofters from Skye in the Highland Clearances.\nIn 1946, author Gavin Maxwell bought the island and established a factory to process shark oil from basking sharks. The enterprise was unsuccessful, lasting just three years. Maxwell wrote about it in his book \"Harpoon at a Venture\". After the failure of the business the island was sold on to Maxwell's business partner's wife (Jeanne Geddes), Tex Geddes. The island had the first solar-powered telephone exchange in the world.\nPreviously mainly Scottish Gaelic-speaking, most of the population was evacuated, at their request, to Mull on 20 June 1953 due to the poor ferry schedule in the winter when it was frequently cancelled due to bad weather , since then the island has been sparsely populated. In 2001 the population was 7. By 2003 this had dwindled to 2 and the usually resident population at the 2011 and 2022 censuses was three.\nStamps.\nLocal stamps were issued for Soay between 1965 and 1967, all on the Europa theme, some being overprinted to commemorate Sir Winston Churchill. As the stamps were produced without the owner's permission, they are regarded as bogus.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28918", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28918", "title": "Storytelling game", "text": "Type of gameA storytelling game is a game where multiple players collaborate on telling a story. Some games primarily feature spoken storytelling, while others primarily feature collaborative writing. In some storytelling games, such as many tabletop role-playing games, each player represents one or more characters in the developing story. Others involve more third-person narrative.\nCollaborative writing games.\nCollaborative fiction is a form of storytelling which uses collaborative writing as the primary medium. A group of authors share creative control of a story. Exquisite Corpse, a Surrealist parlour game, is an example of a collaborative writing game. The parlour game Consequences is similar.\nStorytelling card games.\nIn storytelling card games, players use cards containing narrative prompts or plot details to tell a collaborative story. Examples include \"Once Upon a Time\" and \"For the Queen\".\nTabletop role-playing games.\nStorytelling TTRPGs take various forms. Some require one participant (a gamemaster or narrator) to describe the setting and take supporting character roles, while others distribute this function among multiple players. White Wolf Game Studio's Storyteller System, which is used in World of Darkness role-playing games such as \"\", is a well-known TTRPG described as a \"storytelling game.\" These use a narrator. Other storytelling TTRPGs distribute narrative authority equally among all players. Examples include \"The Quiet Year\", \"Fall of Magic\", and \"Companions' Tale\".\nIn contrast to improvisational theatre and live action role-playing games, TTRPG players describe the actions of their characters rather than acting them out, except during dialogue or, in some games, monologue.\nHistory of storytelling TTRPGs.\n\"Matrix Game\" (c. 1988) by Chris Engle was an early collaborative storytelling game not based in simulation. In this system, a referee decides the likeliness of the facts proposed by the players, and events happen or not according to a dice roll. Players can propose counter-arguments that are resolved in a dice rolling contest. A conflict round can follow to resolve any inconsistencies or further detail new plot points. \nIn 1999, game designer Ian Millington's \"Ergo\" offered a collaborative role-playing system. It was based on the rules of the Fudge universal role-playing system, but eliminated the need for a gamemaster, distributing the responsibility for the game and story equally among all players and undoing the equivalence between player and character. \nThe coin system in Universalis (2002) relies less on randomness and more on collaboration between players.\nStarting in the mid-00s, storytelling TTRPGs based upon historical events began to emerge in indie role-playing game design communities. Examples include \"Grey Ranks\" (2007) by Jason Morningstar, which takes place during the 1944 Warsaw Uprising, and \"Montsegur 1244\" (2008) by Frederik Jensen, in which players tell a collaborative story about the Cathars."}
{"id": "28922", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28922", "title": "Scorpion", "text": "Predatory order of arachnids\nScorpions (order Scorpiones) are predatory arachnids with eight legs, a pair of grasping pincers and a narrow, segmented tail, often carried in a characteristic forward curve over the back and always ending with a stinger. The evolutionary history of scorpions goes back 435 million years. They mainly live in deserts but have adapted to a wide range of environmental conditions, and can be found on all continents except Antarctica. There are over 2,500 described species, with 22 extant (living) families recognized to date. Their taxonomy is being revised to account for 21st-century genomic studies.\nScorpions primarily prey on insects and other invertebrates, but some species hunt vertebrates. They use their pincers to restrain and kill prey, or to prevent their own predation. The venomous sting is used for offense and defense. During courtship, the male and female grasp each other's pincers and dance while the male tries to move the female onto its sperm packet. All known species give live birth and the female cares for the young as their exoskeletons harden, transporting them on its back. The exoskeleton contains fluorescent chemicals and glows under ultraviolet light.\nThe vast majority of species do not seriously threaten humans, and healthy adults usually do not need medical treatment after a sting. About 25 species (fewer than one percent) have venom capable of killing a human, which happens frequently in the parts of the world where they live, primarily where access to medical treatment is unlikely.\nScorpions appear in art, folklore, mythology, and commercial brands. Scorpion motifs are woven into kilim carpets for protection from their sting. Scorpius is the name of a constellation; the corresponding astrological sign is Scorpio. A classical myth about Scorpius tells how the giant scorpion and its enemy Orion became constellations on opposite sides of the sky.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"scorpion\" originated in Middle English between 1175 and 1225 AD from Old French ', or from Italian ', both derived from the Latin ', equivalent to ', which is the romanization of the Greek \u00a0\u2013 \"\", with no native IE etymology (cfr. Arabic \"\u0295aqrab\" 'scorpion', Proto-Germanic \"*krabb\u00f4\" 'crab').\nEvolution.\nFossil record.\nScorpion fossils have been found in many strata, including marine Silurian and estuarine Devonian deposits, coal deposits from the Carboniferous Period and in amber. Whether the early scorpions were marine or terrestrial has been debated, and while they had book lungs like modern terrestrial species, the most basal such as \"Eramoscorpius\" were originally considered as still aquatic, until it was found that \"Eramoscorpius\" had book lungs. Over 100 fossil species of scorpion have been described. The oldest found as of 2021 is \"Dolichophonus loudonensis\", which lived during the Silurian, in present-day Scotland. \"Gondwanascorpio\" from the Devonian is among the earliest-known terrestrial animals on the Gondwana supercontinent. Some Palaeozoic scorpions possessed compound eyes similar to those of eurypterids. The Triassic fossils \"Protochactas\" and \"Protobuthus\" belong to the modern clades Chactoidea and Buthoidea respectively, indicating that the crown group of modern scorpions had emerged by this time. In 2025, a 140 million year old scorpion was discovered in Jordanian amber by Abbas Haddadin.\nPhylogeny.\nExternal.\nThe Scorpiones are a clade within the pulmonate Arachnida (those with book lungs). Arachnida is placed within the Chelicerata, a subphylum of Arthropoda that contains sea spiders and horseshoe crabs, alongside terrestrial animals without book lungs such as ticks and harvestmen. The extinct Eurypterida, sometimes called sea scorpions, though they were not all marine, are not scorpions; their grasping pincers were chelicerae, unlike those of scorpion which are second appendages. Scorpiones is sister to the Tetrapulmonata, a terrestrial group of pulmonates containing the spiders and whip scorpions.\nRecent studies place pseudoscorpions as the sister group of scorpions in the clade Panscorpiones, which together with Tetrapulmonata makes up the clade Arachnopulmonata.\nCladogram of current understanding of chelicerate relationships, after Sharma and Gavish-Regev (2025):\nInternal.\nThe internal phylogeny of the scorpions has been debated, but genomic analysis consistently places the Bothriuridae as sister to a clade consisting of Scorpionoidea and Chactoidea. The scorpions diversified during the Devonian and into the early Carboniferous. The main division is into the clades Buthida and Iurida. The Bothriuridae diverged starting before temperate Gondwana broke up into separate land masses, completed by the Jurassic. In 2022, the Caraboctonidae and Hadruridae were treated as superfamilies, separate clades from Iuroidea, while the Vaejovidae were similary treated as a separate clade from Chactoidea.\nTaxonomy.\nCarl Linnaeus described six species of scorpion in his genus \"Scorpio\" in 1758 and 1767; three of these are now considered valid and are called \"Scorpio maurus\", \"Androctonus australis\", and \"Euscorpius carpathicus\"; the other three are dubious names. He placed the scorpions among his \"Insecta aptera\" (wingless insects). In 1801, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck divided up the \"Insecta aptera\", creating the taxon Arachnides for spiders, scorpions, and acari (mites and ticks), though it also contained the Thysanura, Myriapoda and parasites such as lice. German arachnologist Carl Ludwig Koch created the order Scorpiones in 1837. He divided it into four families, the six-eyed scorpions \"Scorpionides\", the eight-eyed scorpions \"Buthides\", the ten-eyed scorpions \"Centrurides\", and the twelve-eyed scorpions \"Androctonides\". More recently, some twenty-two families containing over 2,500 species of scorpions have been described, with many additions and much reorganization of taxa in the 21st century. There are over 100 described taxa of fossil scorpions.\nGeographical distribution.\nScorpions are found on all continents except Antarctica. They are unusual among animal groups in that they are most diverse at the subtropics rather than the tropics, and are also less common near the poles. New Zealand, and some of the islands in Oceania, have in the past had small populations of introduced scorpions, but they were exterminated. Five colonies of \"Euscorpius flavicaudis\" have established themselves since the late 19th century in Sheerness in England at 51\u00b0N, while \"Paruroctonus boreus\" lives as far north as Red Deer, Alberta. A few species are on the IUCN Red List; \"Afrolychas braueri\" is classed as critically endangered (2012), \"Isometrus deharvengi\" as endangered (2016) and \"Chiromachus ochropus\" as vulnerable (2014). \nScorpions are usually xerocoles, primarily living in deserts, but they can be found in virtually every terrestrial habitat including high-elevation mountains, caves, and intertidal zones. They are largely absent from boreal ecosystems such as the tundra, high-altitude taiga, and mountain tops. The highest altitude reached by a scorpion is in the Andes, for \"Orobothriurus crassimanus\". As regards microhabitats, scorpions may be ground-dwelling, tree-loving, rock-loving or sand-loving. Some species, such as \"Vaejovis janssi\", are versatile and use any habitat on Socorro Island, Baja California, while others such as \"Euscorpius carpathicus\", endemic to the littoral zone of rivers in Romania, occupy specialized niches.\nMorphology.\nScorpions range in size from the \"Typhlochactas mitchelli\" of Typhlochactidae, to the \"Heterometrus swammerdami\" of Scorpionidae. The body of a scorpion is divided into two parts or tagmata: the cephalothorax or prosoma, and the abdomen or opisthosoma. The opisthosoma consists of a broad anterior portion, the mesosoma or pre-abdomen, followed by a thinner tail-like posterior, the metasoma or post-abdomen. External differences between the sexes are not obvious in most species. In some, the tail of the male is slenderer than that of the female.\nCephalothorax.\nThe cephalothorax comprises the carapace, eyes, chelicerae (mouth parts), pedipalps (which have chelae, commonly called claws or pincers) and four pairs of walking legs. Scorpions have two eyes on the top of the cephalothorax, and usually two to five pairs of eyes along the front corners of the cephalothorax. While unable to form sharp images, their central eyes are amongst the most light sensitive in the animal kingdom, especially in dim light, which makes it possible for nocturnal species to use starlight to navigate at night. The chelicerae are at the front and below the carapace. They are pincer-like and have three segments and \"teeth\". The brain of a scorpion is located in the front part of the cephalothorax, just above the esophagus. As in other arachnids, the nervous system is highly concentrated in the cephalothorax, but has a long ventral nerve cord with segmented ganglia which may be a primitive trait.\nThe pedipalp is a segmented, clawed appendage segmented into (from closest to the body outward) the coxa, trochanter, femur, patella, tibia (including the fixed claw and the manus) and tarsus (moveable claw). Unlike those of some other arachnids, the eight-segmented legs have not been altered for other purposes, though they may occasionally be used for digging, and females may use them to catch emerging young. They are covered with many proprioceptors, bristles and sensory setae. Depending on the species, the legs may have spines and spurs.\nMesosoma.\nThe mesosoma or preabdomen is the broad part of the opisthosoma. In the early stages of embryonic development the mesosoma consist of eight segments, but the first segment disappear before birth, so the mesosoma in scorpions actually consist of segments 2-8. These anterior seven somites (segments) of the opisthosoma are each covered by a hardened plate, the tergite, on the back surface. Underneath, somites 3 to 7 are armored with matching plates called sternites. The underside of somite 1 has two covering over the genital opening. Sternite 2 forms the basal plate bearing the comb-like pectines, which function as sensory organs.\nThe next four somites, 3 to 6, all possess two spiracles each. They serve as openings for the scorpion's respiratory organs, known as book lungs, and vary in shape. There are thus four pairs of book lungs; each consists of some 140 to 150 thin flaps or lamellae filled with air inside a pulmonary chamber, connected on the ventral side to an atrial chamber which opens into a spiracle. Bristles keep the lamellae from touching. A muscle opens the spiracle and widens the atrial chamber; dorsoventral muscles contract to constricts the pulmonary chamber, pushing air out, and relax to allow the chamber to refill. The 7th and last somite lacks any notable structure.\nThe mesosoma contains the heart or \"dorsal vessel\" which is the center of the scorpion's open circulatory system. The heart is continuous with a deep arterial system which spreads throughout the body. Sinuses return deoxygenated blood (hemolymph) to the heart; the blood is re-oxygenated by cardiac pores. The mesosoma also houses the reproductive system. The female gonads are three or four tubes which are aligned and have two to four transverse anastomoses connecting them. These tubes create oocytes and house developing embryos. They connect to two oviducts which connect to a single atrium leading to the genital orifice. Male gonads are two pairs of cylindrical tubes with a ladder-like configuration; they contain spermatozoa-producing cysts. Both tubes end in a spermiduct, one on the opposite sides of the mesosoma. They connect to glandular symmetrical structures called paraxial organs, which end at the genital orifice. These create two halves of the chitin-based spermatophore which merge.\nMetasoma.\nThe \"tail\" or metasoma is divded into five segments and the telson, which is not strictly a segment. The five segments are merely body rings; they lack apparent sterna or terga, and are largest farthest from the center. These segments have keels, setae and bristles which may be used for taxonomic classification. The anus is at the back of the last segment, and is encircled by four anal papillae and the anal arch. The tails of some species contain light receptors.\nThe telson includes the vesicle, which contains a symmetrical pair of venom glands. Externally it bears the curved stinger, the hypodermic aculeus, equipped with sensory hairs. Venom ducts are attached to the glands to transport the substance along the aculeus from the bulb of the gland to immediately near the tip, where each of the paired ducts has its own venom pore. An intrinsic muscle system attached to the glands pumps venom through the stinger into the intended victim. The stinger contains metalloproteins with zinc, hardening the tip. The optimal angle to launch a sting is around 30 degrees relative to the tip.\nBiology.\nScorpion are typically nocturnal or crepuscular, finding shelter during the day in burrows, cracks and bark. Many species dig an elementary shelter underneath tiny stones. Scorpions may use burrows built by other animals or dig their own; scorpion burrows vary in complexity and depth. \"Hadrurus\" species dig burrows over deep while \"Urodacus hoplurus\" digs in spirals. Digging is done using the mouth parts, claws and legs. In several species, particularly of the family Buthidae, individuals can be found in the same shelter; bark scorpions may gather in groups of up to 30 individuals. In some species, families of females and young sometimes aggregate.\nScorpions prefer areas where the temperature remains in the range of , but may survive temperatures from well below freezing to desert heat. Scorpions can withstand intense heat: \"Leiurus quinquestriatus\", \"Scorpio maurus\" and \"Hadrurus arizonensis\" can live in temperatures of if they are sufficiently hydrated. Desert species must deal with the extreme changes in temperature from sunrise to sunset or between seasons; \"Pectinibuthus birulai\" lives in a temperature range of . Scorpions that live outside deserts prefer lower temperatures. The ability to withstand the cold may be related to the increase in the sugar trehalose when the temperature drops. Some species hibernate. Scorpions have immunity to ionizing radiation and have survived nuclear tests in Algeria and Nevada.\nDesert scorpions have several adaptations for water conservation. They excrete insoluble compounds such as xanthine, guanine, and uric acid, not requiring water for their removal from the body. Guanine is the main component has it holds the greatest amount of nitrogen. A scorpion's cuticle holds in moisture via lipids and waxes from epidermal glands, and protects against ultraviolet radiation. Even a dehydrated scorpion can survive with high osmotic pressure in its blood. Desert scorpions get most of their moisture from the food they eat but some can absorb water from the sand if it is humid enough. Species that live in denser vegetation and in more moderate temperatures will drink from puddles or water accumulated on plants.\nA scorpion uses its stinger both for killing prey and defense. Some species make direct, quick strikes with their tails while others make slower, more circular strikes which can more easily return the stinger to a position where it can strike again. \"Leiurus quinquestriatus\" can whip its tail at a speed of up to in a defensive strike.\nMortality and defense.\nScorpions may be attacked by other arthropods like ants, spiders, solifugids and centipedes. Major predators include frogs, lizards, snakes, birds, and mammals. Predators adapted for hunting scorpions include the grasshopper mouse and desert long-eared bat, which are immune to their venom. In one study, scorpion remains were found in 70% of the latter's droppings. Scorpions host parasites including mites, scuttle flies, nematodes and some bacteria. The immune system of scorpions is strong enough to resist several types of bacterial infections.\nWhen threatened, a scorpion raises its claws and tail in a defensive posture. Some species stridulate to warn off predators by rubbing certain hairs, the stinger or the pectines. Certain species have a preference for using either the claws or stinger as defense, depending on the size of the appendages. A few scorpions, such as \"Parabuthus\", \"Centruroides margaritatus\", and \"Hadrurus arizonensis\", squirt venom as far as which can injure predators in the eyes. Some \"Ananteris\" species can shed parts of their tail to escape predators. The parts do not grow back, leaving them unable to sting and defecate, but they can still kill small prey and reproduce for at least eight months afterward.\nDiet and feeding.\nScorpions generally prey on insects, particularly grasshoppers, crickets, termites, beetles and wasps. They also prey on spiders, solifugids, woodlice and even small vertebrates including lizards, snakes and mammals. Species with large claws may prey on earthworms and mollusks. The majority of species are opportunistic and consume a variety of prey though some may be highly specialized; \"Isometroides vescus\" specializes on certain burrowing spiders. Prey size depends on the size of the species. Several scorpion species are sit-and-wait predators, which involves a hungry scorpion staying at or near the entrance to their burrow until prey arrives. Others actively search for prey. Scorpions detect their prey with mechanoreceptive and chemoreceptive hairs on their bodies and grab them with their claws. Small animals are killed merely with the claws, particularly by large-clawed species. Larger and more dangerous prey is given a sting.\nScorpions, like other arachnids, digest their food externally. The chelicerae are used to rip small amounts of food off the prey item and into a pre-oral cavity underneath. The digestive juices from the gut are egested onto the food, and the digested food is then sucked into the gut. Any solid indigestible matter (such as exoskeleton fragments) is collected by setae in the pre-oral cavity and ejected. The sucked-in food is pumped into the midgut by the pharynx, where it is further digested. The waste is transported through the hindgut and out of the anus. Scorpions can eat large amounts of food during one meal. They can internally store food in a specialized organ and have a very low metabolic rate which enables some to survive up to a year without eating.\nMating.\nMost scorpions reproduce sexually, with male and female individuals; species in some genera, such as \"Hottentotta\" and \"Tityus\", and the species \"Centruroides gracilis\", \"Liocheles australasiae\", and \"Ananteris coineaui\" have been reported, not necessarily reliably, to reproduce through parthenogenesis, in which unfertilized eggs develop into living embryos. Receptive females produce pheromones which are picked up by wandering males using their pectines to comb the substrate. Males begin courtship by shifting their bodies back and forth, with the legs still, a behavior known as juddering. This appears to produce ground vibrations that are picked up by the female.\nThe pair then make contact using their pedipalps, and perform a dance called the \"promenade \u00e0 deux\" (French for \"a walk for two\"). In this dance, the male and female move around while facing each other, as the male searches for a suitable place to deposit its spermatophore. The courtship ritual can involve several other behaviors such as a cheliceral kiss, in which the male and female grasp each other's mouth-parts, \"arbre droit\" (\"upright tree\") where the partners elevate their posteriors and rub their tails together, and sexual stinging, in which the male stings the female to subdue it. The dance may be minutes to hours long.\nWhen the male has located a suitably stable surface, it deposits the spermatophore and guides the female over it. This allows the spermatophore to enter the female's genital opercula, which triggers release of the sperm, thus fertilizing the female. A mating plug then forms in the female to block further matings until it gives birth. The male and female then abruptly separate. Sexual cannibalism after mating has only been reported anecdotally in scorpions.\nBirth and development.\nGestation in scorpions can last for over a year in some species. They have two types of embryonic development; apoikogenic and katoikogenic. In the apoikogenic system, which is mainly found in the Buthidae, embryos develop in yolk-rich eggs inside follicles. The katoikogenic system is documented in Hemiscorpiidae, Scorpionidae and Diplocentridae, and involves the embryos growing in a diverticulum which has a teat-like structure for them to feed through. Unlike the majority of arachnids, which are oviparous, hatching from eggs, scorpions seem to be universally viviparous, with live births; though apoikogenic species are ovoviviparous where young hatch from eggs inside the mother before being born. They are unusual among terrestrial arthropods in the amount of care a female gives to her offspring. The size of a brood varies by species, from 3 to over 100. The body size of scorpions is not correlated either with brood size or with life cycle length.\nBefore giving birth, the female raises the front of its body and positions its pedipalps and front legs under itself for the young to fall through (\"birth basket\"). Each young exit through the genital opercula, expel the embryonic membrane, if any, and climb onto the mother's back where they remain until they have gone through at least one molt. The period before the first molt is called the pro-juvenile stage; the young lack the ability to eat or sting, but have suckers on their tarsi. This period lasts 5 to 25 days, depending on the species. The brood molt for the first time simultaneously in a process that lasts 6 to 8 hours, marking the beginning of the juvenile stage.\nJuvenile stages or instars generally resemble smaller versions of adults, with pincers, hairs and stingers. They are still soft and colorless, and thus continue to ride on their mother's back for protection. As days pass, they become harder and more pigmented. They may leave their mother temporarily, returning when they sense potential danger. When fully hardened, young can hunt and kill on their own and eventually become fully independent. A scorpion goes through an average of six molts before maturing, which may not occur until it is 6 to 83 months old, depending on the species. They can reach an age of 25 years.\nFluorescence.\nScorpions glow a vibrant blue-green when exposed to certain wavelengths of ultraviolet light, such as that produced by a black light, due to fluorescent chemicals such as beta-carboline in the cuticle. Accordingly, a hand-held ultraviolet lamp has long been a standard tool for nocturnal field surveys of these animals. Fluorescence occurs as a result of sclerotization and increases in intensity with each successive instar. This fluorescence may function in detecting light.\nRelationship with humans.\nStings.\nScorpion venom serves to kill or paralyze prey rapidly, but only 25 species have venom that is deadly to humans, the most dangerous being \"Leiurus quinquestriatus\". People with allergies are especially at risk, but otherwise symptoms typically last no more than two days for non-deadly species. Deaths from lethal stings are caused by excessive autonomic activity and toxic effects on cardiovascular or neuromuscular systems. Antivenom is used to counter scorpion envenomations, along with vasodilators to treat the cardiovascular system and benzodiazepines for the neuromuscular system. Severe hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis to scorpion antivenin can occur, though rarely.&lt;ref name=\"10.4103/0972-5229.164807\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nScorpion stings are a public health problem, particularly in the tropical and subtropical regions of the Americas, North Africa, the Middle East and India. Around 1.5 million scorpion envenomations occur each year, with around 2,600 deaths. Mexico is one of the most affected countries, with the highest biodiversity of scorpions in the world, some 200,000 envenomations per year and at least 300 deaths.\nEfforts are made to prevent envenomation and to control scorpion populations. Prevention encompasses personal activities such as checking shoes and clothes before putting them on, not walking in bare feet or sandals, and filling in holes and cracks where scorpions might nest. Street lighting reduces scorpion activity. Control may involve the use of insecticides such as pyrethroids, or gathering scorpions manually with the help of ultraviolet lights. Domestic predators of scorpions, such as chickens and turkeys, can help to reduce the risk to a household.\nPotential medical use.\nScorpion venom is a mixture of neurotoxins; most of these are peptides, chains of amino acids. Many of them interfere with membrane channels that transport sodium, potassium, calcium, or chloride ions. These channels are essential for nerve conduction, muscle contraction and many other biological processes. Some of these molecules may be useful in medical research and might lead to the development of new disease treatments. Among their potential therapeutic uses are as analgesic, anti-cancer, antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, antiparasitic, bradykinin-potentiating, and immunosuppressive drugs. As of 2020, no scorpion toxin-based drug is for sale, though chlorotoxin is being trialled for use against glioma, a brain cancer.\nConsumption.\nScorpions are eaten in West Africa, Myanmar and East Asia. Fried scorpion is traditionally eaten in Shandong, China. There, scorpions can be cooked and eaten in a variety of ways, including roasting, frying, grilling, raw, or alive. The stingers are typically not removed, since heat negates the harmful effects of the venom. In Thailand, scorpions are not eaten as often as other arthropods, such as grasshoppers, but they are sometimes fried as street food. They are used in Vietnam to make snake wine (scorpion wine).\nPets.\nScorpions are often kept as pets. They are relatively simple to keep, the main requirements being a secure enclosure such as a glass terrarium with a lockable lid and the appropriate temperature and humidity for the chosen species, which typically means installing a heating mat and spraying regularly with a little water. The substrate needs to resemble that of the species' natural environment, such as peat for forest species, or lateritic sand for burrowing desert species. Scorpions in the genera \"Pandinus\" and \"Heterometrus\" are docile enough to handle. A large \"Pandinus\" may consume up to three crickets each week. Cannibalism is more common in captivity than in the wild and can be minimized by providing many small shelters within the enclosure and ensuring there is plenty of prey. The pet trade has threatened wild populations of some scorpion species, particularly \"Androctonus australis\" and \"Pandinus imperator\".\nCulture.\nThe scorpion is a culturally significant animal. One of the earliest occurrences of the scorpion in culture is its inclusion, as \"Scorpio\", in the 12 signs of the Zodiac by Babylonian astronomers during the Chaldean period.\nIn ancient Egypt, the goddess Serket, who protected the Pharaoh, was often depicted as a scorpion. In Greek mythology, Artemis or Gaia sent a giant scorpion named Scorpius to kill the hunter Orion, who had said he would kill all the world's animals. Orion and the scorpion both became constellations; as enemies they were placed on opposite sides of the world, so when one rises in the sky, the other sets.\nScorpions are mentioned in the Bible and the Talmud as symbols of danger and maliciousness. The Sanskrit medical encyclopedia, The \"Su\u015brutasa\u1e43hita\", datable to before 500 CE, contains a detailed description of thirty types of scorpion, classified according to the levels of toxicity of their stings and their colours. Treatments for scorpion-sting are described. Scorpions have also appeared as a motif in art, especially in Islamic art in the Middle East.\nA scorpion motif is often woven into Turkish kilim flatweave carpets, for protection from their sting. The scorpion is perceived both as an embodiment of evil and as a protective force such as a dervish's powers to combat evil. In Muslim folklore, the scorpion portrays human sexuality. Scorpions are used in folk medicine in South Asia, especially in antidotes for scorpion stings.\nThe fable of \"The Scorpion and the Frog\" has been interpreted as showing that vicious people cannot resist hurting others, even when it is not in their interests. More recently, the action in John Steinbeck's 1947 novella \"The Pearl\" centers on a poor pearl fisherman's attempts to save his infant son from a scorpion sting, only to lose him to human violence. Scorpions have equally appeared in western artforms including film and poetry: the surrealist filmmaker Luis Bu\u00f1uel made symbolic use of scorpions in his 1930 classic \"L'Age d'or\" (\"The Golden Age\"). A hand- or forearm-balancing asana in modern yoga as exercise with the back arched and one or both legs pointing forward over the head in the manner of the scorpion's tail is called Scorpion pose.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28923", "revid": "36320931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28923", "title": "Shriners", "text": "Masonic organization\nShriners International, formally known as the Ancient Arabic Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine (AAONMS), is an American Masonic society. Founded in 1872 in New York City, it is headquartered in Tampa, Florida, and has https://, with a global membership of nearly 1.7 million \"Shriners\". The organization is known for its colorful Middle Eastern theme, elaborate participation in parades and festivals, and the Shriners Children's network of nonprofit pediatric medical facilities.\nShriners International describes itself as a global fraternity \"based on fun, fellowship, and the Masonic principles of brotherly love, relief, and truth\". As an appendant body within Freemasonry, membership is open to men who have been raised to the degree of Master Masons in a Masonic rite; various partner organizations accept women and youth. Shriners are obliged to uphold the fraternity's mission and values, which include self-improvement, service and leadership to the community, and active involvement in social and philanthropic causes.\nShriners International is recognizable for its Middle Eastern-inspired iconography, ceremonies, and motif: Shriners wear distinctive red fezzes as their official headgear, while fraternal regalia often features camels, pyramids, the Sphinx and other ancient Egyptian and Arabian symbols. The headquarters of local chapters, formally known as Shrine Centers, are sometimes called \"Temples\" or even \"Mosques\"; most have names such as Egypt, Sahara, Morocco, and Oasis, and many are built in the Moorish Revival style. The organization is governed by the \"Imperial Divan\"\u2014referring to the traditional government councils of the Near East\u2014composed of 12 \"Imperial Officers\" who serve as a board of directors. However, Shriners International has no connection with the region nor with Islam. \nPreviously known as Shriners North America, the fraternity adopted its current name in 2010 in recognition of its increasingly global membership; as of 2024, there are Shrine Centers in Canada (since 1888), Mexico (1907), Panama (1918), Puerto Rico, the Philippines (2010), Germany (2011), Brazil (2015) and Bolivia (2018).\nNotable American Shriners include FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, actors Mel Blanc, John Wayne, Ernest Borgnine, and Roy Rogers, Supreme Court chief justice Earl Warren, General Douglas MacArthur, and presidents Gerald Ford and Harry Truman.\nHistory.\nIn 1870, there were several thousand Freemasons in Manhattan, many of whom lunched at the Knickerbocker Cottage at a special table on the second floor. There, the idea of a new fraternity for Masons, stressing fun and fellowship, was discussed. Together, Walter M. Fleming and William J. Florence established a separate fellowship to fulfill those ideals.\nWhile on tour in Marseille, Florence, an actor, was invited to a party given by an Arab diplomat. The entertainment was a musical comedy. At its conclusion, the guests became members of a secret society. Florence took notes and drawings at his initial viewing and on two other occasions, once in Algiers and once in Cairo. When he returned to New York in 1870, he showed his material to Fleming.\nFleming created the ritual, emblem and costumes. Florence and Fleming were initiated August 13, 1870, and they initiated 11 men on June 16, 1871.\nThe group adopted a Middle Eastern theme and soon established Temple, although the term Temple has now been replaced by Shrine Auditorium or Shrine Center. The first Temple established was Mecca Temple, established at the New York City Masonic Hall on September 26, 1872. Fleming was the first potentate.\nIn 1875, there were 43 Shriners in the organization. To encourage membership, the Imperial Grand Council of the Ancient Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine for North America was created at the June 6, 1876 meeting of Mecca Temple. Fleming was elected the first imperial potentate. By 1878, there were 425 members in 13 temples in eight states, and by 1888, there were 7,210 members in 48 temples in the United States and Canada. By the Imperial Session held in Washington, D.C., in 1900, there were 55,000 members and 82 Temples. \nPrince Hall Shrinedom.\nHistorically, the Shrine was open to only White men. In 1893, an African American counterpart to the Shriners movement was initiated by John G. Jones and 13 other Prince Hall masons, known as the \"Imperial Grand Council of Prince Hall Shriners, Ancient Arabic Order Nobles Mystic Shrine\" (A.A.O.N.M.S.). In 1900, the name was changed to the \"Ancient Egyptian Arabic Order Nobles Mystic Shrine of North and South America and its Jurisdiction, Incorporate\" (A.E.A.O.N.M.S).\nBeginning in 1919, there were legal conflicts between the White and African American orders, with a White only order from Texas filing a lawsuit against a local African American order for infringement of White Shriners regalia and traditions. The White order was initially successful in quashing the predominantly African American temple until the ruling was overturned in appeals in 1929; protecting the right of the African American Prince Hall Shriners to continue calling themselves Shriners; using its emblems; practicing its rituals; and fundraising nationwide.\nThe Worldwide Fraternal Shrine Family is headquartered in Memphis, Tennessee, and counts 25,000 members in 270 shrines; with its own women's auxiliary organizations. Their primary recipients of charitable donations are the Legal Defense Fund, the NAACP, the National Urban League, the UNCF, and various hospitals and universities.\nSyria Mosque.\nIn 1911, the Syria Mosque was completed in Pittsburgh and inaugurated in 1916. This 3,700-seat performance venue, originally for Shriners, later became significant as the \"birthplace of network television\". An example of Exotic Revival architecture, it was never used as a mosque but featured religious Arabic iconography and inscriptions, partly based on the Alhambra. Architect Gulzar Haider was \"fascinated\" by its design, but criticized the \"insensitive and callous misuse of another religion\u2019s artistic vocabulary and symbolic grammar,\" claiming it was part of the \"'oriental obsession' of the otherwise 'puritanical' Europeans and Americans\". \nMusicians who have performed at the Syria Mosque include Bruce Springsteen, Louis Armstrong, Bob Dylan, Pink Floyd, Jimmy Buffett, and The Beach Boys. Political event hosts included Reagan, Nixon, Truman, and Kennedy. Despite efforts to conserve the building as a historic landmark, the Syria Mosque was torn down in 1991.\nWomen's auxiliaries.\nThe Ladies Oriental Shrine of North America was founded in 1903 in Wheeling, West Virginia, and the Daughters of the Nile was founded in 1913 in Seattle, Washington. Both are for women only and they support the Shriners Hospitals and promote sociability. Membership in either organization is open to any woman 18 years of age and older who is related to a Shriner or Master Mason by birth or marriage. The latter organization has local branches called \"Temples,\" and there were ten of these in 1922. Among the famous members of the Daughters of the Nile was First Lady Florence Harding, wife of Warren G. Harding.\nGrowth.\nBy 1938 there were about 340,000 members in the United States. That year, \"Life\" published photographs of the Shriners' rites. It described the Shriners as being the first in prestige, wealth and show among secret societies, and that Shriners organizations typically include a town's most prominent citizens.\nOrganizational rebranding.\nIn 2002, following the September 11 attacks, the \"faux-Middle Eastern practices and trappings\" led Shriners to be \"mistaken for a Muslim organization, leading to harassment and vandalism\". This included threatening phone calls and harassment of Rhode Island Shriners (formerly known as Palestine Temple Shriners) driving a Shriners van to transport sick children to Shriner hospitals.By 2011, Shriners removed much of the Middle Eastern theming, both locally and within the broader organization. This was in continued response to \"the events of Sept. 11, 2001 and subsequent military conflicts\". Changes included renaming the organization from \"Ancient Arabic Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine\" to \"Shriners International;\" renaming the \"Arabic Patrol\" to \"The Patrol\" and removing the word Syria from Syria Shriners vanity plates. Despite these changes, the Illustrious Potentate of Pittsburgh's Syria Shrine chapter stated that \"pretty much all non-atheists are welcome, including Muslims\".\nMembership.\nHistorically, a Mason had to complete either the Scottish Rite or York Rite systems to be eligible for membership in the Shrine.\nIn 1991, brick-mason Michael G. Vaughan filed a lawsuit against the Oleika Shrine Temple in Lexington, Kentucky, for hazing practices to which he said he was subjected in his efforts to become a Shriner. In court, Vaughan told jurors that in June 1989, he was blindfolded and received a jolt of electricity that was applied to his bare buttocks as part of the Shriners' initiation rites. He said he was forced to walk on an electric mat that was meant to simulate the hot sands of the Sahara, and that he was knocked unconscious and received other injuries during his initiation. Vaughan said the initiation left him humiliated and embarrassed, and caused him to suffer anxiety, nightmares, and a sleep disorder. After two hours of deliberation, the jury rejected the claim.\nArchitecture.\nSome of the earliest Shrine Centers often chose a Moorish Revival style for their Temples. Architecturally notable Shriners Temples include: the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles; the former Mecca Temple, now called New York City Center and used primarily as a concert hall; Medinah Temple in Chicago; Newark Symphony Hall; the Landmark Theater (formerly The Mosque) in Richmond, Virginia; the Tripoli Shrine Temple in Milwaukee, Wisconsin; the Polly Rosenbaum Building (formerly the El Zaribah Shrine Auditorium) in Phoenix; the Helena Civic Center (Montana) (formerly the Algeria Shrine Temple); Abou Ben Adhem Shrine Mosque in Springfield, Missouri; Murat Shrine Temple (now Old National Center) in Indianapolis; the Fox Theatre in Atlanta, Georgia, which was jointly built between the Atlanta Shriners and movie mogul William Fox; and the Syria Mosque in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.\nPhilanthropy.\nShriners Hospitals for Children.\nThe Shrine's charitable arm is the Shriners Hospitals for Children, a network of 22 healthcare facilities in the United States, Mexico, and Canada.\nIn June 1920, the Imperial Council Session voted to establish a Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children to treat orthopedic injuries and conditions, diseases, burns, spinal cord injuries, and birth defects, such as cleft lip and palate, in children. The first hospital opened in 1922 in Shreveport, Louisiana. By the end of the decade 13 more hospitals were operational.\nAny child under the age of 18 can be admitted to the hospital if a doctor determines the child can be treated. There is no requirement for religion, race or relationship to a Shriner.\nUntil June 2012, all care at Shriners Hospitals was provided without charge to patients and their families. At that time, because the size of their endowment had decreased due to losses in the stock market, Shriners Hospitals started billing patients' insurance companies, but continued to offer free care to children without insurance. Shriners hospitals waive all costs insurance does not cover. Shriners Hospitals for Children is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.\nShriners Hospitals for Children are located in these cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEvents.\nShriners host the annual East\u2013West Shrine Game, a college football all-star game.\nThe Shriners originally hosted a golf tournament in association with singer/actor Justin Timberlake, called the Justin Timberlake Shriners Hospitals for Children Open, a PGA Tour golf tournament played in Las Vegas, Nevada. The relationship between Timberlake and the Shriners ended in 2012, when the Shriners reported that Timberlake was interested in being involved with the organization only when television cameras were present. In July 2012, the PGA Tour and Shriners Hospitals for Children announced a five-year title sponsorship extension, carrying the commitment to the Shriners Hospitals for Children Open through 2017. The name was changed to The Shriners Hospitals for Children Open and is played in Las Vegas, Nevada.\nMany Shrine Centers also hold a yearly Shrine Circus as a fundraiser.\nOnce a year, the fraternity meets for the Imperial Session in a North American city.\nControversies.\nIn 2008, an investigative committee established by the joint boards of the Shriners of North America fraternity and the Shriners Hospitals for Children found that Ralph Semb, chairman of the Shriners Hospitals Board of Trustees, had unilaterally tried to fire fund-raising executive Edgar McGonigal. McGonigal had declined to hire a direct-mail company indirectly linked to Gene Bracewell, the imperial treasurer of the fraternal organization. McGonigal said he did not hire the company because of its ties to a financial company that had performed poorly in previous dealings. The committee found that Semb and Bracewell had violated the organizations' conflict of interest policy and their ethics code and recommended that Semb and Bracewell be reprimanded. The report included accusations of financial improprieties within the organization, including not reporting benefits Shriners leaders received as income and knowingly filing incorrect tax forms for the hospitals. Other Shriners came forward with additional complaints, including the mixing of charitable and noncharitable assets and the disappearance of money raised for the hospitals.\nShriners International has drawn criticism from animal welfare organizations for allowing member clubs to host circuses featuring animals. Since approximately 2013, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) has staged protests during circus performances, expressing concern over the poor treatment animals receive in the care of the companies that the Shriners lease from, such as Carson &amp; Barnes. The Pittsburgh Shrine Circus stopped using animals in 2019, and the Moolah Shrine Circus in Missouri stopped using elephants in 2023.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28925", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28925", "title": "Science fiction fandom", "text": "Subculture of fans who enjoy science fiction\nScience fiction fandom or SF fandom is a community or fandom of people interested in science fiction in contact with one another based upon that interest. SF fandom has a life of its own, but not much in the way of formal organization (although formal clubs such as the Futurians (1937\u20131945) and the Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society (1934\u2013present) are recognized examples of organized fandom).\nMost often called simply \"fandom\" within the community, it can be viewed as a distinct subculture, with its own literature and jargon; marriages and other relationships among fans are common, as are multi-generational fan families.\nOrigins and history.\nScience fiction fandom started through the letter column of Hugo Gernsback's fiction magazines. Not only did fans write comments about the stories\u2014they sent their addresses, and Gernsback published them. Soon, fans were writing letters directly to each other, and meeting in person when they lived close together, or when one of them could manage a trip. In New York City, David Lasser, Gernsback's managing editor, nurtured the birth of a small local club called the Scienceers, which held its first meeting in a Harlem apartment on 11 December 1929. Almost all the members were adolescent boys. Around this time, a few other small local groups began to spring up in metropolitan areas around the United States, many of them connecting with fellow enthusiasts via the Science Correspondence Club. In May 1930 the first science-fiction fan magazine, \"The Comet\", was produced by the Chicago branch of the Science Correspondence Club under the editorship of Raymond A. Palmer (later a noted, and notorious, sf magazine editor) and Walter Dennis. In January 1932, the New York City circle, which by then included future comic-book editors Julius Schwartz and Mort Weisinger, brought out the first issue of their own publication, \"The Time Traveller\", with Forrest J Ackerman of the embryonic Los Angeles group as a contributing editor.\nIn 1934, Gernsback established a correspondence club for fans called the Science Fiction League, the first fannish organization. Local groups across the nation could join by filling out an application. A number of clubs came into being around this time. LASFS (the Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society) was founded at this time as a local branch of the SFL, while several competing local branches sprang up in New York City and immediately began feuding among themselves.\nIn 1935, PSFS (the Philadelphia Science Fiction Society, 1935\u2013present) was formed. The next year, half a dozen fans from NYC came to Philadelphia to meet with the PSFS members, as the first Philadelphia Science Fiction Conference, which some claim as the world's first science fiction convention.\nSoon after the fans started to communicate directly with each other came the creation of science fiction fanzines. These amateur publications might or might not discuss science fiction and were generally traded rather than sold. They ranged from the utilitarian or inept to professional-quality printing and editing. In recent years, Usenet newsgroups such as rec.arts.sf.fandom, websites and blogs have somewhat supplanted printed fanzines as an outlet for expression in fandom, though many popular fanzines continue to be published. Science-fiction fans have been among the first users of computers, email, personal computers and the Internet.\nMany professional science fiction authors started their interest in science fiction as fans, and some still publish their own fanzines or contribute to those published by others.\nA widely regarded (though by no means error-free) history of fandom in the 1930s can be found in Sam Moskowitz's \"The Immortal Storm: A History of Science Fiction Fandom\" (Hyperion Press, 1988, ; original edition The Atlanta Science Fiction Organization Press, Atlanta, Georgia 1954). Moskowitz was himself involved in some of the incidents chronicled and has his own point of view, which has often been criticized.\nBy country.\nSweden.\nOrganized fandom in Sweden (\"Sverifandom\") emerged during the early 1950s. The first Swedish science fiction fanzine was started in the early 1950s. The oldest still existing club, Club Cosmos in Gothenburg, was formed in 1954, and the first Swedish science-fiction convention, LunCon, was held in Lund in 1956.\nToday, there are a number of science fiction clubs in the country, including Scandinavian Society for Science Fiction (whose club fanzine, \"Science Fiction Forum\", was once edited by Stieg Larsson, a board member and one-time chairman thereof), Link\u00f6pings Science Fiction-F\u00f6rening and Sigma Terra Corps. Between one and four science-fiction conventions are held each year in Sweden, among them Swecon, the annual national Swedish con. An annual prize is awarded to someone that has contributed to the national fandom by the Alvar Appeltoffts Memorial Prize Fund.\nUK.\nSF fandom in the UK has close ties with that in the US. In the UK there are multiple conventions. The largest regular convention for literary SF (book-focused) fandom is the British National convention or Eastercon. Strangely enough this is held over the Easter weekend. Committee membership and location changes year-to-year. The license to use the Eastercon name for a year is awarded by votes of the business meeting of the Eastercon two years previously. There are a variety of other local or intermittent conventions run by fandom, such as the series of Mexicons that ran from 1984 to 1994.\nThere are substantially larger events run by UK media fandom and commercial organisations also run \"gate shows\" (for-profit operations with paid staff.) The UK has also hosted the Worldcon several times, most recently in 2014. News of UK events appears in the fanzine \"Ansible\" produced by David Langford each month.\nItaly.\nThe beginning of an Italian science fiction fandom can be located between the late 1950s and early 1960s, when magazines such as \"Oltre il Cielo\" and \"Futuro\" started to publish readers\u2019 letters and promote correspondences and the setting-up of clubs in various cities. Among the first fanzines, \"Futuria Fantasia\" was cyclostyled in Milan in 1963 by Luigi Cozzi (later to become a filmmaker), its title paid homage to Ray Bradbury's fanzine by the same name; \"L\u2019Aspidistra\", edited by Riccardo Leveghi in Trento starting in 1965 featured contributions by Gianfranco de Turris, Gian Luigi Staffilano, and Sebastiano Fusco, future editors of professional magazines and book series; also Luigi Naviglio, editor in 1965 of the fanzine \"Nuovi Orizzonti\", was soon to become a writer for \"I Romanzi del Cosmo\". During subsequent years fanzines continued to function as training grounds for future editors and writers, and the general trend was towards improved quality and life expectancy (e.g. \"The Time Machine\" run for 50 issues starting in 1975, \"Intercom\" for 149 issues between 1979 and 1999, before its migration to the web as an e-zine until 2003, then as a website).\nIn 1963, the first Trieste Festival of Science Fiction Cinema took place, anticipating the first conventions as an opportunity for a nationwide social gathering. Informal meetings were organized in Milan, Turin and Carrara between 1965 and 1967. In 1972, the first European convention, Eurocon, was organized in Trieste, during which an Italia Award was also created. Eurocon was back in Italy in 1980 and 2009 (in 1989 a Eurocon was held in San Marino).\nSince its foundation in 2013, the association \"World SF Italia\" coordinates the organization the annual national convention (Italcon) and awards (Premio Italia \u2013 with thirty- two categories across media \u2013 and Premio Vegetti \u2013 best Italian novel and essay).\nConventions.\nSince the late 1930s, SF fans have organized conventions, non-profit gatherings where the fans (some of whom are also professionals in the field) meet to discuss SF and generally enjoy themselves. (A few fannish couples have held their weddings at conventions.) The 1st World Science Fiction Convention or Worldcon was held in conjunction with the 1939 New York World's Fair, and has been held annually since the end of World War II. Worldcon has been the premier convention in fandom for over half a century; it is at this convention that the Hugo Awards are bestowed, and attendance can approach 8,000 or more.\nSF writer Cory Doctorow calls science fiction \"perhaps the most social of all literary genres\", and states, \"Science fiction is driven by organized fandom, volunteers who put on hundreds of literary conventions in every corner of the globe, every weekend of the year.\"\nSF conventions can vary from minimalist \"relaxacons\" with a hundred or so attendees to heavily programmed events with four to six or more simultaneous tracks of programming, such as WisCon and Worldcons.\nCommercial shows dealing with SF-related fields are sometimes billed as 'science fiction conventions', but are operated as for-profit ventures, with an orientation towards passive spectators, rather than involved fans, and a tendency to neglect or ignore written SF in favor of television, film, comics, video games, etc. One of the largest of these is the annual Dragon*Con in Atlanta, Georgia, with an attendance of more than 20,000 since 2000.\nScience-fiction societies.\nIn the United States, many science-fiction societies were launched as chapters of the Science Fiction League and, when it faded into history, several of the original League chapters remained viable and were subsequently incorporated as independent organizations. Most notable among the former League chapters which were spun off was the Philadelphia Science Fiction Society, which served as a model for subsequent SF societies formed independent of the League history.\nScience-fiction societies, more commonly referred to as \"clubs\" except on the most formal of occasions, form a year-round base of activities for science-fiction fans. They are often associated with an SF convention or group of conventions, but maintain a separate existence as cultural institutions within specific geographic regions. Several have purchased property and maintain ongoing collections of SF literature available for research, as in the case of the Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society, the New England Science Fiction Association, and the Baltimore Science Fiction Society. Other SF Societies maintain a more informal existence, meeting at general public facilities or the homes of individual members, such as the Bay Area Science Fiction Association.\nOffshoots and subcommunities.\nAs a community devoted to discussion and exploration of new ideas, fandom has become an incubator for many groups that started out as special interests within fandom, some of which have partially separated into independent intentional communities not directly associated with science fiction. Among these groups are comic book fandom, media fandom, the Society for Creative Anachronism, gaming, and furry fandom, sometimes referred to collectively as \"fringe fandoms\" with the implication that the original fandom centered on science-fiction texts (magazines and later books and fanzines) is the \"true\" or \"core\" fandom. Fandom also welcomes and shares interest with other groups including LGBT communities, libertarians, neo-pagans, and space activist groups like the L5 Society, among many others. Some groups exist almost entirely within fandom but are distinct and cohesive subcultures in their own rights, such as filkers, costumers, and convention runners (sometimes called \"SMOFs\").\nFandom encompasses subsets of fans that are principally interested in a single writer or subgenre, such as Tolkien fandom, and (\"Trekkies\"). Even short-lived television series may have dedicated followings, such as the fans of Joss Whedon's \"Firefly\" television series and movie \"Serenity\", known as Browncoats.\nParticipation in science fiction fandom often overlaps with other similar interests, such as fantasy role-playing games, comic books and anime, and in the broadest sense fans of these activities are felt to be part of the greater community of SF fandom.\nThere are active SF fandoms around the world. Fandom in non-Anglophone countries is based partially on local literature and media, with cons and other elements resembling those of English-speaking fandom, but with distinguishing local features. For example, Finland's national gathering Finncon is funded by the government, while all conventions and fan activities in Japan are heavily influenced by anime and manga.\nFanspeak.\nScience fiction and fantasy fandom has its own slang or jargon, sometimes called \"fanspeak\" (the term has been in use since at least 1962).\nFanspeak is made up of acronyms, blended words, obscure in-jokes, and standard terms used in specific ways. Some terms used in fanspeak have spread to members of the Society for Creative Anachronism (\"Scadians\"), Renaissance Fair participants (\"Rennies\"), hacktivists, and internet gaming and chat fans, due to the social and contextual intersection between the communities. Examples of fanspeak used in these broader fannish communities include gafiate, a term meaning to drop out of SF related community activities, with the implication to Get A Life. The word is derived via the acronym for \"get away from it all\". A related term is fafiate, for \"forced away from it all\". The implication is that one would really rather still be involved in fandom, but circumstances make it impossible.\nTwo other acronyms commonly used in the community are FIAWOL (Fandom Is A Way Of Life) and its opposite FIJAGH (Fandom Is Just A Goddamned Hobby) to describe two ways of looking at the place of fandom in one's life.\nScience-fiction fans often refer to themselves using the irregular plural \"fen\": man/men, fan/fen.\nIn fiction.\nAs science fiction fans became professional writers, they started slipping the names of their friends into stories. Wilson \"Bob\" Tucker slipped so many of his fellow fans and authors into his works that doing so is called tuckerization.\nThe subgenre of \"recursive science fiction\" has a fan-maintained bibliography at the New England Science Fiction Association's website; some of it is about science fiction fandom, some not.\nIn Robert Bloch's 1956 short story, \"A Way Of Life\", science-fiction fandom is the only institution to survive a nuclear holocaust and eventually becomes the basis for the reconstitution of civilization. The science-fiction novel \"Gather in the Hall of the Planets\", by K.M. O'Donnell (aka Barry N. Malzberg), 1971, takes place at a New York City science-fiction convention and features broad parodies of many SF fans and authors. A pair of SF novels by Gene DeWeese and Robert \"Buck\" Coulson, \"Now You See It/Him/Them\" and \"Charles Fort Never Mentioned Wombats\" are set at Worldcons; the latter includes an in-character \"introduction\" by Wilson Tucker (himself a character in the novel) which is a sly self-parody verging on a self-tuckerization.\nThe 1991 SF novel \"Fallen Angels\" by Larry Niven, Jerry Pournelle and Michael Flynn constitutes a tribute to SF fandom. The story includes a semi-illegal fictional Minneapolis Worldcon in a post-disaster world where science, and thus fandom, is disparaged. Many of the characters are barely tuckerized fans, mostly from the Greater Los Angeles area.\nMystery writer Sharyn McCrumb's \"Bimbos of the Death Sun\" and \"Zombies of the Gene Pool\" are murder mysteries set at a science-fiction convention and within the broader culture of fandom respectively. While containing mostly nasty caricatures of fans and fandom, some fans take them with good humor; others consider them vicious and cruel.\nIn 1994 and 1996, two anthologies of alternate history science fiction involving World Science Fiction Conventions, titled \"Alternate Worldcons\" and \"Again, Alternate Worldcons\", edited by Mike Resnick were published.\nFans are slans.\nA.E. van Vogt's 1940 novel \"Slan\" was about a mutant variety of humans who are superior to regular humanity and are therefore hunted down and killed by the normal human population. While the story has nothing to do with fandom, many science-fiction fans felt very close to the protagonists, feeling their experience as bright people in a mundane world mirrored that of the mutants; hence, the rallying cry, \"Fans Are Slans!\"; and the tradition that a building inhabited primarily by fans can be called a slan shack.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28926", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28926", "title": "Spin", "text": "Spin or spinning most often refers to:\nSpin, spinning or spinnin may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28927", "revid": "161900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28927", "title": "Stellar classification", "text": "Classification of stars based on spectral properties\nIn astronomy, stellar classification is the classification of stars based on their spectral characteristics. Electromagnetic radiation from the star is analyzed by splitting it with a prism or diffraction grating into a spectrum exhibiting the rainbow of colors interspersed with spectral lines. Each line indicates a particular chemical element or molecule, with the line strength indicating the abundance of that element. The strengths of the different spectral lines vary mainly due to the temperature of the photosphere, although in some cases there are true abundance differences. The \"spectral class\" of a star is a short code primarily summarizing the ionization state, giving an objective measure of the photosphere's temperature.\nMost stars are currently classified under the Morgan\u2013Keenan (MK) system using the letters \"O\", \"B\", \"A\", \"F\", \"G\", \"K\", and \"M\", a sequence from the hottest (\"O\" type) to the coolest (\"M\" type). Each letter class is then subdivided using a numeric digit with \"0\" being hottest and \"9\" being coolest (e.g., A8, A9, F0, and F1 form a sequence from hotter to cooler). The sequence has been expanded with three classes for other stars that do not fit in the classical system: \"W\", \"S\" and \"C\". Some stellar remnants or objects of deviating mass have also been assigned letters: \"D\" for white dwarfs and \"L\", \"T\" and \"Y\" for brown dwarfs (and exoplanets).\nIn the MK system, a luminosity class is added to the spectral class using Roman numerals. This is based on the width of certain absorption lines in the star's spectrum, which vary with the density of the atmosphere and so distinguish giant stars from dwarfs. Luminosity class\u00a0\"0\" or \"Ia+\" is used for \"hypergiants\", class\u00a0\"I\" for \"supergiants\", class\u00a0\"II\" for bright \"giants\", class\u00a0\"III\" for regular \"giants\", class\u00a0\"IV\" for \"subgiants\", class\u00a0\"V\" for \"main-sequence stars\", class\u00a0\"sd\" (or \"VI\") for \"subdwarfs\", and class\u00a0\"D\" (or \"VII\") for \"white dwarfs\". The full spectral class for the Sun is then G2V, indicating a main-sequence star with a surface temperature around 5,800\u00a0K.\nConventional colour description.\nThe conventional colour description takes into account only the peak of the stellar spectrum. In actuality, however, stars radiate in all parts of the spectrum. Because all spectral colours combined appear white, the actual apparent colours the human eye would observe are far lighter than the conventional colour descriptions would suggest. This characteristic of 'lightness' indicates that the simplified assignment of colours within the spectrum can be misleading. Excluding colour-contrast effects in dim light, in typical viewing conditions there are no green, cyan, indigo, or violet stars. \"Yellow\" dwarfs such as the Sun are white, \"red\" dwarfs are a deep shade of yellow/orange, and \"brown\" dwarfs do not literally appear brown, but hypothetically would appear dim red or grey/black to a nearby observer.\nModern classification.\nThe modern classification system is known as the \"Morgan\u2013Keenan\" (MK) classification. Each star is assigned a spectral class (from the older Harvard spectral classification, which did not include luminosity) and a luminosity class using Roman numerals as explained below, forming the star's spectral type.\nOther modern stellar classification systems, such as the UBV system, are based on color indices\u2014the measured differences in three or more color magnitudes. Those numbers are given labels such as \"U\u2212V\" or \"B\u2212V\", which represent the colors passed by two standard filters (e.g. \"U\"ltraviolet, \"B\"lue and \"V\"isual).\nHarvard spectral classification.\nThe \"Harvard system\" is a one-dimensional classification scheme by astronomer Annie Jump Cannon, who re-ordered and simplified the prior alphabetical system by Draper (see History). Stars are grouped according to their spectral characteristics by single letters of the alphabet, optionally with numeric subdivisions. Main-sequence stars vary in surface temperature from approximately 2,000 to 50,000\u00a0K, whereas more-evolved stars \u2013 in particular, newly-formed white dwarfs \u2013 can have surface temperatures above 100,000\u00a0K. Physically, the classes indicate the temperature of the star's atmosphere and are normally listed from hottest to coldest.\nThe traditional mnemonic for remembering the order of the spectral type letters, from hottest to coolest, is \"Oh, Be A Fine Guy/Girl: Kiss Me!\". Many alternative mnemonics have been proposed, in contests held by astronomy courses and organizations, but the traditional mnemonic remains the most popular.\nThe spectral classes O through M, as well as other more specialized classes discussed later, are subdivided by Arabic numerals (0\u20139), where 0 denotes the hottest stars of a given class. For example, A0 denotes the hottest stars in class\u00a0A and A9 denotes the coolest ones. Fractional numbers are allowed; for example, the star Mu Normae is classified as O9.7. The Sun is classified as G2.\nThe fact that the Harvard classification of a star indicated its surface or photospheric temperature (or more precisely, its effective temperature) was not fully understood until after its development, though by the time the first Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram was formulated (by 1914), this was generally suspected to be true. In the 1920s, the Indian physicist Meghnad Saha derived a theory of ionization by extending well-known ideas in physical chemistry pertaining to the dissociation of molecules to the ionization of atoms. First he applied it to the solar chromosphere, then to stellar spectra.\nHarvard astronomer Cecilia Payne then demonstrated that the \"O-B-A-F-G-K-M\" spectral sequence is actually a sequence in temperature. Because the classification sequence predates our understanding that it is a temperature sequence, the placement of a spectrum into a given subtype, such as B3 or A7, depends upon (largely subjective) estimates of the strengths of absorption features in stellar spectra. As a result, these subtypes are not evenly divided into any sort of mathematically representable intervals.\nMorgan\u2013Keenan classification.\nThe \"Yerkes spectral classification\", also called the \"MK,\" or Morgan-Keenan (alternatively referred to as the MKK, or Morgan-Keenan-Kellman) system from the authors' initials, is a system of stellar spectral classification introduced in 1943 by William Wilson Morgan, Philip C. Keenan, and Edith Kellman from Yerkes Observatory. This two-dimensional (temperature and luminosity) classification scheme is based on spectral lines sensitive to stellar temperature and surface gravity, which is related to luminosity (whilst the \"Harvard classification\" is based on just surface temperature). Later, in 1953, after some revisions to the list of standard stars and classification criteria, the scheme was named the \"Morgan\u2013Keenan classification\", or \"MK\", which remains in use today.\nDenser stars with higher surface gravity exhibit greater pressure broadening of spectral lines. The gravity, and hence the pressure, on the surface of a giant star is much lower than for a dwarf star because the radius of the giant is much greater than a dwarf of similar mass. Therefore, differences in the spectrum can be interpreted as \"luminosity effects\" and a luminosity class can be assigned purely from examination of the spectrum.\nA number of different \"luminosity classes\" are distinguished, as listed in the table below.\nMarginal cases are allowed; for example, a star may be either a supergiant or a bright giant, or may be in between the subgiant and main-sequence classifications.\nIn these cases, two special symbols are used between the two luminosity classes:\nFor example, a star classified as A3-4III/IV would be in between spectral types A3 and A4, while being either a giant star or a subgiant.\nSub-dwarf classes have also been used: VI for sub-dwarfs (stars slightly less luminous than the main sequence).\nNominal luminosity class\u00a0VII (and sometimes higher numerals) is now rarely used for white dwarf or \"hot sub-dwarf\" classes, since the temperature-letters of the main sequence and giant stars no longer apply to white dwarfs.\nOccasionally, letters \"a\" and \"b\" are applied to luminosity classes other than supergiants; for example, a giant star slightly less luminous than typical may be given a luminosity class of IIIb, while a luminosity class IIIa indicates a star slightly brighter than a typical giant.\nA sample of extreme V stars with strong absorption in He II \u03bb4686 spectral lines have been given the \"Vz\" designation. An example star is HD 93129 B.\nSpectral peculiarities.\nAdditional nomenclature, in the form of lower-case letters, can follow the spectral type to indicate peculiar features of the spectrum.\nFor example, 59 Cygni is listed as spectral type\u00a0B1.5Vnne, indicating a spectrum with the general classification B1.5V, as well as very broad absorption lines and certain emission lines.\nHistory.\nThe reason for the odd arrangement of letters in the Harvard classification is historical, having evolved from the earlier Secchi classes and been progressively modified as understanding improved.\nSecchi classes.\nDuring the 1860s and 1870s, pioneering stellar spectroscopist Angelo Secchi created the \"Secchi classes\" in order to classify observed spectra. By 1866, he had developed three classes of stellar spectra, shown in the table below.\nIn the late 1890s, this classification began to be superseded by the Harvard classification, which is discussed in the remainder of this article.\nThe Roman numerals used for Secchi classes should not be confused with the completely unrelated Roman numerals used for Yerkes luminosity classes and the proposed neutron star classes.\nDraper system.\nAfter the death of her husband, Mary Anna Draper began to fund the creation of the Harvard Plate Stacks and the study of these plates at the Harvard College Observatory. The director of the Observatory, Edward C. Pickering began to hire pioneering female astronomers collectively known as the Harvard Computers. Thought they would study many different astronomical subjects, an early result of this work was the first edition of \"The Henry Draper Memorial Catalogue of Stellar Spectra\", first published in 1890. Williamina Fleming classified most of the spectra in the first edition of the catalogue and is credited with classifying over 10,000 featured stars and discovering 10 novae and more than 200 variable stars. With the help of the Harvard Computers, especially Williamina Fleming, the first iteration of the Henry Draper catalogue was devised to replace the Roman-numeral scheme established by Angelo Secchi.\nThe catalogue used a scheme in which the previously used Secchi classes (I to V) were subdivided into more specific classes, given letters from A to P. Also, the letter Q was used for stars not fitting into any other class. Fleming worked with Pickering to differentiate 17 different classes based on the intensity of hydrogen spectral lines, which causes variation in the wavelengths emanated from stars and results in variation in color appearance. The spectra in class A tended to produce the strongest hydrogen absorption lines while spectra in class O produced virtually no visible lines. The lettering system displayed the gradual decrease in hydrogen absorption in the spectral classes when moving down the alphabet. This classification system was later modified by Annie Jump Cannon and Antonia Maury to produce the Harvard spectral classification scheme.\nThe old Harvard system (1897).\nIn 1897, another astronomer at Harvard, Antonia Maury, placed the Orion subtype of Secchi class\u00a0I ahead of the remainder of Secchi class\u00a0I, thus placing the modern type\u00a0B ahead of the modern type\u00a0A. She was the first to do so, although she did not use lettered spectral types, but rather a series of twenty-two types numbered from I\u2013XXII.\nBecause the 22\u00a0Roman numeral groupings did not account for additional variations in spectra, three additional divisions were made to further specify differences: Lowercase letters were added to differentiate relative line appearance in spectra; the lines were defined as:\nAntonia Maury published her own stellar classification catalogue in 1897 called \"Spectra of Bright Stars Photographed with the 11\u00a0inch Draper Telescope as Part of the Henry Draper Memorial\", which included 4,800\u00a0photographs and Maury's analyses of 681\u00a0bright northern stars. This was the first instance in which a woman was credited for an observatory publication.\nThe current Harvard system (1912).\nIn 1901, Annie Jump Cannon returned to the lettered types, but dropped all letters except O, B, A, F, G, K, M, and N used in that order, as well as P for planetary nebulae and Q for some peculiar spectra. She also used types such as B5A for stars halfway between types B and A, F2G for stars one fifth of the way from F to G, and so on.\nFinally, by 1912, Cannon had changed the types B, A, B5A, F2G, etc. to B0, A0, B5, F2, etc. This is essentially the modern form of the Harvard classification system. This system was developed through the analysis of spectra on photographic plates, which could convert light emanated from stars into a readable spectrum.\nMount Wilson classes.\nA luminosity classification known as the Mount Wilson system was used to distinguish between stars of different luminosities. This notation system is still sometimes seen on modern spectra.\nSpectral types.\nThe stellar classification system is taxonomic, based on type specimens, similar to classification of species in biology: The categories are defined by one or more standard stars for each category and sub-category, with an associated description of the distinguishing features.\n\"Early\" and \"late\" nomenclature.\nStars are often referred to as \"early\" or \"late\" types. \"Early\" is a synonym for \"hotter\", while \"late\" is a synonym for \"cooler\".\nDepending on the context, \"early\" and \"late\" may be absolute or relative terms. \"Early\" as an absolute term would therefore refer to O or B, and possibly A stars. As a relative reference it relates to stars hotter than others, such as \"early K\" being perhaps K0, K1, K2 and K3.\n\"Late\" is used in the same way, with an unqualified use of the term indicating stars with spectral types such as K and M, but it can also be used for stars that are cool relative to other stars, as in using \"late G\" to refer to G7, G8, and G9.\nIn the relative sense, \"early\" means a lower Arabic numeral following the class letter, and \"late\" means a higher number.\nThis obscure terminology is a hold-over from a late nineteenth century model of stellar evolution, which supposed that stars were powered by gravitational contraction via the Kelvin\u2013Helmholtz mechanism, which is now known to not apply to main-sequence stars. If that were true, then stars would start their lives as very hot \"early-type\" stars and then gradually cool down into \"late-type\" stars. This mechanism provided ages of the Sun that were much smaller than what is observed in the geologic record, and was rendered obsolete by the discovery that stars are powered by nuclear fusion. The terms \"early\" and \"late\" were carried over, beyond the demise of the model they were based on.\nClass O.\nO-type stars are very hot and extremely luminous, with most of their radiated output in the ultraviolet range. These are the rarest of all main-sequence stars. About 1 in 3,000,000 (0.00003%) of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood are O-type stars. Some of the most massive stars lie within this spectral class. O-type stars frequently have complicated surroundings that make measurement of their spectra difficult.\nO-type spectra formerly were defined by the ratio of the strength of the He\u00a0II \u03bb4541 relative to that of He\u00a0I \u03bb4471, where \u03bb is the radiation wavelength. Spectral type O7 was defined to be the point at which the two intensities are equal, with the He\u00a0I line weakening towards earlier types. Type\u00a0O3 was, by definition, the point at which said line disappears altogether, although it can be seen very faintly with modern technology. Due to this, the modern definition uses the ratio of the nitrogen line N\u00a0IV \u03bb4058 to N\u00a0III \u03bb\u03bb4634-40-42.\nO-type stars have dominant lines of absorption and sometimes emission for He\u00a0II lines, prominent ionized (Si\u00a0IV, O\u00a0III, N\u00a0III, and C\u00a0III) and neutral helium lines, strengthening from O5 to O9, and prominent hydrogen Balmer lines, although not as strong as in later types. Higher-mass O-type stars do not retain extensive atmospheres due to the extreme velocity of their stellar wind, which may reach 2,000\u00a0km/s. Because they are so massive, O-type stars have very hot cores and burn through their hydrogen fuel very quickly, so they are the first stars to leave the main sequence.\nWhen the MKK classification scheme was first described in 1943, the only subtypes of class\u00a0O used were O5 to O9.5. The MKK scheme was extended to O9.7 in 1971 and O4 in 1978, and new classification schemes that add types O2, O3, and O3.5 have subsequently been introduced.\nExample spectral standards:\nClass B.\nB-type stars are very luminous and blue. Their spectra have neutral helium lines, which are most prominent at the B2 subclass, and moderate hydrogen lines. As O- and B-type stars are so energetic, they only live for a relatively short time. Thus, due to the low probability of kinematic interaction during their lifetime, they are unable to stray far from the area in which they formed, apart from runaway stars.\nThe transition from class\u00a0O to class\u00a0B was originally defined to be the point at which the He\u00a0II \u03bb4541 disappears. However, with modern equipment, the line is still apparent in the early B-type stars. Today for main-sequence stars, the B class is instead defined by the intensity of the He\u00a0I violet spectrum, with the maximum intensity corresponding to class\u00a0B2. For supergiants, lines of silicon are used instead; the Si\u00a0IV \u03bb4089 and Si\u00a0III \u03bb4552 lines are indicative of early B. At mid-B, the intensity of the latter relative to that of Si\u00a0II \u03bb\u03bb4128-30 is the defining characteristic, while for late B, it is the intensity of Mg\u00a0II \u03bb4481 relative to that of He\u00a0I \u03bb4471.\nThese stars tend to be found in their originating OB associations, which are associated with giant molecular clouds. The Orion OB1 association occupies a large portion of a spiral arm of the Milky Way and contains many of the brighter stars of the constellation Orion. About 1 in 800 (0.125%) of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood are B-type main-sequence stars. B-type stars are relatively uncommon and the closest is Regulus, at around 80 light years.\nMassive yet non-supergiant stars known as Be\u00a0stars have been observed to show one or more Balmer lines in emission, with the hydrogen-related electromagnetic radiation series projected out by the stars being of particular interest. Be stars are generally thought to feature unusually strong stellar winds, high surface temperatures, and significant attrition of stellar mass as the objects rotate at a curiously rapid rate.\nObjects known as B[e] stars \u2013 or B(e) stars for typographic reasons \u2013 possess distinctive neutral or low ionisation emission lines that are considered to have forbidden mechanisms, undergoing processes not normally allowed under current understandings of quantum mechanics.\nExample spectral standards:\nClass A.\nA-type stars are among the more common naked eye stars, and are white or bluish-white. They have strong hydrogen lines, at a maximum by A0, and also lines of ionized metals (Fe\u00a0II, Mg\u00a0II, Si\u00a0II) at a maximum at A5. The presence of Ca\u00a0II lines is notably strengthening by this point. About 1 in 160 (0.625%) of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood are A-type stars, which includes 9 stars within 15 parsecs.\nExample spectral standards:\nClass F.\nF-type stars have strengthening spectral lines \"H\" and \"K\" of Ca\u00a0II. Neutral metals (Fe\u00a0I, Cr\u00a0I) beginning to gain on ionized metal lines by late F. Their spectra are characterized by the weaker hydrogen lines and ionized metals. Their color is white. About 1 in 33 (3.03%) of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood are F-type stars, including 1 star Procyon A within 20 ly.\nExample spectral standards:\nClass G.\nG-type stars, including the Sun, have prominent spectral lines \"H\" and \"K\" of Ca\u00a0II, which are most pronounced at G2.\nThey have even weaker hydrogen lines than F, but along with the ionized metals, they have neutral metals.\nThere is a prominent spike in the G band of CN molecules.\nClass\u00a0G main-sequence stars make up about 7.5%, nearly one in thirteen, of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood.\nThere are 21 G-type stars within 10pc.\nClass G contains the \"Yellow Evolutionary Void\". Supergiant stars often swing between O or B (blue) and K or M (red). While they do this, they do not stay for long in the unstable yellow supergiant class.\nExample spectral standards:\nClass K.\nK-type stars are orangish stars that are slightly cooler than the Sun. They make up about 12% of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood. There are also giant K-type stars, which range from hypergiants like RW Cephei, to giants and supergiants, such as Arcturus, whereas orange dwarfs, like Alpha Centauri\u00a0B, are main-sequence stars.\nThey have extremely weak hydrogen lines, if those are present at all, and mostly neutral metals (Mn\u00a0I, Fe\u00a0I, Si\u00a0I). By late K, molecular bands of titanium oxide become present. Mainstream theories (those rooted in lower harmful radioactivity and star longevity) would thus suggest such stars have the optimal chances of heavily evolved life developing on orbiting planets (if such life is directly analogous to Earth's) due to a broad habitable zone yet much lower harmful periods of emission compared to those with the broadest such zones.\nExample spectral standards:\nClass M.\nClass\u00a0M stars are by far the most common. About 76% of the main-sequence stars in the solar neighborhood are class\u00a0M stars. However, class\u00a0M main-sequence stars (red dwarfs) have such low luminosities that none are bright enough to be seen with the unaided eye, unless under exceptional conditions. The brightest-known M\u00a0class main-sequence star is Lacaille 8760, class\u00a0M0V, with magnitude\u00a06.7 (the limiting magnitude for typical naked-eye visibility under good conditions being typically quoted as 6.5), and it is extremely unlikely that any brighter examples will be found.\nAlthough most class\u00a0M stars are red dwarfs, most of the largest-known supergiant stars in the Milky Way are class M stars, such as VY Canis Majoris, VV Cephei, Antares, and Betelgeuse. Furthermore, some larger, hotter brown dwarfs are late class\u00a0M, usually in the range of M6.5 to M9.5.\nThe spectrum of a class\u00a0M star contains lines from oxide molecules (in the visible spectrum, especially TiO) and all neutral metals, but absorption lines of hydrogen are usually absent. TiO bands can be strong in class\u00a0M stars, usually dominating their visible spectrum by about M5. Vanadium(II) oxide bands become present by late\u00a0M.\nExample spectral standards:\nExtended spectral types.\nA number of new spectral types have been taken into use from newly discovered types of stars.\nHot blue emission star classes.\nSpectra of some very hot and bluish stars exhibit marked emission lines from carbon or nitrogen, or sometimes oxygen.\nClass WR (or W): Wolf\u2013Rayet.\nOnce included as type O stars, the Wolf\u2013Rayet stars of class\u00a0W or WR are notable for spectra lacking hydrogen lines. Instead their spectra are dominated by broad emission lines of highly ionized helium, nitrogen, carbon, and sometimes oxygen. They are thought to mostly be dying supergiants with their hydrogen layers blown away by stellar winds, thereby directly exposing their hot helium shells. Class\u00a0WR is further divided into subclasses according to the relative strength of nitrogen and carbon emission lines in their spectra (and outer layers).\nWR spectra range is listed below:\nAlthough the central stars of most planetary nebulae (CSPNe) show O-type spectra, around 10% are hydrogen-deficient and show WR spectra. These are low-mass stars and to distinguish them from the massive Wolf\u2013Rayet stars, their spectra are enclosed in square brackets: e.g. [WC]. Most of these show [WC] spectra, some [WO], and very rarely [WN].\nSlash stars.\nThe \"slash\" stars are O-type stars with WN-like lines in their spectra. The name \"slash\" comes from their printed spectral type having a slash in it (e.g. \"Of/WNL\")).\nThere is a secondary group found with these spectra, a cooler, \"intermediate\" group designated \"Ofpe/WN9\". These stars have also been referred to as WN10 or WN11, but that has become less popular with the realisation of the evolutionary difference from other Wolf\u2013Rayet stars. Recent discoveries of even rarer stars have extended the range of slash stars as far as O2-3.5If*/WN5-7, which are even hotter than the original \"slash\" stars.\nMagnetic O stars.\nThey are O stars with strong magnetic fields. Designation is Of?p.\nCool red and brown dwarf classes.\nThe new spectral types L, T, and Y were created to classify infrared spectra of cool stars. This includes both red dwarfs and brown dwarfs that are very faint in the visible spectrum.\nBrown dwarfs, stars that do not undergo hydrogen fusion, cool as they age and so progress to later spectral types. Brown dwarfs start their lives with M-type spectra and will cool through the L, T, and Y spectral classes, faster the less massive they are; the highest-mass brown dwarfs cannot have cooled to Y or even T dwarfs within the age of the universe. Because this leads to an unresolvable overlap between spectral types' effective temperature and luminosity for some masses and ages of different L-T-Y types, no distinct temperature or luminosity values can be given.\nClass L.\nClass L dwarfs get their designation because they are cooler than M stars and L is the remaining letter alphabetically closest to M. Some of these objects have masses large enough to support hydrogen fusion and are therefore stars, but most are of substellar mass and are therefore brown dwarfs. They are a very dark red in color and brightest in infrared. Their atmosphere is cool enough to allow metal hydrides and alkali metals to be prominent in their spectra.\nDue to low surface gravity in giant stars, TiO- and VO-bearing condensates never form. Thus, L-type stars larger than dwarfs can never form in an isolated environment. However, it may be possible for these L-type supergiants to form through stellar collisions, an example of which is V838 Monocerotis while in the height of its luminous red nova eruption.\nClass T.\nClass\u00a0T dwarfs are cool brown dwarfs with surface temperatures between approximately . Their emission peaks in the infrared. Methane is prominent in their spectra.\nStudy of the number of proplyds (protoplanetary disks, clumps of gas in nebulae from which stars and planetary systems are formed) indicates that the number of stars in the galaxy should be several orders of magnitude higher than what was previously conjectured. It is theorized that these proplyds are in a race with each other. The first one to form will become a protostar, which are very violent objects and will disrupt other proplyds in the vicinity, stripping them of their gas. The victim proplyds will then probably go on to become main-sequence stars or brown dwarfs of the L and T classes, which are quite invisible to us.\nClass Y.\nBrown dwarfs of spectral class\u00a0Y are cooler than those of spectral class\u00a0T and have qualitatively different spectra from them. A total of 17\u00a0objects have been placed in class\u00a0Y as of August 2013. Although such dwarfs have been modelled and detected within forty light-years by the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) there is no well-defined spectral sequence yet and no prototypes. Nevertheless, several objects have been proposed as spectral classes Y0, Y1, and Y2.\nThe spectra of these prospective Y objects display absorption around 1.55\u00a0micrometers. Delorme et al. have suggested that this feature is due to absorption from ammonia, and that this should be taken as the indicative feature for the T-Y transition. In fact, this ammonia-absorption feature is the main criterion that has been adopted to define this class. However, this feature is difficult to distinguish from absorption by water and methane, and other authors have stated that the assignment of class Y0 is premature.\nThe latest brown dwarf proposed for the Y spectral type, WISE 1828+2650, is a &gt;\u00a0Y2\u00a0dwarf with an effective temperature originally estimated around 300\u00a0K, the temperature of the human body. Parallax measurements have, however, since shown that its luminosity is inconsistent with it being colder than ~400\u00a0K. The coolest Y dwarf currently known is WISE 0855\u22120714 with an approximate temperature of 250\u00a0K, and a mass just seven times that of Jupiter.\nThe mass range for Y\u00a0dwarfs is 9\u201325\u00a0Jupiter masses, but young objects might reach below one Jupiter mass (although they cool to become planets), which means that Y class objects straddle the 13\u00a0Jupiter mass deuterium-fusion limit that marks the current IAU division between brown dwarfs and planets.\nPeculiar brown dwarfs.\nYoung brown dwarfs have low surface gravities because they have larger radii and lower masses compared to the field stars of similar spectral type. These sources are marked by a letter beta (\u03b2) for intermediate surface gravity and gamma (\u03b3) for low surface gravity. Indication for low surface gravity are weak CaH, KI and NaI lines, as well as strong VO line. Alpha (\u03b1) stands for normal surface gravity and is usually dropped. Sometimes an extremely low surface gravity is denoted by a delta (\u03b4). The suffix \"pec\" stands for peculiar. The peculiar suffix is still used for other features that are unusual and summarizes different properties, indicative of low surface gravity, subdwarfs and unresolved binaries.\nThe prefix sd stands for subdwarf and only includes cool subdwarfs. This prefix indicates a low metallicity and kinematic properties that are more similar to halo stars than to disk stars. Subdwarfs appear bluer than disk objects.\nThe red suffix describes objects with red color, but an older age. This is not interpreted as low surface gravity, but as a high dust content. The blue suffix describes objects with blue near-infrared colors that cannot be explained with low metallicity. Some are explained as L+T binaries, others are not binaries, such as 2MASS J11263991\u22125003550 and are explained with thin and/or large-grained clouds.\nLate giant carbon-star classes.\nCarbon-stars are stars whose spectra indicate production of carbon \u2013 a byproduct of triple-alpha helium fusion. With increased carbon abundance, and some parallel s-process heavy element production, the spectra of these stars become increasingly deviant from the usual late spectral classes\u00a0G, K, and M. Equivalent classes for carbon-rich stars are S and C.\nThe giants among those stars are presumed to produce this carbon themselves, but some stars in this class are double stars, whose odd atmosphere is suspected of having been transferred from a companion that is now a white dwarf, when the companion was a carbon-star.\nClass C.\nOriginally classified as R and N\u00a0stars, these are also known as \"carbon stars\". These are red giants, near the end of their lives, in which there is an excess of carbon in the atmosphere. The old R and N classes ran parallel to the normal classification system from roughly mid-G to late M. These have more recently been remapped into a unified carbon classifier C with N0 starting at roughly C6. Another subset of cool carbon stars are the C\u2013J-type stars, which are characterized by the strong presence of molecules of 13 CN in addition to those of 12 CN. A few main-sequence carbon stars are known, but the overwhelming majority of known carbon stars are giants or supergiants. There are several subclasses:\nClass S.\nClass\u00a0S stars form a continuum between class\u00a0M stars and carbon stars. Those most similar to class\u00a0M stars have strong ZrO absorption bands analogous to the TiO bands of class\u00a0M stars, whereas those most similar to carbon stars have strong sodium D lines and weak C2 bands. Class\u00a0S stars have excess amounts of zirconium and other elements produced by the s-process, and have more similar carbon and oxygen abundances to class\u00a0M or carbon stars. Like carbon stars, nearly all known class\u00a0S stars are asymptotic-giant-branch stars.\nThe spectral type is formed by the letter\u00a0S and a number between zero and ten. This number corresponds to the temperature of the star and approximately follows the temperature scale used for class\u00a0M giants. The most common types are S3 to S5. The non-standard designation S10 has only been used for the star Chi Cygni when at an extreme minimum.\nThe basic classification is usually followed by an abundance indication, following one of several schemes: S2,5; S2/5; S2 Zr4 Ti2; or S2*5. A number following a comma is a scale between 1 and 9 based on the ratio of ZrO and TiO. A number following a slash is a more-recent but less-common scheme designed to represent the ratio of carbon to oxygen on a scale of 1 to 10, where a 0 would be an MS star. Intensities of zirconium and titanium may be indicated explicitly. Also occasionally seen is a number following an asterisk, which represents the strength of the ZrO bands on a scale from 1 to 5.\nClasses MS and SC: Intermediate carbon-related classes.\nIn between the M and S classes, border cases are named MS stars. In a similar way, border cases between the S and C-N classes are named SC or CS. The sequence M \u2192 MS \u2192 S \u2192 SC \u2192 C-N is hypothesized to be a sequence of increased carbon abundance with age for carbon stars in the asymptotic giant branch.\nWhite dwarf classifications.\nThe class\u00a0D (for Degenerate) is the modern classification used for white dwarfs\u2014low-mass stars that are no longer undergoing nuclear fusion and have shrunk to planetary size, slowly cooling down. Class\u00a0D is further divided into spectral types DA, DB, DC, DO, DQ, DX, and DZ. The letters are not related to the letters used in the classification of other stars, but instead indicate the composition of the white dwarf's visible outer layer or atmosphere.\nThe white dwarf types are as follows:\nThe type is followed by a number giving the white dwarf's surface temperature. This number is a rounded form of 50400/\"T\"eff, where \"T\"eff is the effective surface temperature, measured in kelvins. Originally, this number was rounded to one of the digits 1 through 9, but more recently fractional values have started to be used, as well as values below 1 and above 9.(For example DA1.5 for IK Pegasi B)\nTwo or more of the type letters may be used to indicate a white dwarf that displays more than one of the spectral features above.\nExtended white dwarf spectral types.\nA different set of spectral peculiarity symbols are used for white dwarfs than for other types of stars:\nLuminous blue variables.\nLuminous blue variables (LBVs) are rare, massive and evolved stars that show unpredictable and sometimes dramatic variations in their spectra and brightness. During their \"quiescent\" states, they are usually similar to B-type stars, although with unusual spectral lines. During outbursts, they are more similar to F-type stars, with significantly lower temperatures. Many papers treat LBV as its own spectral type.\nSpectral types of non-single objects: Classes P and Q.\nFinally, the classes P and Q are left over from the system developed by Cannon for the \"Henry Draper Catalogue\". They are occasionally used for certain objects, not associated with a single star: Type\u00a0P objects are stars within planetary nebulae (typically young white dwarfs or hydrogen-poor M giants); type\u00a0Q objects are novae.\nStellar remnants.\nStellar remnants are objects associated with the death of stars. Included in the category are white dwarfs, and as can be seen from the radically different classification scheme for class\u00a0D, stellar remnants are difficult to fit into the MK system.\nThe Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram, which the MK system is based on, is observational in nature so these remnants cannot easily be plotted on the diagram, or cannot be placed at all. Old neutron stars are relatively small and cold, and would fall on the far right side of the diagram. Planetary nebulae are dynamic and tend to quickly fade in brightness as the progenitor star transitions to the white dwarf branch. If shown, a planetary nebula would be plotted to the right of the diagram's upper right quadrant. A black hole emits no visible light of its own, and therefore would not appear on the diagram.\nA classification system for neutron stars using Roman numerals has been proposed: type I for less massive neutron stars with low cooling rates, type II for more massive neutron stars with higher cooling rates, and a proposed type III for more massive neutron stars (possible exotic star candidates) with higher cooling rates. The more massive a neutron star is, the higher neutrino flux it carries. These neutrinos carry away so much heat energy that after only a few years the temperature of an isolated neutron star falls from the order of billions to only around a million Kelvin. This proposed neutron star classification system is not to be confused with the earlier Secchi spectral classes and the Yerkes luminosity classes.\nReplaced spectral classes.\nSeveral spectral types, all previously used for non-standard stars in the mid-20th century, have been replaced during revisions of the stellar classification system. They may still be found in old editions of star catalogs: R and N have been subsumed into the new C class as C-R and C-N.\nStellar classification, habitability, and the search for life.\nWhile humans may eventually be able to colonize any kind of stellar habitat, this section will address the probability of life arising around other stars.\nStability, luminosity, and lifespan are all factors in stellar habitability. Humans know of only one star that hosts life, the G-class Sun, a star with an abundance of heavy elements and low variability in brightness. The Solar System is also unlike many stellar systems in that it only contains one star (see Habitability of binary star systems).\nWorking from these constraints and the problems of having an empirical sample set of only one, the range of stars that are predicted to be able to support life is limited by a few factors. Of the main-sequence star types, stars more massive than 1.5 times that of the Sun (spectral types O, B, and A) age too quickly for advanced life to develop (using Earth as a guideline). On the other extreme, dwarfs of less than half the mass of the Sun (spectral type M) are likely to tidally lock planets within their habitable zone, along with other problems (see Habitability of red dwarf systems). While there are many problems facing life on red dwarfs, many astronomers continue to model these systems due to their sheer numbers and longevity.\nFor these reasons NASA's Kepler Mission is searching for habitable planets at nearby main-sequence stars that are less massive than spectral type A but more massive than type M\u2014making the most probable stars to host life dwarf stars of types F, G, and K.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28928", "revid": "26074453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28928", "title": "Sinope", "text": "Sinope may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28929", "revid": "49679309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28929", "title": "Seven Sisters", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSeven Sisters may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28930", "revid": "50730184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28930", "title": "SN 1987A", "text": "1987 supernova event in the constellation Dorado\nSN\u00a01987A was a Type II supernova in the Large Magellanic Cloud, a dwarf satellite galaxy of the Milky Way. It occurred approximately from Earth and was the closest observed supernova since Kepler's Supernova in 1604. Light and neutrinos from the explosion reached Earth on February 23, 1987, and it was designated \"SN\u00a01987A\" as the first supernova discovered that year. Its brightness peaked in May of that year, with an apparent magnitude of about 3, brighter than the constellation's brightest star, Alpha Doradus.\nIt was the first supernova that modern astronomers were able to study in great detail, and its observations have provided much insight into core-collapse supernovae. SN\u00a01987A provided the first opportunity to confirm by direct observation the radioactive source of the energy for visible light emissions, by detecting predicted gamma-ray line radiation from two of its abundant radioactive nuclei. This proved the radioactive nature of the long-duration post-explosion glow of supernovae.\nIn 2019, indirect evidence for the presence of a collapsed neutron star within the remnants of SN 1987A was discovered using the Atacama Large Millimeter Array telescope. Further evidence was subsequently uncovered in 2021 through observations conducted by the Chandra and NuSTAR X-ray telescopes.\nDiscovery.\nSN 1987A was discovered independently by Ian Shelton and Oscar Duhalde at the Las Campanas Observatory in Chile on February 24, 1987, and within the same 24 hours by Albert Jones in New Zealand.\nLater investigations found photographs showing the supernova brightening rapidly early on February 23. On March 4\u201312, 1987, it was observed from space by Astron, the largest ultraviolet space telescope of that time.\nProgenitor.\nFour days after the event was recorded, the progenitor star was tentatively identified as Sanduleak \u221269 202 (Sk \u221269 202), a blue supergiant.\nAfter the supernova faded, that identification was definitively confirmed, as Sk \u221269 202 had disappeared. The possibility of a blue supergiant producing a supernova was considered surprising, and the confirmation led to further research which identified an earlier supernova with a blue supergiant progenitor.\nSome models of SN 1987A's progenitor attributed the blue color largely to its chemical composition rather than its evolutionary stage, particularly the low levels of heavy elements. There was some speculation that the star might have merged with a companion star before the supernova. However, it is now widely understood that blue supergiants are natural progenitors of some supernovae, although there is still speculation that the evolution of such stars could require mass loss involving a binary companion.\nNeutrino emissions.\nApproximately two to three hours before the visible light from SN 1987A reached Earth, a burst of neutrinos was observed at three neutrino observatories. This was likely due to neutrino emission which occurs simultaneously with core collapse, but before visible light is emitted as the shock wave reaches the stellar surface. At 7:35 UT, 12 antineutrinos were detected by Kamiokande II, 8 by IMB, and 5 by Baksan in a burst lasting less than 13 seconds. Approximately three hours earlier, the Mont Blanc liquid scintillator detected a five-neutrino burst, but this is generally believed to not be associated with SN 1987A.\nThe Kamiokande II detection, which at 12 neutrinos had the largest sample population, showed the neutrinos arriving in two distinct pulses. The first pulse at 07:35:35 comprised 9 neutrinos over a period of 1.915 seconds. A second pulse of three neutrinos arrived during a 3.220-second interval from 9.219 to 12.439 seconds after the beginning of the first pulse.\nAlthough only 25 neutrinos were detected during the event, it was a significant increase from the previously observed background level. This was the first time neutrinos known to be emitted from a supernova had been observed directly, which marked the beginning of neutrino astronomy. The observations were consistent with theoretical supernova models in which 99% of the energy of the collapse is radiated away in the form of neutrinos. The observations are also consistent with the models' estimates of a total neutrino count of 1058 with a total energy of 1046 joules, i.e. a mean value of some dozens of MeV per neutrino. Billions of neutrinos passed through a square centimeter on Earth.\nThe neutrino measurements allowed upper bounds on neutrino mass and charge, as well as the number of flavors of neutrinos and other properties. For example, the data show that the rest mass of the electron neutrino is &lt;\u00a016\u00a0eV/c2 at 95% confidence, which is 30,000 times smaller than the mass of an electron. The data suggest that the total number of neutrino flavors is at most 8 but other observations and experiments give tighter estimates. Many of these results have since been confirmed or tightened by other neutrino experiments such as more careful analysis of solar neutrinos and atmospheric neutrinos as well as experiments with artificial neutrino sources.\nNeutron star.\nSN 1987A appears to be a core-collapse supernova, which should result in a neutron star given the size of the original star. The neutrino data indicate that a compact object did form at the star's core, and astronomers immediately began searching for the collapsed core. The Hubble Space Telescope took images of the supernova regularly from August 1990 without a clear detection of a neutron star.\nA number of possibilities for the \"missing\" neutron star were considered. First, that the neutron star may be obscured by surrounding dense dust clouds. Second, that a pulsar was formed, but with either an unusually large or small magnetic field. Third, that large amounts of material fell back on the neutron star, collapsing it further into a black hole. Neutron stars and black holes often give off light as material falls onto them. If there is a compact object in the supernova remnant, but no material to fall onto it, it would be too dim for detection. A fourth hypothesis is that the collapsed core became a quark star.\nIn 2019, evidence was presented for a neutron star inside one of the brightest dust clumps, close to the expected position of the supernova remnant. In 2021, further evidence was presented of hard X-ray emissions from SN 1987A originating in the pulsar wind nebula. The latter result is supported by a three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic model, which describes the evolution of SN 1987A from the SN event to the present, and reconstructs the ambient environment, predicting the absorbing power of the dense stellar material around the pulsar.\nIn 2024, researchers using the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) identified distinctive emission lines of ionized argon within the central region of the Supernova 1987A remnants. These emission lines, discernible only near the remnant's core, were analyzed using photoionization models. The models indicate that the observed line ratios and velocities can be attributed to ionizing radiation originating from a neutron star illuminating gas from the inner regions of the exploded star.\nLight curve.\nAfter an explosion of a Type II supernova such as SN 1987A, much of the light is produced by the energy from radioactive decay. The radioactivity keeps the remnant hot enough to glow, without which the remnant would dim quickly. The decay of 56Ni through its daughters 56Co to 56Fe produces gamma-ray photons that are absorbed and dominate the heating and thus the luminosity of the ejecta at intermediate times (several weeks) to late times (several months). Energy for the peak of the light curve of SN1987A was provided by the decay of 56Ni to 56Co (half life of 6 days) while energy for the later light curve in particular fit very closely with the 77.3-day half-life of 56Co decaying to 56Fe. Later measurements by space gamma-ray telescopes of the small fraction of the 56Co and 57Co gamma rays that escaped the SN1987A remnant without absorption confirmed earlier predictions that those two radioactive nuclei were the power source.\nBecause the 56Co in SN1987A has now completely decayed, it no longer supports the luminosity of the SN 1987A ejecta. That is currently powered by the radioactive decay of 44Ti, with a half life of about 60 years but which increases with its ionization state as the decay is purely through electron capture. With this change, X-rays produced by the ring interactions of the ejecta began to contribute significantly to the total light curve. This was noticed by the Hubble Space Telescope as a steady increase in luminosity 10,000 days after the event in the blue and red spectral bands. X-ray lines 44Ti observed by the INTEGRAL space X-ray telescope showed that the total mass of radioactive 44Ti synthesized during the explosion was .\nObservations of the radioactive power from their decays in the 1987A light curve have measured accurate total masses of the 56Ni, 57Ni, and 44Ti created in the explosion, which agree with the masses measured by gamma-ray line space telescopes and provides nucleosynthesis constraints on the computed supernova model.\nInteraction with circumstellar material.\nThe three bright rings around SN 1987A that were visible after a few months in images by the Hubble Space Telescope are material from the stellar wind of the progenitor. These rings were ionized by the ultraviolet flash from the supernova explosion, and consequently began emitting in various emission lines. These rings did not \"turn on\" until several months after the supernova and the process can be very accurately studied through spectroscopy. The rings are large enough that their angular size can be measured precisely: the inner ring is 0.808 arcseconds (3.92 microradians) in radius. The time light traveled to brighten the inner ring gives its radius of 0.66 (ly) light years. Using this as the base of a right angle triangle and the angular size as seen from the Earth for the local angle, one can use basic trigonometry to calculate the distance to SN 1987A, which is about 168,000 light-years. The material from the explosion is catching up with the material expelled during both its red and blue supergiant phases and heating it, so we observe ring structures about the star.\nAround 2001, the expanding (&gt;7,000\u00a0km/s) supernova ejecta collided with the inner ring. This caused its heating and the generation of x-rays\u2014the x-ray flux from the ring increased by a factor of three between 2001 and 2009. A part of the x-ray radiation, which is absorbed by the dense ejecta close to the center, is responsible for a comparable increase in the optical flux from the supernova remnant in 2001\u20132009. This increase of the brightness of the remnant reversed the trend observed before 2001, when the optical flux was decreasing due to the decaying of 44Ti isotope.\nA study reported in June 2015, using images from the Hubble Space Telescope and the Very Large Telescope taken between 1994 and 2014, shows that the emissions from the clumps of matter making up the rings are fading as the clumps are destroyed by the shock wave. It is predicted the ring would fade away between 2020 and 2030. These findings are also supported by the results of a three-dimensional hydrodynamic model which describes the interaction of the blast wave with the circumstellar nebula.\nThe model also shows that X-ray emission from ejecta heated up by the shock will be dominant very soon, after which the ring would fade away. As the shock wave passes the circumstellar ring it will trace the history of mass loss of the supernova's progenitor and provide useful information for discriminating among various models for the progenitor of SN 1987A.\nIn 2018, radio observations from the interaction between the circumstellar ring of dust and the shockwave confirmed that the shockwave has now left the circumstellar material. It also shows that the speed of the shockwave, which slowed down to 2,300\u00a0km/s while interacting with the dust in the ring, has now re-accelerated to 3,600\u00a0km/s.\nCondensation of warm dust in the ejecta.\nSoon after the SN 1987A outburst, three major groups embarked in a photometric monitoring of the supernova: the South African Astronomical Observatory (SAAO), the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO), and the European Southern Observatory (ESO). In particular, the ESO team reported an infrared excess which became apparent beginning less than one month after the explosion (March 11, 1987). Three possible interpretations for it were discussed in this work: the infrared echo hypothesis was discarded, and thermal emission from dust that could have condensed in the ejecta was favoured (in which case the estimated temperature at that epoch was ~ 1250 K, and the dust mass was approximately M\u2609). The possibility that the IR excess could be produced by optically thick free-free emission seemed unlikely because the luminosity in UV photons needed to keep the envelope ionized was much larger than what was available, but it was not ruled out in view of the eventuality of electron scattering, which had not been considered.\nHowever, none of these three groups had sufficiently convincing proofs to claim for a dusty ejecta on the basis of an IR excess alone.\nAn independent Australian team advanced several arguments in favour of an echo interpretation. This seemingly straightforward interpretation of the nature of the IR emission was challenged by the ESO group and definitively ruled out after presenting optical evidence for the presence of dust in the SN ejecta.\nTo discriminate between the two interpretations, they considered the implication of the presence of an echoing dust cloud on the optical light curve, and on the existence of diffuse optical emission around the SN. They concluded that the expected optical echo from the cloud should be resolvable, and could be very bright with an integrated visual brightness of magnitude 10.3 around day 650. However, further optical observations, as expressed in SN light curve, showed no inflection in the light curve at the predicted level. Finally, the ESO team presented a convincing clumpy model for dust condensation in the ejecta.\nAlthough it had been thought more than 50 years ago that dust could form in the ejecta of a core-collapse supernova, which in particular could explain the origin of the dust seen in young galaxies, that was the first time that such a condensation was observed. If SN 1987A is a typical representative of its class then the derived mass of the warm dust formed in the debris of core collapse supernovae is not sufficient to account for all the dust observed in the early universe. However, a much larger reservoir of ~0.25 solar mass of colder dust (at ~26 K) in the ejecta of SN 1987A was found with the infrared Herschel Space Telescope in 2011 and confirmed with the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) in 2014.\nALMA observations.\nFollowing the confirmation of a large amount of cold dust in the ejecta, ALMA has continued observing SN 1987A. Synchrotron radiation due to shock interaction in the equatorial ring has been measured. Cold (20\u2013100K) carbon monoxide (CO) and silicate molecules (SiO) were observed. The data show that CO and SiO distributions are clumpy, and that different nucleosynthesis products (C, O and Si) are located in different places of the ejecta, indicating the footprints of the stellar interior at the time of the explosion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28931", "revid": "34651759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28931", "title": "Standard Oil", "text": "American oil company (1870\u20131911)\nStandard Oil Company was a corporate trust in the petroleum industry that existed from 1882 to 1911. The origins of the trust lay in the operations of the Standard Oil Company (Ohio), which had been founded in 1870 by John D. Rockefeller. The trust was born on January 2, 1882, when a group of 41 investors signed the Standard Oil Trust Agreement, which pooled their securities of 40 companies into a single holding agency managed by nine trustees. The original trust was valued at $70 million. On March 21, 1892, the Standard Oil Trust was dissolved by order of the Supreme Court of Ohio and its holdings were reorganized into 20 independent companies that formed an unofficial union referred to as \"Standard Oil Interests.\" In 1899, the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey acquired the shares of the other 19 companies and became the holding company for the trust.\nJersey Standard operated a near monopoly in the American oil industry from 1899 until 1911 and was the largest corporation in the United States. In 1911, the landmark Supreme Court case \"Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States\" found Jersey Standard guilty of anticompetitive practices and ordered it to break up its holdings. The charge against Jersey came about in part as a consequence of the reporting of Ida Tarbell, who wrote \"The History of the Standard Oil Company\". The net value of companies severed from Jersey Standard in 1911 was $375 million, which constituted 57 per cent of Jersey's value. After the dissolution, Jersey Standard became the United States' second largest corporation after United States Steel.\nJersey Standard, which was renamed Exxon in 1973 and ExxonMobil in 1999, remains one of the largest public oil companies in the world. Many of the companies that disassociated from Jersey Standard in 1911 remained powerful businesses through the twentieth century, and have since merged into other oil and gas companies; two of the largest include Chevron Corporation, the continuation of the Standard Oil Company of California, and BP, which while founded separately from Standard's lineage later acquired Standard Oil of Ohio and Standard Oil of Indiana (which later was known as Amoco).\nFounding and early years.\nStandard Oil's prehistory began in 1863, as an Ohio partnership formed by industrialist John D. Rockefeller, his brother William Rockefeller, Henry Flagler, chemist Samuel Andrews, silent partner Stephen V. Harkness, and Oliver Burr Jennings, who had married the sister of William Rockefeller's wife. In 1870, Rockefeller abolished the partnership and incorporated Standard Oil in Ohio. The company was established with $1 million in capital. Of the initial 10,000 shares, John D. Rockefeller received 2,667, Harkness received 1,334, William Rockefeller, Flagler, and Andrews received 1,333 each, Jennings received 1,000, and the firm of Rockefeller, Andrews &amp; Flagler received 1,000. Rockefeller chose the \"Standard Oil\" name as a symbol of the reliable \"standards\" of quality and service that he envisioned for the nascent oil industry.\nIn the early years, John D. Rockefeller dominated the combine; he was the single most important figure in shaping the new oil industry. He quickly distributed power and the tasks of policy formation to a system of committees, but always remained the largest shareholder. Authority was centralized in the company's main office in Cleveland, but decisions in the office were made cooperatively.\nThe company grew by increasing sales and through acquisitions. After purchasing competing firms, Rockefeller shut down those he believed to be inefficient and kept the others. In a seminal deal, in 1868, the Lake Shore Railroad, a part of the New York Central, gave Rockefeller's firm a going rate of one cent a gallon or forty-two cents a barrel, an effective 71% discount from its listed rates in return for a promise to ship at least 60 carloads of oil daily and to handle loading and unloading on its own. Smaller companies decried such deals as unfair because they were not producing enough oil to qualify for discounts.\nStandard's actions and secret transport deals helped its kerosene price to drop from 58 to 26 cents from 1865 to 1870. Rockefeller used the Erie Canal as a cheap alternative form of transportation\u2014in the summer months when it was not frozen\u2014to ship his refined oil from Cleveland to the industrialized Northeast. In the winter months, his only options were the three trunk lines\u2014the Erie Railroad and the New York Central Railroad to New York City, and the Pennsylvania Railroad to Pittsburgh and Philadelphia.\nCompetitors disliked the company's business practices, but consumers liked the lower prices. Standard Oil, being formed well before the discovery of the Spindletop oil field (in Texas, far from Standard Oil's base in the Midwest) and a demand for oil other than for heat and light, was well placed to control the growth of the oil business. The company was perceived to own and control all aspects of the trade.\nSouth Improvement Company.\nIn 1872, Rockefeller joined the South Improvement Co. which would have allowed him to receive rebates for shipping and drawbacks on oil his competitors shipped. He successfully convinced refineries in Cleveland to sell their businesses to Standard Oil in exchange for cash or stock. But when this deal became known, competitors convinced the Pennsylvania Legislature to revoke South Improvement's charter. No oil was ever shipped under this arrangement. Using highly effective tactics, later widely criticized, it absorbed or destroyed most of its competition in Cleveland in less than two months and later throughout the northeastern United States.\nHepburn Committee.\nA. Barton Hepburn was directed by the New York State Legislature in 1879, to investigate the railroads' practice of giving rebates to their largest clients within the state. Merchants without ties to the oil industry had pressed for the hearings. Prior to the committee's investigation, few knew of the size of Standard Oil's control and influence on seemingly unaffiliated oil refineries and pipelines\u2014Hawke (1980) cites that only a dozen or so within Standard Oil knew the extent of company operations.\nThe committee counsel, Simon Sterne, questioned representatives from the Erie Railroad and the New York Central Railroad and discovered that at least half of their long-haul traffic granted rebates and much of this traffic came from Standard Oil. Even independent companies not allied with Standard Oil confirmed receiving these rebates such as Simon Bernheimner, who was once a partner of the Olefin Oil Company. The committee then shifted its focus to Standard Oil's operations. John Dustin Archbold, as president of Acme Oil Company, denied that Acme was associated with Standard Oil. He then admitted to being a director of Standard Oil.\nThe committee's final report scolded the railroads for their rebate policies and cited Standard Oil as an example. This scolding was largely moot to Standard Oil's interests since long-distance oil pipelines were now their preferred method of transportation.\nStandard Oil Trust.\nIn response to state laws that had the result of limiting the scale of companies, Rockefeller and his associates developed innovative ways of organizing to effectively manage their fast-growing enterprise. On January 2, 1882, they combined their disparate companies, spread across dozens of states, under a single group of trustees. By a secret agreement, the existing 37 stockholders conveyed their shares \"in trust\" to nine trustees: John and William Rockefeller, Oliver H. Payne, Charles Pratt, Henry Flagler, John D. Archbold, William G. Warden, Jabez Bostwick, and Benjamin Brewster.\n\"Whereas some state legislatures imposed special taxes on out-of-state corporations doing business in their states, other legislatures forbade corporations in their state from holding the stock of companies based elsewhere. (Legislators established such restrictions in the hope that they would force successful companies to incorporate\u2014and thus pay taxes\u2014in their state.)\"\nStandard Oil's organizational concept proved so successful that other giant enterprises adopted this \"trust\" form.\nBy 1882, Rockefeller's top aide was John Dustin Archbold, whom he left in control after disengaging from business to concentrate on philanthropy after 1896. Other notable principals of the company include Henry Flagler, developer of the Florida East Coast Railway and resort cities, and Henry H. Rogers, who built the Virginian Railway.\nIn 1885, Standard Oil of Ohio moved its headquarters from Cleveland to its permanent headquarters at 26 Broadway in New York City. Concurrently, the trustees of Standard Oil Company of Ohio chartered the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey (SOCNJ) to take advantage of New Jersey's more lenient corporate stock ownership laws.\nSherman Antitrust Act of 1890.\nIn 1890, Congress overwhelmingly passed the Sherman Antitrust Act (Senate 51\u20131; House 242\u20130), a source of American anti-monopoly laws. The law forbade every contract, scheme, deal, or conspiracy to restrain trade, though the phrase \"restraint of trade\" remained subjective. The Standard Oil group quickly attracted attention from antitrust authorities leading to a lawsuit filed by Ohio Attorney General David K. Watson.\nEarnings and dividends.\nFrom 1882 to 1906, Standard paid out $548,436,000 () in dividends at a 65.4% payout ratio. The total net earnings from 1882 to 1906 amounted to $838,783,800 (), exceeding the dividends by $290,347,800, which was used for plant expansions.\n1895\u20131913.\nIn 1896, John Rockefeller retired from the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey, the holding company of the group, but remained president and a major shareholder. Vice-president John Dustin Archbold took a large part in the running of the firm. In the year 1904, Standard Oil controlled 91% of oil refinement and 85% of final sales in the United States. At this time, state and federal laws sought to counter this development with antitrust laws. In 1911, the U.S. Justice Department sued the group under the federal antitrust law and ordered its breakup into 39 companies.\nStandard Oil's market position was initially established through an emphasis on efficiency and responsibility. While most companies dumped gasoline in rivers (this was before the automobile was popular), Standard used it to fuel its machines. While other companies' refineries piled mountains of heavy waste, Rockefeller found ways to sell it. For example, Standard bought the company that invented and produced Vaseline, the Chesebrough Manufacturing Co., which was a Standard company only from 1908 until 1911.\nOne of the original \"Muckrakers\" Ida M. Tarbell, was an American author and journalist whose father was an oil producer whose business had failed because of Rockefeller's business dealings. After extensive interviews with a sympathetic senior executive of Standard Oil, Henry H. Rogers, Tarbell's investigations of Standard Oil fueled growing public attacks on Standard Oil and monopolies in general. Her work was published in 19 parts in \"McClure's\" magazine from November 1902 to October 1904, then in 1904 as the book \"The History of the Standard Oil Co\".\nThe Standard Oil Trust was controlled by a small group of families. Rockefeller stated in 1910: \"I think it is true that the Pratt family, the Payne\u2013Whitney family (which were one, as all the stock came from Colonel Payne), the Harkness-Flagler family (which came into the company together) and the Rockefeller family controlled a majority of the stock during all the history of the company up to the present time.\"\nThese families reinvested most of the dividends in other industries, especially railroads. They also invested heavily in the gas and the electric lighting business (including the giant Consolidated Gas Co. of New York City). They made large purchases of stock in U.S. Steel, Amalgamated Copper, and even Corn Products Refining Co.\nWeetman Pearson, a British petroleum entrepreneur in Mexico, began negotiating with Standard Oil in 1912\u201313 to sell his \"El Aguila\" oil company, since Pearson was no longer bound to promises to the Porfirio D\u00edaz regime (1876\u20131911) not to sell to U.S. interests. However, the deal fell through and the firm was sold to Royal Dutch Shell.\nChina.\nStandard Oil's production increased so rapidly it soon exceeded U.S. demand, and the company began viewing export markets. In the 1890s, Standard Oil began marketing kerosene to China's large population of close to 400\u00a0million as lamp fuel. For its Chinese trademark and brand, Standard Oil adopted the name \"Mei Foo\" () as a transliteration. Mei Foo also became the name of the tin lamp that Standard Oil produced and gave away or sold cheaply to Chinese farmers, encouraging them to switch from vegetable oil to kerosene. The response was positive, sales boomed, and China became Standard Oil's largest market in Asia. Prior to Pearl Harbor, Stanvac was the largest single U.S. investment in Southeast Asia.\nThe North China Department of Socony (Standard Oil Company of New York) operated a subsidiary called Socony River and Coastal Fleet, North Coast Division, which became the North China Division of Stanvac (Standard Vacuum Oil Company) after that company was formed in 1933. To distribute its products, Standard Oil constructed storage tanks, canneries (bulk oil from large ocean tankers was re-packaged into tins), warehouses, and offices in key Chinese cities. For inland distribution, the company had motor tank trucks and railway tank cars, and for river navigation, it had a fleet of low-draft steamers and other vessels.\nStanvac's North China Division, based in Shanghai, owned hundreds of vessels, including motor barges, steamers, launches, tugboats, and tankers. Up to 13 tankers operated on the Yangtze River, the largest of which were \"Mei Ping\" (\u00a0gross register tons\u00a0(GRT)), \"Mei Hsia\" (\u00a0GRT), and \"Mei An\" (\u00a0GRT). All three were destroyed in the 1937 USS \"Panay\" incident.\n\"Mei An\" was launched in 1901 and was the first vessel in the fleet. Other vessels included \"Mei Chuen\", \"Mei Foo\", \"Mei Hung\", \"Mei Kiang\", \"Mei Lu\", \"Mei Tan\", \"Mei Su\", \"Mei Hsia\", \"Mei Ying\", and \"Mei Yun\". \"Mei Hsia\", a tanker, was specially designed for river duty. It was built by New Engineering and Shipbuilding Works of Shanghai, who also built the 500-ton launch \"Mei Foo\" in 1912.\n\"Mei Hsia\" (\"Beautiful Gorges\") was launched in 1926 and carried 350 tons of bulk oil in three holds, plus a forward cargo hold, and space between decks for carrying general cargo or packed oil. She had a length of , a beam of , a depth of , and had a bulletproof wheelhouse. \"Mei Ping\" (\"Beautiful Tranquility\"), launched in 1927, was designed off-shore, but assembled and finished in Shanghai. Its oil-fuel burners came from the U.S. and water-tube boilers came from England.\nMiddle East.\nStandard Oil and Socony-Vacuum Oil Company became partners in providing markets for the oil reserves in the Middle East. In 1906, SOCONY (later Mobil) opened its first fuel terminals in Alexandria. It explored in Palestine before the World War broke out, but ran into conflict with the local authorities.\nMonopoly charges and antitrust legislation.\nBy 1890, Standard Oil controlled 88 percent of the refined oil flows in the United States. The state of Ohio successfully sued Standard, compelling the dissolution of the trust in 1892. In response, Standard simply separated Standard Oil of Ohio and kept control of it. Eventually, the state of New Jersey changed its incorporation laws to allow a company to hold shares in other companies in any state.\nAs a result, the Standard Oil Trust, based at 26 Broadway in New York, was legally reborn as a holding company in 1899 - the \"Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey\" (SOCNJ). This company held stock in 41 others, which controlled other companies, which in turn controlled yet other companies. According to Daniel Yergin in his Pulitzer Prize-winning \"\" (1990), this conglomerate was seen by the public as all-pervasive, controlled by a select group of directors, and completely unaccountable.\nIn 1904, Standard controlled 91 percent of production and 85 percent of final sales. Most of its output was kerosene, of which 55 percent was exported around the world. After 1900 it did not try to force competitors out of business by selling at a loss. The federal Commissioner of Corporations studied Standard's operations from the period of 1904 to 1906 and concluded that \"beyond question ... the dominant position of the Standard Oil Co. in the refining industry was due to unfair practices\u2014to abuse of the control of pipe-lines, to railroad discriminations, and to unfair methods of competition in the sale of the refined petroleum products\".\nBecause of competition from other firms, their market share gradually eroded to 70 percent by 1906 which was the year when the antitrust case was filed against Standard. Standard's market share was 64 percent by 1911 when Standard was ordered broken up. At least 147 refining companies were competing with Standard including Gulf, Texaco, and Shell. It did not try to monopolize the exploration and extraction of oil (its share in 1911 was 11 percent).\nIn 1909, the U.S. Justice Department sued Standard under federal antitrust law, the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, for sustaining a monopoly and restraining interstate commerce by:\nRebates, preferences, and other discriminatory practices in favor of the combination by railroad companies; restraint and monopolization by control of pipe lines, and unfair practices against competing pipe lines; contracts with competitors in restraint of trade; unfair methods of competition, such as local price cutting at the points where necessary to suppress competition; [and] espionage of the business of competitors, the operation of bogus independent companies, and payment of rebates on oil, with the like intent.\nThe lawsuit argued that Standard's monopolistic practices had taken place over the preceding four years:\nThe general result of the investigation has been to disclose the existence of numerous and flagrant discriminations by the railroads on behalf of the Standard Oil Co. and its affiliated corporations. With comparatively few exceptions, mainly of other large concerns in California, the Standard has been the sole beneficiary of such discriminations. In almost every section of the country that company has been found to enjoy some unfair advantages over its competitors, and some of these discriminations affect enormous areas.\nThe government identified four illegal patterns: (1) secret and semi-secret railroad rates; (2) discriminations in the open arrangement of rates; (3) discriminations in classification and rules of shipment; (4) discriminations in the treatment of private tank cars. The government alleged:\nAlmost everywhere the rates from the shipping points used exclusively, or almost exclusively, by the Standard are relatively lower than the rates from the shipping points of its competitors. Rates have been made low to let the Standard into markets, or they have been made high to keep its competitors out of markets. Trifling differences in distances are made an excuse for large differences in rates favorable to the Standard Oil Co., while large differences in distances are ignored where they are against the Standard. Sometimes connecting roads prorate on oil\u2014that is, make through rates which are lower than the combination of local rates; sometimes they refuse to prorate; but in either case the result of their policy is to favor the Standard Oil Co. Different methods are used in different places and under different conditions, but the net result is that from Maine to California the general arrangement of open rates on petroleum oil is such as to give the Standard an unreasonable advantage over its competitors.\nThe government said that Standard raised prices to its monopolistic customers but lowered them to hurt competitors, often disguising its illegal actions by using bogus, supposedly independent companies it controlled.\nThe evidence is, in fact, absolutely conclusive that the Standard Oil Co. charges altogether excessive prices where it meets no competition, and particularly where there is little likelihood of competitors entering the field, and that, on the other hand, where competition is active, it frequently cuts prices to a point which leaves even the Standard little or no profit, and which more often leaves no profit to the competitor, whose costs are ordinarily somewhat higher.\nOn May 15, 1911, the US Supreme Court upheld the lower court judgment and declared the Standard Oil group to be an \"unreasonable\" monopoly under the Sherman Antitrust Act, Section II. It ordered Standard to break up into 39 independent companies with different boards of directors, the biggest two of the companies being Standard Oil of New Jersey (which became Exxon) and Standard Oil of New York (which became Mobil).\nStandard's president, John D. Rockefeller, had long since retired from any management role. But, as he owned a quarter of the shares of the resultant companies, and those share values mostly doubled, he emerged from the dissolution as the richest man in the world. The dissolution had actually propelled Rockefeller's personal wealth.\nBreakup.\nBy 1911 the Supreme Court of the United States ruled, in \"Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States\", that Standard Oil Company of New Jersey must be dissolved under the Sherman Antitrust Act and split into 34 companies. Two of these companies were Standard Oil of New Jersey (Jersey Standard or Esso), which eventually became Exxon, and Standard Oil of New York (Socony), which eventually became Mobil; those two companies later merged into ExxonMobil.\nOver the next few decades, both companies grew significantly. Jersey Standard, led by Walter C. Teagle, became the largest oil producer in the world. It acquired a 50 percent share in Humble Oil &amp; Refining Co., a Texas oil producer. Socony purchased a 45 percent interest in Magnolia Petroleum Co., a major refiner, marketer, and pipeline transporter. In 1931, Socony merged with Vacuum Oil Co., an industry pioneer dating back to 1866, and a growing Standard Oil spin-off in its own right.\nIn the Asia-Pacific region, Jersey Standard had oil production and refineries in the Dutch East Indies but no marketing network. Socony-Vacuum had Asian marketing outlets supplied remotely from California. In 1933, Jersey Standard and Socony-Vacuum merged their interests in the region into a 50\u201350 joint venture. Standard-Vacuum Oil Co., or \"Stanvac\", operated in 50 countries, from East Africa to New Zealand, before it was dissolved in 1962.\nRockefeller's original company, Standard Oil Company of Ohio (Sohio), effectively ceased to exist when it was purchased by BP in 1987. BP continued to sell gasoline under the Sohio brand until 1991. Other Standard oil entities include \"Standard Oil of Indiana\" which became Amoco after other mergers and a name change in the 1980s, and \"Standard Oil of California\" which became Chevron Corporation.\nLegacy and criticism of breakup.\nSome have speculated that if not for that court ruling, Standard Oil could have possibly been worth more than $1\u00a0trillion in the 2000s. Whether the breakup of Standard Oil was beneficial is a matter of some controversy. Some economists believe that Standard Oil was not a monopoly, and argue that the intense free market competition resulted in cheaper oil prices and more diverse petroleum products. Critics claimed that success in meeting consumer needs was driving other companies, who were not as successful, out of the market.\nAn example of this thinking was given in 1890, when Rep. William Mason, arguing in favor of the Sherman Antitrust Act, said: \"trusts have made products cheaper, have reduced prices; but if the price of oil, for instance, were reduced to one cent a barrel, it would not right the wrong done to people of this country by the \"trusts\" which have destroyed legitimate competition and driven honest men from legitimate business enterprise\".\nThe Sherman Antitrust Act prohibits the restraint of trade. Defenders of Standard Oil insist that the company did not restrain trade; they were simply superior competitors. The federal courts ruled otherwise.\nSome economic historians have observed that Standard Oil was in the process of losing its monopoly at the time of its breakup in 1911. Although Standard had 90 percent of American refining capacity in 1880, by 1911, that had shrunk to between 60 and 65 percent because of the expansion in capacity by competitors. Numerous regional competitors (such as Pure Oil in the East, Texaco and Gulf Oil in the Gulf Coast, Cities Service and Sun in the Midcontinent, Union in California, and Shell overseas) had organized themselves into competitive vertically integrated oil companies, the industry structure pioneered years earlier by Standard itself.\nIn addition, demand for petroleum products was increasing more rapidly than the ability of Standard to expand. The result was that although in 1911 Standard still controlled most production in the older regions of the Appalachian Basin (78 percent share, down from 92 percent in 1880), Lima-Indiana (90 percent, down from 95 percent in 1906), and the Illinois Basin (83 percent, down from 100 percent in 1906), its share was much lower in the rapidly expanding new regions that would dominate U.S. oil production in the 20th century. In 1911, Standard controlled only 44 percent of production in the Midcontinent, 29 percent in California, and 10 percent on the Gulf Coast.\nSome analysts argue that the breakup was beneficial to consumers in the long run, and no one has ever proposed that Standard Oil be reassembled in pre-1911 form. ExxonMobil, however, does represent a substantial part of the original company.\nSince the breakup of Standard Oil, several companies, such as General Motors and Microsoft, have come under antitrust investigation for being inherently too large for market competition; however, most of them remained together. The only company since the breakup of Standard Oil that was divided into parts like Standard Oil was AT&amp;T, which after decades as a regulated natural monopoly, was forced to divest itself of the Bell System in 1984.\nSuccessor companies.\nStandard Oil's breakup split the company into 39 separate companies. Several of these companies were considered among the Seven Sisters who dominated the industry worldwide for much of the 20th century, and both Standard Oil's direct and indirect descendants make up Big Oil.\nToday, Standard Oil's influence is primarily concentrated in a few companies:\nMany of today's largest oil and gas companies are or have acquired a descendant of Standard Oil. Moreover, many other companies have acquired or been created from Standard Oil descendants over time, including Unilever (which acquired Standard descendant Vaseline in 1987), TransUnion (created originally as a holding company for Standard descendant Union Tank Car) and Berkshire Hathaway (which later acquired Union Tank Car).\nRights to the name.\nOf the 39 \"Baby Standards\", 11 were given rights to the Standard Oil name, based on the state they were in. Conoco and Atlantic elected to use their respective names instead of the Standard name, and their rights would be claimed by other companies.\nBy the 1980s, most companies were using their brand names instead of the Standard name, with Amoco being the last one to have widespread use of the \"Standard\" name, as it gave Midwestern owners the option of using the Amoco name or Standard.\nThree supermajor companies now own the rights to the Standard name in the United States: ExxonMobil, Chevron Corp., and BP. BP acquired its rights through acquiring Standard Oil of Ohio and merging with Amoco and has a small handful of stations in the Midwestern United States using the Standard name. Likewise, BP continues to sell marine fuel under the Sohio brand at various marinas throughout Ohio. ExxonMobil keeps the Esso trademark alive at stations that sell diesel fuel by selling \"Esso Diesel\" displayed on the pumps.\nExxonMobil has full international rights to the Standard name, and continues to use the Esso name overseas and in Canada. To protect its trademark, Chevron has one station in each state it owns the rights to be branded as Standard. Some of its Standard-branded stations have a mix of some signs that say Standard and some signs that say Chevron. Over time, Chevron has changed which station in a given state is the Standard station. As of December 2024 Chevron got a new federal trademark registered for the Standard name for its new electric charging fuel stations.\nIn February 2016, ExxonMobil successfully asked a U.S. federal court to lift the 1930s trademark injunction that banned it from using the Esso brand in some states. Neither BP nor Chevron objected to the decision. ExxonMobil asked for it to be lifted primarily so it could have universal marketing material for its stations globally and, likewise, the Esso name returned to some minor station signage at both Exxon and Mobil stations.\nAs of 2021, six states that have the Standard Oil name rights are not being actively used by the companies that own them. Chevron withdrew from Kentucky (home of the Standard Oil of Kentucky, which Chevron acquired in 1961) in 2010, while BP gradually withdrew from five Great Plains and Rocky Mountain states (Colorado, Montana, North Dakota, Oklahoma, and Wyoming) since the initial conversion of Amoco sites to BP. As ExxonMobil has stations in all of these states, with the aforementioned minor signage ExxonMobil has de facto claimed the Standard trademark in these states, though they are still held by their respective rights holders.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28933", "revid": "3476301", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28933", "title": "Scots Gaelic", "text": ""}
{"id": "28935", "revid": "12780680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28935", "title": "Seismology", "text": "Scientific study of earthquakes and propagation of elastic waves through a planet\nSeismology (; from Ancient Greek \u03c3\u03b5\u03b9\u03c3\u03bc\u03cc\u03c2 (\"seism\u00f3s\") meaning \"earthquake\" and -\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03af\u03b1 (\"-log\u00eda\") meaning \"study of\") is the scientific study of earthquakes (or generally, quakes) and the generation and propagation of elastic waves through planetary bodies. It also includes studies of the environmental effects of earthquakes such as tsunamis; other seismic sources such as volcanoes, plate tectonics, glaciers, rivers, oceanic microseisms, and the atmosphere; and artificial processes such as explosions.\nPaleoseismology is a related field that uses geology to infer information regarding past earthquakes. A recording of Earth's motion as a function of time, created by a seismograph is called a seismogram. A seismologist is a scientist who works in basic or applied seismology.\nHistory.\nAncient and classical eras.\nScholarly interest in earthquakes can be traced back to antiquity. Early speculations on the natural causes of earthquakes were included in the writings of Thales of Miletus (c.\u2009585 BCE), Anaximenes of Miletus (c.\u2009550 BCE), Aristotle (c.\u2009340 BCE), and Zhang Heng (132 CE).\nIn 132 CE, Zhang Heng of China's Han dynasty designed the first known seismoscope.\nBeginnings of modern science.\nIn the 17th century, Athanasius Kircher argued that earthquakes were caused by the movement of fire within a system of channels inside the Earth. Martin Lister (1638\u20131712) and Nicolas Lemery (1645\u20131715) proposed that earthquakes were caused by chemical explosions within the Earth.\nThe Lisbon earthquake of 1755, coinciding with the general flowering of science in Europe, set in motion intensified scientific attempts to understand the behaviour and causation of earthquakes. The earliest responses include work by John Bevis (1757) and John Michell (1761). Michell determined that earthquakes originate within the Earth and were waves of movement caused by \"shifting masses of rock miles below the surface\".\nIn response to a series of earthquakes near Comrie in Scotland in 1839, a committee was formed in the United Kingdom in order to produce better detection methods for earthquakes. The outcome of this was the production of one of the first modern seismometers by James David Forbes, first presented in a report by David Milne-Home in 1842. This seismometer was an inverted pendulum, which recorded the measurements of seismic activity through the use of a pencil placed on paper above the pendulum. The designs provided did not prove effective, according to Milne's reports.\nFrom 1857, Robert Mallet laid the foundation of modern instrumental seismology and carried out seismological experiments using explosives. He is also responsible for coining the word \"seismology.\" He is widely considered to be the \"Father of Seismology\".\nIn 1889 Ernst von Rebeur-Paschwitz recorded the first teleseismic earthquake signal (an earthquake in Japan recorded at Pottsdam Germany).\nIn 1897, Emil Wiechert's theoretical calculations led him to conclude that the Earth's interior consists of a mantle of silicates, surrounding a core of iron.\nIn 1906 Richard Dixon Oldham identified the separate arrival of P waves, S waves and surface waves on seismograms and found the first clear evidence that the Earth has a central core.\nIn 1909, Andrija Mohorovi\u010di\u0107, one of the founders of modern seismology, discovered and defined the Mohorovi\u010di\u0107 discontinuity. Usually referred to as the \"Moho discontinuity\" or the \"Moho,\" it is the boundary between the Earth's crust and the mantle. It is defined by the distinct change in velocity of seismological waves as they pass through changing densities of rock.\nIn 1910, after studying the April 1906 San Francisco earthquake, Harry Fielding Reid put forward the \"elastic rebound theory\" which remains the foundation for modern tectonic studies. The development of this theory depended on the considerable progress of earlier independent streams of work on the behavior of elastic materials and in mathematics.\nAn early scientific study of aftershocks from a destructive earthquake came after the January 1920 Xalapa earthquake. An Wiechert seismograph was brought to the Mexican city of Xalapa by rail after the earthquake. The instrument was deployed to record its aftershocks. Data from the seismograph would eventually determine that the mainshock was produced along a shallow crustal fault.\nIn 1926, Harold Jeffreys was the first to claim, based on his study of earthquake waves, that below the mantle, the core of the Earth is liquid.\nIn 1937, Inge Lehmann determined that within Earth's liquid outer core there is a solid inner core.\nIn 1950, Michael S. Longuet-Higgins elucidated the ocean processes responsible for the global background seismic microseism.\nBy the 1960s, Earth science had developed to the point where a comprehensive theory of the causation of seismic events and geodetic motions had come together in the now well-established theory of plate tectonics.\nTypes of seismic wave.\nSeismic waves are elastic waves that propagate in solid or fluid materials. They can be divided into \"body waves\" that travel through the interior of the materials; \"surface waves\" that travel along surfaces or interfaces between materials; and \"normal modes\", a form of standing wave.\nBody waves.\nThere are two types of body waves, pressure waves or primary waves (P waves) and shear or secondary waves (S waves). P waves are longitudinal waves associated with compression and expansion, and involve particle motion parallel to the direction of wave propagation. P waves are always the first waves to appear on a seismogram as they are the waves that travel fastest through solids. S waves are transverse waves associated with shear, and involve particle motion perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. S waves travel more slowly than P waves so they appear later than P waves on a seismogram. Because of their low shear strength, fluids cannot support transverse elastic waves, so S waves travel only in solids.\nSurface waves.\nSurface waves are the result of P and S waves interacting with the surface of the Earth. These waves are dispersive, meaning that different frequencies have different velocities. The two main surface wave types are Rayleigh waves, which have both compressional and shear motions, and Love waves, which are purely shear. Rayleigh waves result from the interaction of P waves and vertically polarized S waves with the surface and can exist in any solid medium. Love waves are formed by horizontally polarized S waves interacting with the surface, and can only exist if there is a change in the elastic properties with depth in a solid medium, which is always the case in seismological applications. Surface waves travel more slowly than P waves and S waves because they are the result of these waves traveling along indirect paths to interact with Earth's surface. Because they travel along the surface of the Earth, their energy decays less rapidly than body waves (1/distance2 vs. 1/distance3), and thus the shaking caused by surface waves is generally stronger than that of body waves, and the primary surface waves are often thus the largest signals on earthquake seismograms. Surface waves are strongly excited when their source is close to the surface, as in a shallow earthquake or a near-surface explosion, and are much weaker for deep earthquake sources.\nNormal modes.\nBoth body and surface waves are traveling waves; however, large earthquakes can also make the entire Earth \"ring\" like a resonant bell. This ringing is a mixture of normal modes with discrete frequencies and periods of approximately an hour or shorter. Normal-mode motion caused by a very large earthquake can be observed for up to a month after the event. The first observations of normal modes were made in the 1960s as the advent of higher-fidelity instruments coincided with two of the largest earthquakes of the 20th century, the 1960 Valdivia earthquake and the 1964 Alaska earthquake. Since then, the normal modes of the Earth have given us some of the strongest constraints on the deep structure of the Earth.\nEarthquakes.\nOne of the first attempts at the scientific study of earthquakes followed the 1755 Lisbon earthquake. Other earthquakes that spurred major advancements in the science of seismology include the 1857 Basilicata earthquake, the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, the 1964 Alaska earthquake, the 2004 Sumatra-Andaman earthquake, and the 2011 Great East Japan earthquake.\nControlled seismic sources.\nSeismic waves produced by explosions or vibrating controlled sources are one of the primary methods of underground exploration in geophysics (in addition to many different electromagnetic methods such as induced polarization and magnetotellurics). Controlled-source seismology has been used to map salt domes, anticlines and other geologic traps in petroleum-bearing rocks, faults, rock types, and long-buried giant meteor craters. For example, the Chicxulub Crater, which was caused by an impact that has been implicated in the extinction of the dinosaurs, was localized to Central America by analyzing ejecta in the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene boundary, and then physically proven to exist using seismic maps from oil exploration.\nDetection of seismic waves.\nSeismometers are sensors that detect and record the motion of the Earth arising from elastic waves. Seismometers may be deployed at the Earth's surface, in shallow vaults, in boreholes, or underwater. A complete instrument package that records seismic signals is called a seismograph. Networks of seismographs continuously record ground motions around the world to facilitate the monitoring and analysis of global earthquakes and other sources of seismic activity. Rapid location of earthquakes makes tsunami warnings possible because seismic waves travel considerably faster than tsunami waves.\nSeismometers also record signals from non-earthquake sources ranging from explosions (nuclear and chemical), to local noise from wind or anthropogenic activities, to incessant signals generated at the ocean floor and coasts induced by ocean waves (the global microseism), to cryospheric events associated with large icebergs and glaciers. Above-ocean meteor strikes with energies as high as 4.2 \u00d7 1013 J (equivalent to that released by an explosion of ten kilotons of TNT) have been recorded by seismographs, as have a number of industrial accidents and terrorist bombs and events (a field of study referred to as forensic seismology). A major long-term motivation for the global seismographic monitoring has been for the detection and study of nuclear testing.\nMapping Earth's interior.\nBecause seismic waves commonly propagate efficiently as they interact with the internal structure of the Earth, they provide high-resolution noninvasive methods for studying the planet's interior. One of the earliest important discoveries (suggested by Richard Dixon Oldham in 1906 and definitively shown by Harold Jeffreys in 1926) was that the outer core of the earth is liquid. Since S waves do not pass through liquids, the liquid core causes a \"shadow\" on the side of the planet opposite the earthquake where no direct S waves are observed. In addition, P waves travel much slower through the outer core than the mantle.\nProcessing readings from many seismometers using seismic tomography, seismologists have mapped the mantle of the earth to a resolution of several hundred kilometers. This has enabled scientists to identify convection cells and other large-scale features such as the large low-shear-velocity provinces near the core\u2013mantle boundary.\nSeismology and society.\nEarthquake prediction.\nForecasting a probable timing, location, magnitude and other important features of a forthcoming seismic event is called earthquake prediction. Various attempts have been made by seismologists and others to create effective systems for precise earthquake predictions, including the VAN method. Most seismologists do not believe that a system to provide timely warnings for individual earthquakes has yet been developed, and many believe that such a system would be unlikely to give useful warning of impending seismic events. However, more general forecasts routinely predict seismic hazard. Such forecasts estimate the probability of an earthquake of a particular size affecting a particular location within a particular time-span, and they are routinely used in earthquake engineering.\nPublic controversy over earthquake prediction erupted after Italian authorities indicted six seismologists and one government official for manslaughter in connection with a magnitude 6.3 earthquake in L'Aquila, Italy on April 5, 2009. A report in Nature stated that the indictment was widely seen in Italy and abroad as being for failing to predict the earthquake and drew condemnation from the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the American Geophysical Union. However, the magazine also indicated that the population of Aquila do not consider the failure to predict the earthquake to be the reason for the indictment, but rather the alleged failure of the scientists to evaluate and communicate risk. The indictment claims that, at a special meeting in L'Aquila the week before the earthquake occurred, scientists and officials were more interested in pacifying the population than providing adequate information about earthquake risk and preparedness.\nIn locations where a historical record exists it may be used to estimate the timing, location and magnitude of future seismic events. There are several interpretative factors to consider. The epicentres or foci and magnitudes of historical earthquakes are subject to interpretation meaning it is possible that 5\u20136 Mw earthquakes described in the historical record could be larger events occurring elsewhere that were felt moderately in the populated areas that produced written records. Documentation in the historic period may be sparse or incomplete, and not give a full picture of the geographic scope of an earthquake, or the historical record may only have earthquake records spanning a few centuries, a very short time frame in a seismic cycle.\nEngineering seismology.\nEngineering seismology is the study and application of seismology for engineering purposes. It generally applied to the branch of seismology that deals with the assessment of the seismic hazard of a site or region for the purposes of earthquake engineering. It is, therefore, a link between earth science and civil engineering. There are two principal components of engineering seismology. Firstly, studying earthquake history (e.g. historical and instrumental catalogs of seismicity) and tectonics to assess the earthquakes that could occur in a region and their characteristics and frequency of occurrence. Secondly, studying strong ground motions generated by earthquakes to assess the expected shaking from future earthquakes with similar characteristics. These strong ground motions could either be observations from accelerometers or seismometers or those simulated by computers using various techniques, which are then often used to develop ground-motion prediction equations (or ground-motion models)http://.\nTools.\nSeismological instruments can generate large amounts of data. Systems for processing such data include:\nList of seismologists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28936", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28936", "title": "Cyanoacrylate", "text": "Type of fast-acting adhesive\nCyanoacrylates are a family of strong fast-acting adhesives with industrial, medical, and household uses that are derived from ethyl cyanoacrylate and related esters. The cyanoacrylate group in the monomer rapidly polymerizes in the presence of water to form long, strong chains.\nSpecific cyanoacrylates include methyl 2-cyanoacrylate (MCA), ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate (ECA, commonly sold under trade names such as \"Super Glue\" and \"Krazy Glue\"), \"n\"-butyl cyanoacrylate (n-BCA), octyl cyanoacrylate, and 2-octyl cyanoacrylate (used in medical, veterinary and first aid applications). Cyanoacrylate adhesives are sometimes known generically as instant glue, power glue, or super glue. The abbreviation \"CA\" is commonly used for industrial grade cyanoacrylate.\nDevelopment.\nThe original patent for cyanoacrylate was filed in 1947 by the B.F. Goodrich Company as an outgrowth of a search for materials suitable for clear plastic gun sights for the war effort. In 1942, a team of scientists headed by Harry Coover Jr. stumbled upon a formulation that stuck to everything with which it came in contact. The team quickly rejected the substance for the wartime application, but in 1951, while working as researchers for Eastman Kodak, Coover and a colleague, Fred Joyner, rediscovered cyanoacrylates, then applied for a patent in 1954 which was issued in 1956. The two had realized its true commercial potential, and a form of the adhesive was first sold in 1958 under the name \"Eastman #910\" (later \"Eastman 910\").\nDuring the 1960s, Eastman Kodak sold cyanoacrylate to Loctite, which in turn repackaged and distributed it under a different brand name \"Loctite Quick Set 404\". In 1971, Loctite developed its own manufacturing technology and introduced its own line of cyanoacrylate, called \"Super Bonder\". Loctite quickly gained market share, and by the late 1970s it was believed to have exceeded Eastman Kodak's share in the North American industrial cyanoacrylate market. National Starch and Chemical Company purchased Eastman Kodak's cyanoacrylate business and combined it with several acquisitions made throughout the 1970s forming Permabond. Other manufacturers of cyanoacrylate include LePage (a Canadian company acquired by Henkel in 1996), the Permabond Division of National Starch and Chemical, which was a subsidiary of Unilever. Together, Loctite, Eastman, and Permabond accounted for approximately 75% of the industrial cyanoacrylate market. As of 2019[ [update]] Permabond continued to manufacture the original 910 formula.\nPolymerization.\nThe most common monomer is ethyl cyanoacrylate. Several related esters are known. To facilitate easy handling, a cyanoacrylate monomer is frequently formulated with an ingredient such as fumed silica to make it more viscous or gel-like. Formulations are available with additives to increase shear strength, creating a more impact resistant bond. Such additives may include rubber, as in Loctite's \"Ultra Gel\", or others which are not specified.\nIn general, the C=C groups rapidly undergo chain-growth polymerization in the presence of water (specifically hydroxide ions), forming long, strong chains, joining the bonded surfaces together. Because the presence of moisture causes the glue to set, exposure to normal levels of humidity in the air causes a thin skin to start to form within seconds, which greatly slows the reaction; hence, cyanoacrylates are applied as thin coats to ensure that the reaction proceeds rapidly for bonding. Cyanoacrylate adhesives generally have a short shelf life\u2014about one year from manufacture if unopened, and one month once opened, but this can be extended by refrigeration. \nGeneral properties.\nCyanoacrylates are mainly used as adhesives. Thin layers bond effectively, thick layers much less so. They bond many substances, including human skin and tissues, natural fibres, cotton, wool, and leather.\nCyanoacrylate glue has a low shearing strength, which has led to its use as a temporary adhesive in cases where the piece needs to be sheared off later. Common examples include mounting a workpiece to a sacrificial glue block on a lathe, and tightening pins and bolts. It is also used in conjunction with another slower, but more resilient, adhesive as a way of rapidly forming a joint, which then holds the pieces in the appropriate configuration until the second adhesive has set.\nCyanoacrylate-based glue has a weak bond with smooth surfaces and as such easily gives to friction; a good example of this is the fact that cyanoacrylates may be removed from human skin by means of abrasives (e.g. sugar or sandpaper).\nUses.\nMedical and veterinary.\nCyanoacrylate glue is widely used in human and veterinary medicine. It was in veterinary use for mending bone, hide, and tortoise shell by the early 1970s or before. A cyanoacrylate spray was used in the Vietnam War to reduce bleeding in wounded soldiers until they could be taken to a hospital. \n\"n\"-Butyl cyanoacrylate has been used medically since the 1970s. In the US, due to its potential to irritate the skin, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) did not approve its use as a medical adhesive until 1998 with Dermabond (2-octyl cyanoacrylate). A 1986 independent study suggests that cyanoacrylate can be safer and more functional for wound closure than traditional suturing (stitches). Although cyanoacrylates are widely used for sutureless wound repair, \"existing adhesives still lack sufficient adhesion strength to completely replace sutures and staples.\"\nSome rock climbers use cyanoacrylate to repair damage to the skin on their fingertips. Similarly, stringed-instrument players can form protective finger caps (typically, when they lose their calluses due to inactivity or accidents) with cyanoacrylates. While the glue is not very toxic and wears off quickly with shed skin, applying large quantities of glue and its fumes directly to the skin can cause chemical burns.\nWhile standard \"superglue\" is 100% ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate, many custom formulations (e.g.\",\" 91% ECA, 9% poly(methyl methacrylate), &lt;0.5% hydroquinone, and a small amount of organic sulfonic acid, and variations on the compound \"n\"-butyl cyanoacrylate for medical applications) have come to be used for specific applications. Three cyanoacrylate compounds are available as topical skin adhesives: 2-Octyl cyanoacrylate is marketed as Dermabond, SurgiSeal, and LiquiBand Exceed. \"n\"-Butyl cyanoacrylate is marketed as Histoacryl, Indermil, GluStitch, GluSeal, PeriAcryl, and LiquiBand. The compound ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate is available as Epiglu.\nThe ester substituent has several effects upon the biocompatibility of the adhesive. Longer side chains result in higher flexibility of the cured adhesive allowing a better match for the flexibility of skin, and can result in a slower release of formaldehyde after curing. Alkoxy-ethyl substituents have also been investigated and have shown some promise as a medical adhesive.\nForensics.\nCyanoacrylate is used as a forensic tool to capture latent fingerprints on non-porous surfaces like glass, plastic, etc. Cyanoacrylate is warmed to produce fumes that react with the invisible fingerprint residues and atmospheric moisture to form a white polymer (polycyanoacrylate) on the fingerprint ridges. The ridges can then be recorded. The developed fingerprints are, on most surfaces (except on white plastic or similar), visible to the naked eye. Invisible or poorly visible prints can be further enhanced by applying a luminescent or non-luminescent stain.\nCosmetics.\nCyanoacrylate is used in the cosmetology and beauty industry as an eyelash extension glue, or a \"nail glue\" for some artificial nail enhancements such as nail tips and nail wraps, and is sometimes mistaken for eye drops causing accidental injury (adhesion and/or chemical eye injury).\nNiche and hobbies.\nCyanoacrylates are used to assemble prototype electronics (used in wire wrap), flying model aircraft, and as retention dressings for nuts and bolts. Their effectiveness in bonding metal and general versatility have made them popular among modeling and miniatures hobbyists.\nCyanoacrylate glue's ability to resist water has made it popular with marine aquarium hobbyists for fragmenting corals. The cut branches of hard corals, such as Acropora, can be glued to a piece of live rock (harvested reef coral) or Milliput (epoxy putty) to allow the new fragment to grow out. It is safe to use directly in the tank, unlike silicone which must be cured to be safe. However, as a class of adhesives, traditional cyanoacrylates are classified as having \"weak\" resistance to both moisture and heat although the inclusion of phthalic anhydride reportedly counteracts both of these characteristics.\nCyanoacrylate glue is also used frequently in aquascaping both freshwater and marine aquariums for the purpose of securing the rhizomes of live plants to pieces of wood or stone. Thin cyanoacrylate glue has application in woodworking. It can be used as a fast-drying, glossy finish. An oil, such as boiled linseed oil, may be used to control the rate at which the cyanoacrylate cures. Cyanoacrylate glue is also used in combination with sawdust (from a saw or sanding) to fill voids and cracks. These repair methods are used on piano soundboards, wood instruments, and wood furniture. Cyanoacrylate glue is also used in the finishing of pen blanks (wooden blanks for turning pens) that have been turned on a lathe by applying multiple thin layers to build up a hard, clear finish that can then be sanded and polished to a glossy finish.\nSome hobby applications call for cyanoacrylate glue mixed with inorganic fillers such as baking soda (sodium bicarbonate) and calcium oxide.\nArchery.\nCyanoacrylate is used in archery to glue fletching to arrow shafts. Some special fletching glues are primarily cyanoacrylate repackaged in special fletching glue kits. Such tubes often have a long, thin metal nozzle for improved precision in applying the glue to the base of the fletching and to ensure secure bonding to the arrow shaft.\nFencing.\nCyanoacrylate is used in fencing to glue the blade wire into the groove of the \u00e9p\u00e9e or foil.\nSafety issues.\nSkin injuries.\nCyanoacrylate adhesives may make body parts adhere, and may cause skin to be torn off trying to separate them. Without force, however, the glue will spontaneously separate from the skin over time (up to four days). The glue can also cause chemical burns, and exposed skin should be washed with soap and warm water. Separation can be accelerated by applying vegetable oil or acetone near, on, and around the glue. Glue can cause serious injuries if it gets in the eyes; in such cases the eye(s) should be rinsed with lukewarm water for 15 minutes and medical care obtained.\nToxicity.\nHeating causes depolymerization of the cured polymers producing gaseous products that are highly irritating. They are immediately polymerized by the moisture in the membranes and become inert. These risks can be minimized by using cyanoacrylate in well-ventilated areas. About 5% of the population can become sensitized to cyanoacrylate fumes after repeated exposure, resulting in flu-like symptoms. Cyanoacrylate may also be a skin irritant, causing an allergic skin reaction. The American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) assign a threshold limit value exposure limit of 200 parts per billion. On rare occasions, inhalation may trigger asthma. There is no singular measurement of toxicity for all cyanoacrylate adhesives because of the large number of adhesives that contain various cyanoacrylate formulations.\nThe United Kingdom's Health and Safety Executive and the United States National Toxicology Program have concluded that the use of ethyl cyanoacrylate is safe and that additional study is unnecessary. The compound 2-octyl cyanoacrylate degrades much more slowly due to its longer organic backbone (series of covalently bonded carbon molecules) and the adhesive does not reach the threshold of tissue toxicity. Due to the toxicity issues of ethyl cyanoacrylate, the use of 2-octyl cyanoacrylate for sutures is preferred.\nReaction with cotton, wool, and other fibrous materials.\nApplying cyanoacrylate to some natural materials such as cotton (jeans, cotton swabs, cotton balls, and certain yarns or fabrics), leather or wool results in a powerful, rapid, exothermic reaction. This reaction also occurs with fiberglass and carbon fiber. The heat released may cause serious burns or release irritating white smoke. Material safety data sheets for cyanoacrylate instruct users not to wear cotton (jeans) or wool clothing, especially cotton gloves, when applying or handling cyanoacrylates.\nSolvents and debonders.\nAcetone, commonly found as a fraction of nail polish remover (or at hardware stores in pure form), is a widely available solvent capable of softening cured cyanoacrylate. Other solvents include nitromethane, dimethylformamide, dimethyl sulfoxide, and methylene chloride. Another viable solvent for removing cured cyanoacrylate is \"gamma\"-butyrolactone. Commercial debonders are also available, many based on propylene carbonate.\nShelf life.\nCyanoacrylate adhesives have a short shelf life. Date-stamped containers help to ensure that the adhesive is still viable. One manufacturer supplies the following information and advice: When kept unopened in a cool, dry location such as a refrigerator at a temperature of about 55\u00a0\u00b0F (13\u00a0\u00b0C), the shelf life of cyanoacrylate will be extended from about one year from manufacture to at least 15 months. If the adhesive is to be used within six months, it is not necessary to refrigerate it. Cyanoacrylates are moisture-sensitive, and moving from a cool to a hot location will create condensation; after removing from the refrigerator, it is best to let the adhesive reach room temperature before opening. After opening, it should be used within 30 days. Open containers should not be refrigerated. Another manufacturer says that the maximum shelf life of 12 months is obtained for some of their cyanoacrylates if the original containers are stored at . One manufacturer has given a very detailed explanation in answer to a question about shelf life, including the fact that cyanoacrylate adhesives contain an inhibitor to slow curing in the bottle; the amount of inhibitor affects shelf life (but a glue with more inhibitor can require accelerant to be applied for some applications).\nPolymerization is nearly stopped, leading to an almost unlimited shelf life, by storing unopened at , the typical temperature of a domestic freezer, and allowing the contents to reach room temperature before use. Opening a container while chilled may cause moisture from the air to condense in the container.\nAs cyanoacrylates age, they polymerize, become thicker, and cure more slowly. They can be thinned with a cyanoacrylate of the same chemical composition with lower viscosity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28938", "revid": "42792949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28938", "title": "Shell script", "text": "Script written for an operating system shell\nA shell script is a computer program designed to be run by a Unix shell, a command-line interpreter. The various dialects of shell scripts are considered to be command languages. Typical operations performed by shell scripts include file manipulation, program execution, and printing text. A script which sets up the environment, runs the program, and does any necessary cleanup or logging, is called a wrapper.\nThe term is also used more generally to mean the automated mode of running an operating system shell; each operating system uses a particular name for these functions including batch files (MSDos-Win95 stream, OS/2), command procedures (VMS), and shell scripts (Windows NT stream and third-party derivatives like Take Command/4NT\u2014article is at cmd.exe), and mainframe operating systems are associated with a number of terms.\nAll Unix-like systems include at least one POSIX shell (typically either bash or the zsh compatibility mode), while many also include a modern shell like fish or nushell.\nCapabilities.\nComments.\nComments are ignored by the shell. They typically begin with the hash symbol (codice_1), and continue until the end of the line.\nConfigurable choice of scripting language.\nThe shebang, or hash-bang, is a special kind of comment which the system uses to determine what interpreter to use to execute the file. The shebang consists of the characters \"codice_2\". In Unix-like operating systems, the characters following the \"codice_2\" prefix are interpreted as a path to an executable program that will interpret the script.\nShortcuts.\nA shell script can provide a convenient variation of a system command where special environment settings, command options, or post-processing apply automatically, but in a way that allows the new script to still act as a fully normal Unix command.\nOne example would be to create a version of ls, the command to list files, giving it a shorter command name of codice_4, which would be normally saved in a user's codice_5 directory as codice_6, and a default set of command options pre-supplied.\nLC_COLLATE=C ls -FCas \"$@\"\nHere, the first line uses a shebang to indicate which interpreter should execute the rest of the script, and the second line makes a listing with options for file format indicators, columns, all files (none omitted), and a size in blocks. The codice_7 sets the default collation order to not fold upper and lower case together, not intermix dotfiles with normal filenames as a side effect of ignoring punctuation in the names (dotfiles are usually only shown if an option like codice_8 is used), and the codice_9 causes any parameters given to codice_4 to pass through as parameters to ls, so that all of the normal options and other syntax known to ls can still be used.\nThe user could then simply use codice_4 for the most commonly used short listing.\nAnother example of a shell script that could be used as a shortcut would be to print a list of all the files and directories within a given directory.\nclear\nls -al\nIn this case, the shell script would start with its normal starting line of #!/bin/sh. Following this, the script executes the command clear which clears the terminal of all text before going to the next line. The following line provides the main function of the script. The ls -al command lists the files and directories that are in the directory from which the script is being run. The ls command attributes could be changed to reflect the needs of the user.\nBatch jobs.\nShell scripts allow several commands that would be entered manually at a command-line interface to be executed automatically, and without having to wait for a user to trigger each stage of the sequence. For example, in a directory with three C source code files, rather than manually running the four commands required to build the final program from them, one could instead create a script for POSIX-compliant shells, here named codice_12 and kept in the directory with them, which would compile them automatically:\nprintf 'compiling...\\n'\ncc -c foo.c\ncc -c bar.c\ncc -c qux.c\ncc -o myprog foo.o bar.o qux.o\nprintf 'done.\\n'\nThe script would allow a user to save the file being edited, pause the editor, and then just run codice_13 to create the updated program, test it, and then return to the editor. Since the 1980s or so, however, scripts of this type have been replaced with utilities like make which are specialized for building programs.\nGeneralization.\nSimple batch jobs are not unusual for isolated tasks, but using shell loops, tests, and variables provides much more flexibility to users. A POSIX sh script to convert JPEG images to PNG images, where the image names are provided on the command-line\u2014possibly via wildcards\u2014instead of each being listed within the script, can be created with this file, typically saved in a file like codice_14\nfor jpg; do # use $jpg in place of each filename given, in turn\n png=${jpg%.jpg}.png # construct the PNG version of the filename by replacing .jpg with .png\n printf 'converting \"%s\" ...\\n' \"$jpg\" # output status info to the user running the script\n if convert \"$jpg\" jpg.to.png; then # use convert (provided by ImageMagick) to create the PNG in a temp file\n mv jpg.to.png \"$png\" # if it worked, rename the temporary PNG image to the correct name\n else # ...otherwise complain and exit from the script\n printf &gt;&amp;2 'jpg2png: error: failed output saved in \"jpg.to.png\".\\n'\n exit 1\n fi # the end of the \"if\" test construct\ndone # the end of the \"for\" loop\nprintf 'all conversions successful\\n' # tell the user the good news\nThe codice_15 command can then be run on an entire directory full of JPEG images with just codice_16\nProgramming.\nMany modern shells also supply various features usually found only in more sophisticated general-purpose programming languages, such as control-flow constructs, variables, comments, arrays, subroutines and so on. With these sorts of features available, it is possible to write reasonably sophisticated applications as shell scripts. However, they are still limited by the fact that most shell languages have little or no support for data typing systems, classes, threading, complex math, and other common full language features, and are also generally much slower than compiled code or interpreted languages written with speed as a performance goal.\nThe standard Unix tools sed and awk provide extra capabilities for shell programming; Perl can also be embedded in shell scripts as can other scripting languages like Tcl. Perl and Tcl come with graphics toolkits as well.\nTypical shell languages.\nScripting languages commonly found on UNIX, Linux, and POSIX-compliant operating system installations include:\nNon-POSIX shells in common use include:\nThe C and Tcl shells have syntax quite similar to that of said programming languages, and the Korn shells and Bash are developments of the Bourne shell, which is based on the ALGOL language with elements of a number of others added as well. On the other hand, the various shells plus tools like awk, sed, grep, and BASIC, Lisp, C and so forth contributed to the Perl programming language.\nFormerly-popular shells include:\nRelated programs such as shells based on Python, Ruby, C, Java, Perl, Pascal, Rexx etc. in various forms are also widely available.\nSo called remote shells such as \nare really just tools to run a more complex shell on a remote system and have no 'shell' like characteristics themselves.\nOther scripting languages.\nMany powerful scripting languages, such as Python, Perl, and Tcl, have been introduced to address tasks that are too large, complex, or repetitive to be comfortably handled by traditional shell scripts, while avoiding the overhead associated with compiled languages like C or Java.\nAlthough the distinction between scripting languages and general-purpose high-level programming languages is often debated, scripting languages are typically characterized by their interpreted nature, simplified syntax, and primary use in automating tasks, coordinating system operations, and writing \"glue code\" between components. Even when scripting languages such as Python or JavaScript support compilation to bytecode or use JIT to improve performance, they are still commonly referred to as \"scripting languages\" due to their historical association with automation, lightweight tooling, and scripting environments rather than standalone application development.\nImportantly, scripting is a form of programming. While \"scripting\" may emphasize lightweight, task-oriented automation, the broader term \"programming\" encompasses both scripting and software development in compiled or structured languages. As such, scripting involves writing code to instruct a computer to perform specific tasks\u2014meeting the fundamental definition of programming.\nLife cycle.\nShell scripts often serve as an initial stage in software development, and are often subject to conversion later to a different underlying implementation, most commonly being converted to Perl, Python, or C. The interpreter directive allows the implementation detail to be fully hidden inside the script, rather than being exposed as a filename extension, and provides for seamless reimplementation in different languages with no impact on end users.\nWhile files with the \".sh\" file extension are usually a shell script of some kind, most shell scripts do not have any filename extension.\nAdvantages and disadvantages.\nPerhaps the biggest advantage of writing a shell script is that the commands and syntax are exactly the same as those directly entered at the command-line. The programmer does not have to switch to a totally different syntax, as they would if the script were written in a different language, or if a compiled language were used.\nOften, writing a shell script is much quicker than writing the equivalent code in other programming languages. The many advantages include easy program or file selection, quick start, and interactive debugging. A shell script can be used to provide a sequencing and decision-making linkage around existing programs, and for moderately sized scripts the absence of a compilation step is an advantage. Interpretive running makes it easy to write debugging code into a script and re-run it to detect and fix bugs. Non-expert users can use scripting to tailor the behavior of programs, and shell scripting provides some limited scope for multiprocessing.\nOn the other hand, shell scripting is prone to costly errors. Inadvertent typing errors such as codice_31 (instead of the intended codice_32) are folklore in the Unix community; a single extra space converts the command from one that deletes all subdirectories contained in the current directory, to one which deletes everything from the file system's root directory. Similar problems can transform codice_33 and codice_34 into dangerous weapons, and misuse of the codice_35 redirect can delete the contents of a file.\nAnother significant disadvantage is the slow execution speed and the need to launch a new process for almost every shell command executed. When a script's job can be accomplished by setting up a pipeline in which efficient filter commands perform most of the work, the slowdown is mitigated, but a complex script is typically several orders of magnitude slower than a conventional compiled program that performs an equivalent task.\nThere are also compatibility problems between different platforms. Larry Wall, creator of Perl, famously wrote that \"It's easier to port a shell than a shell script.\"\nSimilarly, more complex scripts can run into the limitations of the shell scripting language itself; the limits make it difficult to write quality code, and extensions by various shells to ameliorate problems with the original shell language can make problems worse.\nMany disadvantages of using some script languages are caused by design flaws within the language syntax or implementation, and are not necessarily imposed by the use of a text-based command-line; there are a number of shells which use other shell programming languages or even full-fledged languages like Scsh (which uses Scheme).\nInteroperability among scripting languages.\nMany scripting languages share similar syntax and features due to their adherence to the POSIX standard, and several shells provide modes to emulate or maintain compatibility with others. This allows scripts written for one shell to often run in another with minimal changes.\nFor example, Bash supports much of the original Bourne shell syntax and offers a POSIX-compliant mode to improve portability. However, Bash also includes a number of extensions not found in POSIX, commonly referred to as bashisms. While these features enhance scripting capabilities, they may reduce compatibility with other shells like Dash or ksh.\nShell scripting on other operating systems.\nInteroperability software such as Cygwin, the MKS Toolkit, Interix (formerly part of Microsoft Windows Services for UNIX), Hamilton C shell, and UWIN (AT&amp;T Unix for Windows) enables Unix shell programs to run on Windows NT-based systems, though some features may not be fully supported on the older MS-DOS/Windows 95 platforms. Earlier versions of the MKS Toolkit also provided support for OS/2. \nIn addition, several DCL (Digital Command Language) implementations are available for Windows environments. These include scripting tools like XLNT, which integrates with the Windows command shell and supports automation for CGI programming and Windows Script Host. macOS (formerly Mac OS X) is also Unix-based and includes a POSIX-compliant shell environment by default.\nThe console alternatives 4DOS, 4OS2, FreeDOS, Peter Norton's NDOS and Take Command (formerly 4NT) which add functionality to the Windows NT-style cmd.exe, MS-DOS/Windows 95 batch files (run by Command.com), OS/2's cmd.exe, and 4NT respectively are similar to the shells that they enhance and are more integrated with the Windows Script Host, which comes with three pre-installed engines, VBScript, JScript, and VBA and to which numerous third-party engines can be added, with Rexx, Perl, Python, Ruby, and Tcl having pre-defined functions in 4NT and related programs. PC DOS is quite similar to MS-DOS, whilst DR DOS is more different. Earlier versions of Windows NT are able to run contemporary versions of 4OS2 by the OS/2 subsystem.\nScripting languages are, by definition, able to be extended; for example, a MS-DOS/Windows 95/98 and Windows NT type systems allows for shell/batch programs to call tools like KiXtart, QBasic, various BASIC, Rexx, Perl, and Python implementations, the Windows Script Host and its installed engines. On Unix and other POSIX-compliant systems, awk and sed are used to extend the string and numeric processing ability of shell scripts. Tcl, Perl, Rexx, and Python have graphics toolkits and can be used to code functions and procedures for shell scripts which pose a speed bottleneck (C, Fortran, assembly language &amp;c are much faster still) and to add functionality not available in the shell language such as sockets and other connectivity functions, heavy-duty text processing, working with numbers if the calling script does not have those abilities, self-writing and self-modifying code, techniques like recursion, direct memory access, various types of sorting and more, which are difficult or impossible in the main script, and so on. Visual Basic for Applications and VBScript can be used to control and communicate with such things as spreadsheets, databases, scriptable programs of all types, telecommunications software, development tools, graphics tools and other software which can be accessed through the Component Object Model.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28940", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28940", "title": "Subtitle (disambiguation)", "text": "Subtitles are text derived from film or television show dialogue that is usually displayed at the bottom of the screen.\nSubtitle or Subtitles may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28942", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28942", "title": "Solder", "text": "Alloy used to join metal pieces\nSolder (; NA: ) is a fusible metal alloy used to create a permanent bond between metal workpieces. Solder is melted in order to wet the parts of the joint, where it adheres to and connects the pieces after cooling. Metals or alloys suitable for use as solder should have a lower melting point than the pieces to be joined. The solder should also be resistant to oxidative and corrosive effects that would degrade the joint over time. Solder used in making electrical connections also needs to have favorable electrical characteristics.\nSoft solder typically has a melting point range of , and is commonly used in electronics, plumbing, and sheet metal work. Alloys that melt between are the most commonly used. Soldering performed using alloys with a melting point above is called \"hard soldering\", \"silver soldering\", or brazing.\nIn specific proportions, some alloys are eutectic \u2014 that is, the alloy's melting point is the lowest possible for a mixture of those components, and coincides with the freezing point. Non-eutectic alloys can have markedly different \"solidus\" and \"liquidus\" temperatures, as they have distinct liquid and solid transitions. Non-eutectic mixtures often exist as a paste of solid particles in a melted matrix of the lower-melting phase as they approach high enough temperatures. In electrical work, if the joint is disturbed while in this \"pasty\" state before it fully solidifies, a poor electrical connection may result; use of eutectic solder reduces this problem. The pasty state of a non-eutectic solder can be exploited in plumbing, as it allows molding of the solder during cooling, e.g. for ensuring watertight joint of pipes, resulting in a so-called \"wiped joint\".\nFor electrical and electronics work, solder wire is available in a range of thicknesses for hand-soldering (manual soldering is performed using a soldering iron or soldering gun), and with cores containing flux. It is also available as a room temperature paste, as a preformed foil shaped to match the workpiece which may be more suited for mechanized mass-production, or in small \"tabs\" that can be wrapped around the joint and melted with a flame where an iron isn't usable or available, as for instance in field repairs. Alloys of lead and tin were commonly used in the past and are still available; they are particularly convenient for hand-soldering. Lead-free solders have been increasing in use due to regulatory requirements plus the health and environmental benefits of avoiding lead-based electronic components. They are almost exclusively used today in consumer electronics.\nSolder wire diameters typically range from ultra-fine (0.25 mm to 0.5 mm) to heavy gauge (1.5 mm to 2.0 mm and above). Each diameter suits particular soldering needs\u2014ultra-fine wires provide precision for delicate electronics work such as micro soldering and surface-mount technology, fine wires (0.5 mm to 1.0 mm) offer versatility for general electronics and prototyping, medium wires (1.0 mm to 1.5 mm) are robust for general-purpose soldering and larger components, while heavy wires are ideal for plumbing, metalwork, and large electrical connections.\nPlumbers often use bars of solder, much thicker than the wire used for electrical applications, and apply flux separately; many plumbing-suitable soldering fluxes are too corrosive (or conductive) to be used in electrical or electronic work. Jewelers often use solder in thin sheets, which they cut into snippets.\nEtymology.\nThe word solder comes from the Middle English word , via Old French and , from the Latin , meaning \"to make solid\".\nComposition.\nLead-based.\nTin-lead (Sn-Pb) solders, also called \"soft solders\", are commercially available with tin concentrations between 5% and 70% by weight. The greater the tin concentration, the greater the solder's tensile and shear strengths. Lead mitigates the formation of tin whiskers, though the precise mechanism for this is unknown. Today, many techniques are used to mitigate the problem, including changes to the annealing process (heating and cooling), addition of elements like copper and nickel, and the application of conformal coatings. Alloys commonly used for electrical soldering are 60/40\u00a0Sn-Pb, which melts at , and 63/37\u00a0Sn-Pb used principally in electrical/electronic work. The latter mixture is a eutectic alloy of these metals, which:\nIn the United States, since 1974, lead is prohibited in solder and flux in plumbing applications for drinking water use, per the Safe Drinking Water Act. Historically, a higher proportion of lead was used, commonly 50/50. This had the advantage of making the alloy solidify more slowly. With the pipes being physically fitted together before soldering, the solder could be wiped over the joint to ensure water tightness. Although lead water pipes were displaced by copper when the significance of lead poisoning began to be fully appreciated, lead solder was still used until the 1980s because it was thought that the amount of lead that could leach into water from the solder was negligible from a properly soldered joint. The electrochemical couple of copper and lead promotes corrosion of the lead and tin. Tin, however, is protected by insoluble oxide. Since even small amounts of lead have been found detrimental to health as a potent neurotoxin, lead in plumbing solder was replaced by silver (food-grade applications) or antimony, with copper often added, and the proportion of tin was increased (see lead-free solder).\nThe addition of tin\u2014more expensive than lead\u2014improves wetting properties of the alloy; lead itself has poor wetting characteristics. High-tin tin-lead alloys have limited use as the workability range can be provided by a cheaper high-lead alloy.\nLead-tin solders readily dissolve gold plating and form brittle intermetallics.\n60/40\u00a0Sn-Pb solder oxidizes on the surface, forming a complex 4-layer structure: tin(IV) oxide on the surface, below it a layer of tin(II) oxide with finely dispersed lead, followed by a layer of tin(II) oxide with finely dispersed tin and lead, and the solder alloy itself underneath.\nLead, and to some degree tin, as used in solder contains small but significant amounts of radioisotope impurities. Radioisotopes undergoing alpha decay are a concern due to their tendency to cause soft errors. Polonium-210 is especially troublesome; lead-210 beta decays to bismuth-210 which then beta decays to polonium-210, an intense emitter of alpha particles. Uranium-238 and thorium-232 are other significant contaminants of alloys of lead.\nLead-free.\nThe European Union Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive and Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive were adopted in early 2003 and came into effect on July 1, 2006, restricting the inclusion of lead in most consumer electronics sold in the EU, and having a broad effect on consumer electronics sold worldwide. In the US, manufacturers may receive tax benefits by reducing the use of lead-based solder. Lead-free solders in commercial use may contain tin, copper, silver, bismuth, indium, zinc, antimony, and traces of other metals. Most lead-free replacements for conventional 60/40 and 63/37\u00a0Sn-Pb solder have melting points from 50 to 200\u00a0\u00b0C higher, though there are also solders with much lower melting points. Lead-free solder typically requires around 2% flux by mass for adequate wetting ability.\nWhen lead-free solder is used in wave soldering, a slightly modified solder pot may be desirable (e.g. titanium liners or impellers) to reduce maintenance cost due to increased tin-scavenging of high-tin solder.\nLead-free solder is prohibited in critical applications, such as aerospace, military and medical projects, because joints are likely to suffer from metal fatigue failure under stress (such as that from thermal expansion and contraction). Although this is a property that conventional leaded solder possesses as well (like any metal), the point at which stress fatigue will usually occur in leaded solder is substantially above the level of stresses normally encountered.\nTin-silver-copper (Sn-Ag-Cu, or \"SAC\") solders are used by two-thirds of Japanese manufacturers for reflow and wave soldering, and by about 75% of companies for hand soldering. The widespread use of this popular lead-free solder alloy family is based on the reduced melting point of the Sn-Ag-Cu ternary eutectic behavior (), which is below the 22/78\u00a0Sn-Ag (wt.%) eutectic of and the 99.3/0.7\u00a0Sn-Cu eutectic of . The ternary eutectic behavior of Sn-Ag-Cu and its application for electronics assembly was discovered (and patented) by a team of researchers from Ames Laboratory, Iowa State University, and from Sandia National Laboratories-Albuquerque.\nMuch recent research has focused on the addition of a fourth element to Sn-Ag-Cu solder, in order to provide compatibility for the reduced cooling rate of solder sphere reflow for assembly of ball grid arrays. Examples of these four-element compositions are 18/64/14/4\u00a0tin-silver-copper-zinc (Sn-Ag-Cu-Zn) (melting range 217\u2013220\u00a0\u00b0C) and 18/64/16/2\u00a0tin-silver-copper-manganese (Sn-Ag-Cu-Mn; melting range of 211\u2013215\u00a0\u00b0C).\nTin-based solders readily dissolve gold, forming brittle intermetallic joins; for Sn-Pb alloys the critical concentration of gold to embrittle the joint is about 4%. Indium-rich solders (usually indium-lead) are more suitable for soldering thicker gold layers as the dissolution rate of gold in indium is much slower. Tin-rich solders also readily dissolve silver; for soldering silver metallization or surfaces, alloys with addition of silver are suitable; tin-free alloys are also a choice, though their wetting ability is poorer. If the soldering time is long enough to form the intermetallics, the tin surface of a joint soldered to gold is very dull.\nHard solder.\nHard solders are used for brazing, and melt at higher temperatures. Alloys of copper with either zinc or silver are the most common.\nIn silversmithing or jewelry making, special hard solders are used that will pass assay. They contain a high proportion of the metal being soldered and lead is not used in these alloys. These solders vary in hardness, designated as \"enameling\", \"hard\", \"medium\", \"easy\" and \"repair\". Enameling solder has a high melting point, close to that of the material itself, to prevent the joint desoldering during firing in the enameling process. The remaining solder types are used in decreasing order of hardness during the process of making an item, to prevent a previously soldered seam or joint desoldering while additional sites are soldered. Easy solder or repair solder are also often used for repair work for the same reason. Flux is also used to prevent joints from desoldering.\nSilver solder is also used in manufacturing to join metal parts that cannot be welded. The alloys used for these purposes contain a high proportion of silver (up to 40%), and may also contain cadmium.\nAlloys.\nDifferent elements serve different roles in the solder alloy:\nImpurities.\nImpurities usually enter the solder reservoir by dissolving the metals present in the assemblies being soldered. Dissolving of process equipment is not common as the materials are usually chosen to be insoluble in solder.\nBoard finishes vs wave soldering bath impurities buildup:\nFlux.\nFlux is a reducing agent designed to help reduce (return oxidized metals to their metallic state) metal oxides at the points of contact to improve the electrical connection and mechanical strength. The two principal types of flux are acid flux (sometimes called \"active flux\"), containing strong acids, used for metal mending and plumbing, and rosin flux (sometimes called \"passive flux\"), used in electronics. Rosin flux comes in a variety of \"activities\", corresponding roughly to the speed and effectiveness of the organic acid components of the rosin in dissolving metallic surface oxides, and consequently the corrosiveness of the flux residue.\nDue to concerns over atmospheric pollution and hazardous waste disposal, the electronics industry has been gradually shifting from rosin flux to water-soluble flux, which can be removed with deionized water and detergent, instead of hydrocarbon solvents. Water-soluble fluxes are generally more conductive than traditionally used electrical / electronic fluxes and so have more potential for electrically interacting with a circuit; in general it is important to remove their traces after soldering. Some rosin type flux traces likewise should be removed, and for the same reason.\nIn contrast to using traditional bars or coiled wires of all-metal solder and manually applying flux to the parts being joined, much hand soldering since the mid-20th century has used flux-core solder. This is manufactured as a coiled wire of solder, with one or more continuous bodies of inorganic acid or rosin flux embedded lengthwise inside it. As the solder melts onto the joint, it frees the flux and releases that on it as well.\nOperation.\nThe solidifying behavior depends on the alloy composition. Pure metals solidify at a certain temperature, forming crystals of one phase. Eutectic alloys also solidify at a single temperature, all components precipitating simultaneously in so-called coupled growth. Non-eutectic compositions on cooling start to first precipitate the non-eutectic phase; dendrites when it is a metal, large crystals when it is an intermetallic compound. Such a mixture of solid particles in a molten eutectic is referred to as a mushy state. Even a relatively small proportion of solids in the liquid can dramatically lower its fluidity.\nThe temperature of total solidification is the solidus of the alloy, the temperature at which all components are molten is the liquidus.\nThe mushy state is desired where a degree of plasticity is beneficial for creating the joint, allowing filling larger gaps or being wiped over the joint (e.g. when soldering pipes). In hand soldering of electronics it may be detrimental as the joint may appear solidified while it is not yet. Premature handling of such joint then disrupts its internal structure and leads to compromised mechanical integrity.\nIntermetallics.\nMany different intermetallic compounds are formed during solidifying of solders and during their reactions with the soldered surfaces. The intermetallics form distinct phases, usually as inclusions in a ductile solid solution matrix, but also can form the matrix itself with metal inclusions or form crystalline matter with different intermetallics. Intermetallics are often hard and brittle. Finely distributed intermetallics in a ductile matrix yield a hard alloy while coarse structure gives a softer alloy. A range of intermetallics often forms between the metal and the solder, with increasing proportion of the metal; e.g. forming a structure of . Layers of intermetallics can form between the solder and the soldered material. These layers may cause mechanical reliability weakening and brittleness, increased electrical resistance, or electromigration and formation of voids. The gold-tin intermetallics layer is responsible for poor mechanical reliability of tin-soldered gold-plated surfaces where the gold plating did not completely dissolve in the solder.\nTwo processes play a role in a solder joint formation: interaction between the substrate and molten solder, and solid-state growth of intermetallic compounds. The base metal dissolves in the molten solder in an amount depending on its solubility in the solder. The active constituent of the solder reacts with the base metal with a rate dependent on the solubility of the active constituents in the base metal. The solid-state reactions are more complex \u2013 the formation of intermetallics can be inhibited by changing the composition of the base metal or the solder alloy, or by using a suitable barrier layer to inhibit diffusion of the metals.\nSome example interactions include:\nPreform.\nA preform is a pre-made shape of solder specially designed for the application where it is to be used. Many methods are used to manufacture the solder preform, stamping being the most common. The solder preform may include the solder flux needed for the soldering process. This can be an internal flux, inside the solder preform, or external, with the solder preform coated.\nSimilar substances.\nGlass solder is used to join glasses to other glasses, ceramics, metals, semiconductors, mica, and other materials, in a process called glass frit bonding. The glass solder has to flow and wet the soldered surfaces well below the temperature where deformation or degradation of either of the joined materials or nearby structures (e.g., metallization layers on chips or ceramic substrates) occurs. The usual temperature of achieving flowing and wetting is between .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28943", "revid": "90542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28943", "title": "Shogun", "text": "Military nobility of Japan (1185\u20131868)\n, officially , was the title of the military rulers of Japan during most of the period spanning from 1185 to 1868. Nominally appointed by the Emperor, shoguns were usually the \"de facto\" rulers of the country, except during parts of the Kamakura period and Sengoku period when the shoguns themselves were figureheads, with real power in the hands of the of the H\u014dj\u014d clan and of the Hosokawa clan. In addition, Taira no Kiyomori and Toyotomi Hideyoshi were leaders of the warrior class who did not hold the position of shogun, the highest office of the warrior class, yet gained the positions of and , the highest offices of the aristocratic class. As such, they ran their governments as its \"de facto\" rulers.\nThe office of shogun was in practice hereditary, although over the course of the history of Japan several different clans held the position. The title was originally held by military commanders during the Heian period in the eighth and ninth centuries. When Minamoto no Yoritomo gained political ascendency over Japan in 1185, the title was revived to regularize his position, making him the first shogun in the usually understood sense.\nIt is often said that one must be of the Minamoto lineage to become a shogun, but this is not true. While it is true that the Minamoto lineage was respected as a lineage suitable for the position of shogun, the fourth and fifth shoguns of the Kamakura shogunate were from the Fujiwara lineage (although their mothers were from the Minamoto lineage), and the sixth through ninth shoguns were from the imperial lineage. Oda Nobunaga, who claimed to be a descendant of the Taira clan, was approached for the position of shogun a month before his death.\nThe shogun's officials were collectively referred to as the ('tent-government'). They were the ones who carried out the actual duties of administration, while the imperial court retained only nominal authority. The tent symbolized the shogun's role as the military's field commander but also denoted that such an office was meant to be temporary. Nevertheless, the institution, known in English as the shogunate ( ), persisted for nearly 700 years, ending when Tokugawa Yoshinobu relinquished the office to Emperor Meiji in 1867 as part of the Meiji Restoration. This term \"bakufu\" only began to be actively used in the 1800s to emphasize that the emperor was the legitimate ruler of the country. During the Tokugawa shogunate the shogunate was officially called .\nEtymology.\nThe term is the abbreviation of the historical title \"sei-i taish\u014dgun\" (\u5f81\u5937\u5927\u5c06\u8ecd): \nThus, a literal translation of \"sei-i taish\u014dgun\" would be 'Commander-in-Chief of the Expeditionary Force Against the Barbarians'.\nThe term originally referred to the general who commanded the army sent to fight the tribes of northern Japan, but after the twelfth century, the term was used to designate the leader of the \"samurai\". The term is often translated \"generalissimo\" and is also used for such military leaders of foreign nations by the Japanese.\nThough now predominantly refers to the historical position \"sei-i taish\u014dgun\" (\u5f81\u5937\u5927\u5c06\u8ecd) in Japanese, the term is generically used for the rank of general in other East Asian languages, such as Chinese (), in which it is secondarily used for the historical Japanese position.\nThe macron in the romanization \"sh\u014dgun\" depicts the Japanese long \"o\" vowel sound in \"\u3057\u3087\u3046\u3050\u3093\", though because of the common tendency to drop diacritics in written English, \"shogun\" has become a common spelling of the English word.\nIn the western world, he was referred to as \"Tycoon\". It was not until later that the proper term of \"Sei-i-tai\" or \"sei-i taish\u014dgun\" was used.\nTitles.\nHistorically, similar terms to \"sei-i taish\u014dgun\" were used with varying degrees of responsibility, although none of them had equal or more importance than \"sei-i taish\u014dgun\". Some of them were:\nHistory.\nFirst shogun.\nThere is no consensus among the various authors since some sources consider Tajihi no Agatamori the first, others say \u014ctomo no Otomaro, other sources assure that the first was Sakanoue no Tamuramaro, while others avoid the problem by just mentioning from the first Kamakura shogun Minamoto no Yoritomo.\nOriginally, the title of \"sei-i taish\u014dgun\" (\"Commander-in-Chief of the Expeditionary Force Against the Barbarians\") was given to military commanders during the early Heian period for the duration of military campaigns against the Emishi, who resisted the governance of the Kyoto-based imperial court.\nHeian period (794\u20131185).\nSakanoue no Tamuramaro.\nSakanoue no Tamuramaro (758\u2013811) was a Japanese general who fought against the Emishi tribes of northern Japan (settled in the territory that today integrates the provinces of Mutsu and Dewa). Tamarumaro was the first general to bend these tribes, integrating their territory to that of the Yamato State. For his military feats he was named sei-i taish\u014dgun and probably because he was the first to win the victory against the northern tribes he is generally recognized as the first shogun in history. (Note: according to historical sources \u014ctomo no Otomaro also had the title of sei-i taish\u014dgun).\nThe regency political system and cloistered rule.\nThe shoguns of this period had no real political power, and the imperial court was in charge of politics. From the mid-9th century to the mid-11th century, the Fujiwara clan controlled political power. They excluded other clans from the political center and monopolized the highest positions in the court, such as , , and , reaching their peak at the end of the 10th century under Fujiwara no Michinaga and Fujiwara no Yorimichi.\nLater, in the mid-11th century, Emperor Go-Sanjo weakened the power of the \"sessh\u014d\" and \"kampaku\" by presiding over politics himself, and when the next emperor, Shirakawa, abdicated and became a cloistered emperor and began a cloistered rule, the \"sessh\u014d\" and \"kampaku\" lost their real political authority and became nominal, effectively ending the Fujiwara regime.\nThe first attempt to establish a warrior class government.\nTaira no Masakado, who rose to prominence in the early 10th century, was the first of the local warrior class to revolt against the imperial court. He had served Fujiwara no Tadahira as a young man, but eventually won a power struggle within the Taira clan and became a powerful figure in the Kanto region. In 939, , a powerful figure in the Hitachi province, fled to Masakado. He was wanted for tyranny by Fujiwara no Korechika, a who oversaw the province of Hitachi province, and Fujiwara no Korechika demanded that Masakado hand over Fujiwara no Haruaki. Masakado refused, and war broke out between Masakado and Fujiwara no Korechika, with Masakado becoming an enemy of the imperial court. Masakado proclaimed that the Kanto region under his rule was independent of the imperial court and called himself the . In response, the imperial court sent a large army led by Taira no Sadamori to kill Masakado. As a result, Masakado was killed in battle in February 940. He is still revered as one of the three great of Japan.\nThe birth of the first warrior class government.\nDuring the reigns of Emperor Shirakawa and Emperor Toba, the Taira clan became , or overseers of various regions, and accumulated wealth by taking samurai from various regions as their retainers. In the struggle to succeed Emperor Toba, former Emperor Sutoku and Emperor Go-Shirakawa, each with his samurai class on his side, fought the H\u014dgen rebellion, which was won by Emperor Go-Shirakawa, who had Taira no Kiyomori and Minamoto no Yoshitomo on his side. Later, Taira no Kiyomori defeated Minamoto no Yoshitomo in the Heiji rebellion and became the first samurai-born aristocratic class, eventually becoming , the highest position of the aristocratic class, and the Taira clan monopolized important positions at the imperial court and wielded power. The seizure of political power by Taira no Kiyomori was the first instance of the warrior class leading politics for the next 700 years.\nHowever, when Taira no Kiyomori used his power to have the child of his daughter Taira no Tokuko and Emperor Takakura installed as Emperor Antoku, there was widespread opposition.\nPrince Mochihito, no longer able to assume the imperial throne, called upon the Minamoto clan to raise an army to defeat the Taira clan, and the Genpei War began. In the midst of the Genpei War, Minamoto no Yoshinaka expelled the Taira clan from Kyoto, and although initially welcomed by the hermit Emperor Go-Shirakawa, he became estranged and isolated due to the disorderly military discipline and lack of political power under his command. He staged a coup, overthrew the emperor's entourage, and became the first of the Minamoto clan to assume the office of . In response, Minamoto no Yoritomo sent Minamoto no Noriyori and Minamoto no Yoshitsune to defeat Yoshinaka, who was killed within a year of becoming shogun. In 1185, the Taira clan was finally defeated in the Battle of Dan-no-ura, and the Minamoto clan came to power.\nKamakura shogunate (1185\u20131333).\nThere are various theories as to the year in which the Kamakura period and Kamakura shogunate began. In the past, the most popular theory was that the year was 1192, when Minamoto no Yoritomo was appointed . Later, the prevailing theory was that the year was 1185, when Yoritomo established the , which controlled military and police power in various regions, and the , which was in charge of tax collection and land administration. Japanese history textbooks as of 2016 do not specify a specific year for the beginning of the Kamakura period, as there are various theories about the year the Kamakura shogunate was established.\nMinamoto no Yoritomo seized power from the central government and aristocracy and by 1192 established a feudal system based in Kamakura in which the private military, the samurai, gained some political powers while the Emperor and the aristocracy remained the \"de jure\" rulers.\nIn 1192, Yoritomo was awarded the title of \"sei-i taish\u014dgun\" by Emperor Go-Toba and the political system he developed with a succession of shoguns as the head became known as a shogunate. Hojo Masako's (Yoritomo's wife) family, the H\u014dj\u014d, seized power from the Kamakura shoguns.\nIn 1199, Yoritomo died suddenly at the age of 53, and the 18-year-old Minamoto no Yoriie took over as second shogun. To support the young Yoriie, the decisions of the shogunate were made by a 13-man council, including Hojo Tokimasa and his son Hojo Yoshitoki, but this was effectively dismantled shortly afterwards when one of the key members lost his political position and two others died of illness.\nPuppetization of the shogun by the \"shikken\".\nWhen Minamoto no Yoriie fell ill in 1203, a power struggle broke out between the Hojo clan and Hiki Yoshikazu, and Hojo Tokimasa destroyed the Hiki clan. Tokimasa then installed the 12-year-old Minamoto no Sanetomo as the third shogun, puppeting him while himself becoming the first and assuming actual control of the shogunate. Hojo Yoshitoki later assassinated Minamoto no Yoriie.\nHowever, Hojo Tokimasa lost influence in 1204 when he killed Hatakeyama Shigetada, believing false information that his son-in-law Shigetada was about to rebel, and lost his position in 1205 when he tried to install his son-in-law Hiraga Tomomasa as the fourth shogun. Hojo Yoshitoki became the second \"shikken\", and the shogunate was administered under the leadership of Hojo Masako.\nIn 1219, the third shogun, Minamoto no Sanetomo, was assassinated for unknown reasons.\nIn 1221, war broke out for the first time in Japan between the warrior class government and the imperial court, and in this battle, known as the J\u014dky\u016b War, the shogunate defeated former Emperor Go-Toba. The shogunate exiled former Emperor Go-Toba to Oki Island for waging war against the shogunate. The shogunate learned its lesson and set up an administrative body in Kyoto called the to oversee the imperial court and western Japan.\nAfter the sudden death of Hojo Yoshitoki in 1224, Hojo Yasutoki became the third \"shikken\", and after the death of Hojo Masako in 1225, the administration of the shogunate returned to a council system.\nIn 1226, Hojo Yasutoki installed Kujo Yoritsune, a member of the \"sekkan\" family, as the fourth shogun.\nIn 1232, the Goseibai Shikimoku was enacted, the first codified law by a warrior class government in Japan.\nPuppetization of the shogun by the \"tokus\u014d\".\nIn 1246, Hojo Tokiyori became the fifth \"shikken\", and in 1252 he installed Prince Munetaka as the sixth shogun. The appointment of a member of the imperial family as shogun made the shogun more and more like a puppet. After retiring from the shikkens, he used his position as head of the Hojo clan's main family, , to dominate politics, thus shifting the source of power in the shogunate from the \"shikken\" to \"tokus\u014d\".\nDuring the reign of Hojo Tokimune, the eighth \"shikken\" and seventh \"tokus\u014d\", the shogunate twice defeated the Mongol invasion of Japan in 1274 and 1281. The shogunate defeated the Mongols with the help of samurai called , lords in the service of the shogunate. However, since the war was a war of national defense and no new territory was gained, the shogunate was unable to adequately reward the \"gokenin\", and their dissatisfaction with the shogunate grew.\nIn 1285, during the reign of Hojo Sadatoki, the ninth \"shikken\" and \"eighth tokus\u014d\", Adachi Yasumori and his clan, who had been the main vassals of the Kamakura shogunate, were destroyed by Taira no Yoritsuna, further strengthening the ruling system of the \"tokus\u014d\", which emphasized blood relations. As tokus\u014d's ruling system was strengthened, the power of the title of , \"tokus\u014d\"'s chief retainer, increased, and when \"tokus\u014d\" was young or incapacitated, \"naikanrei\" took control of the shogunate. Taira no Yoritsuna during the reign of Hojo Sadatoki, and Nagasaki Takatsuna and Nagasaki Takasuke during the reign of Hojo Takatoki, the fourteenth \"shikken\" and ninth \"tokus\u014d\", were \"naikanrei\" who took control of the Kamakura shogunate.\u3000In other words, Japanese politics was a multiple puppet structure: Emperor, shogun, shikken, tokus\u014d, and naikanrei.\nIn response to \"gokenin\"'s dissatisfaction with the shogunate, Emperor Go-Daigo planned to raise an army against the shogunate, but his plan was leaked and he was exiled to Oki Island in 1331. In 1333, Emperor Go-Daigo escaped from Oki Island and again called on \"gokenin\" and samurai to raise an army against the shogunate. Kusunoki Masashige was the first to respond to the call, sparking a series of rebellions against the shogunate in various places. Ashikaga Takauji, who had been ordered by the shogunate to suppress the forces of Emperor Go-Daigo, turned to the emperor's side and attacked \"Rokuhara Tandai\". Then, in 1333, Nitta Yoshisada invaded Kamakura and the Kamakura shogunate fell, and the H\u014dj\u014d clan was destroyed.\nKenmu Restoration (1333\u20131336).\nAround 1334\u20131336, Ashikaga Takauji helped Emperor Go-Daigo regain his throne in the Kenmu Restoration.\nEmperor Go-Daigo rejected cloistered rule and the shogunate and abolished the \"sessh\u014d\" and \"kampaku\" in favour of an emperor-led government. He also began building a new palace and established four new administrative bodies. However, the nobles who had long been out of politics and the newly appointed samurai were unfamiliar with administrative practices, and the court was unable to handle the drastic increase in lawsuits. Emperor Go-Daigo gave high positions and rewards only to the nobles, and the warriors began to swear allegiance to Ashikaga Takauji, who was willing to give up his personal fortune to give them such rewards.\nDuring the Kenmu Restoration, after the fall of the Kamakura shogunate in 1333, another short-lived shogun arose. Prince Moriyoshi (Morinaga), son of Go-Daigo, was awarded the title of \"sei-i taish\u014dgun\". However, Prince Moriyoshi was later put under house arrest and, in 1335, killed by Ashikaga Tadayoshi.\nEmperor Go-daigo did not like the growing fame of Ashikaga Takauji and ordered Nitta Yoshisada and others to defeat Ashikaga Takauji. In response, Takauji led a group of samurai against the new government and defeated the imperial court forces. This ended Emperor Go-Daigo's new regime in 1336 after only two years.\nAshikaga (Muromachi) shogunate (1336/1338\u20131573).\nAfter the failure of the Kenmu Restoration, Emperor Go-Daigo fled to Enryaku-ji Temple on Mount Hiei with the Three Sacred Treasures (Imperial regalia, \u4e09\u7a2e\u306e\u795e\u5668). On the other hand, Ashikaga Takauji installed Emperor K\u014dmy\u014d as the new emperor without the Three Sacred Treasures in 1336.\nAshikaga Takauji tried to make peace with Emperor Go-Daigo, but the negotiations failed when Emperor Go-Daigo refused. Emperor Go-Daigo moved to Yoshino, and the country entered the Nanboku-cho period (1336-1392), in which two emperors existed at the same time in two different imperial courts, the Southern Court in Yoshino and the Northern Court in Kyoto.\nIn 1338, Ashikaga Takauji, like Minamoto no Yoritomo, a descendant of the Minamoto princes, was awarded the title of \"sei-i taish\u014dgun\" by Emperor K\u014dmy\u014d and established the Ashikaga shogunate, which nominally lasted until 1573. The Ashikaga had their headquarters in the Muromachi district of Kyoto, and the time during which they ruled is also known as the Muromachi period.\nBetween 1346 and 1358, the Ashikaga shogunate gradually expanded the authority of the , the local military and police officials established by the Kamakura shogunate, giving the \"shugo\" jurisdiction over land disputes between and allowing the \"shugo\" to receive half of all taxes from the areas they controlled. The \"shugo\" shared their newfound wealth with the local samurai, creating a hierarchical relationship between the \"shugo\" and the samurai, and the first early , called , appeared.\nAshikaga Yoshimitsu, the third shogun, negotiated peace with the Southern court, and in 1392 he reunited the two courts by absorbing the Southern court, ending the 58-year Nanboku-cho period. Yoshimitsu continued to hold power after passing the shogunate to his son Ashikaga Yoshimochi in 1395, becoming , the highest rank of the nobility, and remaining in power until his death in 1408.\nIn 1428, Ashikaga Yoshimochi, the fourth shogun, was ill and the question of his succession arose. Ashikaga Yoshikazu, the 5th shogun, died of illness at the age of 19, so the 6th shogun was chosen from among Yoshimochi's four brothers, and to ensure fairness, a lottery was held. The sixth shogun was Ashikaga Yoshinori. However, he was not educated to be a shogun, and his temperamental and despotic behavior caused resentment, and he was assassinated by Akamatsu Mitsusuke during the . This led to instability in the Ashikaga shogunate system.\n\u014cnin war and Sengoku period.\nAshikaga Yoshimasa, the 8th shogun, tried to strengthen the power of the shogun, but his close associates did not follow his instructions, leading to political chaos and increasing social unrest. Since he had no sons, he tried to install his younger brother Ashikaga Yoshimi as the ninth shogun, but when his wife Hino Tomiko gave birth to Ashikaga Yoshihisa, a conflict arose among the \"shugo daimyo\" as to whether Yoshimi or Yoshihisa would be the next shogun. The Hatakeyama and Shiba clans were also divided into two opposing factions over succession within their own clans, and Hosokawa Katsumoto and Yamana S\u014dzen, who were father-in-law and son-in-law, were politically at odds with each other.\nIn 1467, these conflicts finally led to the \u014cnin War between the Eastern Army, led by Hosokawa Katsumoto and including Hatakeyama Masanaga, Shiba Yoshitoshi, and Ashikaga Yoshimi, and the Western Army, led by Yamana S\u014dzen and including Hatakeyama Yoshinari, Shiba Yoshikado, and Ashikaga Yoshihisa.\u3000In 1469, the war spread to the provinces, but in 1473, Hosokawa Katsumoto and Yamana S\u014dzen, the leaders of both armies, were dead, and in 1477, the war ended when the western lords, including Hatakeyama Yoshinari and \u014cuchi Masahiro, withdrew their armies from Kyoto.\nThe war devastated Kyoto, destroying many aristocratic and samurai residences, Shinto shrines, and Buddhist temples, and undermining the authority of the Ashikaga shoguns, greatly reducing their control over the various regions. Thus began the Sengoku period, a period of civil war in which the \"daimyo\" of various regions fought to expand their own power. \"Daimyo\" who became more powerful as the shogunate's control weakened were called , and they often came from \"shugo daimyo\", , and . In other words, \"sengoku daimyo\" differed from \"shugo daimyo\" in that \"sengoku daimyo\" was able to rule the region on his own, without being appointed by the shogun.\nIn 1492, Hosokawa Masamoto, the , second in rank to the shogun in the Ashikaga shogunate, and the equivalent of in the Kamakura shogunate, staged a coup, banished the 10th shogun, Ashikaga Yoshitane, from Kyoto, and installed Ashikaga Yoshizumi as the 11th shogun, making the shogun a puppet of the Hosokawa clan. Hosokawa Takakuni, who came to power later, installed Ashikaga Yoshiharu as the 12th shogun in 1521. In 1549, Miyoshi Nagayoshi banished the 12th shogun and his son Ashikaga Yoshiteru from Kyoto and seized power. From this point on, the Miyoshi clan continued to hold power in and around Kyoto until Oda Nobunaga entered Kyoto in 1568.\nBy the time of the 13th shogun, Ashikaga Yoshiteru, the shogun already had few direct fiefs and direct military forces, and his sphere of influence was limited to a few lands around Kyoto, losing both economic and military power. As a result, Ashikaga Yoshiteru was often chased out of Kyoto by the \"sengoku daimyo\" Miyoshi Nagayoshi and his forces, and was finally killed in an attack by the forces of Miyoshi Yoshitsugu and Matsunaga Hisahide. Ashikaga Yoshiteru was known as a great swordsman and was a student of Tsukahara Bokuden, who was known as one of the strongest swordsmen. According to Yagy\u016b Munenori, a swordsmanship instructor in the Tokugawa Shogunate, Ashikaga Yoshiteru was one of the five best swordsmen of his time. According to several historical books, including Lu\u00eds Fr\u00f3is' \"Historia de Japam\", he fought hard with \"naginata\" and \"tachi\" during a raid, defeating many of his enemies, but eventually ran out of strength and was killed.\nAzuchi\u2013Momoyama period (1573\u20131603).\nThe Azuchi-Momoyama period refers to the period when Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi Hideyoshi were in power. They and Tokugawa Ieyasu are the three unifiers of Japan. The name \"Azuchi-Momoyama\" comes from the fact that Nobunaga's castle, Azuchi Castle, was located in Azuchi, Shiga, and Fushimi Castle, where Hideyoshi lived after his retirement, was located in Momoyama. Although the two leaders of the warrior class during this period were not given the title of , Oda Nobunaga was given a title almost equal to it, and Toyotomi Hideyoshi a higher one.\nThis era began when Oda Nobunaga expelled Ashikaga Yoshiaki from Kyoto and destroyed the Ashikaga shogunate. Adopting an innovative military strategy using and an economic policy that encouraged economic activity by the common people, he rapidly expanded his power, defeating a series of \"sengoku daimyo\" and armed Buddhist temple forces to unify the central part of Japan.\nNobunaga was given the title of , an official position as the number three in the imperial court since ancient times, and the title of , which meant leader of the warrior class. This title was a highly prestigious title given to the leader of the warrior class, similar to the title . This was the first time since Minamoto no Sanetomo in 1218 that a member of the warrior class had been appointed \"udaijin\". Previously, the only warrior class members appointed to higher positions than \"udaijin\" were Taira no Kiyomori and Ashikaga Yoshimitsu as , and Ashikaga Yoshinori and Ashikaga Yoshimasa as . Nobunaga was betrayed by his vassal Akechi Mitsuhide, who died in the Honn\u014d-ji incident. It is believed that about a month before his death, Nobunaga was approached by the imperial court to accept one of the following positions: , \"daij\u014d-daijin\", or shogun. As a result, he was posthumously promoted to \"daij\u014d-daijin\" in 1582.\nToyotomi Hideyoshi, a general under Nobunaga, conquered Shikoku, Kyushu, Kant\u014d, and the Tohoku after Nobunaga's death, completing Nobunaga's attempt to unify Japan. Despite his peasant background, he rose through the ranks under Nobunaga, becoming , samurai, \"sengoku daimyo\", and finally, after Nobunaga's death, and . It was the first time in history that a non-aristocrat by birth became a \"kampaku\". He obtained these titles, the highest ranks of the aristocracy, by being adopted into the Konoe family and formally becoming an aristocrat. He then passed the position and title of \"kampaku\" to his nephew, Toyotomi Hidetsugu. He remained in power as , the title of retired \"kampaku\", until his death. There are various theories as to why he refused or failed to receive the title of shogun, but the fact that he came from a peasant background seems to have had something to do with it. Hideyoshi died of illness at Fushimi Castle at the age of 63.\nBefore his death, Hideyoshi ordered that Japan be ruled by a council of the five most powerful \"sengoku daimyo\", , and Hideyoshi's five retainers, , until his only heir, the five-year-old Toyotomi Hideyori, reached the age of 16. However, having only the young Hideyori as Hideyoshi's successor weakened the Toyotomi regime. Today, the loss of all of Hideyoshi's adult heirs is considered the main reason for the downfall of the Toyotomi clan.\nHideyoshi's younger brother, Toyotomi Hidenaga, who had supported Hideyoshi's rise to power as a leader and strategist, had already died of illness in 1591, and his nephew, Toyotomi Hidetsugu, who was Hideyoshi's only adult successor, was forced to commit seppuku in 1595 along with many other vassals on Hideyoshi's orders for suspected rebellion.\nIn this politically unstable situation, Maeda Toshiie, one of the \"go-tair\u014d\", died of illness, and Tokugawa Ieyasu, one of the \"go-tair\u014d\"' who had been second in power to Hideyoshi but had not participated in the Imjin War, rose to power, and Ieyasu came into conflict with Ishida Mitsunari, one of the \"go-buky\u014d\" and others. This conflict eventually led to the Battle of Sekigahara, in which the led by Ieyasu defeated the led by Mitsunari, and Ieyasu nearly gained control of Japan.\nTokugawa shogunate (1603\u20131868).\nRuled by 15 Tokugawa shoguns, the Edo period (1603\u20131868) saw dramatic economic and cultural development, fostered by a relatively peaceful society. Edo (now Tokyo) became the largest city in the world at the time, Genroku and Kasei cultures flourished, and enjoyed a variety of cultural activities such as ukiyo-e, kabuki, bunraku, rakugo, k\u014ddan, haiku, and literature.\nThe Edo period began in 1603 when Tokugawa Ieyasu was given the title of and established the Tokugawa shogunate in Edo (now Tokyo). Ieyasu set a precedent in 1605 when he retired as shogun in favour of his son Tokugawa Hidetada, though he maintained power from behind the scenes as .\nIn order to establish the rule of the Tokugawa shogunate, he exchanged the fiefdoms of various daimyo to increase or decrease their areas of control. The who had sided with Tokugawa Ieyasu before the Battle of Sekigahara were reassigned to various locations between Edo, the base of the Tokugawa shogunate, and Osaka, where Toyotomi Hideyoshi's concubine, Yodo-dono, and his son, Toyotomi Hideyori, were located. On the other hand, he reassigned the who had submitted to Tokugawa Ieyasu after the Battle of Sekigahara, to remote areas separated from politically important regions. Then, in 1614 and 1615, he twice attacked Osaka Castle, forcing Yodo-dono and Toyotomi Hideyori to commit suicide and destroying the Toyotomi clan (Siege of Osaka), thereby eliminating any resistance that might have stood in the way of Tokugawa rule in Japan and consolidating the power of the Tokugawa shogunate.\nIn 1615, the Tokugawa shogunate enacted the to control the imperial court. The first article implied that the emperor should not be involved in politics and that what he did should be academic. The following articles regulated the appointment of the and , as well as detailed regulations on the dress of the emperor and the court nobles. It also stipulated that the shogunate could intervene in the revision of the era name, which had originally been the prerogative of the imperial court. It also stipulated that nobles could be exiled if they disobeyed the orders of the shogunate. During the Edo period, effective power rested with the Tokugawa shogun, not the Emperor in Kyoto, even though the former ostensibly owed his position to the latter. The shogun controlled foreign policy, the military, and feudal patronage. The role of the Emperor was ceremonial, similar to the position of the Japanese monarchy after the Second World War.\nIn 1617, a month before his death, Ieyasu was appointed .\nThe fifth shogun, Tokugawa Tsunayoshi, enforced an animal protection law called the from 1685 to 1709. According to earlier theories, this was a bad law that demanded extreme animal protection and severe punishment for violators. Today, however, the law is seen as less extreme and more protective of human life, and is credited with sweeping away the rough and tumble spirit of the people that had persisted since the Sengoku period and improving the sense of ethics among the Japanese people.\nIn the early Edo period, Japan was the world's largest producer of gold and silver, but by the second half of the 17th century, these resources had been almost completely depleted, and most of the gold and silver produced was shipped out of the country, leaving the shogunate in financial difficulties. The eighth shogun, Tokugawa Yoshimune, implemented a series of reforms known as the Ky\u014dh\u014d Reforms. He reduced the shogunate's expenses while increasing revenue by requiring feudal lords to contribute rice to the shogunate in exchange for cutting the length of in half. He increased the revenue of the shogunate by 20% by encouraging the development of new rice fields. He also encouraged the cultivation of cash crops such as sweet potatoes and sugar cane, which allowed agriculture to flourish and increased tax revenues. He issued new money with a reduced gold content to prevent price increases. He learned from the Great Fire of Meireki, which killed 100,000 people, and built extensive roads and firebreaks around the city. He established a to receive petitions from the common people, which led to the formation of a firefighting organization by the townspeople and the establishment of a Koishikawa Yojosho (Koishikawa Hospital) where the common people could receive medical care.\nTanuma Okitsugu, who held the position of , during the reign of Tokugawa Ieharu, the 10th shogun, adopted a policy of mercantilism. Since the Ky\u014dh\u014d Reforms of Tokugawa Yoshimune had already made it impossible to collect more taxes from the peasants, Okitsugu began collecting taxes in exchange for granting exclusive business rights to the . To stimulate commerce, he also attempted to unify the monetary system by minting a large number of new coins that could be conveniently used in both eastern Japan, where gold coins were widely used, and western Japan, where silver coins were widely used, and distributing them throughout Japan.\nTokugawa Ienari, the 11th shogun, ruled the shogunate for 54 years, first as shogun from 1787 to 1837 and then as \"\u014cgosho\" from 1837 to 1841. His 50-year reign was the longest of any shogun. Prior to his reign, Japan had suffered major earthquakes, several volcanic eruptions, droughts, floods and urban fires, and the finances of the shogunate were strained. Therefore, during Ienari's reign, from 1787 to 1793, Matsudaira Sadanobu led the Kansei Reforms to improve the finances of the shogunate. After Ienari's death, from 1841 to 1843, Mizuno Tadakuni led the Tenpo Reforms, but the effects of these reforms were limited.\nSuccessive shoguns held the highest or near-highest court ranks, higher than most court nobles. They were made of court rank upon assuming office, then , and the highest rank of was conferred upon them upon their death. The Tokugawa shogunate established that the court ranks granted to daimyo by the imperial court were based on the recommendation of the Tokugawa shogunate, and the court ranks were used to control the daimyo.\nThe Bakumatsu era and the end of the shogunate and the warrior class.\nThe beginning of the Bakumatsu era at the end of the Edo period is the subject of various theories, and can be dated to the 1820s and 1830s, when the shogunate's rule became unstable, or to the Tenp\u014d Reforms of 1841\u20131843, or to Matthew C. Perry's arrival in Japan in 1853 and his call for the opening of the country. On the other hand, the end point is clear, when the 15th Shogun, Tokugawa Yoshinobu, returned the authority to govern Japan to Emperor Meiji.\nDuring this period, the shogunate, the imperial court, the various , and the samurai were deeply divided into two factions: the , which favored the shogunate's leadership in dealing with domestic and foreign crises, and the , which recommended that the shogunate form a coalition with the powerful \"han\" (daimyo domain) and the imperial court. The Nanki faction favored Tokugawa Iemochi as the successor to the 13th shogun, Tokugawa Iesada, while the Hitotsubashi favored Tokugawa Yoshinobu. When the shogunate concluded the Convention of Kanagawa in 1854 and the Treaty of Amity and Commerce in 1858, the Hitotsubashi faction opposed these treaties, but the shogunate captured and executed them in the Ansei Purge. In retaliation, Hitotsubashi samurai assassinated Ii Naosuke, the in the Sakuradamon Incident. To win over the Hitotsubashi faction, the shogunate advocated a and welcomed Kazunomiya, the younger sister of Emperor Komei, as the wife of the 14th shogun, Tokugawa Iemochi, but the Hitotsubashi faction condemned this political marriage.\nThe Ch\u014dsh\u016b Domain was the most radical, advocating the overthrow of the shogunate, emperor-centered politics, and the defeat of foreign powers. They expanded their political power through exchanges with Sanjo Sanetomi and others in the imperial court who shared their ideology. In response, the Satsuma and Aizu domains and some aristocrats who supported the \"K\u014dbu gattai\" expelled Sanjo Sanetomi and the Ch\u014dsh\u016b Domain from Kyoto in a political uprising on August 18 of the lunar calendar in 1863. In 1864, some forces of the Ch\u014dsh\u016b Domain marched toward Kyoto in the Kinmon incident, but the combined forces of the shogunate, the Satsuma Domain, and the Aizu Domain defeated the Ch\u014dsh\u016b Domain. In 1864, the Shogunate sent a large force against the rebellious Ch\u014dsh\u016b Domain in the First Ch\u014dsh\u016b expedition. The Shogunate won the war without a fight, as the leaders of the Ch\u014dsh\u016b Domain committed seppuku. Meanwhile, the Ch\u014dsh\u016b Domain was defeated by foreign allied forces in the Shimonoseki campaign, and the Satsuma Domain engaged the British forces in the Bombardment of Kagoshima. Both domains realized that Japan was militarily behind the Western powers, and they promoted reforms within their domains while strengthening their will to overthrow the shogunate.\nIn 1866, Sakamoto Ry\u014dma brokered a dramatic reconciliation between the previously hostile Ch\u014dsh\u016b and Satsuma domains, and the Ch\u014dsh\u016b and Satsuma domains formed the Satch\u014d Alliance. In 1866, the shogunate launched the Second Ch\u014dsh\u016b expedition, but was defeated by the Ch\u014dsh\u016b Domain, severely damaging the shogunate's prestige. The Satsuma Domain refused the shogunate's order to go to war. In 1867, the 15th shogun, Tokugawa Yoshinobu, finally returned power to Emperor Meiji, ending the Edo period and 700 years of shogunate rule over Japan.\nFrom 1868 to 1869, the imperial forces, led by the Ch\u014dsh\u016b and Satsuma domains, and the former shogunate forces, led by the Aizu Domain, fought the Boshin War, which the imperial forces won. With this war, the domestic pacification of the imperial forces was nearly complete, and with the Meiji Restoration, Japan began to rapidly modernize and emerge as an international military and economic power. The rapid modernization of Japan during the Meiji era (1868\u20131912) was aided by the fact that, under the rule of successive Tokugawa shoguns, many Japanese were educated in and had a thriving publishing culture.\nThe Satsuma Rebellion of 1877 was the last battle between the imperial forces and the disenfranchised ex-samurai and the last civil war in Japan. As a result of this war, the warrior class ended its history.\nThe Honj\u014d Masamune was inherited by successive shoguns and it represented the Tokugawa shogunate. It was crafted by swordsmith Masamune (1264\u20131343) and recognized as one of the finest Japanese swords in history. After World War 2, in December 1945, Tokugawa Iemasa gave the sword to a police station at Mejiro and it went missing.\nHeirs of the Tokugawa shogun.\nDuring the reign of the third shogun, Tokugawa Iemitsu, the at Edo Castle was expanded at the suggestion of his nanny, Lady Kasuga, to ensure the birth of a male heir to the shogun's lineage, and became a vast shogun's harem with nearly 1,000 women working as maidservants. The women of \"\u014doku\" were highly hierarchical, with the of the shogun, who was of aristocratic lineage, ruling at the top, and the older women who had served her for a long time actually controlling \"\u014doku\". The women who worked as maidservants in \"\u014doku\" were daughters of the , a high-ranking class of samurai, and they had servants from the and peasants who worked for them. Even low-ranking servants were treated as concubines of the shogun if they bore his children. One such example was Otama, the daughter of a grocer, who gave birth to the fifth shogun, Tokugawa Ietsuna. The \"\u014doku\" was also used to ensure the Tokugawa shogun's rule over the country by arranging political marriages between the shogun's children and the children of daimyo in various regions. The \"\u014doku\" continued until 1868, when the Tokugawa shogunate was dissolved.\nThe Owari, Kish\u016b (Kii), and Mito Tokugawa families, called the , founded by the children of Tokugawa Ieyasu, were the second most prestigious family after the shogun's family, and if the shogun's family failed to produce an heir, a male member of one of the three families was installed as shogun. For example, the 8th shogun, Tokugawa Yoshimune, and the 14th shogun, Tokugawa Iemochi, were originally heads of the Kish\u016b Tokugawa family.\nIn order to keep the shogun's lineage alive, the 8th Shogun, Yoshimune, had his children establish the Tayasu, Hitotsubashi, and Shimizu Tokugawa families, which were called the and were treated as the second most prestigious daimyo after the \"Gosanke\". Of these, the Hitotsubashi Tokugawa family produced the 11th shogun, Tokugawa Ienari. His son Tokugawa Ieyoshi became the 12th shogun, and Ieyoshi's son Tokugawa Iesada became the 13th shogun. Tokugawa Yoshinobu became the 15th shogun after being adopted by the Hitotsubashi Tokugawa family from the Mito Tokugawa family. The head of \"Gosanky\u014d\" had the privilege of entering the \"\u014doku\", where men were forbidden.\nShogunate (\"Bakufu\").\nEtymology.\nFrom the 1800s, the shogunate's administration was known as the , literally meaning \"government from the curtain\". In this context, \"curtain\" is a synecdoche for a type of semi-open tent called a \"maku\", a temporary battlefield headquarters from which a samurai general would direct his forces, and whose sides would be decorated with his mon. The application of the term \"bakufu\" to the shogunate government was therefore heavy with symbolism, connoting both the explicitly military character of the shogunal regime and its (at least theoretically) ephemeral nature.\nThe term originally meant the dwelling and household of a shogun, but in time, became a metonym for the system of government dominated by a feudal military monarchy, exercised in the name of the shogun or by the shogun himself. \nThe term \"bakufu\" was not officially used at the time of the shogunate; the Tokugawa shogunate was called .\nIt was not until the Bakumatsu era in the 1800s that the term \"bakufu\" began to be actively used in its current meaning of \"shogunate\".\nThe late Mito school of the time preferred the term \"bakufu\" because they wanted to emphasize that Japan was an emperor-centered country, and that the shogunate was merely the administration of the shogun appointed by the emperor. The modern use of the term was then established when history textbooks at Imperial Universities in the 1890s defined that only the three regimes of Kamakura, Ashikaga, and Tokugawa were \"bakufu\" and that the appointment of a shogun was essential for the establishment of the \"bakufu\".\nGovernance structure.\nThe shogunate system was originally established under the Kamakura shogunate by Minamoto no Yoritomo after the Genpei War, although theoretically the state, and therefore the Emperor, still held \"de jure\" ownership of all land in Japan. The system had some feudal elements, with lesser territorial lords pledging their allegiance to greater ones. Samurai were rewarded for their loyalty with agricultural surplus, usually rice, or labor services from peasants. In contrast to European feudal knights, samurai were not landowners. The hierarchy that held this system of government together was reinforced by close ties of loyalty between the \"daimy\u014d\", samurai, and their subordinates.\nEach shogunate was dynamic, not static. Power was constantly shifting and authority was often ambiguous. The study of the ebbs and flows in this complex history continues to occupy the attention of scholars. Each shogunate encountered competition. Sources of competition included the Emperor and the court aristocracy, the remnants of the imperial governmental systems, the \"daimy\u014ds\", the \"sh\u014den\" system, the great temples and shrines, the , the \"shugo\" and \"jit\u014d\", the \"jizamurai\" and early modern \"daimy\u014d\". Each shogunate reflected the necessity of new ways of balancing the changing requirements of central and regional authorities.\nRelationship with the emperor.\nSince Minamoto no Yoritomo turned the figure of the shogun into a permanent and hereditary position and until the Meiji Restoration, there were two ruling classes in Japan:\nNo shogun tried to usurp the throne, even when they had at their disposal the military power of the territory. There were two reasons primarily:\nUnable to usurp the throne, the shoguns sought throughout history to keep the emperor away from the country's political activity, relegating them from the sphere of influence. One of the few powers that the imperial house could retain was that of being able to \"control time\" through the designation of the Japanese Neng\u014d or Eras and the issuance of calendars.\nEmperors twice tried to recover the power they enjoyed before the establishment of the shogunate. In 1219 the Emperor Go-Toba accused the H\u014dj\u014d as outlaws. Imperial troops mobilized, leading to the J\u014dky\u016b War (1219\u20131221), which would culminate in the third Battle of Uji (1221). During this, the imperial troops were defeated and the emperor Go-Toba was exiled. With the defeat of Go-Toba, the samurai government over the country was confirmed. At the beginning of the fourteenth century the Emperor Go-Daigo decided to rebel, but the H\u014dj\u014d, who were then regents, sent an army from Kamakura. The emperor fled before the troops arrived and took the imperial insignia. The shogun named his own emperor, giving rise to the era .\nDuring the 1850s and 1860s, the shogunate was severely pressured both abroad and by foreign powers. It was then that various groups angry with the shogunate for the concessions made to the various European countries found in the figure of the emperor an ally through which they could expel the Tokugawa shogunate from power. The motto of this movement was and they finally succeeded in 1868, when imperial power was restored after centuries of being in the shadow of the country's political life.\nLegacy.\nToday, the head of the Japanese government is the Prime Minister. The usage of the term \"shogun\" has nevertheless continued in colloquialisms. A retired Prime Minister who still wields considerable power and influence behind the scenes is called a , a sort of modern incarnation of the cloistered rule. Examples of \"shadow shoguns\" are former Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka and the politician Ichir\u014d Ozawa.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28944", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28944", "title": "Short-term memory", "text": "Memory used for information that only needs to be stored for a short time\nShort-term memory (or \"primary\" or \"active memory\") is the capacity for holding a small amount of information in an active, readily available state for a short interval. For example, short-term memory holds a phone number that has just been recited. The duration of short-term memory (absent rehearsal or active maintenance) is estimated to be on the order of seconds. The commonly cited capacity of 7 items, found in Miller's law, has been superseded by 4\u00b11 items. In contrast, long-term memory holds information indefinitely.\nShort-term memory is not the same as working memory, which refers to structures and processes used for temporarily storing and manipulating information.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStores.\nThe idea of separate memories for short-term and long-term storage originated in the 19th century. A model of memory developed in the 1960s assumed that all memories are formed in one store and transfer to other stores after a small period of time. This model is referred to as the \"modal model\", most famously detailed by Shiffrin. The model states that memory is first stored in sensory memory, which has a large capacity but can only maintain information for milliseconds. A representation of that rapidly decaying memory is moved to short-term memory. Short-term memory does not have a large capacity like sensory memory, but holds information for seconds or minutes. The final storage is long-term memory, which has a very large capacity and is capable of holding information possibly for a lifetime.\nThe exact mechanisms by which this transfer takes place, whether all or only some memories are retained permanently, and even to have the existence of a genuine distinction between stores, remain controversial.\nEvidence.\nAnterograde amnesia.\nOne form of evidence supporting the existence of a short-term store comes from anterograde amnesia, which is when individuals cannot learn new long-term facts and episodes. Despite these challenges, patients with this form of amnesia have an intact ability to retain small amounts of information over short time scales (up to 30 seconds) but have little ability to form longer-term memories (illustrated by patient HM). This suggests that short-term store is spared from damage and diseases.\nDistraction tasks.\nOther evidence comes from experimental studies showing that some manipulations such as distractions can impair the recall memory for the last 3 to 5 words most recently learned from a list of words (it is presumed that they are held in short-term memory). However, recall for words from earlier in the list (it is presumed, stored in long-term memory) are unaffected. Other manipulations (e.g., semantic similarity of the words) affect only memory for earlier list words, but do not affect memory for the most recent few words. These results show that different factors such as distraction affect short-term recall (disruption of rehearsal) and long-term recall (semantic similarity). Together, these findings show that long-term memory and short-term memory can vary independently of each other.\nModels.\nUnitary model.\nNot all researchers agree that short- and long-term memory are separate systems. The alternative Unitary Model proposes that short-term memory consists of temporary activations of long term representations (that there is one memory that behaves variously over all time scales, from milliseconds to years). It has been difficult to identify a sharp boundary between short-term and long-term memory. For instance, Tarnow reported that the recall probability vs. latency curve is a straight line from 6 to 600 seconds, with the probability of failure to recall only saturating after 600 seconds. If two different stores were operating in this time domain, it is reasonable to expect a discontinuity in this curve. Other research has shown that the detailed pattern of recall errors looks remarkably similar to recall of a list immediately after learning (it is presumed, from short-term memory) and recall after 24 hours (necessarily from long-term memory).\nFurther evidence for a unified store comes from experiments involving continual distractor tasks. In 1974, Bjork and Whitten presented subjects with word pairs to remember; before and after each word pair, subjects performed a simple multiplication task for 12 seconds. After the final word-pair, subjects performed the multiplication distractor task for 20 seconds. They reported that the recency effect (the increased probability of recall of the last items studied) and the primacy effect (the increased probability of recall of the first few items) was sustained. These results are incompatible with a separate short-term memory as the distractor items should have displaced some of the word-pairs in the buffer, thereby weakening the associated strength of the items in long-term memory.\nTzeng (1973) reported an instance where the recency effect in free recall did not seem to result from a short-term memory store. Subjects were presented with four study-test periods of 10 word lists, with a continual distractor task (20-second period of counting-backward). At the end of each list, participants had to free-recall as many words as possible. After recall of the fourth list, participants were asked to recall items from all four lists. Both the initial and final recall showed a recency effect. These results violated the predictions of a short-term memory model, where no recency effect would be expected.\nKoppenaal and Glanzer (1990) attempted to explain these phenomena as a result of the subjects' adaptation to the distractor task, which allowed them to preserve at least some short-term memory capabilities. In their experiment the long-term recency effect disappeared when the distractor after the last item differed from the distractors that preceded and followed the other items (e.g., arithmetic distractor task and word reading distractor task). Thapar and Greene challenged this theory. In one of their experiments, participants were given a different distractor task after every study item. According to Koppenaal and Glanzer's theory, no recency effect would be expected as subjects would not have had time to adapt to the distractor; yet such a recency effect remained in place in the experiment.\nAnother explanation.\nOne proposed explanation for recency in a continual distractor condition, and its disappearance in an end-only distractor task is the influence of contextual and distinctive processes. According to this model, recency is a result of the similarity of the final items' processing context to the processing context of the other items and the distinctive position of the final items versus intermediate items. In the end distractor task, the processing context of the final items is no longer similar to that of the other list items. At the same time, retrieval cues for these items are no longer as effective as without the distractor. Therefore, recency recedes or vanishes. However, when distractor tasks are placed before and after each item, recency returns, because all the list items have similar processing context.\nSynaptic theory.\nVarious researchers have proposed that stimuli are coded in short-term memory using transmitter depletion. According to this hypothesis, a stimulus activates a spatial pattern of activity across neurons in a brain region. As these neurons fire, the available neurotransmitters are depleted. This depletion pattern represents stimulus information and functions as a memory trace. The memory trace decays over time as a consequence of neurotransmitter reuptake mechanisms that restore neurotransmitters to prior levels.\nRelationship with working memory.\nThe relationship between short-term memory and working memory is described by various theories, but the two concepts are generally considered distinct. Neither holds information for long, but short-term memory is a simple store, while working memory allows it to be manipulated. Short-term memory is part of working memory, but is not the same thing.\nWorking memory refers to structures and processes used for temporarily storing and manipulating information. Working memory has been termed \"working attention\". Working memory and attention together play a major role in the thought process. Short-term memory in general refers to the short-term storage of information, and it does not encompass memory manipulation or organization. Thus, while short-term memory components appear in working memory models, the concept of short-term memory is distinct from other concepts.\nWithin Baddeley's influential 1986 model of working memory two short-term storage mechanisms appear: the phonological loop and the visuospatial sketchpad. Most of the above research involves the phonological loop, because most of the work on short-term memory uses verbal material. Since the 1990s, however, research on visual short-term memory and spatial short-term memory has expanded.\nDuration.\nThe limited duration of short-term memory (~18 seconds without rehearsal) suggests that its contents spontaneously decay over time. The decay assumption is part of many theories of short-term memory. The most notable one is Baddeley's model of working memory. The decay assumption is usually paired with the idea of rapid covert rehearsal: to retain information for longer, information must be periodically repeated or rehearsed, either by articulating it out loud or by mental simulation. Another type of rehearsal that can improve short-term memory is attention-based rehearsal. Information is mentally searched in a particular sequence. Once recalled, the information re-enters short-term memory and is then retained for a further period.\nNairn and Lewandosky et al. dispute that spontaneous decay plays any significant role in short-term forgetting, and the evidence is not conclusive.\nOne alternative asserts that several elements (such as digits, words, or pictures, or logos) are held in short-term memory simultaneously, their representations compete with each other for recall, degrading each other. Thereby, new content gradually replaces older content, unless the older content is actively protected.\nCapacity.\nWhatever the cause(s) of short-term forgetting, consensus asserts that it limits the amount of retained new information short term. This limit is referred to as the finite capacity of short-term memory. Short-term memory capacity is often called memory span, in reference to a common measurement procedure. In a memory span test, the experimenter presents a list of items (e.g. digits or words) of increasing length. An individual's span is determined as the longest list length that he or she can recall correctly in the given order on half or more trials.\nIn an early and influential article, \"The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two\", Miller suggested that human short-term memory has a forward memory span of approximately seven plus or minus two items and that that was well known at the time (apparently originating with Wundt). Later research reported that this \"magical number seven\" is roughly accurate for college students recalling lists of digits, but memory span varies widely across populations and material. For example, the ability to recall words in order depends on characteristics of those words: fewer words can be recalled when the words have longer spoken duration; this is known as the \"word-length effect\", or when their speech sounds are similar to each other; this is called the \"phonological similarity effect\". More words can be recalled when the words are highly familiar or occur frequently in speech. Recall performance is better when all of the words are taken from a single semantic category (such as games) than when the words are chosen randomly. A later estimate of short-term memory capacity reported that the capacity was about four pieces, or \"chunks\", of information. Other notable theories argue against measuring capacity in terms of the number of elements.\nIn the visual domain, several studies report no fixed capacity limit in terms of total number of items that can be retained. Instead, some investigators have argued for a limited resource that can be flexibly shared between items held in short-term memory, with some items (in the focus of attention) being allocated more resource and being recalled with greater fidelity. Many of these experiments have used delayed response tasks that have a continuous, analogue response space, rather than using a binary (correct/incorrect) recall method as is often used in change detection tasks. Instead of asking people to report whether a change occurred between the memory and probe array, delayed reproduction tasks require participants to reproduce the precise quality of a visual feature, e.g. an object's orientation or colour.\nRehearsal.\nRehearsal is the process of repeating information to be retained, ostensibly keeping it in short-term memory. Each repetition reenters the information into short-term memory, thus keeping that information for another 10 to 20 seconds (the average storage time for short-term memory).\nThis process allows information to be stored in the memory avoiding distracting stimuli, rehearsal allows new information to be strengthened which results in a likelihood of this information being stored in the long-term memory \nHowever, the success of rehearsal can depend on factors such as attention as well as any form of distraction that is present because of this active rehearsal is essential to store that new information.\nChunking.\nChunking is a technique that allows memory to remember more things. Chunking involves organizing material into meaningful groups. Chunking can greatly increase recall capacity. For example, in recalling a phone number, chunking the digits into three groups (area code, prefix, and extension). This method of remembering phone numbers is far more effective than attempting to remember a sequence of 10 digits.\nPractice and the usage of existing information in long-term memory can lead to additional improvements in chunking. In one testing session, an American cross-country runner was able to recall a string of 79 digits after hearing them only once by chunking them into groups the size of a running time.\nFactors.\nDiseases that cause neurodegeneration, such as Alzheimer's disease, can damage short-term as well as long-term memory. Damage to certain sections of the brain due to this disease causes a shrinkage in the cerebral cortex, which impairs the ability to think and recall.\nShort-term memory performance is influenced by diet. More intake of blueberries was reported to improve short-term memory after continuous use whereas alcohol decreases short-term memory performance.\nConditions.\nAge.\nMemory loss is a natural aging process. Research has reported short-term memory decreases with age. The decline appears to be constant and continuous beginning in the twenties.\nOne study used data from a previous study that compiled normative French data for three short-term memory tasks (verbal, visual and spatial). They found impairments in participants between the ages of 55 and 85 years of age.\nAdvanced age is also associated with decrements in episodic memory. The associated deficit is that differences in recognition memory reflect difficulty in binding components of a memory episode and bound units. A previous study used mixed and blocked test designs and reported an associative deficit for older adults.\nEven absent neurological diseases and disorders, progressive and gradual loss of some intellectual functions become evident in later years. Several tests assess the psychophysical characteristics of the elderly, such as the functional reach (FR) test and the mini\u2013mental state examination (MMSE). FR is an index of the aptitude to maintain balance in an upright position, while the MMSE test is a global index of cognitive abilities. These tests were used by Costarella et al. to evaluate the psychophysical characteristics of older adults. They found a loss of physical performance (FR, related to height) as well as a loss of cognitive abilities (MMSE).\nAlzheimer's disease.\nMemory distortion in Alzheimer's disease is a disorder common in older adults. One study compared patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease versus age matched healthy adults. Alzheimer's patients had more severely reduced short-term memory. Visual short-term memory is also impaired in sporadic, late-onset as well as familial Alzheimer's disease, when assessed using delayed reproduction tasks. These studies point to a deficit in visual feature binding as an important component of the deficit. Episodic memory and semantic abilities deteriorate early in Alzheimer's disease. Since the cognitive system includes interconnected and reciprocally influenced neuronal networks, one study hypothesized that stimulation of lexical-semantic abilities may benefit semantically structured episodic memory. They found that Lexical-Semantic stimulation treatment could improve episodic memory.\nAphasia.\nAphasias commonly occur after left-hemisphere stroke or with neurodegenerative conditions such as primary progressive aphasias. Patients with left temporoparietal focal lesions may suffer a deficit of verbal short-term memory, which may also be a feature of logopenic primary progressive aphasia.\nMany language-impaired patients complain about short-term memory deficits. Family members confirm that patients have trouble recalling previously known names and events. These signals are supported by studies reporting that many aphasics also have trouble with visual-memory required tasks. There have been reports of deficits in verbal short-term memory when related to short-term memory, these deficits are harder to treat since there are less measurements for verbal short-term memory.\nSchizophrenia.\nCore symptoms of schizophrenia patients have been linked to cognitive deficits. One neglected factor that contributes to those deficits is the comprehension of time.\nSchizophrenics are not able to process how much time has passed. They are unable to process this because they have impaired temporal information processing. They cannot tell what the actual time is, what day of the week it is, what month it is, or what year it is. For some, they feel as though time is either sped up or slowed down. This causes them to have instability in life. Not being able to tell time or know what year they are in, forces them to not be able to have a stable life. Schizophrenics have the inability to detect rhythm irregularities and estimating durations of time. This affects the verbal and psychical abilities. They have a harder time making judgments between multiple events because it is all bound together as one for them.\nPost-traumatic stress disorder.\nPosttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is associated with altered processing of emotional material with strong attentional bias toward trauma-related information. It interferes with cognitive processing. Aside from trauma processing specificities, a range of cognitive impairments have been associated with PTSD state, including attention and verbal memory deficits.\nIntelligence.\nFew studies have been done on the relationship between short-term memory and intelligence. One study examined whether people with PTSD had equivalent levels of short-term, non-verbal memory on the Benton Visual Retention Test (BVRT), and whether they had equivalent levels of intelligence on the Raven Standard Progressive Matrices (RSPM). They found that people with PTSD had worse short-term, non-verbal memory on the BVRT, despite having comparable levels of intelligence on the RSPM, concluding impairments in memory influence intelligence assessments in the subjects.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28945", "revid": "50696834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28945", "title": "State supreme court", "text": "Highest court in the state judiciary of a U.S. state\nIn the United States, a state supreme court (known by other names in some states) is the highest court in the state judiciary of a U.S. state. On matters of state law, the judgment of a state supreme court is considered final and binding in both state and federal courts. \nGenerally, a state supreme court, like most appellate tribunals, is exclusively for hearing appeals of legal issues. Although state supreme court rulings on matters of state law are final, rulings on matters of federal law (generally made under the state court's concurrent jurisdiction) can be appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States. Each state supreme court consists of a panel of judges selected by methods outlined in the state constitution. Among the most common methods for selection are gubernatorial appointment, non-partisan election, and partisan election, but the different states follow a variety of procedures.\nRole and powers.\nUnder the system of federalism established by the United States Constitution, federal courts have limited jurisdiction, and state courts handle many more cases than do federal courts. Each of the fifty states has at least one supreme court that serves as the highest court in the state; two states, Texas and Oklahoma, have separate supreme courts for civil and criminal matters. The five permanently inhabited U.S. territories, as well Washington, D.C., each have comparable supreme courts. On matters of state law, the judgment of a state supreme court is considered final and binding in both state and federal courts. State supreme courts are completely distinct from any United States federal courts located within the geographical boundaries of a state's territory, or the federal-level Supreme Court.\nThe exact duties and powers of the state supreme courts are established by state constitutions and state law. Generally, state supreme courts, like most appellate tribunals, are exclusively for hearing appeals on decisions issued by lower courts, and do not make any finding of facts or hold trials. They can, however, overrule the decisions of lower courts, remand cases to lower courts for further proceedings, and establish binding precedent for future cases. Some state supreme courts do have original jurisdiction over specific issues; for example, the Supreme Court of Virginia has original jurisdiction over cases of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, and writs of actual innocence based on DNA or other biological evidence.\nJurisdiction and appellate procedure.\nAs the highest court in the state, a state supreme court has appellate jurisdiction over all matters of state law. Many states have two or more levels of courts below the state supreme court; for example, in Pennsylvania, a case might first be heard in one of the Pennsylvania courts of common pleas, be appealed to the Superior Court of Pennsylvania, and then finally be appealed to the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania. In other states, including Delaware, the state supreme court is the only appellate court in the state and thus has direct appellate jurisdiction over all lower courts.\nLike the U.S. Supreme Court, most state supreme courts have implemented \"discretionary review.\" Under such a system, intermediate appellate courts are entrusted with deciding the vast majority of appeals. Intermediate appellate courts generally focus on the mundane task of what appellate specialists call \"error correction,\" which means their primary task is to decide whether the record reflects that the trial court correctly applied existing law. In a few states without intermediate appellate courts, the state supreme court may operate under \"mandatory review\", in which it \"must\" hear all appeals from the trial courts. This was the case, for example, in Nevada prior to 2014. For certain categories of cases, many state supreme courts that otherwise have discretionary review operate under mandatory review, usually with regard to cases involving the interpretation of the state constitution or capital punishment.\nOne of the informal traditions of the American legal system is that all litigants are entitled to at least one appeal after a final judgment on the merits. However, appeal is merely a \"privilege\" provided by statute, court rules, or custom; the U.S. Supreme Court has repeatedly ruled that there is no federal constitutional \"right\" to an appeal.\nStates with unique appellate procedures.\nIowa, Nevada, and Oklahoma have a unique procedure for appeals. In those states, \"all\" appeals are filed with the appropriate Supreme Court (Iowa and Nevada each have a single Supreme Court, while Oklahoma has separate civil and criminal Supreme Courts) which then keeps all cases of first impression for itself to decide. It forwards the remaining cases\u00a0\u2013 which deal with points of law it has already addressed\u00a0\u2013 to the intermediate Court of Appeals. Under this so-called \"push-down\" or \"deflection\" model of appellate procedure, the state supreme court can immediately establish final statewide precedents on important issues of first impression as soon as they arise, rather than waiting several months or years for the intermediate appellate court to make a first attempt at resolving the issue (and leaving the law uncertain in the interim). \nNotably, the Supreme Court of Virginia has always operated under discretionary review for nearly all cases, but from its creation in 1985, the intermediate Court of Appeals of Virginia heard appeals as a matter of right only in family and administrative cases. After two other states adopted appeals of right in the late 2000s, this left Virginia as the only state in the Union with \"no\" first appeal of right for the vast majority of civil and criminal cases. Appellants were still free to petition for review, but such petitions were subject to severe length constraints (6,125 words or 35 pages in Virginia) and necessarily were more narrowly targeted than an opening brief in an appeal of right to an intermediate appellate court (in contrast, an appellant's opening brief to a California intermediate appellate court can run up to 14,000 words). The vast majority of decisions of Virginia circuit courts in civil and criminal cases were thereby insulated from appellate review on the merits. In March 2021, Virginia enacted a comprehensive reform package allowing for appeals of right to the Court of Appeals in civil and criminal cases. The same bill expanded the Court of Appeals from 11 to 17 judges to handle the increased workload.\nRelationship with federal courts and federal law.\nUnder American federalism, a state supreme court's ruling on a matter of purely state law is final and binding and must be accepted in both state and federal courts. However, when a case involves federal statutory or constitutional law, review of state supreme court decisions may be sought by way of a petition for writ of \"certiorari\" to the Supreme Court of the United States. The U.S. Supreme Court is the only federal court that has jurisdiction over direct appeals from state court decisions, although other federal courts are sometimes allowed \"collateral review\" of state cases in specific situations, for example regarding individuals on death row.\nAs the U.S. Supreme Court recognized in \"Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins\" (1938), no part of the federal Constitution actually grants federal courts or the federal Congress the power to directly dictate the content of state law (as distinguished from creating altogether separate federal law that in a particular situation may override state law). Clause 1 of Section 2 of Article Three of the United States Constitution describes the scope of federal judicial power, but only extended it to \"the Laws of the United States\" and not the laws of the several or individual states. It is this silence on that latter issue that gave rise to the American distinction between state and federal common law not found in other English-speaking common law federations like Australia and Canada.\nIn theory, state supreme courts are bound by the precedent established by the U.S. Supreme Court as to all issues of federal law, but in practice, the Supreme Court reviews very few decisions from state courts. For example, in 2007 the Court reviewed 244 cases appealed from federal courts and only 22 from state courts. Despite the relatively small number of decisions reviewed, Professors Sara Benesh and Wendy Martinek found that state supreme courts follow precedent more closely than federal courts in the area of search and seizure and appear to follow precedent in confessions as well.\nAdditionally, some scholars have argued that state and federal courts should judge according to different judicial theories on topics such as statutory interpretation and stare decisis.\nSelection.\nState supreme court judges are selected in a variety of ways, with the method of selection often depending on the circumstances in which the seat is filled. Under one common method, the Missouri Plan, the governor fills judicial vacancies by choosing from a list compiled by a non-partisan commission. These judges serve an interim term until they stand in a retention election, in which they win a full term if a majority of voters vote for retention. Many other states elect judges through non-partisan elections in which multiple candidates appear on the ballot without their partisan affiliation listed. Most of the remaining states base their judicial selection system on gubernatorial appointments or partisan elections, although several states use a mix of different methods. South Carolina and Virginia use a system of legislative appointment, while in Vermont, the governor makes the initial appointment of judges, but the legislature has the power to re-appoint judges to new terms.\nVarious other factors can influence the appointment and re-appointment of state supreme court judges. Most judicial selection systems involving gubernatorial appointment make use of a nominating commission to recommend a list of candidates from which the governor must choose, but a minority of states allow the governor to nominate candidates even if they were not recommended by the commission. Many of the states that use gubernatorial appointment require the appointment to be confirmed by the state legislature or some other body, such as the Massachusetts Governor's Council. Although most states limit judicial terms to a set number of years, judges in Massachusetts and New Hampshire serve until they reach a mandatory retirement limit, while in Rhode Island, judges serve lifetime appointments. Most judges represent the entire state, but in Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, and Mississippi, judges represent districts of the state. Many states, including some states in which the governor is not otherwise involved in the appointment process, allow the governor to make interim appointments to fill judicial vacancies.\nIn many states with judicial elections, political contributions from groups such as trade associations and political action committees are allowed.\nRemoval.\nThe various states provide different methods for the removal of state supreme court judges during their terms, with many states providing multiple methods. Two common methods of removal are impeachment by the state legislature, and removal by state judicial boards or commissions. Other states provide for the removal of judges through recall elections, court action, gubernatorial action (with legislative consent), or through a resolution passed by a super-majority in both houses of the state legislature.\nLocation.\nTraditionally, state supreme courts are headquartered in the capital cities of their respective states, though they may occasionally hold oral arguments elsewhere. The six main exceptions are:\nAs for the court's actual facilities, a state supreme court may be housed in the state capitol, in a nearby state office building shared with other courts or state executive branch agencies, or in a small courthouse reserved for its exclusive use. State supreme courts normally require a courtroom for oral argument, private chambers for all justices, a conference room, offices for law clerks and other support staff, a law library, and a lobby with a filing window where the court clerk can accept filings and release new decisions in the form of \"slip opinions\" (that is, in looseleaf format held together only by a staple).\nTerminology.\nBecause state supreme courts generally hear only appeals, some courts have names which directly indicate their function\u00a0\u2013 in the state of New York and in the District of Columbia, the highest court is called the \"Court of Appeals\". In New York, the \"Supreme Court\" is the trial court of general unlimited jurisdiction and the intermediate appellate court is called the \"Supreme Court\u2014Appellate Division\". \nWest Virginia mixes the two; its highest court is called the \"Supreme Court of Appeals\". \nOther states' supreme courts have used the term \"Appeals\": Pennsylvania's court of last resort from 1780-1808; New Jersey's supreme courts under the 1844 constitution; and Delaware's supreme court were all called the \"Court of Errors and Appeals\". The term \"Errors\" refers to the now-obsolete writ of error, which was used by state supreme courts to correct certain types of egregious errors committed by lower courts.\nMassachusetts and New Hampshire originally named their highest courts the \"Superior Court of Judicature.\" Since 1780, Massachusetts has used the name \"Supreme Judicial Court\" (to distinguish itself from the state legislature, which is called the Massachusetts General Court); New Hampshire uses the name \"Supreme Court\". Additionally the highest court in Maine is named the \"Supreme Judicial Court\". This similar terminology is probably a holdover from the time when Maine was part of Massachusetts. In Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Delaware, New Jersey, and New York, the highest courts formerly used variations of the term \"Court of Errors,\" which indicated that the court's primary purpose was to correct the errors of lower courts.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28946", "revid": "23596633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28946", "title": "Stability", "text": "Stability may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28948", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28948", "title": "Abbas I (Shah of Persia)", "text": ""}
{"id": "28949", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28949", "title": "Search engines", "text": ""}
{"id": "28951", "revid": "50367080", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28951", "title": "Spyware", "text": "Malware that collects and transmits user information without their knowledge\nSpyware (a portmanteau for spying software) is any malware that aims to gather information about a person or organization and send it to another entity in a way that harms the user by violating their privacy, endangering their device's security, or other means. This behavior may be present in other malware and in legitimate software. Websites may engage in spyware behaviors like web tracking. Hardware devices may also be affected. \nSpyware is frequently associated with advertising and involves many of the same issues. Because these behaviors are so common, and can have non-harmful uses, providing a precise definition of spyware is a difficult task.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nAs personal computers and broadband connections became more common, the use of the internet for e-commerce transactions rose. Early retailers included book dealer Amazon.com and CD retailer CDNOW.com, which both were founded in 1994. As competition over customers intensified, some e-commerce companies turned to questionable methods to entice customers into completing transactions with them.\nThe first recorded use of the term spyware occurred on October 16, 1995, in a Usenet post that poked fun at Microsoft's business model. \"Spyware\" at first denoted \"software\" meant for espionage purposes. However, in early 2000 the founder of Zone Labs, Gregor Freund, used the term in a press release for the ZoneAlarm Personal Firewall. \nIn early 2000, Steve Gibson formulated the first description of spyware after realizing software that stole his personal information had been installed on his computer.\nLater in 2000, a parent using ZoneAlarm was alerted to the fact that \"Reader Rabbit\", educational software marketed to children by the Mattel toy company, was surreptitiously sending data back to Mattel. Since then, \"spyware\" has taken on its present sense.\nAccording to a 2005 study by AOL and the National Cyber-Security Alliance, 61 percent of surveyed users' computers were infected with some form of spyware. 92 percent of surveyed users with spyware reported that they did not know of its presence, and 91 percent reported that they had not given permission for the installation of the spyware.\nAs of 2006[ [update]], spyware has become one of the preeminent security threats to computer systems running Microsoft Windows operating systems. Computers on which Internet Explorer (IE) was the primary browser are particularly vulnerable to such attacks, not only because IE was the most widely used, but also because its tight integration with Windows allows spyware access to crucial parts of the operating system.\nBefore Internet Explorer 6 SP2 was released as part of Windows XP Service Pack 2, the browser would automatically display an installation window for any ActiveX component that a website wanted to install. The combination of user ignorance about these changes, and the assumption by Internet Explorer that all ActiveX components are benign, helped to spread spyware significantly. Many spyware components would also make use of exploits in JavaScript, Internet Explorer and Windows to install without user knowledge or permission.\nThe Windows Registry contains multiple sections where modification of key values allows software to be executed automatically when the operating system boots. Spyware can exploit this design to circumvent attempts at removal. The spyware typically links itself to each location in the registry that allows execution. Once running, the spyware will periodically check if any of these links are removed. If so, they will be automatically restored. This ensures that the spyware will execute when the operating system is booted, even if some (or most) of the registry links are removed.\nTargeted advertisement.\nIn the search for more effective advertising strategies, companies soon discovered the potential in ads that were targeted towards user interests. Once targeted advertising began to appear online, advertisers began to develop software that became known as spyware that collected users' personal interests through their browsing habits. Spyware brought along reduced system performance and security. The information gathered by spyware was used for constructing user profiles detailing what users could be persuaded to buy. The introduction of online advertisements opened up a new way of funding software development by having the software display advertisements to its users; software developers could offer their software \"free of charge\", since they were paid by the advertising agency. However, there is a distinction between \"free of charge\" and a \"free gift\", differences arising in the fact that a free gift is given without any expectations of future compensation, while something provided free of charge expects something in return. When downloading software described as \"free of charge\", users had no reason to suspect that it would report their Internet usage so that presented advertisements could be targeted towards their interests.\nProblems arose due to users not being informed about neither the occurrence nor the extent of such monitoring, and were not given a chance to decide on whether to participate or not. As advertisements became targeted, the borders between adware and spyware started to dissolve, it started to both monitor users and deliver targeted ads.\nThe arms-race between spyware vendors.\nAs the chase for faster financial gains intensified, several competing advertisers turned to more nefarious methods in an attempt to stay ahead of their competitors. As a result, this created a gray area between conventional ads that people chose to see, such as ads from subscription services, ads pushed on users through \"pop-ups\" and downloaded ads displayed in a program itself.\nThis practice pushed online advertising closer to the dark side of spam and other types of invasive, privacy compromising advertising. During this development, users experienced infections from unsolicited software that crashed their computers by accident, changed application settings, harvested personal information, and deteriorated their computer experience. Over time, these problems led to the introduction of countermeasures in the form of anti-spyware tools.\nAnti-spyware has become a new area of online vending with fierce competition. These tools purported to clean computers from spyware, adware, and any other type of shady software located in that same gray area. This type of software can lead to false positives as some types of legitimate software came to be branded by some users as \"Spyware\" (i.e. Spybot: Search &amp; Destroy identifies the Scan Spyware program as a Spybot.) These tools were designed similarly to anti-malware tools, such as antivirus software. Anti-spyware tools identify programs using signatures (semantics, program code, or other identifying attributes). The process only works on known programs, which can lead to the false positives mentioned earlier and leave previously unknown spyware undetected. To further aggravate the situation, some shady companies distributed fake anti-spyware tools in their search for a larger piece of the online advertising market. These fake tools claimed to remove spyware, but instead installed their own share of adware and spyware on unsuspecting users' computers. Sometimes, this software would also remove adware and spyware from competing vendors. \nNew spyware programs are constantly being released in what seems to be a never-ending stream, although the increase has leveled out somewhat over the last few years. According to developers of anti-spyware programs, the fight against spyware is more complicated than the fight against viruses, trojan horses, and worms. There is still no consensus on a definition or classification system of spyware, which negatively affects the accuracy of anti-spyware tools resulting in some spyware programs being able to remain undetected on users' computers. \nOverview.\nSpyware is mostly classified into four types: adware, system monitors, tracking including web tracking, and trojans; examples of other notorious types include digital rights management capabilities that \"phone home\", keyloggers, rootkits, and web beacons. These four categories are not mutually exclusive and they have similar tactics in attacking networks and devices. The main goal is to install, hack into the network, avoid being detected, and safely remove themselves from the network.\nSpyware is mostly used for the stealing information and storing Internet users' movements on the Web and serving up pop-up ads to Internet users. Whenever spyware is used for malicious purposes, its presence is typically hidden from the user and can be difficult to detect. Some spyware, such as keyloggers, may be installed by the owner of a shared, corporate, or public computer intentionally in order to monitor users.\nWhile the term \"spyware\" suggests software that monitors a user's computer, the functions of spyware can extend beyond simple monitoring. Spyware can collect almost any type of data, including personal information like internet surfing habits, user logins, and bank or credit account information. Spyware can also interfere with a user's control of a computer by installing additional software or redirecting web browsers. Some spyware can change computer settings, which can result in slow Internet connection speeds, un-authorized changes in browser settings, or changes to software settings.\nSometimes, spyware is included along with genuine software, and may come from a malicious website or may have been added to the intentional functionality of genuine software (see the paragraph about Facebook, below). In response to the emergence of spyware, a small industry has sprung up dealing in anti-spyware software. Running anti-spyware software has become a widely recognized element of computer security practices, especially for computers running Microsoft Windows. A number of jurisdictions have passed anti-spyware laws, which usually target any software that is surreptitiously installed to control a user's computer.\nIn German-speaking countries, spyware used or made by the government is called \"govware\" by computer experts (in common parlance: , literally \"Government Trojan\"). Govware is typically a trojan horse software used to intercept communications from the target computer. Some countries, like Switzerland and Germany, have a legal framework governing the use of such software. In the US, the term \"policeware\" has been used for similar purposes.\nUse of the term \"spyware\" has eventually declined as the practice of tracking users has been pushed ever further into the mainstream by major websites and data mining companies; these generally break no known laws and compel users to be tracked, not by fraudulent practices \"per se\", but by the default settings created for users and the language of terms-of-service agreements. \nIn one documented example, on CBS/CNet News reported, on March 7, 2011, an analysis in \"The Wall Street Journal\" revealed the practice of Facebook and other websites of tracking users' browsing activity, which is linked to their identity, far beyond users' visits and activity on the Facebook site itself. The report stated: \"Here's how it works. You go to Facebook, you log in, you spend some time there, and then ... you move on without logging out. Let's say the next site you go to is \"The New York Times\". Those buttons, without you clicking on them, have just reported back to Facebook and Twitter that you went there and also your identity within those accounts. Let's say you moved on to something like a site about depression. This one also has a tweet button, a Google widget, and those, too, can report back who you are and that you went there.\" \"The Wall Street Journal\" analysis was researched by Brian Kennish, founder of Disconnect, Inc.\nPrivacy-invasive software.\nPrivacy-invasive software is a category of software that invades a user's privacy to gather information about the user and their device without prior knowledge or consent. Such software is sometimes loosely referred to as \"spyware\" but the information gathering can be malicious or non-malicious. The collected data is often used commercially such as being sold to advertisers or other third parties.\"\".\nDefinitions.\nDespite different interpretations of the definition of spyware; all descriptions include two central aspects, a degree of associated user consent, and the level of negative impact they impart on the user and their computer system (further discussed in Section 2.3 and Section 2.5 in ). Because of the diffuse understanding in the spyware concept, the Anti-Spyware Coalition (ASC), constituted by public interest groups, trade associations, and anti-spyware companies, has come to the conclusion that the term spyware should be used at two different abstraction levels. At the low level, they use the following definition, which is similar to Steve Gibson's original one:\nHowever, since this definition does not encompass all of the different types of spyware available, they also provide a wider definition, which is more abstract in its appearance:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDifficulties in defining spyware forced the ASC to define what they call \"Spyware (and Other Potentially Unwanted Technologies)\" instead. This includes any software that does not have the users' explicit consent for running on their computers. Another group that has tried to define spyware is StopBadware, which consists of actors such as Harvard Law School, Oxford University, Google, Lenovo, and Sun Microsystems. StopBadware does not use the term spyware at all, but instead introduced the term \"badware\". Their definition is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nDistinction.\nDisagreement among users and organizations on the definition of the term \"spyware\" has resulted from the subjectivity of the term. What some users regard as legitimate software could be regarded as a spyware by others. As the term \"spyware\" has gained traction; close synonyms such as trackware, evilware and badware have been created to distinguish the subject from the term spyware. As a result, the term \"privacy-invasive software\" was introduced to encapsulate all such software. \nThe work by Warkentiens et al. (described in Section 7.3.1 in ) can be used as a starting point when developing a classification of privacy-invasive software, where privacy-invasive software is classified as a combination between \"user consent\" and \"direct negative consequences\". User consent is specified as either \"low\", \"medium\" or \"high\", while the degree of direct negative consequences span between \"tolerable\", \"moderate\", and \"severe\". This classification allows developers and users to first make a distinction between legitimate software and spyware, and secondly between spyware and malicious software. All software that has a low user consent, \"or\" which impairs severe direct negative consequences should be regarded as malware. While, on the other hand, any software that has high user consent, \"and\" which results in tolerable direct negative consequences should be regarded as legitimate software. Under this classification system, spyware constitutes the remaining group of software, i.e. those that have medium user consent, or which impair moderate direct negative consequences. This classification is described in further detail in Chapter 7 in .\nThis classification system is broken down further with the distinction of \"direct negative consequences\" and \"indirect negative consequences\". This distinguishes between any negative behavior a program has been designed to carry out (direct negative consequences) and security threats introduced by just having that software executing on the system (indirect negative consequences). One example of an indirect negative consequence is the exploitation risk of software vulnerabilities in programs that execute on users' systems without their knowledge.\nRoutes of infection.\nSpyware does not necessarily spread in the same way as a virus or worm because infected systems generally do not attempt to transmit or copy the software to other computers. Instead, spyware installs itself on a system by deceiving the user or by exploiting software vulnerabilities.\nMost spyware is installed without knowledge, or by using deceptive tactics. Spyware may try to deceive users by bundling itself with desirable software. Other common tactics are using a Trojan horse, spy gadgets that look like normal devices but turn out to be something else, such as a USB Keylogger. These devices actually are connected to the device as memory units but are capable of recording each stroke made on the keyboard. Some spyware authors infect a system through security holes in the Web browser or in other software. When the user navigates to a Web page controlled by the spyware author, the page contains code which attacks the browser and forces the download and installation of spyware.\nThe installation of spyware frequently involves Internet Explorer. Its popularity and history of security issues have made it a frequent target. Its deep integration with the Windows environment make it susceptible to attack into the Windows operating system. Internet Explorer also serves as a point of attachment for spyware in the form of Browser Helper Objects, which modify the browser's behaviour.\nEffects and behaviors.\nA spyware program rarely operates alone on a computer; an affected machine usually has multiple infections. Users frequently notice unwanted behavior and degradation of system performance. A spyware infestation can create significant unwanted CPU activity, disk usage, and network traffic. Stability issues, such as applications freezing, failure to boot, and system-wide crashes are also common. Usually, this effect is intentional, but may be caused from the malware simply requiring large amounts of computing power, disk space, or network usage. Spyware, which interferes with networking software commonly causes difficulty connecting to the Internet.\nIn some infections, the spyware is not even evident. Users assume in those situations that the performance issues relate to faulty hardware, Windows installation problems, or another malware infection. Some owners of badly infected systems resort to contacting technical support experts, or even buying a new computer because the existing system \"has become too slow\". Badly infected systems may require a clean reinstallation of all their software in order to return to full functionality.\nMoreover, some types of spyware disable software firewalls and antivirus software, and/or reduce browser security settings, which opens the system to further opportunistic infections. Some spyware disables or even removes competing spyware programs, on the grounds that more spyware-related annoyances increase the likelihood that users will take action to remove the programs.\nKeyloggers are sometimes part of malware packages downloaded onto computers without the owners' knowledge. Some keylogger software is freely available on the internet, while others are commercial or private applications. Most keyloggers allow not only keyboard keystrokes to be captured, they also are often capable of collecting screen captures from the computer.\nA typical Windows user has administrative privileges, mostly for convenience. Because of this, any program the user runs has unrestricted access to the system. As with other operating systems, Windows users are able to follow the principle of least privilege and use non-administrator accounts. Alternatively, they can reduce the privileges of specific vulnerable Internet-facing processes, such as Internet Explorer.\nSince Windows Vista is, by default, a computer administrator that runs everything under limited user privileges, when a program requires administrative privileges, a User Account Control pop-up will prompt the user to allow or deny the action. This improves on the design used by previous versions of Windows.\nSpyware is also known as tracking software.\nRemedies and prevention.\nAs the spyware threat has evolved, a number of techniques have emerged to counteract it. These include programs designed to remove or block spyware, as well as various user practices which reduce the chance of getting spyware on a system.\nNonetheless, spyware remains a costly problem. When a large number of pieces of spyware have infected a Windows computer, the only remedy may involve backing up user data, and fully reinstalling the operating system. For instance, some spyware cannot be completely removed with tools from Symantec or Microsoft.\nAnti-spyware programs.\nMany programmers and some commercial firms have released products designed to remove or block spyware. Programs such as PC Tools' Spyware Doctor, Lavasoft's \"Ad-Aware SE\" and Patrick Kolla's \"Spybot - Search &amp; Destroy\" rapidly gained popularity as tools to remove, and in some cases intercept, spyware programs. In December 2004, Microsoft acquired the \"GIANT AntiSpyware\" software, re\u2011branding it as \"Microsoft AntiSpyware (Beta 1)\" and releasing it as a free download for Genuine Windows XP and Windows 2003 users. In November, 2005, it was renamed Windows Defender.\nMajor anti-virus firms such as Symantec, McAfee and Sophos have also added anti-spyware features to their existing anti-virus products. Early on, anti-virus firms expressed reluctance to add anti-spyware functions, citing lawsuits brought by spyware authors against the authors of web sites and programs which described their products as \"spyware\". However, recent versions of these major firms home and business anti-virus products do include anti-spyware functions, albeit treated differently from viruses. Symantec Anti-Virus, for instance, categorizes spyware programs as \"extended threats\" and now offers real-time protection against these threats.\nOther Anti-spyware tools include FlexiSPY, Mobilespy, mSPY, TheWiSPY, and UMobix.\nHow anti-spyware software works.\nAnti-spyware programs can combat spyware in two ways:\nSuch programs inspect the contents of the Windows registry, operating system files, and installed programs, and remove files and entries which match a list of known spyware. Real-time protection from spyware works identically to real-time anti-virus protection: the software scans disk files at download time, and blocks the activity of components known to represent spyware.\nIn some cases, it may also intercept attempts to install start-up items or to modify browser settings. Earlier versions of anti-spyware programs focused chiefly on detection and removal. Javacool Software's SpywareBlaster, one of the first to offer real-time protection, blocked the installation of ActiveX-based spyware.\nLike most anti-virus software, many anti-spyware/adware tools require a frequently updated database of threats. As new spyware programs are released, anti-spyware developers discover and evaluate them, adding to the list of known spyware, which allows the software to detect and remove new spyware. As a result, anti-spyware software is of limited usefulness without regular updates. Updates may be installed automatically or manually.\nA popular generic spyware removal tool used by those that requires a certain degree of expertise is HijackThis, which scans certain areas of the Windows OS where spyware often resides and presents a list with items to delete manually. As most of the items are legitimate windows files/registry entries it is advised for those who are less knowledgeable on this subject to post a HijackThis log on the numerous antispyware sites and let the experts decide what to delete.\nIf a spyware program is not blocked and manages to get itself installed, it may resist attempts to terminate or uninstall it. Some programs work in pairs: when an anti-spyware scanner (or the user) terminates one running process, the other one respawns the killed program. Likewise, some spyware will detect attempts to remove registry keys and immediately add them again. Usually, booting the infected computer in safe mode allows an anti-spyware program a better chance of removing persistent spyware. Killing the process tree may also work.\nSecurity practices.\nTo detect spyware, computer users have found several practices useful in addition to installing anti-spyware programs. Many users have installed a web browser other than Internet Explorer, such as Mozilla Firefox or Google Chrome. Though no browser is completely safe, Internet Explorer was once at a greater risk for spyware infection due to its large user base as well as vulnerabilities such as ActiveX but these three major browsers are now close to equivalent when it comes to security.\nSome ISPs\u2014particularly colleges and universities\u2014have taken a different approach to blocking spyware: they use their network firewalls and web proxies to block access to Web sites known to install spyware. On March 31, 2005, Cornell University's Information Technology department released a report detailing the behavior of one particular piece of proxy-based spyware, \"Marketscore\", and the steps the university took to intercept it. Many other educational institutions have taken similar steps.\nIndividual users can also install firewalls from a variety of companies. These monitor the flow of information going to and from a networked computer and provide protection against spyware and malware. Some users install a large hosts file which prevents the user's computer from connecting to known spyware-related web addresses. Spyware may get installed via certain shareware programs offered for download. Downloading programs only from reputable sources can provide some protection from this source of attack.\nIndividual users can use cellphone / computer with physical (electric) switch, or isolated electronic switch that disconnects microphone, camera without bypass and keep it in disconnected position where not in use, that limits information that spyware can collect. (Policy recommended by NIST Guidelines for Managing the Security of Mobile Devices, 2013).\nApplications.\n\"Stealware\" and affiliate fraud.\nA few spyware vendors, notably 180 Solutions, have written what the \"New York Times\" has dubbed \"stealware\", and what spyware researcher Ben Edelman terms \"affiliate fraud\", a form of click fraud. Stealware diverts the payment of affiliate marketing revenues from the legitimate affiliate to the spyware vendor.\nSpyware which attacks affiliate networks places the spyware operator's affiliate tag on the user's activity \u2013 replacing any other tag, if there is one. The spyware operator is the only party that gains from this. The user has their choices thwarted, a legitimate affiliate loses revenue, networks' reputations are injured, and vendors are harmed by having to pay out affiliate revenues to an \"affiliate\" who is not party to a contract. Affiliate fraud is a violation of the terms of service of most affiliate marketing networks. Mobile devices can also be vulnerable to chargeware, which manipulates users into illegitimate mobile charges.\nIdentity theft and fraud.\nIn one case, spyware has been closely associated with identity theft. In August 2005, researchers from security software firm Sunbelt Software suspected the creators of the common CoolWebSearch spyware had used it to transmit \"chat sessions, user names, passwords, bank information, etc.\"; however it turned out that \"it actually (was) its own sophisticated criminal little trojan that's independent of CWS.\" This case was investigated by the FBI.\nThe Federal Trade Commission estimates that 27.3\u00a0million Americans have been victims of identity theft, and that financial losses from identity theft totaled nearly $48\u00a0billion for businesses and financial institutions and at least $5\u00a0billion in out-of-pocket expenses for individuals.\nDigital rights management.\nSome copy-protection technologies have borrowed from spyware. In 2005, Sony BMG Music Entertainment was found to be using rootkits in its XCP digital rights management technology Like spyware, not only was it difficult to detect and uninstall, it was so poorly written that most efforts to remove it could have rendered computers unable to function.\nTexas Attorney General Greg Abbott filed suit, and three separate class-action suits were filed. Sony BMG later provided a workaround on its website to help users remove it.\nBeginning on April 25, 2006, Microsoft's Windows Genuine Advantage Notifications application was installed on most Windows PCs as a \"critical security update\". While the main purpose of this deliberately uninstallable application is to ensure the copy of Windows on the machine was lawfully purchased and installed, it also installs software that has been accused of \"phoning home\" on a daily basis, like spyware. It can be removed with the RemoveWGA tool.\nPersonal relationships.\nStalkerware is spyware that has been used to monitor electronic activities of partners in intimate relationships. At least one software package, Loverspy, was specifically marketed for this purpose. Depending on local laws regarding communal/marital property, observing a partner's online activity without their consent may be illegal; the author of Loverspy and several users of the product were indicted in California in 2005 on charges of wiretapping and various computer crimes.\nBrowser cookies.\nAnti-spyware programs often report Web advertisers' HTTP cookies, the small text files that track browsing activity, as spyware. While they are not always inherently malicious, many users object to third parties using space on their personal computers for their business purposes, and many anti-spyware programs offer to remove them.\nShameware.\nShameware or \"accountability software\" is a type of spyware that is not hidden from the user, but operates with their knowledge, if not necessarily their consent. Parents, religious leaders or other authority figures may require their children or congregation members to install such software, which is intended to detect the viewing of pornography or other content deemed inappropriate, and to report it to the authority figure, who may then confront the user about it.\nSpyware programs.\nThese common spyware programs illustrate the diversity of behaviors found in these attacks. Note that as with computer viruses, researchers give names to spyware programs which may not be used by their creators. Programs may be grouped into \"families\" based not on shared program code, but on common behaviors, or by \"following the money\" of apparent financial or business connections. For instance, a number of the spyware programs distributed by Claria are collectively known as \"Gator\". Likewise, programs that are frequently installed together may be described as parts of the same spyware package, even if they function separately.\nSpyware vendors.\nSpyware vendors include NSO Group, which in the 2010s sold spyware to governments for spying on human rights activists and journalists. NSO Group was investigated by Citizen Lab.\nRogue anti-spyware programs.\nMalicious programmers have released a large number of rogue (fake) anti-spyware programs, and widely distributed Web banner ads can warn users that their computers have been infected with spyware, directing them to purchase programs which do not actually remove spyware\u2014or else, may add more spyware of their own.\nThe recent[ [update]] proliferation of fake or spoofed antivirus products that bill themselves as antispyware can be troublesome. Users may receive popups prompting them to install them to protect their computer, when it will in fact add spyware. It is recommended that users do not install any freeware claiming to be anti-spyware unless it is verified to be legitimate. Some known offenders include:\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFake antivirus products constitute 15 percent of all malware.\nOn January 26, 2006, Microsoft and the Washington state attorney general filed suit against Secure Computer for its Spyware Cleaner product.\nLegal issues.\nCriminal law.\nUnauthorized access to a computer is illegal under computer crime laws, such as the U.S. Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, the U.K.'s Computer Misuse Act, and similar laws in other countries. Since owners of computers infected with spyware generally claim that they never authorized the installation, a \"prima facie\" reading would suggest that the promulgation of spyware would count as a criminal act. Law enforcement has often pursued the authors of other malware, particularly viruses. However, few spyware developers have been prosecuted, and many operate openly as strictly legitimate businesses, though some have faced lawsuits.\nSpyware producers argue that, contrary to the users' claims, users do in fact give consent to installations. Spyware that comes bundled with shareware applications may be described in the legalese text of an end-user license agreement (EULA). Many users habitually ignore these purported contracts, but spyware companies such as Claria say these demonstrate that users have consented.\nDespite the ubiquity of EULAs agreements, under which a single click can be taken as consent to the entire text, relatively little caselaw has resulted from their use. It has been established in most common law jurisdictions that this type of agreement can be a binding contract \"in certain circumstances.\" This does not, however, mean that every such agreement is a contract, or that every term in one is enforceable.\nSome jurisdictions, including the U.S. states of Iowa and Washington, have passed laws criminalizing some forms of spyware. Such laws make it illegal for anyone other than the owner or operator of a computer to install software that alters Web-browser settings, monitors keystrokes, or disables computer-security software.\nIn the United States, lawmakers introduced a bill in 2005 entitled the Internet Spyware Prevention Act, which would imprison creators of spyware. \nAdditionally, several diplomatic efforts have been made to curb the growing usage of Spywares. Launched by France and the UK in early 2024, the Pall Mall Process aims to address the proliferation and irresponsible use of commercial cyber intrusion capabilities.\nAdministrative sanctions.\nUS FTC actions.\nThe US Federal Trade Commission has sued Internet marketing organizations under the \"unfairness doctrine\" to make them stop infecting consumers' PCs with spyware. In one case, that against Seismic Entertainment Productions, the FTC accused the defendants of developing a program that seized control of PCs nationwide, infected them with spyware and other malicious software, bombarded them with a barrage of pop-up advertising for Seismic's clients, exposed the PCs to security risks, and caused them to malfunction. Seismic then offered to sell the victims an \"antispyware\" program to fix the computers, and stop the popups and other problems that Seismic had caused. On November 21, 2006, a settlement was entered in federal court under which a $1.75\u00a0million judgment was imposed in one case and $1.86\u00a0million in another, but the defendants were insolvent\nIn a second case, brought against CyberSpy Software LLC, the FTC charged that CyberSpy marketed and sold \"RemoteSpy\" keylogger spyware to clients who would then secretly monitor unsuspecting consumers' computers. According to the FTC, Cyberspy touted RemoteSpy as a \"100% undetectable\" way to \"Spy on Anyone. From Anywhere.\" The FTC has obtained a temporary order prohibiting the defendants from selling the software and disconnecting from the Internet any of their servers that collect, store, or provide access to information that this software has gathered. The case is still in its preliminary stages. A complaint filed by the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) brought the RemoteSpy software to the FTC's attention.\nNetherlands OPTA.\nAn administrative fine, the first of its kind in Europe, has been issued by the Independent Authority of Posts and Telecommunications (OPTA) from the Netherlands. It applied fines in total value of Euro 1,000,000 for infecting 22 million computers. The spyware concerned is called DollarRevenue. The law articles that have been violated are art. 4.1 of the Decision on universal service providers and on the interests of end users; the fines have been issued based on art. 15.4 taken together with art. 15.10 of the Dutch telecommunications law.\nCivil law.\nFormer New York State Attorney General and former Governor of New York Eliot Spitzer has pursued spyware companies for fraudulent installation of software. In a suit brought in 2005 by Spitzer, the California firm Intermix Media, Inc. ended up settling, by agreeing to pay US$7.5\u00a0million and to stop distributing spyware.\nThe hijacking of Web advertisements has also led to litigation. In June 2002, a number of large Web publishers sued Claria for replacing advertisements, but settled out of court.\nCourts have not yet had to decide whether advertisers can be held liable for spyware that displays their ads. In many cases, the companies whose advertisements appear in spyware pop-ups do not directly do business with the spyware firm. Rather, they have contracted with an advertising agency, which in turn contracts with an online subcontractor who gets paid by the number of \"impressions\" or appearances of the advertisement. Some major firms such as Dell Computer and Mercedes-Benz have sacked advertising agencies that have run their ads in spyware.\nLibel suits by spyware developers.\nLitigation has gone both ways. Since \"spyware\" has become a common pejorative, some makers have filed libel and defamation actions when their products have been so described. In 2003, Gator (now known as Claria) filed suit against the website PC Pitstop for describing its program as \"spyware\". PC Pitstop settled, agreeing not to use the word \"spyware\", but continues to describe harm caused by the Gator/Claria software. As a result, other anti-spyware and anti-virus companies have also used other terms such as \"potentially unwanted programs\" or greyware to denote these products.\nWebcamGate.\nIn the 2010 WebcamGate case, plaintiffs charged two suburban Philadelphia high schools secretly spied on students by surreptitiously and remotely activating webcams embedded in school-issued laptops the students were using at home, and therefore infringed on their privacy rights. The school loaded each student's computer with LANrev's remote activation tracking software. This included the now-discontinued \"TheftTrack\". While TheftTrack was not enabled by default on the software, the program allowed the school district to elect to activate it, and to choose which of the TheftTrack surveillance options the school wanted to enable.\nTheftTrack allowed school district employees to secretly remotely activate the webcam embedded in the student's laptop, above the laptop's screen. That allowed school officials to secretly take photos through the webcam, of whatever was in front of it and in its line of sight, and send the photos to the school's server. The LANrev software disabled the webcams for all other uses (\"e.g.\", students were unable to use Photo Booth or video chat), so most students mistakenly believed their webcams did not work at all. On top of the webcam surveillance, TheftTrack allowed school officials to take screenshots and send them to the school's server. School officials were also granted the ability to take snapshots of instant messages, web browsing, music playlists, and written compositions. The schools admitted to secretly snapping over 66,000 webshots and screenshots, including webcam shots of students in their bedrooms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28952", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28952", "title": "William Jones (philologist)", "text": "British scholar and judge (1746\u20131794)\nSir William Jones (28 September 1746 \u2013 27 April 1794) was a Welsh scholar and judge. Born in Westminster, London to Welsh mathematician William Jones, he moved to the Bengal Presidency where Jones served as a puisne judge on the Supreme Court of Judicature at Fort William and also became a scholar of ancient Indian history. As part of his research, he was the first to assert the kinship of the Indo-European languages. Jones also founded the Asiatic Society in Calcutta in 1784.\nEarly life.\nWilliam Jones was born in London; his father William Jones (1675\u20131749) was a mathematician from Anglesey in Wales, noted for introducing the use of the symbol \u03c0. The young William Jones was a linguistic prodigy, who in addition to his native languages English and Welsh, learned Greek, Latin, Persian, Arabic, Hebrew and the basics of Chinese writing at an early age. By the end of his life, he knew eight languages with critical thoroughness.\nJones's father died when he was aged three, and his mother Mary Nix Jones raised him. He was sent to Harrow School in September 1753 and then went on to University College, Oxford. He graduated there in 1768 and became M.A. in 1773. Financially constrained, he took a position tutoring the seven-year-old Lord Althorp, son of Earl Spencer. For the next six years, he worked as a tutor and translator. During this time he published in 1770 \"Histoire de Nader Chah\" (\"History of Nader Shah\"), a French translation of a work originally written in Persian by Mirza Mehdi Khan Astarabadi. This was done at the request of King Christian VII of Denmark: he had visited Jones, who by the age of 23 had already acquired a reputation as an orientalist, and in appreciation of his work he was granted membership in the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters. This would be the first of his numerous works on Persia, Anatolia, and the Middle East in general.\nLegal studies and politics in England.\nIn 1770, Jones joined the Middle Temple and studied law for three years, a preliminary to his life-work in India. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society on 30 April 1772. In 1773, he was elected a member of The Club, of which he became president in 1780. He spent some time as a circuit judge in Wales, and then became involved in politics: he made a fruitless attempt to resolve the American Revolution in concert with Benjamin Franklin in Paris, and ran for the post of Member of Parliament from Oxford in the general election of 1780, but was unsuccessful.\nJones was a radical political thinker, and a friend of American independence. His work, \"The principles of government; in a dialogue between a scholar and a peasant\" (1783), was the subject of a trial for seditious libel (known as the Case of the Dean of St Asaph) after it was reprinted by his brother-in-law William Davies Shipley.\nIndian tenure.\nHe was appointed puisne judge to the Supreme Court of Judicature at Fort William in Calcutta, Bengal, on 4 March 1783, and on 20 March he was knighted. In April 1783 he married Anna Maria Shipley, the eldest daughter of Jonathan Shipley, Bishop of Llandaff and Bishop of St Asaph. Anna Maria used her artistic skills to help Jones document life in India. On 25 September 1783, he arrived in Calcutta.\nIn the Subcontinent he was entranced by Indian culture, an as-yet untouched field in European scholarship, and on 15 January 1784 he founded the Asiatic Society in Calcutta. He studied the Vedas with R\u0101malocana, a pandit teaching at the Hindu University of Nadiya, becoming a proficient Sanskritist. Jones kept up a ten-year correspondence on the topic of \"jyotisa\" or Hindu astronomy with fellow orientalist Samuel Davis. He learnt the ancient concept of Hindu Laws from Pandits.\nOver the next ten years, he produced a flood of works on India, launching the modern study of the subcontinent in virtually every social science. He also wrote on the Hindu and Muslim laws, music, literature, botany, and geography, and made the first English translations of several important works of Indian literature.\nSir William Jones sometimes also went by the nom de plume Youns Uksfardi (\u06cc\u0648\u0646\u0633 \u0627\u0648\u06a9\u0633\u0641\u0631\u062f\u06cc, \"Jones of Oxford\"). This pen name can be seen on the inner front cover of his \"Persian Grammar\" published in 1771 (and in subsequent editions).\nJones's works, especially his translations, with their philological and anthropological appeal, became a major inspiration of a certain orientalist strain discernible in Romantic poetries such as Coleridge's \"Kubla Khan\" or Fitzgerald's \"Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam\".\nHe died in Calcutta on 27 April 1794 at the age of 47 and is buried in South Park Street Cemetery.\nScholarly contributions.\nJones is known today for his propositions about relationships between the Indo-European languages. In his \"Third Anniversary Discourse \" to the Asiatic Society (1786) he suggested that Sanskrit, Greek and Latin languages had a common root, and that indeed they might all be further related, in turn, to Gothic and the Celtic languages, as well as to Persian. Although his name is closely associated with this observation, he was not the first to make it. In the 16th century, European visitors to India became aware of similarities between Indian and European languages and as early as 1653, the Dutch scholar Marcus Zuerius van Boxhorn had published a proposal for a proto-language (\"Scythian\") for Germanic, Romance, Greek, Baltic, Slavic, Celtic and Iranian. Finally, in a memoir sent to the French Academy of Sciences in 1767 Gaston-Laurent Coeurdoux, a French Jesuit who spent all his life in India, had specifically demonstrated the existing analogy between Sanskrit and European languages. In 1786 Jones postulated a proto-language uniting Sanskrit, Iranian, Greek, Latin, Germanic and Celtic, but in many ways, his work was less accurate than his predecessors, as he erroneously included Egyptian, Japanese and Chinese in the Indo-European languages, while omitting Hindustani and Slavic. Jones also suggested that Sanskrit \"was introduced [to north India] by conquerors from other kingdoms in some very remote age\" displacing \"the pure Hindi\" of north India.\nNevertheless, Jones's third annual discourse before the Asiatic Society on the history and culture of the Hindus (delivered on 2 February 1786 and published in 1788) with the famed \"philologer\" passage is often cited as the beginning of comparative linguistics and Indo-European studies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The \"Sanscrit\" language, whatever be its antiquity, is of a wonderful structure; more perfect than the \"Greek\", more copious than the \"Latin\", and more exquisitely refined than either, yet bearing to both of them a stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs and the forms of grammar, than could possibly have been produced by accident; so strong indeed, that no philologer could examine them all three, without believing them to have sprung from some common source, which, perhaps, no longer exists; there is a similar reason, though not quite so forcible, for supposing that both the \"Gothic\" and the \"Celtic\", though blended with a very different idiom, had the same origin with the \"Sanscrit\"; and the old \"Persian\" might be added to the same family.\nThis common source came to be known as Proto-Indo-European.\nJones was the first to propose the concept of an \"Aryan invasion\" into the Indian subcontinent, which according to Jones led to a lasting ethnic division in India between descents of indigenous Indians and those of the Aryans. This idea fell into obscurity due to a lack of evidence at the time, but was later taken up by amateur Indologists such as the colonial administrator Herbert Hope Risley.\nJones also propounded theories that might appear peculiar today but were less so in his time. For example, he believed that Egyptian priests had migrated and settled down in India in prehistoric times. He also posited that the Chinese were originally Hindus belonging to the Kshatriya caste.\nJones, in his 1772 \"Essay on the Arts called Imitative\", was one of the first to propound an expressive theory of poetry, valorising expression over description or imitation: \"If the arguments, used in this essay, have any weight, it will appear, that the finest parts of poetry, music, and painting, are expressive of the passions...the inferior parts of them are descriptive of natural objects\". He thereby anticipated Wordsworth in grounding poetry on the basis of a Romantic subjectivity.\nJones was a contributor to Hyde's \"Notebooks\" during his term on the bench of the Supreme Court of Judicature. The notebooks are a valuable primary source of information for life in late 18th-century Bengal and are the only extant sources for the proceedings of the Supreme Court.\nLegal contributions.\nAfter reaching Calcutta, Jones was unhappy with the appointed pandits of the court, who were tasked with interpreting the laws of Hinduism and contributing to judgements. After a number of cases in which different pandits came up with different rulings, Jones determined to thoroughly learn Sanskrit so that he could independently interpret the original sources.\nJones's final judicial project was suggesting and leading the compilation of a Sanskrit \"digest of Hindu Law\", with the original plan of translating the work himself. After his death, the translation was completed by Henry Thomas Colebrooke.\nView on the historical timeline of the Biblical events.\nJones said that \"either the first eleven chapters of Genesis ... are true, or the whole fabrick [sic] of our national religion is false, a conclusion which none of us, I trust, would wish to be drawn.\" (1788, 225)\nHe also said that \"I... am obliged of course to believe the sanctity of the venerable books [of Genesis].\" (1788, 225)\nJones \"traced the foundation of the Indian empire above three thousand eight hundred years from now\" (Jones, 1790). Jones thought it was important that this date would be between Archbishop Ussher's Creation date of 4004 BC and the Great Flood that Jones considered to have been in 2350 BC.\nEncounter with Anquetil-Duperron.\nIn Europe, a discussion as to the authenticity of the first translation of the Avesta scriptures arose. It was the first evidence of an Indo-European language as old as Sanskrit to be translated into a modern European language. It was suggested that the so-called Zend-Avesta was not the genuine work of the prophet Zoroaster but was a recent forgery. Foremost among the detractors, it is to be regretted, was the distinguished (though young) orientalist William Jones. He claimed, in a letter published in French (1771), that the translator Anquetil-Duperron had been duped, that the Parsis of Surat had palmed off upon him a conglomeration of worthless fabrications and absurdities. In England, Jones was supported by Richardson and Sir John Chardin; in Germany, by Meiners. Anquetil-Duperron was labelled an impostor who had invented his own script to support his claim. This debate was not settled for almost a century.\nChess poem.\nIn 1763, at the age of 17, Jones wrote the poem \"Caissa\" in English, based on a 658-line poem called \"Scacchia, Ludus\" published in 1527 by Marco Girolamo Vida, giving a mythical origin of chess that has become well known in the chess world.\nIn the poem, the nymph Caissa initially repels the advances of Mars, the god of war. Spurned, Mars seeks the aid of the god of sport, who creates the game of chess as a gift for Mars to win Caissa's favour. Mars wins her over with the game.\nCaissa has since been referred to as the \"goddess\" of chess, and her name is used in several contexts in modern chess playing.\n\"An Elegiac Poem\".\nThomas Maurice (1754\u20131824) published \"An Elegiac Poem\" in 1795; full title: \"An Elegiac and Historical Poem: Sacred to the Memory and Virtues of the Honourable Sir William Jones. Containing a Retrospective Survey of the Progress of Science, and the Mohammedan Conquests in Asia\".\nSchopenhauer's citation.\nArthur Schopenhauer referred to one of Sir William Jones's publications in \u00a71 of \"The World as Will and Representation\" (1819). Schopenhauer was trying to support the doctrine that \"everything that exists for knowledge, and hence the whole of this world, is only object in relation to the subject, perception of the perceiver, in a word, representation.\" He quoted Jones's original English:\n... how early this basic truth was recognized by the sages of India since it appears as the fundamental tenet of the Ved\u00e2nta philosophy ascribed to Vyasa, is proved by Sir William Jones in the last of his essays: \"On the Philosophy of the Asiatics\" (\"Asiatic Researches\", vol. IV, p. 164): \"The fundamental tenet of the Ved\u00e2nta school consisted not in denying the existence of matter, that is solidity, impenetrability, and extended figure (to deny which would be lunacy), but in correcting the popular notion of it, and in contending that it has no essence independent of mental perception; that existence and perceptibility are convertible terms.\"\nSchopenhauer used Jones's authority to relate the basic principle of his philosophy to what was, according to Jones, the most important underlying proposition of Ved\u00e2nta. He made more passing reference to Sir William Jones's writings elsewhere in his works.\nOration by Hendrik Arent Hamaker.\nOn 28 September 1822, the Dutch orientalist Hendrik Arent Hamaker, who accepted a professorship at the University of Leiden, gave his inaugural lecture in Latin \"https://\" (The Life and Works of William Jones)(Leiden, 1823).\nSir William Jones in American Literature.\nHerman Melville's \"Moby-Dick\" mentions William Jones in Chapter 79, \"The Prairie\":Champollion deciphered the wrinkled granite hieroglyphics. But there is no Champollion to decipher the Egypt of every man's and every being's face. Physiognomy, like every other human science, is but a passing fable. If then, Sir William Jones, who read in thirty languages, could not read the simplest peasant's face in its profounder and more subtle meanings, how may unlettered Ishmael hope to read the awful Chaldee of the Sperm Whale's brow? I put that brow before you. Read it if you can.\nEdgar Allan Poe's short story \"Berenice\" starts with a motto, the first half of a poem, by Ibn Zaiat: \"Dicebant mihi sodales si sepulchrum amicae visitarem, curas meas aliquantulum fore levatas.\" It was taken from the works of William Jones, and here is the missing part (from Complete Works, Vol. 2, London, 1799): \n\"Dixi autem, an ideo aliud praeter hoc pectus habet sepulchrum?\"\nMy companions said to me, if I would visit the grave of my lover, I might somewhat alleviate my worries. I answered \"could she be buried elsewhere than in my heart?\"\nMemorial.\nThere is a statue of Jones, by the sculptor John Bacon in St Paul's Cathedral, London, erected in 1799.\nBibliography.\nListing in most cases only editions and reprints that came out during Jones's own lifetime, books by, or prominently including work by, William Jones, are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Botanist/styles.css\"/&gt;The standard author abbreviation Jones is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28953", "revid": "31541467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28953", "title": "Stephen, King of England", "text": "King of England from 1135 to 1154\nStephen (1092 or 1096 \u2013 25 October 1154), often referred to as Stephen of Blois, was King of England from 22 December 1135 to his death in 1154. He was Count of Boulogne \"jure uxoris\" from 1125 until 1147 and Duke of Normandy from 1135 until 1144. His reign was marked by the Anarchy, a civil war with his cousin and rival, the Empress Matilda, whose son, Henry II, succeeded Stephen as the first of the Angevin kings of England.\nStephen was born in the County of Blois in central France as the fourth son of Stephen-Henry, Count of Blois, and Adela, daughter of William the Conqueror. His father died as a crusader while Stephen was still young, and he was brought up by his mother. Placed into the court of his uncle Henry I of England, Stephen rose in prominence and was granted extensive lands. He married Matilda of Boulogne, inheriting additional estates in Kent and Boulogne that made the couple one of the wealthiest in England. Stephen narrowly escaped drowning with Henry I's son, William Adelin, in the sinking of the \"White Ship\" in 1120; William's death left the succession of the English throne open to challenge. When Henry died in 1135, Stephen quickly crossed the English Channel and took the throne with the help of his brother Henry, Bishop of Winchester, arguing that the preservation of order across the kingdom took priority over his earlier oaths to support the claim of Henry I's daughter, the Empress Matilda.\nThe early years of Stephen's reign were largely successful, despite a series of attacks on his possessions in England and Normandy by David I of Scotland, Welsh rebels, and the Empress Matilda's husband Geoffrey Plantagenet, Count of Anjou. In 1138, the Empress's half-brother Robert of Gloucester rebelled against Stephen, threatening civil war. Together with his close advisor, Waleran de Beaumont, Stephen took firm steps to defend his rule, including arresting a powerful family of bishops. When the Empress and Robert invaded in 1139, Stephen was unable to crush the revolt rapidly, and it took hold in the south-west of England. Captured at the battle of Lincoln in 1141, he was abandoned by many of his followers and lost control of Normandy. He was freed only after his wife and William of Ypres, one of his military commanders, captured Robert at the Rout of Winchester, but the war dragged on for many years with neither side able to win an advantage.\nStephen became increasingly concerned with ensuring that his son Eustace would inherit his throne. The King tried to convince the church to agree to crown Eustace to reinforce his claim. However, Pope Eugene III refused, and Stephen found himself in a sequence of increasingly bitter arguments with his senior clergy. In 1153, the Empress's son Henry invaded England and built an alliance of powerful regional barons to support his claim for the throne. The two armies met at Wallingford, but neither side's barons were keen to fight another pitched battle. Stephen began to examine a negotiated peace, a process hastened by the sudden death of Eustace. Later in the year Stephen and Henry agreed to the Treaty of Winchester, in which Stephen recognised Henry as his heir in exchange for peace, passing over William, Stephen's second son. Stephen died the following year. Modern historians have extensively debated the extent to which his personality, external events, or the weaknesses in the Norman state contributed to this prolonged period of civil war.\nEarly life (1097\u20131135).\nChildhood.\nStephen was born in Blois, France, in either 1092 or 1096. His father was Stephen-Henry, Count of Blois and Chartres, an important French nobleman and an active crusader who died when Stephen was at most ten years old. During the First Crusade, Stephen-Henry had acquired a reputation for cowardice, and he returned to the Levant again in 1101 to rebuild his reputation; there he was killed at the battle of Ramlah. Stephen's mother, Adela, was the daughter of William the Conqueror and Matilda of Flanders. She was famous among her contemporaries for her piety and strong personality. Indeed, Adela was a major reason for Stephen-Henry's return to the Levant. She had a strong formative influence on Stephen during his growing years; she would live to see her son take her father's throne of England, but would die within a year after that.\nIn the 12th century, France was a loose collection of counties and smaller polities under the minimal control of the king of France. The king's power was linked to his control of the rich province of \u00cele-de-France, just to the east of Stephen's home county of Blois. To the west lay the three counties of Maine, Anjou and Touraine, and to the north of Blois was the Duchy of Normandy, from which William the Conqueror had conquered England in 1066. William's children were still fighting over the collective Anglo-Norman inheritance. The rulers across this region spoke a similar language, albeit with regional dialects; followed the same religion; and were closely interrelated. They were also highly competitive and frequently in conflict with one another for valuable territory and the castles that controlled those territories.\nStephen had at least four brothers and one sister, along with two probable half-sisters. His eldest brother was William, who under normal circumstances would have ruled Blois and Chartres. William was probably intellectually disabled, and Adela instead had the counties pass to her second son, Theobald, later also Count of Champagne. Stephen's other older brother, Odo, died young, probably in his early teens. \nStephen's younger brother, Henry, was probably born four years after him. The brothers formed a close-knit family group, and Adela encouraged Stephen to take up the role of a feudal knight or baron, whilst steering Henry towards a career in the church, possibly so that their personal career interests would not overlap. Unusually, Stephen was raised in his mother's household rather than being sent to a close relative; he was taught Latin and riding, and was educated in recent history and Biblical stories by his tutor, William the Norman.\nRelationship with Henry I.\nStephen's early life was heavily influenced by his relationship with his uncle Henry I. Henry seized power in England following the death of his elder brother William Rufus. In 1106 he invaded and captured the Duchy of Normandy, controlled by his eldest brother, Robert Curthose, defeating Robert's army at the battle of Tinchebray. Henry then found himself in conflict with Louis VI of France, who took the opportunity to declare Robert's son, William Clito, the Duke of Normandy. \nHenry responded by forming a network of alliances with the western counties of France against Louis, resulting in a regional conflict that would last throughout Stephen's early life. Adela and Theobald allied themselves with Henry, and Stephen's mother decided to place him in Henry's court. Henry fought his next military campaign in Normandy, from 1111 onwards, where rebels led by Robert of Bell\u00eame were opposing his rule. Stephen was probably with Henry during the military campaign of 1112, when he was knighted by the King. He was present at court during the King's visit to the Abbey of Saint-Evroul in 1113. Stephen probably first visited England in either 1113 or 1115, almost certainly as part of Henry's court.\nHenry became a powerful patron of Stephen, and probably chose to support him because Stephen was part of his extended family and a regional ally, yet not sufficiently wealthy or powerful in his own right to represent a threat to either the King or his son and heir, William Adelin. As a third surviving son, even of an influential regional family, Stephen still needed the support of a powerful patron to progress in life. \nWith Henry's support, Stephen rapidly began to accumulate lands and possessions. Following the battle of Tinchebray in 1106, Henry confiscated the County of Mortain from his cousin William and the Honour of Eye from Robert Malet. In 1113, Stephen was granted both the title and the honour, although without the lands previously held by William in England. The gift of the Honour of Lancaster also followed after it was confiscated by Henry from Roger the Poitevin. Stephen was also given lands in Alen\u00e7on in southern Normandy by Henry, but the local Normans rebelled, seeking assistance from Fulk IV, Count of Anjou. Stephen and his older brother Theobald were comprehensively beaten in the subsequent campaign, which culminated in the Battle of Alen\u00e7on, and the territories were not recovered.\n\"White Ship\" and succession.\nIn 1120, the English political landscape changed dramatically. Three hundred passengers embarked on the \"White Ship\" to travel from Barfleur in Normandy to England, including the heir to the throne, William Adelin, and many other senior nobles. Stephen had intended to sail on the same ship but changed his mind at the last moment and got off to await another vessel, either out of concern for overcrowding on board the ship, or because he was suffering from diarrhoea. The ship foundered en route, and all but one of the passengers died, including William Adelin.\nWith William Adelin dead, the inheritance to the English throne was thrown into doubt. Rules of succession in western Europe at the time were uncertain; in some parts of France, male primogeniture, in which the eldest son would inherit a title, was becoming increasingly popular. It was also traditional for the king of France to crown his successor whilst he himself was still alive, making the intended line of succession relatively clear, but this was not the case in England. In other parts of Europe, including Normandy and England, the tradition was for lands to be divided up, with the eldest son taking patrimonial lands\u2014usually considered to be the most valuable\u2014and younger sons being given smaller, or more recently acquired, partitions or estates. There was no precedent of a woman ruler. The problem was further complicated by the sequence of unstable Anglo-Norman successions over the previous sixty years \u2013 William the Conqueror had gained England by force; two of his sons, Robert Curthose and William Rufus, had fought a war amongst themselves for the throne, with Rufus, who was younger, emerging victorious; and Henry had likewise acquired control of Normandy only by force. There had been no peaceful, uncontested successions.\nHenry had only one other legitimate child, the Empress Matilda, but as a woman she was at a substantial political disadvantage. Shortly after the death of his son, the King took a second wife, Adeliza of Louvain, but it became increasingly clear that he would not have another legitimate son, and he instead looked to Matilda as his intended heir. Matilda was married to Holy Roman Emperor Henry V, but her husband died in 1125, and she was remarried in 1128 to Geoffrey Plantagenet, Count of Anjou, whose lands bordered the Duchy of Normandy. Geoffrey was unpopular with the Anglo-Norman elite: as an Angevin ruler, he was a traditional enemy of the Normans. At the same time, tensions continued to grow as a result of Henry's domestic policies, in particular the high level of revenue he was raising to pay for his various wars. Conflict was curtailed, however, by the power of the King's personality and reputation.\nMeanwhile, the King arranged for Stephen to marry in 1125 to Matilda, the daughter and only heiress of Eustace III, Count of Boulogne, who owned both the important continental port of Boulogne and vast estates in the north-west and south-east of England. In 1127, William Clito, a potential claimant to the English throne, seemed likely to become the Count of Flanders; Henry sent Stephen on a mission to prevent this, and in the aftermath of his successful election, William attacked Stephen's lands in neighbouring Boulogne in retaliation. Eventually, a truce was declared, and William died the following year.\nHenry attempted to build up a base of political support for Matilda in both England and Normandy, demanding that his court take oaths first in 1127, and then again in 1128 and 1131, to recognise Matilda as his immediate successor and recognise her descendants as the rightful rulers after her. Stephen was amongst those who took this oath in 1127. Nonetheless, relations between Henry, Matilda, and Geoffrey became increasingly strained towards the end of the King's life. Matilda and Geoffrey suspected that they lacked genuine support in England, and proposed to Henry in 1135 that the King should hand over the royal castles in Normandy to Matilda whilst he was still alive and insist on the Norman nobility swearing immediate allegiance to her, thereby giving the couple a much more powerful position after Henry's death. Henry angrily declined to do so, probably out of a concern that Geoffrey would try to seize power in Normandy somewhat earlier than intended. A fresh rebellion broke out in southern Normandy, and Geoffrey and Matilda intervened militarily on behalf of the rebels. In the middle of this confrontation, Henry unexpectedly fell ill and died near Lyons-la-For\u00eat.\nSuccession (1135).\nStephen was a well established figure in Anglo-Norman society by 1135. He was extremely wealthy, well-mannered and liked by his peers; he was also considered a man capable of firm action. Chroniclers recorded that despite his wealth and power he was a modest and easy-going leader, happy to sit with his men and servants, casually laughing and eating with them. He was very pious, both in terms of his observance of religious rituals and his personal generosity to the church. Stephen also had a personal Augustinian confessor appointed to him by the Archbishop of Canterbury, who implemented a penitential regime for him, and Stephen encouraged the new order of Cistercians to form abbeys on his estates, winning him additional allies within the church.\nRumours about his father's cowardice during the First Crusade, however, continued to circulate, and a desire to avoid the same reputation may have influenced some of Stephen's rasher military actions. His wife, Matilda, played a major role in running their vast English estates, which contributed to the couple being the second-richest lay household in the country after the King and Queen. The landless Flemish nobleman William of Ypres had joined Stephen's household in 1133.\nStephen's younger brother, Henry of Blois, had also risen to power under Henry I. Henry of Blois had become a Cluniac monk and followed Stephen to England, where the King made him Abbot of Glastonbury, the richest abbey in England. The King then appointed him Bishop of Winchester, one of the richest bishoprics, allowing him to retain Glastonbury as well. The combined revenues of the two positions made Henry of Blois the second-richest man in England after the King. The bishop was keen to reverse what he perceived as encroachment by the Norman kings on the rights of the church. English kings had traditionally exercised a great deal of power and autonomy over the church within their territories. From the 1040s onwards, however, successive popes had put forward a reforming message that emphasised the importance of the church being \"governed more coherently and more hierarchically from the centre\" and established \"its own sphere of authority and jurisdiction, separate from and independent of that of the lay ruler\", in the words of historian Richard Huscroft.\nWhen news began to spread of Henry I's death, many of the potential claimants to the throne were not well placed to respond. Geoffrey and Matilda were in Anjou, rather awkwardly supporting the rebels in their campaign against the royal army, which included a number of Matilda's supporters such as Robert of Gloucester. Many of these barons had taken an oath to stay in Normandy until the late King was properly buried, which prevented them from returning to England. Stephen's brother Theobald was further south still, in Blois. Stephen, however, was in Boulogne, and when news reached him of Henry's death he left for England, accompanied by his military household. Robert had garrisoned the ports of Dover and Canterbury and some accounts suggest that they refused Stephen access when he first arrived. Nonetheless, Stephen probably reached his own estate on the edge of London by 8 December and over the next week he began to seize power in England.\nThe crowds in London traditionally claimed a right to elect the king, and they proclaimed Stephen the new monarch, believing that he would grant the city new rights and privileges in return. Henry of Blois delivered the support of the church to Stephen: Stephen was able to advance to Winchester, where Roger, Bishop of Salisbury and Lord Chancellor, instructed the royal treasury to be handed over to Stephen. On 15 December, Henry delivered an agreement under which Stephen would grant extensive freedoms and liberties to the church, in exchange for the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Papal Legate supporting his succession to the throne. There was the slight problem of the religious oath that Stephen had taken to support the Empress Matilda, but Henry convincingly argued that the late king had been wrong to insist that his court take the oath.\nFurthermore, the late king had only insisted on that oath to protect the stability of the kingdom, and in light of the chaos that might now ensue, Stephen would be justified in ignoring it. Henry was also able to persuade Hugh Bigod, the late king's royal steward, to swear that King Henry had changed his mind about the succession on his deathbed, nominating Stephen instead. Stephen's coronation was held a week later at Westminster Abbey on 22 December 1135. At his coronation, Stephen bore a red shield decorated with three golden lion-centaurs, called sagittaries; this symbology was later used for his coat of arms.\nMeanwhile, the Norman nobility gathered at Le Neubourg to discuss declaring Theobald king, probably following the news that Stephen was gathering support in England. The Normans argued that Theobald, as the more senior grandson of William the Conqueror, had the most valid claim over the kingdom and the duchy, and was certainly preferable to Matilda.\nTheobald met with the Norman barons and Robert of Gloucester at Lisieux on 21 December. Their discussions were interrupted by the sudden news from England that Stephen's coronation was to occur the next day. Theobald then agreed to the Normans' proposal that he be made king, only to find that his former support immediately ebbed away: the barons were not prepared to support the division of England and Normandy by opposing Stephen, who subsequently financially compensated Theobald, who in return remained in Blois and supported his brother's succession.\nEarly reign (1136\u20131139).\nInitial years (1136\u20131137).\nStephen's new Anglo-Norman kingdom had been shaped by the Norman Conquest of England in 1066, followed by the Norman expansion into south Wales over the coming years. Both the kingdom and duchy were dominated by a small number of major barons who owned lands on both sides of the English Channel, with the lesser barons beneath them usually having more localised holdings. The extent to which lands and positions should be passed down through hereditary right or by the gift of the King was still uncertain, and tensions concerning this issue had grown during the reign of Henry I. Certainly lands in Normandy, passed by hereditary right, were usually considered more important to major barons than those in England, where their possession was less certain. Henry had increased the authority and capabilities of the central royal administration, often bringing in \"new men\" to fulfil key positions rather than using the established nobility. In the process he had been able to maximise revenues and contain expenditures, resulting in a healthy surplus and a famously large treasury, but also increasing political tensions.\nStephen had to intervene in the north of England immediately after his coronation. David I of Scotland invaded the north on the news of Henry's death, taking Carlisle, Newcastle and other key strongholds. Northern England was a disputed territory at this time, with the Scottish kings laying a traditional claim to Cumberland, and David also claiming Northumbria by virtue of his marriage to the daughter of Waltheof, Earl of Northumbria. Stephen rapidly marched north with an army and met David at Durham. An agreement was made under which David would return most of the territory he had taken, with the exception of Carlisle. In return, Stephen confirmed the English possessions of David's son Henry, including the Earldom of Huntingdon.\nReturning south, Stephen held his first royal court at Easter 1136. A wide range of nobles gathered at Westminster for the event, including many of the Anglo-Norman barons and most of the higher officials of the church. Stephen issued a new royal charter, confirming the promises he had made to the church, promising to reverse Henry I's policies on the royal forests and to reform any abuses of the royal legal system. He portrayed himself as the natural successor to Henry's policies, and reconfirmed the existing seven earldoms in the kingdom on their existing holders. The Easter court was a lavish event, and a large amount of money was spent on the event itself, clothes and gifts. Stephen gave out grants of land and favours to those present and endowed numerous church foundations with land and privileges. His accession to the throne still needed to be ratified by the Pope, however, and Henry of Blois appears to have been responsible for ensuring that testimonials of support were sent both from their brother Theobald and from Louis VI of France, to whom Stephen represented a useful balance to Angevin power in the north of France. Pope Innocent II confirmed Stephen as king by letter later that year, and Stephen's advisers circulated copies widely around England to demonstrate his legitimacy.\nTroubles continued across Stephen's kingdom. After the Welsh victory at the battle of Llwchwr in January 1136 and the successful ambush of Richard Fitz Gilbert de Clare in April, south Wales rose in rebellion, starting in east Glamorgan and rapidly spreading across the rest of south Wales during 1137. Owain Gwynedd and Gruffydd ap Rhys successfully captured considerable territories, including Carmarthen Castle. Stephen responded by sending Richard's brother Baldwin and the Marcher Lord Robert Fitz Harold of Ewyas into Wales to pacify the region. Neither mission was particularly successful, and by the end of 1137, the King appears to have abandoned attempts to put down the rebellion. Historian David Crouch suggests that Stephen effectively \"bowed out of Wales\" around this time to concentrate on his other problems. Meanwhile, he had put down two revolts in the south-west led by Baldwin de Redvers and Robert of Bampton; Baldwin was released after his capture and travelled to Normandy, where he became an increasingly vocal critic of the King.\nThe security of Normandy was also a concern. Geoffrey of Anjou invaded in early 1136 and, after a temporary truce, invaded later the same year, raiding and burning estates rather than trying to hold the territory. Events in England meant that Stephen was unable to travel to Normandy himself, so Waleran de Beaumont, appointed by Stephen as the lieutenant of Normandy, and Theobald led the efforts to defend the duchy. Stephen himself only returned to the duchy in 1137, where he met with Louis VI and Theobald to agree to an informal regional alliance, probably brokered by Henry, to counter the growing Angevin power in the region. As part of this deal, Louis recognised Stephen's son Eustace as Duke of Normandy in exchange for Eustace giving fealty to the French king. Stephen was less successful, however, in regaining the Argentan province along the Normandy and Anjou border, which Geoffrey had taken at the end of 1135. Stephen formed an army to retake it, but the frictions between his Flemish mercenary forces led by William of Ypres and the local Norman barons resulted in a battle between the two halves of his army. The Norman forces then deserted Stephen, forcing the King to give up his campaign. He agreed to another truce with Geoffrey, promising to pay him 2,000 marks a year in exchange for peace along the Norman borders.\nIn the years following his succession, Stephen's relationship with the church became gradually more complex. The royal charter of 1136 had promised to review the ownership of all the lands that had been taken by the crown from the church since 1087, but these estates were now typically owned by nobles. Henry of Blois's claims, in his role as Abbot of Glastonbury, to extensive lands in Devon resulted in considerable local unrest. In 1136, Archbishop of Canterbury William de Corbeil died. Stephen responded by seizing his personal wealth, which caused some discontent amongst the senior clergy. Henry wanted to succeed to the post, but Stephen instead supported Theobald of Bec, who was eventually appointed. The papacy named Henry papal legate, possibly as consolation for not receiving Canterbury.\nStephen's first few years as king can be interpreted in different ways. He stabilised the northern border with Scotland, contained Geoffrey's attacks on Normandy, was at peace with Louis VI, enjoyed good relations with the church and had the broad support of his barons. There were significant underlying problems, nonetheless. King David and Prince Henry now controlled the north of England, Stephen had abandoned Wales, the fighting in Normandy had considerably destabilised the duchy, and an increasing number of barons felt that Stephen had given them neither the lands nor the titles they felt they deserved or were owed. Stephen was also rapidly running out of money: Henry's considerable treasury had been emptied by 1138 due to the costs of running Stephen's more lavish court and the need to raise and maintain his mercenary armies fighting in England and Normandy.\nDefending the kingdom (1138\u20131139).\nStephen was attacked on several fronts during 1138. First, Robert, Earl of Gloucester, rebelled against the King, starting the descent into civil war in England. An illegitimate son of Henry I and the half-brother of the Empress Matilda, Robert was one of the most powerful Anglo-Norman barons, controlling estates in Normandy. He was known for his qualities as a statesman, his military experience, and leadership ability. Robert had tried to convince Theobald to take the throne in 1135; he did not attend Stephen's first court in 1136 and it took several summonses to convince him to attend court at Oxford later that year. In 1138, Robert renounced his fealty to Stephen and declared his support for Matilda, triggering a major regional rebellion in Kent and across the south-west of England, although Robert himself remained in Normandy. In France, Geoffrey of Anjou took advantage of the situation by re-invading Normandy. David of Scotland also invaded the north of England once again, announcing that he was supporting the claim of his niece the Empress Matilda to the throne, pushing south into Yorkshire.\nAnglo-Norman warfare during the reign of Stephen was characterised by attritional military campaigns, in which commanders tried to seize key enemy castles in order to allow them to take control of their adversaries' territory and ultimately win a slow, strategic victory. The armies of the period centred on bodies of mounted, armoured knights, supported by infantry and crossbowmen. These forces were either feudal levies, drawn up by local nobles for a limited period of service during a campaign, or, increasingly, mercenaries, who were expensive but more flexible and often more skilled. These armies, however, were ill-suited to besieging castles, whether the older motte-and-bailey designs or the newer, stone-built keeps. Existing siege engines were significantly less powerful than the later trebuchet designs, giving defenders a substantial advantage over attackers. As a result, slow sieges to starve defenders out, or mining operations to undermine walls, tended to be preferred by commanders over direct assaults. Occasionally pitched battles were fought between armies but these were considered highly risky endeavours and were usually avoided by prudent commanders. The cost of warfare had risen considerably in the first part of the 12th century, and adequate supplies of ready cash were increasingly proving important in the success of campaigns.\nStephen's personal qualities as a military leader focused on his skill in personal combat, his capabilities in siege warfare and a remarkable ability to move military forces quickly over relatively long distances. In response to the revolts and invasions, he rapidly undertook several military campaigns, focusing primarily on England rather than Normandy. His wife Matilda was sent to Kent with ships and resources from Boulogne, with the task of retaking the key port of Dover, under Robert's control. A small number of Stephen's household knights were sent north to help the fight against the Scots, where David's forces were defeated later that year at the battle of the Standard in August by the forces of Thurstan, the Archbishop of York. Despite this victory, however, David still occupied most of the north. Stephen himself went west in an attempt to regain control of Gloucestershire, first striking north into the Welsh Marches, taking Hereford and Shrewsbury, before heading south to Bath. The town of Bristol itself proved too strong for him, and Stephen contented himself with raiding and pillaging the surrounding area. The rebels appear to have expected Robert to intervene with support that year, but he remained in Normandy throughout, trying to persuade the Empress Matilda to invade England herself. Dover finally surrendered to the Queen's forces later in the year.\nStephen's military campaign in England had progressed well, and historian David Crouch describes it as \"a military achievement of the first rank\". The King took the opportunity of his military advantage to forge a peace agreement with Scotland. Stephen's wife Matilda was sent to negotiate another agreement between Stephen and David, called the treaty of Durham; Northumbria and Cumbria would effectively be granted to David and his son Henry, in exchange for their fealty and future peace along the border. The powerful Ranulf II, Earl of Chester, considered himself to hold the traditional rights to Carlisle and Cumberland and was extremely displeased to see them being given to the Scots. Nonetheless, Stephen could now focus his attention on the anticipated invasion of England by Robert and Matilda's forces.\nRoad to civil war (1139).\nStephen prepared for the Angevin invasion by creating a number of additional earldoms. Only a handful of earldoms had existed under Henry I and these had been largely symbolic in nature. Stephen created many more, filling them with men he considered to be loyal, capable military commanders, and in the more vulnerable parts of the country assigning them new lands and additional executive powers. He appears to have had several objectives in mind, including both ensuring the loyalty of his key supporters by granting them these honours, and improving his defences in key parts of the kingdom. Stephen was heavily influenced by his principal advisor, Waleran de Beaumont. Waleran, his brothers Robert and Hugh, and their younger cousins received the majority of these new earldoms. From 1138 onwards, Stephen gave them the earldoms of Worcester, Leicester, Hereford, Warwick and Pembroke, which \u2013 especially when combined with the possessions of Stephen's new ally, Prince Henry, in Cumberland and Northumbria \u2013 created a wide block of territory to act as a buffer zone between the troubled south-west, Chester, and the rest of the kingdom. With their new lands, the power of the Beamounts grew to the point where David Crouch suggests that it became \"dangerous to be anything other than a friend of Waleran\" at Stephen's court.\nStephen took steps to remove a group of bishops he regarded as a threat to his rule. The royal administration under Henry I had been headed by Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, who was supported by his nephews, Bishops Alexander of Lincoln and Nigel of Ely, and his son, Lord Chancellor Roger le Poer. These bishops were powerful landowners as well as ecclesiastical rulers, and they had begun to build new castles and increase the size of their military forces, leading Stephen to suspect that they were about to defect to the Empress Matilda. Bishop Roger and his family were also enemies of Waleran, who disliked their control of the royal administration. In June 1139, Stephen held his court in Oxford, where a fight between Alan of Brittany and Roger's men broke out, an incident probably deliberately created by Stephen. Stephen responded by demanding that Roger and the other bishops surrender all of their castles in England. This threat was backed up by the arrest of the bishops, with the exception of Nigel who had taken refuge in Devizes Castle; the bishop only surrendered after Stephen besieged the castle and threatened to execute Roger le Poer. The remaining castles were then surrendered to the King.\nStephen's brother Henry was alarmed by this, both as a matter of principle, since Stephen had previously agreed in 1135 to respect the freedoms of the church, and more pragmatically because he himself had recently built six castles and had no desire to be treated in the same way. As the papal legate, he summoned the King to appear before an ecclesiastical council to answer for the arrests and seizure of property. Henry asserted the church's right to investigate and judge all charges against members of the clergy. Stephen sent Aubrey de Vere II as his spokesman to the council, who argued that Roger of Salisbury had been arrested not as a bishop, but rather in his role as a baron who had been preparing to change his support to the Empress Matilda. The King was supported by Hugh of Amiens, Archbishop of Rouen, who challenged the bishops to show how canon law entitled them to build or hold castles. Aubrey threatened that Stephen would complain to the pope that he was being harassed by the English church, and the council let the matter rest following an unsuccessful appeal to Rome. The incident successfully removed any military threat from the bishops, but it may have damaged Stephen's relationship with the senior clergy, and in particular with his brother Henry.\nCivil war (1139\u20131154).\nInitial phase of the war (1139\u20131140).\nThe Angevin invasion finally arrived in 1139. Baldwin de Redvers crossed over from Normandy to Wareham in August in an initial attempt to capture a port to receive the Empress Matilda's invading army, but Stephen's forces forced him to retreat into the south-west. The following month, however, Henry I's widow, Adeliza, invited the Empress to land at Arundel instead, and on 30 September the Empress and Robert of Gloucester arrived in England with 140 knights. The Empress stayed at Arundel Castle, whilst Robert marched north-west to Wallingford and Bristol, hoping to raise support for the rebellion and to link up with Miles of Gloucester, a capable military leader who took the opportunity to renounce his fealty to the King. Stephen promptly moved south, besieging Arundel and trapping Matilda inside the castle.\nStephen then agreed to a truce proposed by his brother Henry; the full details of the truce are not known, but the results were that Stephen first released Matilda from the siege and then allowed her and her household of knights to be escorted to the south-west, where they were reunited with Robert. The reasoning behind Stephen's decision to release his rival remains unclear. Contemporary chroniclers suggested that Henry argued that it would be in Stephen's own best interests to release the Empress and concentrate instead on attacking Robert, and Stephen may have seen Robert, not the Empress, as his main opponent at this point in the conflict. He also faced a military dilemma at Arundel\u2014the castle was considered almost impregnable, and he may have been worried that he was tying down his army in the south whilst Robert roamed freely in the west. Another theory is that Stephen released Matilda out of a sense of chivalry; he was certainly known for having a generous, courteous personality and women were not normally expected to be targeted in Anglo-Norman warfare.\nHaving released the Empress, Stephen focused on pacifying the south-west of England. Although there had been few new defections to the Empress, his enemies now controlled a compact block of territory stretching out from Gloucester and Bristol south-west into Devon and Cornwall, west into the Welsh Marches and east as far as Oxford and Wallingford, threatening London. Stephen started by attacking Wallingford Castle, held by the Empress's childhood friend Brien FitzCount, only to find it too well defended. He then left behind some forces to blockade the castle and continued west into Wiltshire to attack Trowbridge Castle, taking the castles of South Cerney and Malmesbury en route. Meanwhile, Miles of Gloucester marched east, attacking Stephen's rearguard forces at Wallingford and threatening an advance on London. Stephen was forced to give up his western campaign, returning east to stabilise the situation and protect his capital.\nAt the start of 1140, Nigel, Bishop of Ely, whose castles Stephen had confiscated the previous year, rebelled against Stephen as well. Nigel hoped to seize East Anglia and established his base of operations in the Isle of Ely, then surrounded by protective fenland. Stephen responded quickly, taking an army into the fens and using boats lashed together to form a causeway that allowed him to make a surprise attack on the isle. Nigel escaped to Gloucester, but his men and castle were captured, and order was temporarily restored in the east. Robert's men retook some of the territory that Stephen had taken in his 1139 campaign. In an effort to negotiate a truce, Henry of Blois held a peace conference at Bath, to which Stephen sent his wife. The conference collapsed over the insistence by Henry and the clergy that they should set the terms of any peace deal, which Stephen found unacceptable.\nRanulf of Chester remained upset over Stephen's gift of the north of England to Prince Henry. Ranulf devised a plan for dealing with the problem by ambushing Henry whilst the prince was travelling back from Stephen's court to Scotland after Christmas. Stephen responded to rumours of this plan by escorting Henry himself north, but this gesture proved the final straw for Ranulf. Ranulf had previously claimed that he had the rights to Lincoln Castle, held by Stephen, and under the guise of a social visit, Ranulf seized the fortification in a surprise attack. Stephen marched north to Lincoln and agreed to a truce with Ranulf, probably to keep him from joining the Empress's faction, under which Ranulf would be allowed to keep the castle. Stephen returned to London but received news that Ranulf, his brother and their family were relaxing in Lincoln Castle with a minimal guard force, a ripe target for a surprise attack of his own. Abandoning the deal he had just made, Stephen gathered his army again and sped north, but not quite fast enough\u2014Ranulf escaped Lincoln and declared his support for the Empress. Stephen was forced to place the castle under siege.\nSecond phase of the war (1141\u20131142).\nWhile Stephen and his army besieged Lincoln Castle at the start of 1141, Robert and Ranulf advanced on the King's position with a somewhat larger force. When the news reached Stephen, he held a council to decide whether to give battle or to withdraw and gather additional soldiers: Stephen decided to fight, resulting in the Battle of Lincoln on 2 February 1141. The King commanded the centre of his army, with Alan of Brittany on his right and William of Aumale on his left. Robert and Ranulf's forces had superiority in cavalry and Stephen dismounted many of his own knights to form a solid infantry block; he joined them himself, fighting on foot in the battle. Stephen was not a gifted public speaker, and delegated the pre-battle speech to Baldwin of Clare, who delivered a rousing declaration. After an initial success in which William's forces destroyed the Angevins' Welsh infantry, the battle went badly for Stephen. Robert and Ranulf's cavalry encircled Stephen's centre, and the King found himself surrounded by the enemy army. Many of his supporters, including Waleran de Beaumont and William of Ypres, fled from the field at this point but Stephen fought on, defending himself first with his sword and then, when that broke, with a borrowed battle axe. Finally, he was overwhelmed by Robert's men and taken away from the field in custody.\nRobert took Stephen back to Gloucester, where the King met with the Empress Matilda, and was then moved to Bristol Castle, traditionally used for holding high-status prisoners. He was initially left confined in relatively good conditions, but his security was later tightened and he was kept in chains. The Empress now began to take the necessary steps to have herself crowned queen in his place, which would require the agreement of the church and her coronation at Westminster. Bishop Henry summoned a council at Winchester before Easter in his capacity as papal legate to consider the clergy's view. He had made a private deal with the Empress Matilda that he would deliver the support of the church, if she agreed to give him control over church business in England. Henry handed over the royal treasury, rather depleted except for Stephen's crown, to the Empress, and excommunicated many of Stephen's supporters who refused to switch sides. Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury was unwilling to declare Matilda queen so rapidly, however, and a delegation of clergy and nobles, headed by Theobald, travelled to see Stephen in Bristol and consult about their moral dilemma: should they abandon their oaths of fealty to the King? Stephen agreed that, given the situation, he was prepared to release his subjects from their oath of fealty to him, and the clergy gathered again in Winchester after Easter to declare the Empress \"Lady of England and Normandy\" as a precursor to her coronation. When Matilda advanced to London in an effort to stage her coronation in June, though, she faced an uprising by the local citizens in support of Stephen that forced her to flee to Oxford, uncrowned.\nOnce news of Stephen's capture reached him, Geoffrey of Anjou invaded Normandy again and, in the absence of Waleran de Beaumont, who was still fighting in England, Geoffrey took all the duchy south of the river Seine and east of the river Risle. No help was forthcoming from Stephen's brother Theobald this time either, who appears to have been preoccupied with his own problems with France\u2014the new French king, Louis VII, had rejected his father's regional alliance, improving relations with Anjou and taking a more bellicose line with Theobald, which would result in war the following year. Geoffrey's success in Normandy and Stephen's weakness in England began to influence the loyalty of many Anglo-Norman barons, who feared losing their lands in England to Robert and the Empress, and their possessions in Normandy to Geoffrey. Many started to leave Stephen's faction. Waleran de Beaumont was one of those who decided to defect in mid-1141, crossing into Normandy to secure his ancestral possessions by allying himself with the Angevins, and bringing Worcestershire into the Empress's camp. Waleran's twin brother, Robert, effectively withdrew from fighting in the conflict at the same time. Other supporters of the Empress were restored in their former strongholds, such as Bishop Nigel of Ely, or received new earldoms in the west of England. The royal control over the minting of coins broke down, leading to coins being struck by local barons and bishops across the country.\nStephen's wife, Matilda, played a critical part in keeping the King's cause alive during his captivity. Queen Matilda gathered Stephen's remaining lieutenants around her and the royal family in the south-east, advancing into London when the population rejected the Empress. Stephen's long-standing commander William of Ypres remained with the Queen in London; William Martel, the royal steward, commanded operations from Sherborne in Dorset, and Faramus of Boulogne ran the royal household. The Queen appears to have generated genuine sympathy and support from Stephen's more loyal followers. Henry's alliance with the Empress proved short-lived, as they soon fell out over political patronage and ecclesiastical policy; the bishop met the Queen at Guildford and transferred his support to her.\nThe King's eventual release resulted from the Angevin defeat at the Rout of Winchester. Robert of Gloucester and the Empress besieged Henry in the city of Winchester in July. Queen Matilda and William of Ypres then encircled the Angevin forces with their own army, reinforced with fresh troops from London. In the subsequent battle the Empress's forces were defeated and Robert himself was taken prisoner. Further negotiations attempted to deliver a general peace agreement but the Queen was unwilling to offer any compromise to the Empress, and Robert refused to accept any offer to encourage him to change sides to Stephen. Instead, in November the two sides simply exchanged Robert and the King, with Stephen releasing Robert on 1 November 1141. Stephen began re-establishing his authority. Henry held another church council, which this time reaffirmed Stephen's legitimacy to rule, and a fresh coronation of Stephen and Matilda occurred at Christmas 1141.\nAt the beginning of 1142 Stephen fell ill, and by Easter rumours had begun to circulate that he had died. Possibly this illness was the result of his imprisonment the previous year, but he finally recovered and travelled north to raise new forces and to successfully convince Ranulf of Chester to change sides once again. Stephen then spent the summer attacking some of the new Angevin castles built the previous year, including Cirencester, Bampton and Wareham. In September, he spotted an opportunity to seize the Empress Matilda herself in Oxford. Oxford was a secure town, protected by walls and the river Isis, but Stephen led a sudden attack across the river, leading the charge and swimming part of the way. Once on the other side, the King and his men stormed into the town, trapping the Empress in the castle. Oxford Castle, however, was a powerful fortress and, rather than storming it, Stephen had to settle down for a long siege, albeit secure in the knowledge that Matilda was now surrounded. Just before Christmas, the Empress left the castle unobserved, crossed the icy river on foot and made her escape to Wallingford. The garrison surrendered shortly afterwards, but Stephen had lost an opportunity to capture his principal opponent.\nStalemate (1143\u20131146).\nThe war between the two sides in England reached a stalemate in the mid-1140s, while Geoffrey of Anjou consolidated his hold on power in Normandy. 1143 started precariously for Stephen when he was besieged by Robert of Gloucester at Wilton Castle, an assembly point for royal forces in Herefordshire. Stephen attempted to break out and escape, resulting in the battle of Wilton. Once again, the Angevin cavalry proved too strong, and for a moment it appeared that Stephen might be captured for a second time. On this occasion, however, William Martel, Stephen's steward, made a fierce rear guard effort, allowing Stephen to escape from the battlefield. Stephen valued William's loyalty sufficiently to agree to exchange Sherborne Castle for his safe release\u2014this was one of the few instances where Stephen was prepared to give up a castle to ransom one of his men.\nIn late 1143, Stephen faced a new threat in the east, when Geoffrey de Mandeville, Earl of Essex, rose up in rebellion against him in East Anglia. The King had disliked the Earl for several years, and provoked the conflict by summoning Geoffrey to court, where the King arrested him. He threatened to execute Geoffrey unless the Earl handed over his various castles, including the Tower of London, Saffron Walden and Pleshey, all important fortifications because they were in, or close to, London. Geoffrey gave in, but once free he headed north-east into the Fens to the Isle of Ely, from where he began a military campaign against Cambridge, with the intention of progressing south towards London. With all of his other problems and with Hugh Bigod, 1st Earl of Norfolk, in open revolt in Norfolk, Stephen lacked the resources to track Geoffrey down in the Fens and made do with building a screen of castles between Ely and London, including Burwell Castle.\nFor a period, the situation continued to worsen. Ranulf of Chester revolted once again in the summer of 1144, splitting up Stephen's Honour of Lancaster between himself and Prince Henry. In the west, Robert of Gloucester and his followers continued to raid the surrounding royalist territories, and Wallingford Castle remained a secure Angevin stronghold, too close to London for comfort. Meanwhile, Geoffrey of Anjou finished securing his hold on southern Normandy and in January 1144 he advanced into Rouen, the capital of the duchy, concluding his campaign. Louis VII recognised him as Duke of Normandy shortly after. By this point in the war, Stephen was depending increasingly on his immediate royal household, such as William of Ypres and others, and lacked the support of the major barons who might have been able to provide him with significant additional forces; after the events of 1141, Stephen made little use of his network of earls.\nAfter 1143 the war ground on, but progressing slightly better for Stephen. Miles of Gloucester, one of the most talented Angevin commanders, had died whilst hunting over the previous Christmas, relieving some of the pressure in the west. Geoffrey de Mandeville's rebellion continued until September 1144, when he died during an attack on Burwell. The war in the west progressed better in 1145, with the King recapturing Faringdon Castle in Oxfordshire. In the north, Stephen came to a fresh agreement with Ranulf of Chester, but then in 1146 repeated the ruse he had played on Geoffrey in 1143, first inviting Ranulf to court, before arresting him and threatening to execute him unless he handed over a number of castles, including Lincoln and Coventry. As with Geoffrey, the moment Ranulf was released he immediately rebelled, but the situation was a stalemate: Stephen had few forces in the north with which to prosecute a fresh campaign, whilst Ranulf lacked the castles to support an attack on Stephen. By this point, however, Stephen's practice of inviting barons to court and arresting them had brought him into some disrepute and increasing distrust.\nFinal phases of the war (1147\u20131152).\nEngland had suffered extensively from the war by 1147, leading later Victorian historians to call the period of conflict \"the Anarchy\". The contemporary \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" recorded how \"there was nothing but disturbance and wickedness and robbery\". Certainly in many parts of the country, such as Wiltshire, Berkshire, the Thames Valley and East Anglia, the fighting and raiding had caused serious devastation. Numerous \"adulterine\", or unauthorised, castles had been built as bases for local lords \u2014 the chronicler Robert of Torigny complained that as many as 1,115 such castles had been built during the conflict, although this was probably an exaggeration as elsewhere he suggested an alternative figure of 126. The previously centralised royal coinage system was fragmented, with Stephen, the Empress and local lords all minting their own coins. The royal forest law had collapsed in large parts of the country. Some parts of the country, though, were barely touched by the conflict\u2014for example, Stephen's lands in the south-east and the Angevin heartlands around Gloucester and Bristol were largely unaffected, and David I ruled his territories in the north of England effectively. Stephen's overall income from his estates, however, declined seriously during the conflict, particularly after 1141, and royal control over the minting of new coins remained limited outside of the south-east and East Anglia. With Stephen often based in the south-east, increasingly Westminster, rather than the older site of Winchester, was used as the centre of royal government.\nThe character of the conflict in England gradually began to shift; as historian Frank Barlow suggests, by the late 1140s \"the civil war was over\", barring the occasional outbreak of fighting. In 1147 Robert of Gloucester died peacefully, and the next year the Empress Matilda left south-west England for Normandy, both of which contributed to reducing the tempo of the war. The Second Crusade was announced, and many Angevin supporters, including Waleran of Beaumont, joined it, leaving the region for several years. Many of the barons were making individual peace agreements with each other to secure their lands and war gains. Henry FitzEmpress, the eldest son of the Empress Matilda, mounted a small mercenary invasion of England in 1147 but the expedition failed, not least because Henry lacked the funds to pay his men. Surprisingly, Stephen himself ended up paying their costs, allowing Henry to return home safely; his reasons for doing so are unclear. One potential explanation is his general courtesy to a member of his extended family; another is that he was starting to consider how to end the war peacefully, and saw this as a way of building a relationship with Henry.\nHenry FitzEmpress returned to England again in 1149, this time planning to form a northern alliance with Ranulf of Chester. The Angevin plan involved Ranulf agreeing to give up his claim to Carlisle, held by the Scots, in return for being given the rights to the whole of the Honour of Lancaster; Ranulf would give homage to both David and Henry, with Henry having seniority. Following this peace agreement, Henry and Ranulf agreed to attack York, probably with help from the Scots. Stephen marched rapidly north to York and the planned attack disintegrated, leaving Henry to return to Normandy, where he was declared duke by his father.\nAlthough still young, Henry was increasingly gaining a reputation as an energetic and capable leader. His prestige and power increased further when he unexpectedly married the attractive Eleanor, Duchess of Aquitaine, the recently divorced wife of Louis VII, in 1152. The marriage made Henry the future ruler of a huge swathe of territory across France.\nIn the final years of the war, Stephen began to focus on the issue of his family and the succession. He wanted to confirm his eldest son, Eustace, as his successor, although chroniclers recorded that Eustace was infamous for levying heavy taxes and extorting money from those on his lands. Stephen's second son, William, was married to the extremely wealthy heiress Isabel de Warenne, Countess of Surrey. In 1148, Stephen built the Cluniac Faversham Abbey as a resting place for his family. Both Stephen's wife, Matilda, and his brother Theobald died in 1152.\nArgument with the church (1145\u20131152).\nStephen's relationship with the church deteriorated badly towards the end of his reign. The reforming movement within the church, which advocated greater autonomy from royal authority for the clergy, had continued to grow, while new voices such as the Cistercians had gained additional prestige within the monastic orders, eclipsing older orders such as the Cluniacs. Stephen's dispute with the church had its origins in 1140 when Archbishop Thurstan of York died. An argument then broke out between a group of reformers based in York and backed by Bernard of Clairvaux, the head of the Cistercian order, who preferred William of Rievaulx as the new archbishop, and Stephen and his brother Henry, who preferred various Blois family relatives. The row between Henry and Bernard grew increasingly personal, and Henry used his authority as legate to appoint his nephew William of York to the post in 1141 only to find that, when Pope Innocent II died in 1143, Bernard was able to get the appointment rejected by Rome. Bernard then convinced Pope Eugene III to overturn Henry's decision altogether in 1147, deposing William, and appointing Henry Murdac as archbishop instead.\nStephen was furious over what he saw as potentially precedent-setting papal interference in his royal authority and initially refused to allow Murdac into England. When Theobald, the Archbishop of Canterbury, went to consult with the Pope on the matter against Stephen's wishes, the King refused to allow him back into England either and seized his estates. Stephen also cut his links to the Cistercian order and turned instead to the Cluniacs, of which Henry of Blois was a member.\nNonetheless, the pressure on Stephen to get Eustace confirmed as his legitimate heir continued to grow. The King gave Eustace the County of Boulogne in 1147, but it remained unclear whether Eustace would inherit England. Stephen's preferred option was to have Eustace crowned while he himself was still alive, as was the custom in France, but this was not the normal practice in England, and Celestine II, during his brief tenure as pope between 1143 and 1144, had banned any change to this practice. Since the only person who could crown Eustace was Archbishop Theobald, who refused to do so without agreement from the current pope, Eugene III, the matter reached an impasse. At the end of 1148, Stephen and Theobald came to a temporary compromise that allowed Theobald to return to England. Theobald was appointed a papal legate in 1151, adding to his authority. Stephen then made a fresh attempt to have Eustace crowned at Easter 1152, gathering his nobles to swear fealty to Eustace, and then insisting that Theobald and his bishops anoint him king. When Theobald refused yet again, Stephen and Eustace imprisoned both him and the bishops and refused to release them unless they agreed to crown Eustace. Theobald escaped again into temporary exile in Flanders, pursued to the coast by Stephen's knights, marking a low point in Stephen's relationship with the church.\nTreaties and peace (1153\u20131154).\nHenry FitzEmpress returned to England again at the start of 1153 with a small army, supported in the north and east of England by Ranulf of Chester and Hugh Bigod. Stephen's castle at Malmesbury was besieged by Henry's forces, and the King responded by marching west with an army to relieve it. He unsuccessfully attempted to force Henry's smaller army to fight a decisive battle along the river Avon. In the face of the increasingly wintry weather, Stephen agreed to a temporary truce and returned to London, leaving Henry to travel north through the Midlands where the powerful Robert de Beaumont, Earl of Leicester, announced his support for the Angevin cause. Despite only modest military successes, Henry and his allies now controlled the south-west, the Midlands and much of the north of England.\nOver the summer, Stephen intensified the long-running siege of Wallingford Castle in a final attempt to take this major Angevin stronghold. The fall of Wallingford appeared imminent and Henry marched south in an attempt to relieve the siege, arriving with a small army and placing Stephen's besieging forces under siege themselves. Upon news of this, Stephen gathered up a large force and marched from Oxford, and the two sides confronted each other across the River Thames at Wallingford in July. By this point in the war, the barons on both sides seem to have been eager to avoid an open battle. As a result, instead of a battle ensuing, members of the church brokered a truce, to the annoyance of both Stephen and Henry.\nIn the aftermath of Wallingford, Stephen and Henry spoke together privately about a potential end to the war; Stephen's son Eustace, however, was furious about the peaceful outcome at Wallingford. He left his father and returned home to Cambridge to gather more funds for a fresh campaign, where he fell ill and died the next month. Eustace's death removed an obvious claimant to the throne and was politically convenient for those seeking a permanent peace in England. It is possible, however, that Stephen had already begun to consider passing over Eustace's claim; historian Edmund King observes that Eustace's claim to the throne was not mentioned in the discussions at Wallingford, for example, and this may have added to his anger.\nFighting continued after Wallingford but in a rather half-hearted fashion. Stephen lost the towns of Oxford and Stamford to Henry while the King was diverted fighting Hugh Bigod in the east of England, but Nottingham Castle survived an Angevin attempt to capture it. Meanwhile, Henry of Blois and Theobald of Canterbury were for once unified in an effort to broker a permanent peace between the two sides, putting pressure on Stephen to accept a deal. The two armies met again at Winchester, where the leaders would ratify the terms of a permanent peace in November. Stephen announced the Treaty of Winchester in Winchester Cathedral: he recognised Henry as his adopted son and successor, in return for Henry doing homage to him; Stephen promised to listen to Henry's advice, but retained all his royal powers; Stephen's remaining son, William, would do homage to Henry and renounce his claim to the throne, in exchange for promises of the security of his lands; key royal castles would be held on Henry's behalf by guarantors, whilst Stephen would have access to Henry's castles; and the numerous foreign mercenaries would be demobilised and sent home. Stephen and Henry sealed the treaty with a kiss of peace in the cathedral.\nDeath.\nStephen's decision to recognise Henry as his heir was, at the time, not necessarily a final solution to the civil war. Despite the issuing of new currency and administrative reforms, Stephen might potentially have lived for many more years, whilst Henry's position on the continent was far from secure. Although Stephen's son William was unprepared to challenge Henry for the throne in 1153, the situation could well have shifted in subsequent years\u00a0\u2013 there were widespread rumours during 1154 that William planned to assassinate Henry, for example. Historian Graham White describes the treaty of Winchester as a \"precarious peace\", in line with the judgement of most modern historians that the situation in late 1153 was still uncertain and unpredictable.\nCertainly, many problems remained to be resolved, including re-establishing royal authority over the provinces and resolving the complex issue of which barons should control the contested lands and estates after the long civil war. Stephen burst into activity in early 1154, travelling around the kingdom extensively. He began issuing royal writs for the south-west of England once again and travelled to York where he held a major court in an attempt to impress upon the northern barons that royal authority was being reasserted. After a busy summer in 1154, however, Stephen travelled to Dover to meet Thierry, Count of Flanders; some historians believe that the King was already ill and preparing to settle his family affairs. Stephen fell ill with a stomach disease and died on 25 October at the local priory, being buried at Faversham Abbey with his wife Matilda and son Eustace.\nLegacy.\nAftermath.\nAfter Stephen's death, Henry II succeeded to the throne of England. Henry vigorously re-established royal authority in the aftermath of the civil war, dismantling castles and increasing revenues, although several of these trends had begun under Stephen. The destruction of castles under Henry was not as dramatic as once thought, and although he restored royal revenues, the economy of England remained broadly unchanged under both rulers. Stephen's son William was confirmed as the Earl of Surrey by Henry, and prospered under the new regime, with the occasional point of tension with Henry. Stephen's daughter Marie I, Countess of Boulogne, also survived her father; she had been placed in a convent by Stephen, but after his death, she left and married. Stephen's middle son, Baldwin, and second daughter, Matilda, had died before 1147 and were buried at Holy Trinity Priory. Stephen probably had three illegitimate sons, Gervase, Ralph and Americ, by his mistress Damette; Gervase became abbot of Westminster in 1138, but after his father's death he was removed by Henry in 1157 and died shortly afterwards.\nHistoriography.\nMuch of the modern history of Stephen's reign is based on accounts of chroniclers who lived in, or close to, the middle of the 12th century, forming a relatively rich account of the period. All of the main chronicler accounts carry significant regional biases in how they portray the disparate events. Several of the key chronicles were written in the south-west of England, including the \"Gesta Stephani\", or \"Acts of Stephen\", and William of Malmesbury's \"Historia Novella\", or \"New History\". In Normandy, Orderic Vitalis wrote his \"Ecclesiastical History\", covering Stephen's reign until 1141, and Robert of Torigni wrote a later history of the rest of the period. Henry of Huntingdon, who lived in the east of England, produced the \"Historia Anglorum\" that provides a regional account of the reign. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" was past its prime by the time of Stephen but is remembered for its striking account of conditions during \"the Anarchy\". Most of the chronicles carry some bias for or against Stephen, Robert of Gloucester or other key figures in the conflict. Those writing for the church after the events of Stephen's later reign, such as John of Salisbury for example, paint the King as a tyrant due to his argument with the Archbishop of Canterbury; by contrast, clerics in Durham regarded Stephen as a saviour, due to his contribution to the defeat of the Scots at the Battle of the Standard. Later chronicles written during the reign of Henry II were generally more negative: Walter Map, for example, described Stephen as \"a fine knight, but in other respects almost a fool\". A number of charters were issued during Stephen's reign, often giving details of current events or daily routine, and these have become widely used as sources by modern historians.\nHistorians in the \"Whiggish\" tradition that emerged during the Victorian era traced a progressive and universalist course of political and economic development in England over the medieval period. William Stubbs focused on these constitutional aspects of Stephen's reign in his 1874 volume the \"Constitutional History of England\", beginning an enduring interest in Stephen and his reign. Stubbs' analysis, focusing on the disorder of the period, influenced his student John Horace Round to coin the term \"the Anarchy\" to describe the period, a label that, whilst sometimes critiqued, continues to be used today. The late-Victorian scholar Frederic William Maitland also introduced the possibility that Stephen's reign marked a turning point in English legal history\u2014the so-called \"tenurial crisis\".\nStephen remains a popular subject for historical study: David Crouch suggests that after King John he is \"arguably the most written-about medieval king of England\". Modern historians vary in their assessments of Stephen as a king. Historian R. H. C. Davis's influential biography paints a picture of a weak king: a capable military leader in the field, full of activity and pleasant, but \"beneath the surface\u00a0... mistrustful and sly\", with a poor strategic judgement that ultimately undermined his reign. Stephen's lack of sound policy judgement and his mishandling of international affairs, leading to the loss of Normandy and his consequent inability to win the civil war in England, are also highlighted by another of his biographers, David Crouch. Historian and biographer Edmund King, whilst painting a slightly more positive picture than Davis, also concludes that Stephen, while a stoic, pious and genial leader, was also rarely, if ever, his own man, usually relying upon stronger characters such as his wife Matilda and brother Henry. Historian Keith Stringer provides a more positive portrayal of Stephen, arguing that his ultimate failure as king was the result of external pressures on the Norman state, rather than the result of personal failings.\nPopular representations.\nStephen and his reign have been occasionally used in historical fiction. Stephen and his supporters appear in Ellis Peters' historical detective series \"The Cadfael Chronicles\", set between 1137 and 1145. Peters' depiction of Stephen's reign is an essentially local narrative, focused on the town of Shrewsbury and its environs. Peters paints Stephen as a tolerant man and a reasonable ruler, despite his execution of the Shrewsbury defenders after the taking of the city in 1138. In contrast, he is depicted unsympathetically in both Ken Follett's historical novel \"The Pillars of the Earth\" and the TV mini-series adapted from it.\nIssue.\nStephen of Blois married Matilda of Boulogne in 1125. They had five children:\nKing Stephen's illegitimate children by his mistress Damette included:\nGenealogical chart.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Norman English and early Plantagenet monarchs and their relationship with rulers of Western Europe\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28954", "revid": "48537288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28954", "title": "Space Battleship Yamato", "text": "Anime series that started in 1974\n is a Japanese science fiction anime series written by Yoshinobu Nishizaki, directed by manga artist Leiji Matsumoto, and produced by Academy Productions. The series aired in Yomiuri TV from October 6, 1974, to March 30, 1975, totaling up to 26 episodes. It revolves around the character Susumu Kodai (Derek Wildstar in the English version) and an international crew from Earth, tasked during an interstellar war to go into space aboard the space warship \"Yamato,\" derived from the World War II battleship of the same name, in response to a message of aid from the planet Iscandar in order to retrieve a device which is able to reverse the radiation infecting Earth after being bombed by the Gamilas (Gamilons).\n\"Space Battleship Yamato\" is one of the most influential anime series in Japan. Its turn toward serious themes and complex storylines influenced later works in the medium, including \"Gundam\", \"Macross\", and \"Evangelion\", in addition to influencing the style of video games such as \"Space Invaders\".\nDevelopment.\nThe first ideas for what would eventually be \"Space Battleship Yamato\" began in 1973 by producer Yoshinobu Nishizaki, but the project underwent a number of revisions and overhauls before settling on the final design. The team responsible for the creation of \"Space Battleship Yamato\" consisted of Yoshinobu Nishizaki, Keisuke Fujikawa, Eiichi Yamamoto and Aritsune Toyota. It was initially planned to be a tokusatsu, and Nishizaki was inspired to create something set in space after reading \"Methuselah's Children\". Aritsune Toyota offered his 1970 novel as a further source of inspiration for Nishizaki.\nIn 1973, works such as \"The Poseidon Adventure\" and \"Japan Sinks\" were enjoying considerable success. Eiichi Yamamoto believed this was because of the way in which they depicted people being able to survive in extreme circumstances, and this influenced the creation of \"Yamato\". Additionally, he believed that, overall, industrialisation caused people to become more miserable, and \"Yamato\" was designed to show a triumph of humanity and love.\nOriginally intended to be an outer-space variation on \"Lord of the Flies\", the project at first was titled \"Asteroid Ship Icarus\" and had a crew from all over the world journeying through space in a hollowed-out asteroid in search of the planet Iscandar. There was to be much discord among the crew with many of them acting purely out of self-interest and for personal gain. The enemy aliens were originally called Rajendora. The Rajendorians were robots whose exact form was unknown, and it was to be revealed towards the end of the story that the Rajendorians, along with the rest of the life on their home planet, had died over a hundred years ago.\nThe first rough draft of \"Yamato\" came towards the end of summer 1973, where the Yamato (named as such by Nishizaki) was a regular spaceship, that used a large rock as a shell, and the story was notably darker. Heavier emphasis was placed on the character's flaws, who were overall more misanthropic, and only one of them would survive until the end of the series.\nThe production of \"Yamato\" in its conceptual stage was overseen by Eiichi Yamamoto, until 1974, when he had to leave to work on a documentary film. As a replacement, Toshio Masuda, who had worked on \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\", was considered, but had to decline as he had other projects of his own to focus on, though he would become involved in the production of the 1977 film. The role was given to Leiji Matsumoto, who had at an earlier stage declined an offer, due to his desire to have complete creative control. Matsumoto overhauled the story, designing the titular ship after the IJN \"Yamato\", its crew, and the Wave Motion Gun, which came from \"Sexaroid\", an erotic comedy manga written by Matsumoto in 1968.\nIn the earliest stages of production, \"Space Battleship Yamato\" was planned to be 52 episodes in length, before reducing this to 39, and ultimately, 26. The bulk of the cut content centered around Gamilas, who had more characters, and more complex motivations and goals. Additionally, in this earlier stage, the \"Yamato\"'s battles were more closely tied to events in World War II \u2013 for example, the battle near Neptune in the first episode represented Germany circumventing the Maginot Line.\nThe first draft for \"Space Battleship Yamato\" was completed on May 21, 1974. In August, a ten-minute pilot episode was created, with at least nine copies being sent to the relevant organisations, and, after the pilot's success, pre-production of the anime began, with the first episode airing in October that year. The original series contained 26 episodes, following the \"Yamato\"'s voyage out of the Milky Way and back again. A continuing story, it featured the declining health of \"Yamato\"'s Captain Okita (Avatar in the \"Star Blazers\" dub), and the transformation of the brash young orphan Susumu Kodai (Derek Wildstar) into a mature officer, as well as his budding romance with female crewmember Yuki Mori (Nova Forrester). The foreign edits tend to play up the individual characters, while the Japanese original is often more focused on the ship itself. In a speech at the 1995 Anime Expo, series episode director Noboru Ishiguro said low ratings and high production expenses forced producer Yoshinobu Nishizaki to trim down the episode count from the original 39 episodes to only 26. The cut episodes would have introduced Captain Harlock as a new series character.\nStoryline.\nOriginal series.\nIn the year 2199, Earth is threatened by an alien-nation race, known as the Gamilons, which has been bombing Earth for around five years. \nThe last line of defense is at Pluto, where Captain Juzo Okita, alongside Mamoru Kodai, and the last fleet that the Earth Defense Forces has. Gamilon forces ask the Earth Fleet to surrender and in the English version (Star Blazers) Okita tells the Gamilon fleet that they are \"idiots\". Leading the Gamilons to destroy the Earth fleet, except for the Yukikaze, commanded by Mamoru and the Kongou, commanded by Okita, which Mamoru decides to stay behind so Okita can get home safely to Earth, which Okita tries to get Mamoru home with him as well, eventually Okita just flies back to earth, leaving the Yukikaze to get demolished partially.\nWhile the Battle of Pluto was occurring, a spacecraft, neither Terran nor Gamilon flew by Pluto, being noticed by the Kongou's systems. It reached Mars and a capsule launched out of the spacecraft, then the main spacecraft crash landed, which was reported to the two space cadets commanding the Mars center, Susumu Kodai, Mamoru Kodai's younger brother and Daisuke Shima, who flew out of the Mars base and landed near the crash site, where they saw the capsule and a woman who died upon impact outside. In her hand was a voice transmission capsule, which turned out to be from a far away planet known as \"Iscandar\" ruled by Queen Starsha, who was the one who sent the voice capsule. According to the story it also contained plans for an engine called the \"Wave Motion Engine\" that can go at warp speed if timed correctly. It would also be able to shoot heated up energy, at its front end, known as the \"Wave Motion Cannon\". By this point in the series, Earth's radiation was already seeping underground, and it would take an entire year to wipe out the underground cities all of earth were living in. To try to combat this, the EDF, alongside the entire world, started a plan to use an old WWII battleship as the last saving grace of the entire Earth population.\nWhile the Yamato was being rebuilt underground, a scout jet from the Gamilon base on Pluto flew around the Yamato's \"wreckage\", alarms sounded throughout the EDF base, which led to Susumu Kodai and Daisuke Shima flying off to the wreckage without orders. They started fighting the scout plane, which was much faster and more agile than the fighter jet Kodai and Shima were in. Their fighter jet crashed into the ground near the Yamato, and they crossed over a hill and saw the Yamato's wreckage, which was hiding the Space Battleship under the rocks.\nIn episode three, the rebuilt Yamato, still hiding under the wreckage of the old battleship, has to do an emergency launch as the Gamilon base on Pluto sends a missile referred to in Star Blazers as the \"Ultra Menace Missile\". Susumu Kodai and Daisuke Shima are called to the Yamato to test out the systems before the eventual launch. When the crew of the Yamato learn of the danger headed towards the wreckage itself, the Yamato launches and Susumu Kodai, chief of the tactical unit, manages to fire the Yamato's shock cannons at the Ultra Menace Missile. It looked as if the Yamato had been destroyed, but to much of the EDF's surprise, the Yamato came out unscathed, flying through the clouds of the explosion that just happened. In the series, every episode, around 1\u201310 days are taken off the deadline to return home from Iscandar. At this point in time, the Yamato had 364 days left until the human population would die from the radiation.\nAfter the Yamato took off from Earth, it had arrived at the Moon, where the first space warp would occur. In the series, the timing would have to be perfect enough that it hit the middle of going in between the third dimension and the fourth dimension. The warp goes almost perfectly as they arrive at Mars, completing the first of many warps along the mission to Iscandar.\nAfter warping to Mars, it flew by, headed for planet Jupiter, which had a huge magnetic field. By the time it crossed the inter-planetary space between Mars and Jupiter, Jupiter's gravity started pulling the Yamato in. Then, the Yamato fell into a methane sea upon Jupiter's bands of gas and clouds. The Yamato detected a floating continent using infrared technology, but its video panel couldn't show it yet due to the dense clouds and gas on Jupiter. As it fought against the gravity of Jupiter, Susumu Kodai went to check out the floating continent, and was attacked by a Gamilon fighter pilot. After a while it was decided to use the Wave Motion Gun for the first time against the floating continent. The Yamato got into position in front of the floating continent. The gun charged up and fired at the floating continent, destroying it completely, and killing the gamilons on the base.\nOriginal film edition.\nThe series was condensed into a 130-minute-long movie by combining elements from a few key episodes of the first season. Additional animation was created for the movie (such as the scenes on Iscandar) or recycled from the series' test footage (such as the opening sequence). The movie, which was released in Japan on August 6, 1977, was edited down further and dubbed into English in 1978; entitled \"Space Cruiser Yamato\" or simply \"Space Cruiser\", it was only given a limited theatrical release in Europe and Latin America, where it was called ' (\"Star Patrol\", in Brazilian Portuguese) or ' (\"Starship Intrepid\", in Spanish), though it was later released on video in most countries.\nFactions.\nEarth Federation.\nThe Earth Federation or just Earth, is a nation which controls the entirety of planet Earth. It was founded in 2201, after Earth won once the Yamato returned to Earth in late August-early September 2200 (as shown in the original movie).\nHistory.\nBefore the Earth Federation, the United Nations was the main liberation force for Planet Earth during the Earth-Gamilas War, which lasted from 2191 to 2200, after the Battle of Gamilas occurred. It was founded in 1945 after the fall of the Japanese Empire, and lasted until 2201 when it was officially turned into the Earth Federation.\nGreat Gamilas Empire.\nthe Great Gamilas Empire, or just Gamilas is an alien empire located mainly in the Large Magelannic Cloud alongside its twin planet, Iscandar. It is led by Abelt Dessler as Supreme Leader and General Krypt as Prime Minister of Gamilas.\nHistory.\nIn Season 3 of Space Battleship Yamato, it is revealed that the people of Gamilas, came from Planet Galman in which they were brought by presumably Starsha of Iscandar to its sister planet, which became the home for the Gamilas people.\n2200.\nIn 2200, Gamilas was at threat of falling to earth, as around 2 months earlier, at the \"Battle of the Rainbow Star Cluster\" General Erich Domel who was commanding the fleet that was meant to take out the Yamato, got defeated by self-destructing his ship below the Yamato.\nBattle of Gamilas.\nAfter the Battle of the Rainbow Star Cluster, the Yamato was en route to Iscandar, but got caught in a magnetic radio jammer gas, which was beamed by the Gamilas.\nSequels.\n\"Farewell to Space Battleship Yamato\" (1978).\nThe success of the \"Yamato\" movie in Japan led to the production of a second movie that would end the story. Also going by the name \" Yamato\", \"Farewell to Space Battleship Yamato\", set in the year 2201, shows the \"Yamato\" crew going up against the White Comet Empire, a mobile city fortress called Gatlantis, from the Andromeda Galaxy. A titanic space battle results in the crew going out on a suicide mission to save humanity. The film has been considered as a non-canonical, alternate timeline.\n\"Space Battleship Yamato II\" (1978).\nViewer dissatisfaction with the ending of \"Arrivederci Yamato\" prompted the production of a second \"Yamato\" television season which retconned the film and presented a slightly different plot against Z\u014ddah (Prince Zordar in the \"Star Blazers\" dub) and his Comet Empire, and ended without killing off the \"Yamato\" or its primary characters. Like \"Arrivederci\", the story is set in the year 2201, and expands the film story to 26 episodes. This second season featured additional plots such as a love story between Teresa (Trelaina) and \"Yamato\" crew member Daisuke Shima (Mark Venture), and an onboard antagonism between Kodai and Saito (Knox), leader of a group of space marines.\nFootage from \"Arrivederci Yamato\" was reused in the second season, particularly in the opening titles. The sequence of the \"Yamato\" launching from water was also reused in two of the subsequent movies.\n\"Yamato: The New Voyage\" (1979).\nThe television movie \"Yamato: The New Voyage\" (aka \"Bon Voyage Yamato\"), came next, featuring a new enemy, the Black Nebula Empire. The story opens in late 2201. In the film, later modified into a theatrical movie, Dessler sees his home world, Gamilas, destroyed by the grey-skinned aliens, and its twin planet Iscandar next in line for invasion. He finds an eventual ally in the \"Yamato\", then on a training mission under deputy captain Kodai.\n\"Be Forever Yamato\" (1980).\nThe theatrical movie \"Be Forever Yamato\", set in the year 2202, sees the Black Nebula Empire launch a powerful weapon at Earth, a hyperon bomb which will annihilate humanity if they resist a full-scale invasion. The \"Yamato\", under new captain, Yamanami, travels to the aliens' home galaxy only to discover what appears to be a future Earth\u2014defeated and ruled by the enemy. Appearing in this film is Sasha, the daughter of Queen Starsha of Iscandar and Mamoru Kodai (Susumu's older brother).\n\"Space Battleship Yamato III\" (1980).\nFollowing these movies, a third season of the television series was produced, broadcast on Japanese television in 1980. Its date was not mentioned in the broadcast, but design documents, as well as anime industry publications, cited the year 2205 as the time it takes place. In the story, the Sun is hit by a stray proton missile from a nearby battle between forces of the Galman Empire and Bolar Federation. This missile greatly accelerates nuclear fusion in the Sun, and humanity must either evacuate to a new home or find a means of preventing a supernova. During the course of the story, it is learned that the people of the Galman Empire are actually the forebears of Dessler and the Gamilas race. Dessler and the remnants of his space fleet have found and liberated Galman from the Bolar Federation. Originally conceived as a 52-episode story, funding cuts meant the season had to be truncated to 25 episodes, with a corresponding loss of overall story development. This third season was adapted into English several years after the original \"Star Blazers\" run and, to the dissatisfaction of fans, used different voice actors than the earlier seasons.\n\"Final Yamato\" (1983).\nPremiering in Japanese theaters on March 19, 1983, \"Final Yamato\" reunites the crew one more time to combat the threat of the Denguilu, a militaristic alien civilization that intends to use the water planet, Aquarius, to flood Earth and resettle there, having lost their home planet to a galactic collision. Captain Okita, who was found to be in cryogenic sleep since the first season, returns to command the \"Yamato\" and sacrifices himself to stop the Denguili's plan. Kodai and Yuki also get married.\nThe story is set in the year 2203, contradicting earlier assumptions that its predecessor, \"Yamato III\", took place in 2205.\n\"Yamato: Resurrection\" (2009).\nAlthough \"New Space Battleship Yamato\" was abandoned, Nishizaki promptly began work on a new movie titled , set after the original series, while Matsumoto planned a new \"Yamato series\". However, additional legal conflicts stalled both projects until August 2008, when Nishizaki announced plans for the release of his film on December 12, 2009.\nSet 17 years after the events of \"Final Yamato\", \"Resurrection\" brings together some members of the \"Yamato\" crew, who lead Earth's inhabitants to resettle in a far-flung star system after a black hole which will destroy the Solar System in three months is discovered.\nSpin-offs.\n\"Yamato 2520\" (1995).\nIn the mid-1990s, Nishizaki attempted to create a sequel to \"Yamato\", set hundreds of years after the original. \"Yamato 2520\" was to chronicle the adventures of the eighteenth starship to bear the name, and its battle against the Seiren Federation. Much of the continuity established in the original series (including the destruction of Earth's moon) is ignored in this sequel.\nIn place of Leiji Matsumoto, American artist Syd Mead, known for works such as \"\u2200 Gundam\", and \"Blade Runner\", provided the conceptual art.\nDue to the bankruptcy of Nishizaki's company West Cape Corp (former Academy Productions), and legal disputes with Matsumoto over the ownership of the \"Yamato\" copyrights, the series was never finished and only three episodes (out of ten) were produced and released on home video.\n\"Great Yamato No. Zero\" (2004).\n is the second original animated video based on \"Space Battleship Yamato\". It was released in five episodes from 2004 to 2007. Its first episode was temporarily available for streaming online in 2007. Unable to continue his plans for the \"Great Yamato\" project after a copyright shift in March 2002, Leiji Matsumoto radically redesigned the ship and staffed it with a completely new crew starting with modified versions of his \"Great Yamato\" characters.\nThe story begins in 3199, when a mighty enemy attacks the Milky Way from a neighbouring galaxy, and defeats the Milky Way Alliance, reducing them to just six fleets. After the Alliance headquarters is destroyed, and when the collapse of the central Milky Way Alliance is imminent, the \"Great Yamato \"Zero\"\" embarks on a mission to assist the Milky Way Alliance in one last great battle.\n\"New Space Battleship Yamato\" (2004, cancelled).\nIn March 2002, a Tokyo court ruled that Yoshinobu Nishizaki legally owned the \"Yamato\" copyrights. Nishizaki and Matsumoto eventually settled, and Nishizaki pushed ahead with developing a new Yamato television series. Project proposals for a 26-episode television series were drawn up in early 2004, but no further work was done with Tohoku Shinsha not backing the project. American series expert Tim Eldred was able to secure a complete package of art, mecha designs, and story outline at an auction over Japanese store Mandarake in April 2014.\nSet 20 years after \"Final Yamato\", the series would have shown Susumu Kodai leading a salvage operation for the remains of the \"Yamato\". The ship is rebuilt as the Earth Defense Force builds a second Space Battleship Yamato to combat the Balbard Empire, an alien race that has erected a massive honeycombed cage called Ru Sak Gar over Earth, in a bid to stop the human race's spacefaring efforts. A feature film to be released after the series ended would have featured the original space battleship fighting the Balbards' attempt to launch a black hole at Earth. Kodai, Yuki, and Sanada are the only original series characters who would have returned in the series.\nRemakes.\nLive-action film (2010).\nReleased on December 1, 2010, \"Space Battleship Yamato\" is the franchise's first live-action film. Directed by Takashi Yamazaki, the movie stars Takuya Kimura as Susumu Kodai and Meisa Kuroki as Yuki. It was revealed originally that the plot would be based on that of the 1974 series. However, an official trailer released during June 2010 on Japanese television has also shown elements from the series' second season (1978). The film had a budget of over \u00a52 billion, and was the fourth highest grossing Japanese live-action film of the year, and the 31st highest grossing Japanese film of all time at the time of release.\n\"Yamato 2199\" (2012).\nDebuting in Japanese cinemas on April 7, 2012, \"2199\" is a remake of the 1974 series. Yutaka Izubuchi serves as supervising director, with character designs by Nobuteru Yuki, and Junichiro Tamamori and Makoto Kobayashi in charge of mecha and conceptual designs. The series is a joint project of Xebec and AIC. Hideaki Anno designed the new series' opening sequence.\n\"Yamato 2202\" (2017).\nThe sequel to the first remake heptalogy, and debuting in Japanese cinemas on February 25, 2017, \"2202\" is a remake of the second series, with Nobuyoshi Habara as director and Harutoshi Fukui as writer. Most of the staff and original cast from the first remake were brought back to the project. It is also the final animated project by then-defunct Xebec, returning to animate the series.\n\"Yamato 2205\" (2021).\nThe sequel to the second remake heptalogy, it debuted in Japanese cinemas on October 8, 2021. \"2205\" is a remake of the film \"\". Kenji Yasuda directed the film while Harutoshi Fukui returned as writer. It is the first \"Yamato\" work animated by Satelight.\n\"Be Forever Yamato: Rebel 3199\" (2024).\nA sequel in the remake series, \"3199\" was announced in January 2022 and is a remake of both \"Be Forever Yamato\" and \"Space Battleship Yamato III\". It will premiere as seven films, beginning on July 19, 2024. Naomichi Yamato is directing with Fukui returning as writer. The series is animated by Studio Mother with Satelight assisting.\nTimeline(s).\nWith the retelling of \"Arrivederci Yamato\" as the open-ended \"Yamato II\" television series (ending in late 2201), \"Arrivederci\" was redesignated as a discardable, alternate timeline. The follow-on film, \"Yamato: The New Voyage\", took place in late 2201; and its successor, \"Be Forever Yamato\", in early 2202. \"Yamato III\" was commonly believed to be set in 2205 (several printed publications used this date, although it was never stated in the show's broadcast). But the following film, \"Final Yamato\", was set in 2203. The opening narration of \"Final\" mentioned the Bolar/Galman conflict, implying that the date for \"Yamato III\" was to be regarded as some time between 2202 and 2203 (making for an unrealistic and compressed timeline).\nIt is not known if this change was due to the lackluster response to \"Yamato III\", the production staff's dissatisfaction with the truncated series (additionally, Nishizaki and Matsumoto had limited involvement with it), or a mere oversight.\nIn 2220, the ship is rebuilt following the events of \"Final Yamato\". The new captain of the ship is Susumu Kodai, who was the main character in the previous movies. It is stated in \"Space Battleship Yamato: Resurrection\" that it is set 17 years after \"Final Yamato\".\nManga.\n\"Space Battleship Yamato\" (1974).\nLeiji Matsumoto had written adaptations of \"Space Battleship Yamato\", published in Akita Shoten's\n\"B\u014dken \u014c\" magazine from November 1974 issue (released on October 1) to May 1975 issue (published on April 1) and collected into one volume, and \"Farewell to Space Battleship Yamato\", published from July 1978 issue (released on June 1) to December 1979 issue (published on November 1) and collected into two volumes. Also included in the third volume is the gaiden manga \"Eternal Story of Jura\", originally published in 1976 in Akita Shoten's \"Playcomic\" periodical.\nSeven Seas Entertainment licensed the manga in 2017 and released it in English as hardcover omnibus \"Space Battleship Yamato: The Classic Collection\" on April 9, 2019.\n\"Great Yamato\" (2000).\n is a manga created by Leiji Matsumoto during his tenure as a copyright holder for \"Space Battleship Yamato\" (1998\u20132002). It was published in Shogakukan's monthly magazine \"Gotta Comics\" from February 2000 to October 2001 and partially collected into two volumes. It was set in the year 3199 and brought together the distant descendants of the Yamato crew to lift off in a much bigger version of the original ship. In 2001 Matsumoto, Columbia Records, and composer Hiroshi Miyagawa released a music album \"Symphonic Suite Great Yamato\". In early 2002 Matsumoto announced his intentions to create an anime titled \"The Great Galaxy Series: The Tale of Great Yamato 7vs7\". But \"Great Yamato\" was cut short when a court order in Japan blocked Matsumoto's further use of the copyright in March 2002.\nVideo games.\nArcade game.\n\"Space Battleship Yamato\" was a 1985 Japanese exclusive Laserdisc video game designed by Taito which was based on the television series of the same name. \"Game Machine\" listed \"Space Battleship Yamato\" on their August 1, 1985 issue as being the second most-successful upright/cockpit arcade unit of the month.\nGame Boy game.\nReleased in 1992 for the Game Boy, \"Space Battleship Yamato\" is a turn-based strategy game, with the player fighting against Dessler. The player can move a few places on the battlefield at a time, and, if they encounter an enemy, it will start a shoot 'em up section that they must complete without losing all their \"Cosmo Tigers\" in order to advance.\n\"The Distant Planet Iscandar\".\nReleased in 1999 for the PlayStation, the game's story is based on original \"Yamato\" series, but incorporates events from Leiji Matsumoto's manga. The game requires the player to manage the Yamato, and its crew, flying the ship, attacking enemies, and using individual crewmen to invade enemy territory.\n\"Farewell to Space Battleship Yamato, Soldiers of Love\".\nReleased in May 2000 for the PlayStation, this game is based on the events of \"Farewell to Space Battleship Yamato\" and \"Space Battleship Yamato II\". It features the same basic gameplay as \"The Faraway Planet Iscandar\", but allows for a branching story, with events coming from either \"Farewell to Space Battleship Yamato\" or \"Space Battleship Yamato II\".\n\"The Tracks of Heroes\".\nReleased in September 2000 for the PlayStation, this game is an original series fan disc based on the Leiji Matsumoto's 1976 manga \"Eternal Story of Jura\".\n\"Reminiscences of Iscandar\".\nThe first PlayStation 2 \"Yamato\" game, released in 2004, \"Reminiscences of Iscandar\" is more action-oriented than previous titles, focusing more on combat between the Yamato and Gamilas, rather than micromanaging the crew, though it is heavy on dialogue and cutscenes, which make up the majority of the content of the game.\n\"Counterattack of the Dark Nebula\".\nA March 2005 game, and the first \"Yamato\" game to be a third-person shooter, but still offers a branching story like the other games. It is the second in the PS2 trilogy of \"Yamato\" games.\n\"Collapse of the Double Galaxy\".\nAn April 2005 game, and the third in the PS2 trilogy of \"Yamato\" games.\nTyping games.\nThree separate \"Yamato\" typing games have been released \u2013 \"Typing Wave-Motion Gun\" (2000), \"Typing Warp\" (2001), and \"Typing Dispersion Wave-Motion Gun\" (2001).\nPachinko games.\nThree pachinko games for \"Space Battleship Yamato\" have been created, released in 2007, 2009, and 2013.\n\"Space Battleship Yamato: Voyagers of Tomorrow\".\n\"Space Battleship Yamato: Voyagers of Tomorrow\" is a browser game on the G123 platform based on the remake series and released in 2023.\nMerchandise.\nDue to its extensive financial success, \"Space Battleship Yamato\" has since its release seen a long line of merchandise.\nStarting in 1974, many Yamato-themed products have been sold, including clothing, tableware, stationery, and models of the characters, with the \"Cosmo Tigers\" and \"Yamato\" itself receiving particular attention. Additionally, models of Dessler's fleet were available, and at the time it was uncommon for the villain's ships or mecha to be sold. Bandai was responsible for most of the merchandising, and their choice to sponsor \"Space Battleship Yamato\" at such an early stage of its production is considered influential in the company's financial success.\nBandai produced an extensive number of models of the \"Yamato\", in a variety of sizes, the largest, and most elaborate one being a 70\u00a0cm (27.5 inch) model released in 2007. The ship comes with a remote control, designed to look like the Wave-Motion Gun's pistol grip, with which the \"Yamato's\" shutters, main and auxiliary guns, pulse lasers, and Wave-Motion Gun can all be interacted with. The ship was sold for \u00a547,250 ($450).\nLegacy and impact.\nInitially, \"Space Battleship Yamato\" was ignored \u2013 the original 1974 anime was forced to halve its episode count due to low ratings and viewership. However, with the release of the 1977 film, it had a surge in popularity, and ultimately achieved a cult status. During the original broadcast, despite the general lack of interest, Leiji Matsumoto received a \"very surprising\" amount of fan mail from women who had watched the show, which came as a surprise due to the fact he had intended for it to be watched mostly by a male audience.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Two or three months after the broadcast started, fans began to make frequent appearances at the studio. There were enthusiastic girls who came by plane from Kyushu and we gave them cels and background paintings as souvenirs because they had taken such great pains. Those cels now have the same street value as drugs, but in those days they were just a waste of space.\u2014\u200a\nPrior to the release of \"Yamato\" in 1974, anime was called \"terebi manga\" (TV manga). The success of \"Yamato\", both because of its tone and themes that were ambitious for an anime at that time, and the fact it was an original work, made it influential in the move towards the term anime.\nCultural impact.\n\"Space Battleship Yamato\" is one of the most influential anime series in Japan. Its turn towards more serious themes and complex storylines influenced future works in the sci-fi and mecha genre, including \"Gundam\", \"Evangelion\", and \"Macross\".\n\"Yamato\" would go on to influence many later anime, including \"Mobile Suit Gundam\" and \"Neon Genesis Evangelion\". Its popularity subsequently lead to various parodies and references, such as in \"Sgt. Frog\", \"Haruhi Suzumiya\" and \"Space Battleship Tiramisu\".\nHideaki Anno has ranked \"Yamato\" as his favorite anime and credited it with sparking his interest in anime. \"Yamato\" was also the first anime series or movie to win the Seiun Award, a feat not repeated until the film \"Nausica\u00e4 of the Valley of the Wind\" (1984).\nThe later 1977 film \"Star Wars\" bears a number of similarities to the original 1974 \"Yamato\" series. For example, both are space opera works with militant empires, star ships and space battles; the robot R2D2 bears a strong resemblance to Analyzer in \"Yamato\", in terms of both design and narrative function; and both works involve ship design blue-prints which are delivered by the female leads. Several critics have suggested that \"Yamato\" may have influenced \"Star Wars\", though George Lucas did not mention it among his Japanese influences (such as Akira Kurosawa's samurai films).\n\"Yamato\" also had an impact on video games. It was cited as an inspiration behind the influential shoot 'em up game \"Space Invaders\". Game designer Takashi Nishiyama also credits the Wave Motion Gun as the origin of the Hadouken move in the \"Street Fighter\" series.\nCharacters and themes.\nThe \"Space Battleship Yamato\" series generally involves themes of brave sacrifice, noble enemies, and respect for heroes lost in the line of duty. This can be seen as early as the second episode of the first season, which recounts the defeat of the original battleship \"Yamato\" while sailors and pilots from both sides salute her as she sinks (this scene was cut from the English dub, but later included on the \"Star Blazers\" DVD release). The movies spend much time showing the crew visiting monuments to previous missions and recalling the bravery of their fallen comrades. Dessler, the enemy defeated in the first season and left without a home or a people, recognizes that his foes are fighting for the same things he fought for and, eventually, becomes an important and loyal ally to Earth.\nEnglish-language title.\nFor many years, English-language releases of the anime bore the title \"Space Cruiser Yamato\". This romanization has appeared in Japanese publications because Nishizaki, a sailing enthusiast who owned a cruiser yacht, ordered that this translation be used out of love for his boat. However, in reference to naval nomenclature, it is technically inaccurate, as means \"battleship\" and not \"cruiser\" (which in Japanese would be ). Leiji Matsumoto's manga adaptation was usually referred to as \"Cosmoship Yamato\".\n\"Star Blazers\" (1979) is a heavily edited dubbed version for the United States market produced by Westchester Film Corporation. Voyager Entertainment released DVD volumes and comic adaptations of the anime years later.\nContemporary \"Yamato\" releases, including the Voyager Entertainment DVD and Seven Seas Entertainment release of the manga, are marketed either as \"Star Blazers\" or \"Space Battleship Yamato\".\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28957", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28957", "title": "Southern blot", "text": "DNA analysis technique\nSouthern blot is a method used for detection and quantification of a specific DNA sequence in DNA samples. This method is used in molecular biology. Briefly, purified DNA from a biological sample (such as blood or tissue) is digested with restriction enzymes, and the resulting DNA fragments are separated by electrophoresis using an electric current to move them through a sieve-like gel or matrix, which allows smaller fragments to move faster than larger fragments. The DNA fragments are transferred out of the gel or matrix onto a solid membrane, which is then exposed to a DNA probe labeled with a radioactive, fluorescent, or chemical tag. The tag allows any DNA fragments containing complementary sequences with the DNA probe sequence to be visualized within the Southern blot.\nThe Southern blotting combines the transfer of electrophoresis-separated DNA fragments to a filter membrane in a process called blotting, and the subsequent fragment detection by probe hybridization.\nThe method is named after the British biologist Edwin Southern, who first published it in 1975. Other blotting methods (i.e., western blot, northern blot, eastern blot, southwestern blot) that employ similar principles, but using RNA or protein, have later been named for compass directions as a sort of pun from Southern's name. As the label is eponymous, Southern is capitalized, as is conventional of proper nouns. The names for other blotting methods may follow this convention, by analogy.\nHistory.\nSouthern invented Southern blot after combining three innovations. The first one is the restriction endonucleases, which were developed at Johns Hopkins University by Tom Kelly and Hamilton Smith. Those restriction endonucleases are used to cut the DNA at a specific sequence. Kenneth and Noreen Murray introduced this technique as Southern. The second innovation is the gel electrophoresis that is based on separation of mixtures of DNA, RNA, or proteins according to molecular size, which was also developed at Johns Hopkins University, by Daniel Nathans and Kathleen Danna in 1971. The third innovation is the blotting-through method which was developed by Frederick Sanger, when he transferred RNA molecules to DEAE paper. Southern blot was invented in 1973 but it was not published until 1975. Although it was published later the technique was disseminated when Southern introduced the Southern blot technique to a scientist at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory called Michael Mathews by drawing this technique on a paper.\nMethod.\nThe genomic DNA is digested with either one or more than one restriction enzyme, then the DNA fragments are size-fractionated by gel electrophoresis. Before the DNA fragments are transferred to a solid membrane which is either nylon or nitrocellulose membrane they are first denatured by alkaline treatment. After the DNA fragments are immobilized on the membrane, prehybridization methods are used to reduce non-specific probe binding. Then the fragments on the membrane are hybridized with either radiolabeled or nonradioactive labeled DNA, RNA, or oligonucleotide probes that are complementary to the target DNA sequence. Then detection methods are used to visualize the target DNA. \nInterpretation of results.\nHybridization of the probe to a specific DNA fragment on the filter membrane indicates that this fragment contains a DNA sequence that is complementary to the probe.\nThe transfer step of the DNA from the electrophoresis gel to a membrane permits easy binding of the labeled hybridization probe to the size-fractionated DNA. It also allows for the fixation of the target-probe hybrids, required for analysis by autoradiography or other detection methods.\nSouthern blots performed with restriction enzyme-digested genomic DNA may be used to determine the number of sequences (e.g., gene copies) in a genome. A probe that hybridizes only to a single DNA segment that has not been cut by the restriction enzyme will produce a single band on a Southern blot, whereas multiple bands will likely be observed when the probe hybridizes to several highly similar sequences (e.g., those that may be the result of sequence duplication). To improve specificity and reduce hybridization of the probe to sequences that are less than 100% identical, the hybridization parameters may be changed (for instance, by raising the hybridization temperature or lowering the salt content). Nylon membrane is more durable and has higher binding capacity to DNA fragments than nitrocellulose membrane, so the DNA fragments will be more fixed to the membrane even when the membrane is incubated in high temperatures. In addition, compared to the nitrocellulose membrane which requires a high ionic strength buffer to bind the DNA fragments to the membrane, nylon charged membranes use buffers with very low ionic strength to transfer even small fragments of DNA of about 50 bp to the membrane, usually the DNA to be transferred is separated by polyacrylamide gel. In the blotting step the most efficient method to transfer the DNA from the gel to the membrane is the vacuum transfer since it transfers the DNA more rapidly and quantitatively."}
{"id": "28961", "revid": "48614100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28961", "title": "Standard-gauge railway", "text": "Railway track gauge (1435 mm)\nA standard-gauge railway is a railway with a track gauge of . The standard gauge is also called Stephenson gauge (after George Stephenson), international gauge, UIC gauge, uniform gauge, normal gauge in Europe, and SGR in East Africa. It is the most widely used track gauge around the world, with about 55% of the lines in the world using it.\nAll high-speed rail lines use standard gauge except those in Russia, Finland, Uzbekistan, and some line sections in Spain. The distance between the inside edges of the heads of the rails is defined to be 1,435\u00a0mm except in the United States, Canada, and on some heritage British lines, where it is defined in U.S. customary/British Imperial units as exactly \"four feet eight and one half inches\", which is equivalent to 1,435.1mm.\nHistory.\nAs railways developed and expanded, one of the key issues was the track gauge (the distance, or width, between the inner sides of the rail heads) to be used, as the wheels of the rolling stock (locomotives, cars, etc.) must match this distance. Different railways used different gauges, and where track of different gauges met \u2013 a \"gauge break\" \u2013 loads had to be unloaded from one set of rail cars and reloaded onto another, a time-consuming and expensive process. The result was the adoption throughout a large part of the world of a \"standard gauge\" of , allowing interconnectivity and interoperability.\nOrigins.\nA popular legend that has circulated since at least 1937 traces the origin of the gauge even further back than the coalfields of northern England, pointing to the evidence of rutted roads marked by chariot wheels dating from the Roman Empire. Snopes categorised this legend as \"false\", but commented that it \"is perhaps more fairly labeled as 'Partly true, but for trivial and unremarkable reasons.'\" The historical tendency to place the wheels of horse-drawn vehicles around apart probably derives from the width needed to fit a carthorse in between the shafts. Research, however, has been undertaken to support the hypothesis that \"the origin of the standard gauge of the railway might result from an interval of wheel ruts of prehistoric ancient carriages\".\nIn addition, while road-travelling vehicles are typically measured from the outermost portions of the wheel rims, it became apparent that for vehicles travelling on rails, having main wheel flanges that fit \"inside\" the rails is better, thus the minimum distance between the wheels (and, by extension, the inside faces of the rail heads) was the important one.\nA standard gauge for horse railways never existed, but rough groupings were used; in the north of England none was less than . Wylam colliery's system, built before 1763, was , as was John Blenkinsop's Middleton Railway; the old plateway was relaid to so that Blenkinsop's engine could be used. Others were (in Beamish) or (in Bigges Main (in Wallsend), Kenton, and Coxlodge).\nStone block sleepers.\nVery early tramways used pairs of stone blocks which meant that the feet of horses didn't trip over obstacles in the middle of the track. However timber sleepers,\nwhich could cause the feet of horses to trip, held the gauge better.\nPioneer gauges.\nEnglish railway pioneer George Stephenson spent much of his early engineering career working for the coal mines of County Durham. He favoured () for wagonways in Northumberland and Durham, and used it on his Killingworth line. The Hetton and Springwell wagonways also used this gauge.\nStephenson's Stockton and Darlington railway (S&amp;DR) was built primarily to transport coal from mines near Shildon to the port at Stockton-on-Tees. Opening in 1825, the initial gauge of was set to accommodate the existing gauge of hundreds of horse-drawn chaldron wagons that were already in use on the wagonways in the mines. The railway used this gauge for 15 years before a change was made, debuting around 1850, to the gauge. The historic Mount Washington Cog Railway, the world's first mountain-climbing rack railway, is still in operation in the 21st century, and has used the earlier gauge since its inauguration in 1868.\nGeorge Stephenson introduced the gauge (including a belated extra of free movement to reduce binding on curves) for the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, authorised in 1826 and opened 30 September 1830. The extra half inch was not regarded at first as very significant, and some early trains ran on both gauges daily without compromising safety.\nThe success of this project led to Stephenson and his son Robert being employed to engineer several other larger railway projects. Thus the gauge became widespread and dominant in Britain. Robert was reported to have said that if he had had a second chance to choose a gauge, he would have chosen one wider than . \"I would take a few inches more, but a very few\".\nDuring the \"gauge war\" with the Great Western Railway, standard gauge was called \"narrow gauge\", in contrast to the Great Western's broad gauge. The modern use of the term \"narrow gauge\" for gauges less than standard did not arise for many years, until the first such locomotive-hauled passenger railway, the Ffestiniog Railway, was built.\nGauge in Ireland.\nIreland built its first railway with standard 1435mm gauge, but switched to 1600mm gauge after a decree from the Board of Trade.\nEarly Example.\nAn early example of 1435mm gauge was at Willington Colliery, a 3-mile line running to the River Tyne. \nAdoption.\nIn 1845, in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, a Royal Commission on Railway Gauges reported in favour of a standard gauge. The subsequent Gauge Act ruled that new passenger-carrying railways in Great Britain should be built to a standard gauge of , and those in Ireland to a new standard gauge of . In Great Britain, Stephenson's gauge was chosen on the grounds that existing lines of this gauge were eight times longer than those of the rival (later ) gauge adopted principally by the Great Western Railway. It allowed the broad-gauge companies in Great Britain to continue with their tracks and expand their networks within the \"Limits of Deviation\" and the exceptions defined in the Act.\nAfter an intervening period of mixed-gauge operation (tracks were laid with three rails), the Great Western Railway finally completed the conversion of its network to standard gauge in 1892. In North East England, some early lines in colliery (coal mining) areas were , while in Scotland some early lines were . The British gauges converged starting from 1846 as the advantages of equipment interchange became increasingly apparent. By the 1890s, the entire network was converted to standard gauge.\nThe Royal Commission made no comment about small lines narrower than standard gauge (to be called \"narrow gauge\"), such as the Ffestiniog Railway. Thus it permitted a future multiplicity of narrow gauges in the UK. It also made no comments about future gauges in British colonies, which allowed various gauges to be adopted across the colonies.\nParts of the United States, mainly in the Northeast, adopted the same gauge, because some early trains were purchased from Britain. The American gauges converged, as the advantages of equipment interchange became increasingly apparent. Notably, all the broad gauge track in the South was converted to \"almost standard\" gauge over the course of two days beginning on 31 May 1886. \"See\" Track gauge in the United States.\nIn continental Europe, France and Belgium adopted a gauge (measured between the midpoints of each rail's profile) for their early railways. The gauge between the interior edges of the rails (the measurement adopted from 1844) differed slightly between countries, and even between networks within a country (for example, to in France). The first tracks in Austria and in the Netherlands had other gauges ( in Austria for the Donau Moldau line and in the Netherlands for the Hollandsche IJzeren Spoorweg-Maatschappij), but for interoperability reasons (the first rail service between Paris and Berlin began in 1849, first Chaix timetable) Germany adopted standard gauges, as did most other European countries.\nThe modern method of measuring rail gauge was agreed in the first Berne rail convention of 1886.\nEarly railways by gauge.\nInitially standard gauge.\nSeveral lines were initially built as standard gauge but were later converted to another gauge for cost or for compatibility reasons.\nNon-rail use.\nSeveral states in the United States had laws requiring road vehicles to have a consistent gauge to allow them to follow ruts in the road. Those gauges were similar to railway standard gauge.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28962", "revid": "46907086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28962", "title": "Sodium laureth sulfate", "text": "Surfactant/detergent\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nSodium lauryl ether sulfate (SLES), usually contracted as sodium laureth sulfate, and also called sodium alkylethersulfate, is an anionic detergent and surfactant found in many personal care products (soaps, shampoos, toothpaste, etc.) and for industrial uses. SLES is an inexpensive and very effective foaming agent. SLES, sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS), ammonium lauryl sulfate (ALS), and sodium pareth sulfate are surfactants that are used in many cosmetic products for their cleaning and emulsifying properties. It is derived from palm kernel oil or coconut oil. In herbicides, it is used as a surfactant to improve absorption of the herbicidal chemicals and reduces time the product takes to be rainfast, when enough of the herbicidal agent will be absorbed.\nThe chemical formula for this family of surfactants is . Sometimes the number represented by \"n\" is specified in the name, for example laureth-2 sulfate. The product is however heterogeneous in that the number of ethoxyl groups, where \"n\" is the mean. Laureth-3 sulfate is the most common one in commercial products. Compared to the parent sodium lauryl sulfate (), SLES is more surface-active owing to the presence of the ethoxy groups.\nProduction.\nSLES is prepared by ethoxylation of dodecyl alcohol, which is produced industrially from palm kernel oil or coconut oil. The resulting ethoxylate is converted to a half ester of sulfuric acid, which is neutralized by conversion to the sodium salt. The related surfactant sodium lauryl sulfate or SLS (also known as sodium dodecyl sulfate or SDS) is produced similarly, but without the ethoxylation step. SLS and ammonium lauryl sulfate (ALS) are commonly used alternatives to SLES in consumer products.\nEnvironmental impacts.\nSLES is toxic to aquatic animals. Low concentrations can cause severe effects and even death in fish.\nSafety.\nSLES does not induce any adverse responses in any toxicology testing. SLES is a skin and eye irritant but not a sensitizer.\nSLES may retain trace amounts of the probable human carcinogen 1,4-dioxane, an unintended chemical by-product formed during the ethoxylation and subsequent sulfonation steps used to synthesize it. Since the presence of 1,4-dioxane was recognized, many manufacturers have implemented purification processes, such as vacuum and steam stripping, to reduce its concentration in finished products.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28965", "revid": "28968450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28965", "title": "Saraswati River (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "28967", "revid": "47505216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28967", "title": "Simpson Desert", "text": "Desert in Central Australia\nThe Simpson Desert is a large area of dry, red sandy plain and dunes in the Northern Territory, South Australia and Queensland in central Australia. It is the fourth-largest Australian desert, with an area of .\nThe Wangkangurru Yarluyandi people know this area as Munga-Thirri.\nThe desert is underlain by the Great Artesian Basin, one of the largest inland drainage areas in the world. Water from the basin rises to the surface at numerous natural springs, including Dalhousie Springs, and at bores drilled along stock routes, or during petroleum exploration. As a result of exploitation by such bores, the flow of water to springs has been steadily decreasing in recent years. It is also part of the Lake Eyre basin.\nThe Simpson Desert is an erg that contains the world's longest parallel sand dunes. These north-south oriented dunes are static, held in position by vegetation. They vary in height from in the west to around on the eastern side. The largest dune, Nappanerica or Big Red, is in height.\nHistory.\nAboriginal history.\nAboriginal peoples have lived in the Simpson Desert for at least 5000 years and continue to do so today. However, when Europeans came to the area in the late 19th century, they thought that it was an uninhabitable desert that wasn't suitable for human life. The Lower Southern Arrernte and Eastern Arrernte communities inhabited the western regions, while the Karangura and Wanggamala resided in the east. The Wangkangurru people lived in the Simpson Desert using hand-dug wells called \"mikiri\" from long before European colonization until the Federation Drought. The Aboriginal peoples in the Simpson Desert diet before colonization consisted of breads and seed patties made out of Nardoo (\"Marsilea drummondii)\" and Pigweed (\"Aizoon quadrifidum)\" seeds. They also hunted game as well, with there being a variety of fauna to hunt such as kangaroos, wallabies, bandicoots, hopping mice, rats native to the area, lizards, snakes, and dingoes.\nPost-colonisation.\nExplorer Charles Sturt, who visited the region from 1844 to 1846, was the first European to see the desert. In 1880, Augustus Poeppel, a surveyor with the South Australian Survey Department, determined the border between Queensland and South Australia to the west of Haddon Corner, and in doing so, marked the corner point where the States of Queensland and South Australia meet the Northern Territory. After he returned to Adelaide, the links in his surveyor's chain were found to have been stretched. Poeppel's border post was too far west by 300 m. In 1884, surveyor Larry Wells moved the post to its proper position on the eastern bank of Lake Poeppel. The tristate border is now known as Poeppel Corner. In January 1886, surveyor David Lindsay ventured into the desert from the western edge, in the process discovering and documenting, with the help of a Wangkangurru Aboriginal man, 9 native wells, and travelling as far east as the Queensland/Northern Territory border.\nIn 1936, Ted Colson became the first nonindigenous person to cross the desert in its entirety, riding camels. The name Simpson Desert was coined by Cecil Madigan, after Alfred Allen Simpson, an Australian industrialist, philanthropist, and geographer, and president of the South Australian branch of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia. Mr Simpson was the owner of the Simpson washing machine company.\nIn September 1962, geologist Reg Sprigg, his wife Griselda, and their two children completed the first vehicular crossing of the desert.\nIn 1980, Bob Beer became the first person to run across the Simpson. Beer ran 420\u00a0km across the desert in 6.5 days, starting at Alka Seltzer Bore, South Australia and finishing at Birdsville, Queensland. A documentary was made about this trip called \u201cThe Runner\u201d.\nIn 1984, Dennis Bartel was the first white man to successfully walk solo and unsupported west-to-east across the Simpson, 390\u00a0km in 24 days, relying on old Aboriginal wells for water. In 2006, Lucas Trihey was the first nonindigenous person to walk across the desert through the geographical centre away from vehicle tracks and unsupported. He carried all his equipment in a two-wheeled cart, and crossed from East Bore on the western edge of the desert to Birdsville in the east. In 2008, Michael Giacometti completed the first, and only, east-to-west walk across the Simpson Desert. Starting at Bedourie in Queensland, he walked solo and unsupported, towing all his equipment, food, and water in a two-wheeled cart to Old Andado homestead. Also in 2008, Belgian Louis-Philippe Loncke became the first non-indigenous person to complete a north\u2013south crossing of the desert on foot, unsupported, and through the geographical centre.\nIn 2016, explorer Sebastian Copeland and partner Mark George completed the longest unsupported latitudinal crossing (west-to-east across the dunes) of the Simpson They linked the Madigan Line, Colson Track and French Line for the first time, walking from Old Andado homestead to Birdsville, a distance of in 26 days.\nIn 1967, the Queensland government established the Munga-Thirri National Park, formerly known as the Simpson Desert National Park.\nAccess.\nNo maintained roads cross the desert. The Donohue Highway is an unpaved outback track passing from near Boulia towards the Northern Territory border in the north of the desert. Some tracks were created during seismic surveys in the search for gas and oil during the 1960s and 1970s. These include the French Line, the Rig Road, and the QAA Line. Such tracks are still navigable by well-equipped four-wheel drive vehicles that must carry extra fuel and water. Towns providing access to the South Australian edge of the Simpson Desert include Innamincka to the south and Oodnadatta to the southwest; and from the eastern (Queensland) side include Birdsville, Bedourie, Thargomindah, and Windorah. The last fuel on the western side is at the Mount Dare hotel and store. Before 1980, a section of the Commonwealth Railways Central Australian line passed along the western side of the Simpson Desert. The less travelled Madigan Line runs from Old Andado Station to Birdsville. The geographic centre of the desert can be reached by driving 80\u00a0km north from the French Line via the Centre Line. The French Line is the most popular track used to cross the Simpson Desert. Most people chose to cross from west to east as prevailing winds assist in the crossing and the west sides of the dunes are less steep making ascents easier.\nVisitor attractions.\nThe desert is popular with tourists, particularly in winter, and popular landmarks include the ruins and mound springs at Dalhousie Springs, Purnie Bore wetlands, Approdinna Attora Knoll and Poeppel Corner (where Queensland, South Australia and the Northern Territory meet). Because of the excessive heat and inadequately experienced drivers attempting to access the desert in the past, the Department of Environment &amp; Natural Resources has decided since 2008\u20132009 to close the Simpson Desert during the summer \u2013 to save unprepared \"adventurers\" from themselves.\nAnother attraction is the Big Red Bash, which is billed as the most remote music festival on Earth. The event features concerts and a Big Red Bash drag race across sand dunes to raise money for the Royal Flying Doctor Service.\nThe desert can also be crossed by bicycle. The Simpson Desert Bike Challenge crosses the Simpson Desert every year in September.\nClimate.\nThe area has an extremely hot, dry desert climate. Rainfall is minimal, averaging only about 150\u00a0mm per year and falling mainly in summer. The average summer temperature in the desert is 28 degrees Celsius and it can go as high as 50 degrees. Large sand storms are common. Winters are generally cool, but heatwaves even in the middle of July are not unheard of.\nSome of the heaviest rain in decades occurred during 2009\u20132010, and caused the Simpson Desert to burst into life and colour. In early March 2010, Birdsville recorded more rain in 24 hours than is usual in a whole year. Rain inundated Queensland's north-west and Gulf regions. In total, 17 million megalitres of water entered the State's western river systems, leading to Lake Eyre. In 2010, researchers uncovered the courses of ancient river systems under the desert.\nEcology.\nThe Simpson Desert is also a large part of the World Wildlife Fund ecoregion of the same name, which consists of the Channel Country and the Simpson Strzelecki Dunefields bioregions of the Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia (IBRA).\nThe flora of the Simpson Desert ecoregion is limited to drought-resistant shrubs and grasses, especially \"Zygochloa paradoxa\" grass that holds the dunes together and the spinifex and other tough grasses of side slopes and sandy desert floor between the dunes. The Channel Country section of the ecoregion lies to the northeast of the desert proper around the towns of Bedourie and Windorah in Queensland, and consists of low hills covered with Mitchell grass cut through with rivers lined with coolabah trees. The ecoregion also includes areas of rocky upland and seasonally wet clay and salt pans, particularly Lake Eyre, the centre of one of the largest inland drainage systems in the world, including the Georgina and Diamantina Rivers.\nWildlife adapted to this hot, dry environment and seasonal flooding includes the water-holding frog (\"Litoria platycephala\") and a number of reptiles that inhabit the desert grasses such as the perentie. Endemic mammals of the desert include the red kangaroo, dingo, echidna and kowari (\"Dasycercus byrnei\"), while birds include the grey grasswren (\"Amytornis barbatus\") and Eyrean grasswren (\"Amytornis goyderi\"). Lake Eyre and the other seasonal wetlands are important habitats for fish and birds, especially as a breeding ground for waterbirds, while the rivers are home to birds, bats, and frogs. The seasonal wetlands of the ecoregion include Lake Eyre and the Coongie Lakes, as well as the swamps that emerge when Cooper Creek, Strzelecki Creek, and the Diamantina River are in flood. The birds that use these wetlands include the freckled duck (\"Stictonetta naevosa\"), musk duck (\"Biziura lobata\"), silver gull (\"Larus novaehollandiae\"), Australian pelican (\"Pelecanus conspicillatus\"), great egret (\"Ardea alba\"), glossy ibis (\"Plegadis falcinellus\"), and banded stilt (\"Cladorhynchus leucocephalus\"). Also, the mound springs of the Great Artesian Basin are important habitat for a number of plants, fish, snails, and other invertebrates.\nNative vegetation is largely intact as the desert is uninhabitable, so habitats are not threatened by agriculture, but are damaged by introduced species, particularly rabbits and feral camels. The only human activity in the desert proper has been the construction of the gas pipelines, while the country on its fringes has been used for cattle grazing and contains towns such as Innamincka. Mound springs and other waterholes are vulnerable to overuse and damage. Protected areas of the ecoregion include the Simpson Desert, Goneaway, Lochern, Bladensburg, Witjira and Kati Thanda-Lake Eyre National Parks as well as the Innamincka Regional Reserve, and the Munga-Thirri\u2013Simpson Desert National Park.\nEthabuka Reserve is a nature reserve in the north of the desert owned and managed by Bush Heritage Australia.\nDunefields.\nThe extensive dunefields of the Simpson Desert display a range of colours from brilliant white to dark red, and include pinks and oranges.\nMorphology.\nThe sand ridges have a trend of SSE-NNW and continue parallel for great distances. This pattern is seen throughout the deserts of Australia. Some of the ridges continue unbroken for up to 200\u00a0km. The height and the spacing between the ridges are directly related. Where five to six ridges occur in 1\u00a0km, the dune height is around 15 m, but when only one or two ridges occur in 1\u00a0km, the height jumps to 35\u201338 m. In cross section, the lee side is the eastern slope with an incline of 34-38\u00b0, while the stoss side is the western slope with an incline of only 10-20\u00b0. In cross section, the cross beds are planar with foresets alternating between east and west. The foresets have incline angles of 10-30\u00b0.\nSediment.\nThe sand is predominately made up of quartz grains, which are rounded and subangular. They range in size from 0.05 to 1.2\u00a0mm with 0.5\u00a0mm being the typical size for the crests and 0.3\u00a0mm being the average size on the dune flanks. The active crests have sand sediment, but on the interdunes, the sediment is not as well sorted. The sediment varies in colour from pink to brick red, but by the rivers and playas, the sediment colour is light grey. The progression of the colour from grey to red is due to the release of iron oxide from the sediment when weathered.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28968", "revid": "94900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28968", "title": "Skycar", "text": "Skycar may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28969", "revid": "34169420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28969", "title": "Silesian Voivodeship", "text": "Voivodeship of Poland\nSilesian Voivodeship ( ) is an administrative province in southern Poland. With over 4.2 million residents and an area of 12,300 square kilometers, it is the second-most populous, and the most-densely populated and most-urbanized region of Poland. It generates 11.9% of Polish GDP and is characterized by a high life satisfaction, low income inequalities, and high wages.\nThe region has a diversified geography. The Beskid Mountains cover most of the southern part of the voivodeship, with the highest peak of Pilsko on the Polish-Slovakian border reaching above sea level. Silesian Upland dominates the central part of the region, while the hilly, limestone Polish Jura closes it from the northeast. Katowice urban area, located in the central part of the region, is the second most-populous urban area in Poland after Warsaw, with 2.2 million people, and one of Poland's seven supra-regional metropolises, while Rybnik, Bielsko-Bia\u0142a and Cz\u0119stochowa and their respective urban areas are classified among the country's 15 regional agglomerations. \nDespite the voivodeship's name, only the western half of its area is considered to be a part of the historical region of Silesia. The eastern part of Silesian Voivodeship was historically part of Lesser Poland, while a small part in the north of the region was historically considered a part of Greater Poland.\nHistory.\nInterwar Poland.\nSilesian Voivodeship was first created in 1920 when the newly independent Polish state established an autonomous region for all historical lands of Upper Silesia that were to end up in Poland. At the time, Upper Silesia was under international control, and a plebiscite was to be held in 1921 to divide the region between Germany and Poland following local results. Katowice has been chosen to be the provincial capital. In 1938, following the annexation of Trans-Olza region by Poland, the voivodeship's area was expanded to include these new territories. \nThe interwar region did not include more than half of its current area, which were parts of the Kielce voivodeship (Sosnowiec and Cz\u0119stochowa areas), Krak\u00f3w voivodeship (Jaworzno and \u017bywiec areas) or Germany (cities of Zabrze and Bytom as well as Gliwice and Racib\u00f3rz areas). \nGerman occupation.\nAfter the invasion of Poland in 1939, Polish administrative divisions ceased to exist. Nazi Germany annexed most of the current voivodeship's area directly into the German province of Silesia (\"Gau Schlesien\") with capital in Wroc\u0142aw (\"Breslau\") as the governmental district of Katowice (\"Regierungsbezirk Kattowitz\"). This new district included both historically Silesian areas as well as western parts of Lesser Poland. Northern parts of what is the Silesian Voivodeship today, with Cz\u0119stochowa, found themselves in the General Government area. \nIn 1941, the province of Silesia was split into Lower Silesia (with a capital in Wroc\u0142aw) and Upper Silesia (with a capital in Katowice), the latter of which included the governmental district of Opole in addition to the one of Katowice. \nSocialist Poland.\nFollowing World War II, the new communist government of Poland cancelled the autonomous status of the Silesian voivodeship and established a new Silesian-Dabrowa voivodeship (), the area of which roughly corresponded to the German province of Upper Silesia. The name of this region reflected both the Silesian part and the D\u0105browa Basin part. \nIn 1950, Opole voivodeship was created from the western part of the Silesian-Dabrowa voivodeship, and the name of the remaining area changed to Katowice Voivodeship. The new region's borders included, for the first time, the Cz\u0119stochowa area, and roughly resembled the contemporary Silesian Voivodeship. Between 1956\u201359, the name of the region was changed to Stalinogr\u00f3d voivodeship (), reflecting Katowice's forced name change to Stalinogr\u00f3d following the death of Joseph Stalin. \nIn 1975, a new administrative reform introduced 49 new voivodeships. The area of today's Silesian Voivodeship was divided between Cz\u0119stochowa voivodeship (\"wojew\u00f3dztwo cz\u0119stochowskie\") in the north, Katowice voivodeship (\"wojew\u00f3dztwo katowickie\") in the center, and Bielsko-Bia\u0142a voivodeship (\"wojew\u00f3dztwo bielskie\") in the south.\nAfter 1989.\nAs Poland aimed to join the European Union, European negotiators named administrative reform as one of the conditions for accession. As such, in 1999, a new administrative division was introduced, reducing the number of voivodeships from 49 to 16. A Silesian voivodeship has emerged from the reform, with its capital in Katowice, and consisting of most municipalities of the former Katowice, Cz\u0119stochowa, and Bielsko-Bia\u0142a voivodeships. \nGeography.\nThe Silesian Voivodeship borders both the Moravian-Silesian Region (Czech Republic), \u017dilina Region (Slovakia) to the south. It is also bordered by four other Polish voivodeships: those of Opole (to the west), \u0141\u00f3d\u017a (to the north), \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie (to the north-east), and Lesser Poland (to the east).\nThe region includes the Silesian Upland (') in the centre and north-west, and the Krakowsko-Cz\u0119stochowska Upland (') in the north-east. The southern border is formed by the Beskidy Mountains (Beskid \u015al\u0105ski and Beskid \u017bywiecki).\nThe current administrative unit of Silesian Voivodeship is just one fraction of the historical Silesia region which is within the borders of today's Poland (there are also fragments of Silesia in the Czech Republic and Germany). Other parts of today's Polish Silesia are administered as the Opole, the Lower Silesian Voivodeships and the Lubusz Voivodeship. On the other hand, a large part of the current administrative unit of the Silesian Voivodeship is not part of historical Silesia (e.g., Cz\u0119stochowa, Zawiercie, Myszk\u00f3w, Jaworzno, Sosnowiec, \u017bywiec, D\u0105browa G\u00f3rnicza, B\u0119dzin and east part of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a, which were historically parts of Lesser Poland).\nDemography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation.\nMore than one out of every nine of Poland's residents live in the Silesian voivodeship. According to the Polish Statistics Office, the region's population was 4.32 million at the end of 2023, a decrease of 6% from 10 years earlier. \nSimilarly to Poland, the Silesian voivodeship has suffered extremely low fertility and an intensifying natural population decrease. In 2023, the total fertility rate was only 1.10, well below the 2.1 required to sustain a population size and slightly below the Polish average of 1.11. 27,641 people were born while 51,723 died, a natural decrease of -24,082. In 2023, 19.1% of the population was under 20, 32.2% was 20\u201344 years old, 27.4% was 45\u201364, while 21.3% were 65 or older. \nSilesian voivodeship is the most densely populated and most urbanized region of Poland. More than three-fourths of residents live in urban areas, compared to less than 60% on average in Poland. Population density is nearly three times the average, with more than 350 people per square kilometer (nearly 1,000 per square mile). Population density is particularly high in the central part of the region where the polycentric Katowice urban area is located. \nAside from Polish citizens, a large immigrant population resides in the region and is not counted towards official population statistics in Poland. As of November 2024, 99,542 foreigners living in the region paid into social security, and in the 2023/24 academic year, 31,111 foreign students attended primary and secondary schools in the region. In addition, following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the region has attracted many refugees. As of January 2025, 99,545 Ukrainian refugees settled in the Silesian voivodeship.\nReligion.\nSilesian voivodeship is the most religiously diverse region of Poland. In the 2021 census, 71.39% of residents declared they have belonged to a religion, of which Roman Catholicism was the largest denomination with 3.063 million adherents (69.57% of total). The region is divided into five ecclesial provinces: \nJasna G\u00f3ra in Cz\u0119stochowa, located in the northern part of the voivodeship, is the most-visited shrine in Poland and features the Black Madonna icon. \nSilesian voivodeship is also the center of Protestantism, in particular Lutheranism, in Poland. Wis\u0142a and Golesz\u00f3w are the only municipalities in Poland where Lutheranism is the plurality religion, at 46.7% and 37.47% of the total population, respectively. In total, there are 53,980 Protestants in the region (1.23% of the region's population and 42.7% of all protestants in Poland). \nOrigins.\nIn terms of nationality and ethnicity, the 2021 Polish census allowed responders to select up to two nationalities and ethnicities. Polish nationality was selected by 95.49% of residents, while 13.08% indicated other nationalities; in addition to the Polish one or separately. Silesian and German nationalities were the largest, declared by 517,100 and 27,923 residents, respectively.\nThe 2021 census did not count most of recent immigrants towards the resident population but instead considered them as temporary residents. According to the census, 119,594 of such temporary residents lived in the Silesian voivodeship, and the majority of them were Ukrainians.\nTourism.\nBoth the northern and southern parts of the voivodeship are surrounded by a green belt. Bielsko-Bia\u0142a is enveloped by the Beskidy Mountains which are popular with winter sports fans. It offers over 150 ski lifts and 200 kilometres of ski routes. More and more slopes are illuminated and equipped with artificial snow generators. Szczyrk, Brenna, Wis\u0142a and Ustro\u0144 are the most popular winter mountain resorts. Rock climbing sites can be found in Jura Krakowsko-Czestochowska. In the south-western part of the voivodeship are parks and old monasteries (Rudy Raciborskie, Wodzis\u0142aw \u015al\u0105ski). Along the Oder River are interesting natural reserves and places for swimming during the summer.\nThere are numerous castles and palaces in the voivodeship, including the medieval castles of the Piast dynasty in B\u0119dzin, Gliwice, Racib\u00f3rz, and the castles forming the Trail of the Eagle's Nests, including at Bobolice, Mir\u00f3w, Ogrodzieniec and Olsztyn. The best-preserved palaces include those at Brynek, K\u0142obuck, Koniecpol, Ko\u0144czyce Wielkie, P\u0142awniowice, Sosnowiec and Z\u0142oty Potok.\nOften visited is the Black Madonna's Jasna G\u00f3ra Sanctuary in Cz\u0119stochowa \u2013 the annual destination of over 4 million pilgrims from all over the world. Another local pilgrimage destination is the Basilica of St. Mary and St. Bartholomew in Piekary \u015al\u0105skie. Other notable historic churches include the St. Nicholas' Chapel in Cieszyn, a Romanesque rotunda, depicted on the 20 z\u0142otych note, and the St. Mary Magdalene Church in Cieszyn, which contains several sarcophagi of Polish dukes from the Piast dynasty.\nThere are three spa towns in the voivodeship: Gocza\u0142kowice-Zdr\u00f3j, Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j, and Ustro\u0144.\nWith its more than two centuries of industrial history, the region has many technical heritage memorials. These include narrow and standard gauge railways, coal and silver mines, and shafts and their equipment from the 19th and 20th centuries. The historic coal mine complex in Zabrze is listed as a Historic Monument of Poland, and the Historic Silver Mine in Tarnowskie G\u00f3ry is listed as both a UNESCO World Heritage Site and Historic Monument of Poland.\nThere are numerous memorials to Polish uprisings against foreign rule, including the January Uprising of 1863\u20131864 and Silesian Uprisings of 1919\u20131921, and \u015awi\u0119toch\u0142owice hosts the Silesian Uprisings Museum.\nThere are numerous World War II memorials in the voivodeship, including at the sites of Nazi massacres of Poles and Jews, and the sites of former Nazi German forced labour camps and prisons. The Gliwice Radio Tower and Katowice Parachute Tower are local symbols of German provocation and Polish resistance during the war, respectively.\nCities and towns.\nDue to its industrial and urban nature, the voivodeship has many cities and large towns. Of Poland's 40 most populous cities, 12 are in Silesian Voivodeship. 19 of the cities in the voivodeship have the legal status of \"city-county\" (see powiat). In all, it has 24 cities and 47 towns, listed below in descending order of population (as of 2019):\nEconomy.\nThe gross domestic product (GDP) of the province was 61 billion \u20ac in 2018, accounting for 12.3% of the Polish economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 22,200 \u20ac or 74% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 83% of the EU average. Silesia Voivodeship is the province with the fourth-highest GDP per capita in Poland.\nThe Silesian voivodeship is predominantly an industrial region. Most of the\nmining is derived from one of the world's largest bituminous coalfields of the Upper Silesian Industrial District (') and the Rybnik Coal District (') with its major cities Rybnik, Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j, \u017bory and Wodzis\u0142aw \u015al\u0105ski. Lead and zinc can be found near Bytom, Zawiercie and Tarnowskie G\u00f3ry; iron ore and raw materials for building \u2013 near Cz\u0119stochowa. The most important regional industries are: mining, iron, lead, and zinc metallurgy, power industry, engineering, automobile, chemical, building materials, and textile. In the past, the Silesian economy was determined by coal mining. Now, considering the investment volume, car manufacturing is becoming more and more important. The most profitable company in the region is Fiat Auto-Poland S.A. in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a with a revenue of PLN 6.2 billion in 1997. Recently a new car factory has been opened by GM Opel in Gliwice. There are two Special Economic Zones in the area: Katowice and Cz\u0119stochowa. The voivodeship's economy consists of about 323,000, mostly small and medium-sized enterprises, employing over 3 million people. The biggest Polish steelworks, \"Huta Katowice\", is situated in D\u0105browa G\u00f3rnicza.\nThe unemployment rate stood at 3.9% in 2017 and was lower than the national average.\nTransport.\nKatowice International Airport (in Tarnowskie G\u00f3ry County) is used for domestic and international flights, with the other nearby airports being John Paul II International Airport Krak\u00f3w-Balice. The Silesian agglomeration railway network has the largest concentration in the country. \nThe voivodship capital enjoys good railway and road connections with Gda\u0144sk (motorway A1) and Ostrava (motorway A1), Krak\u00f3w (motorway A4), Wroc\u0142aw (motorway A4), \u0141\u00f3d\u017a (motorway A1) and Warsaw. It is also the crossing point for many international routes like E40 connecting Calais, Brussels, Cologne, Dresden, Wroc\u0142aw, Krak\u00f3w and Kyiv and E75 from Scandinavia to the Balkans. A relatively short distance to Vienna facilitates cross-border co-operation and may positively influence the process of European integration.\nLinia Hutnicza Szerokotorowa (known by its acronym \"LHS\", English: \"Broad gauge metallurgy line\") in S\u0142awk\u00f3w is the longest broad gauge railway line in Poland. The line runs on a single track for almost 400\u00a0km from the Polish-Ukrainian border, crossing it just east of Hrubiesz\u00f3w. It is the westernmost broad-gauge railway line in Europe that is connected to the broad-gauge rail system of the countries of the former Soviet Union.\nA large part of the Upper Silesia conurbation features the Silesian Interurbans, the longest tram network in Poland, and one of the largest in the world. Bus and tram transport in and around Katowice and surrounding cities has been managed by the Metropolitan Transport Authority (ZTM) since 2019.\nEducation.\nThere are eleven public universities in the voivodeship. The biggest university is the University of Silesia in Katowice, with 43,000 students. The region's capital boasts the Medical University, the Karol Adamiecki University of Economics in Katowice, the University of Music in Katowice, the Physical Education Academy, and the Academy of Fine Arts. Cz\u0119stochowa is the seat of the Cz\u0119stochowa University of Technology and Pedagogic University. The Silesian University of Technology in Gliwice is nationally renowned. Bielsko-Bia\u0142a is home of the Technical-Humanistic Academy. In addition, 17 new private schools have been established in the region.\nThere are over 300,000 people currently studying in the Voivodeship. The biggest universities (for day 30.11.2016 r.) are:\nPolitics.\nThe Silesian voivodeship's government is headed by the province's ' (governor) who is appointed by the Polish Prime Minister. The ' is then assisted in performing his duties by the voivodeship's marshal, who is the appointed speaker for the voivodeship's executive and is elected by the ' (provincial assembly). The current ' of Silesia is Jaros\u0142aw Wieczorek, whilst the present marshal is Wojciech Sa\u0142uga.\nThe Sejmik of Silesia consists of 48 members.\nAdministrative division.\nSilesian Voivodeship is divided into 36 counties (powiats). These include 19 city counties (far more than any other voivodeship) and 17 land counties. The counties are further divided into 167 gminas.\nThe counties are listed in the following table (ordering within categories is by decreasing population).\nProtected areas.\nProtected areas in Silesian Voivodeship include eight areas designated as Landscape Parks:\nSports.\nFootball, motorcycle speedway, handball, ice hockey, and volleyball enjoy the largest following in the voivodeship, with several successful teams. Most accomplished clubs include men's football clubs G\u00f3rnik Zabrze and Ruch Chorz\u00f3w, women's football club Czarni Sosnowiec, speedway team KS ROW Rybnik, ice hockey team GKS Katowice, men's volleyball team Jastrz\u0119bski W\u0119giel and women's volleyball team BKS Bielsko-Bia\u0142a.\nSince the establishment of the province, several major international sports competitions were co-hosted by the province, including the EuroBasket 2009, 2014 FIVB Volleyball Men's World Championship, 2016 European Men's Handball Championship, 2017 Men's European Volleyball Championship, 2018 FIVB Volleyball Men's Club World Championship, 2019 FIFA U-20 World Cup, 2021 Men's European Volleyball Championship, 2023 World Men's Handball Championship.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28970", "revid": "96647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28970", "title": "SECD machine", "text": "Abstract machine used as a target for compilers\nThe SECD machine is an influential virtual machine and abstract machine intended as a target for compilers of functional programming languages. The letters stand for codice_1, codice_2, codice_3, codice_4, respectively, which are the internal registers of the machine. The registers codice_1, codice_3, and codice_4 point to (some realizations of) stacks, and codice_2 points to (some realization of) an associative array.\nThe machine was the first to be specifically designed to evaluate lambda calculus expressions. It was originally described by Peter Landin in \"The Mechanical Evaluation of Expressions\" in 1964. The description published by Landin was fairly abstract, and left many implementation choices open (like an operational semantics).\nLispkit Lisp was a compiler based on the SECD machine, and the SECD machine has been used as the target for other systems such as Lisp/370. In 1989, researchers at the University of Calgary worked on a hardware implementation of the machine, with the same rationale as a high-level language computer architecture related to a Lisp machine.\nLandin's contribution.\nD. A. Turner (2012) points out that the ALGOL 60 programming language could not return functions from other functions (rendering functions no longer first-class). A function nested inside another function could refer to a variable living on the outer function's stack. If the nested function were returned from the outer function, then it would be referring to a variable in a stack frame that is no longer present. Turner notes that Landin's SECD machine solves this problem (thus allowing functions to return functions), as a function value is now represented with a closure on the heap that can store the environment of variables it should use irrespective of what happens on the stack.\nInformal description.\nWhen evaluation of an expression begins, the expression is loaded as the only element of control codice_9. The environment codice_10, stack codice_11 and dump codice_12 begin empty.\nDuring evaluation of codice_9 it is converted to reverse Polish notation (RPN) with codice_14 (for apply) being the only operator. For example, the expression codice_15 (a single list element) is changed to the list codice_16.\nEvaluation of codice_9 proceeds similarly to other RPN expressions. If the first item in codice_9 is a value, it is pushed onto the stack codice_11. More exactly, if the item is an identifier, the value pushed onto the stack will be the binding for that identifier in the current environment codice_10. If the item is an abstraction, a closure is constructed to preserve the bindings of its free variables (which are in codice_10), and it is this closure which is pushed onto the stack.\nIf the item is codice_14, two values are popped off the stack and the application done (first applied to second). If the result of the application is a value, it is pushed onto the stack.\nIf the application is of an abstraction to a value, however, it will result in a lambda calculus expression that may itself be an application (rather than a value), and so cannot be pushed onto the stack. In this case, the current contents of codice_11, codice_10, and codice_9 are pushed onto the dump codice_12 (which is a stack of these triples), codice_11 is reinitialized to empty, and codice_9 is reinitialized to the application result with codice_10 containing the environment for the free variables of this expression, augmented with the binding that resulted from the application. Evaluation then proceeds as above.\nCompleted evaluation is indicated by codice_9 being empty, in which case the result will be on the stack codice_11. The last saved evaluation state on codice_12 is then popped, and the result of the completed evaluation is pushed onto the stack contents restored from codice_12. Evaluation of the restored state then continues as above.\nIf codice_9 and codice_12 are both empty, overall evaluation has completed with the result on the stack codice_11.\nRegisters and memory.\nThe SECD machine is stack-based. Functions take their arguments from the stack. The arguments to built-in instructions are encoded immediately after them in the instruction stream.\nLike all internal data-structures, the stack is a list, with the codice_11 register pointing at the list's \"head\" or beginning. Due to the list structure, the stack need not be a continuous block of memory, so stack space is available as long as there is a single free memory cell. Even when all cells have been used, garbage collection may yield additional free memory. Obviously, specific implementations of the SECD structure can implement the stack as a canonical stack structure, thus improving the overall efficiency of the virtual machine, provided that a strict bound be put on the dimension of the stack.\nThe codice_9 register points at the head of the code or instruction list that will be evaluated. Once the instruction there has been executed, the codice_9 is pointed at the next instruction in the list\u2014it is similar to an \"instruction pointer\" (or program counter) in conventional machines, except that subsequent instructions are always specified during execution and are not by default contained in subsequent memory locations, as is the case with the conventional machines.\nThe current variable environment is managed by the codice_10 register, which points at a list of lists. Each individual list represents one environment level: the parameters of the current function are in the head of the list, variables that are free in the current function, but bound by a surrounding function, are in other elements of codice_10.\nThe dump, at whose head the codice_12 register points, is used as temporary storage for values of the other registers, for example during function calls. It can be likened to the return stack of other machines.\nThe memory organization of the SECD machine is similar to the model used by most functional language interpreters: a number of memory cells, each of which can hold either an \"atom\" (a simple value, for example \"13\"), or represent an empty or non-empty list. In the latter case, the cell holds two pointers to other cells, one representing the first element, the other representing the list except for the first element. The two pointers are traditionally named \"car\" and \"cdr\" respectively\u2014but the more modern terms \"head\" and \"tail\" are often used instead. The different types of values that a cell can hold are distinguished by a \"tag\". Often different types of atoms (integers, strings, etc.) are distinguished as well.\nSo, a list holding the numbers \"1\", \"2\", and \"3\", usually written as codice_43, might be represented as follows:\n Address Tag Content (value for integers, car &amp; cdr for lists)\n 9 [ integer | 2 ]\n 8 [ integer | 3 ]\n 7 [ list | 8 | 0 ]\n 6 [ list | 9 | 7 ]\n 2 [ list | 1 | 6 ]\n 1 [ integer | 1 ]\n 0 [ nil ]\nThe memory cells 3 to 5 do not belong to our list, the cells of which can be distributed randomly over the memory. Cell 2 is the head of the list, it points to cell 1, which holds the first element's value, and the list containing only \"2\" and \"3\" (beginning at cell 6). Cell 6 points at a cell holding 2 and at cell 7, which represents the list containing only \"3\". It does so by pointing at cell 8 containing the value \"3\", and pointing at an empty list (\"nil\") as cdr. In the SECD machine, cell 0 always implicitly represents the empty list, so no special tag value is needed to signal an empty list (everything needing that can simply point to cell 0).\nThe principle that the cdr in a list cell must point at another list is just a convention. If both car and cdr point at atoms, that will yield a pair, usually written like codice_44\nInstructions.\nA number of additional instructions for basic functions like car, cdr, list construction, integer addition, I/O, etc. exist. They all take any necessary parameters from the stack.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28971", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28971", "title": "Stratego", "text": "Strategy board game\nStratego ( ) is a chess-like strategy board game for two players on a board of 10\u00d710 squares. Each player controls 40 pieces representing individual officer and soldier ranks in an army. The pieces have Napoleonic insignia. The objective of the game is to either find and capture the opponent's \"Flag\" or to capture all movable enemy pieces so that the opponent cannot make any further moves. \"Stratego\" has simple enough rules for young children to play but a depth of strategy that is also appealing to adults.\nThe game is a slightly modified copy of an early 20th century French game named \"L'Attaque\" (\"The Attack\"), and has been in production in Europe since World War II and the United States since 1961. There are now two- and four-player versions, versions with 10, 30 or 40 pieces per player, and boards with smaller sizes (number of spaces). There are also variant pieces and different &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;rulesets&lt;/dfn&gt;.\nThe International Stratego Federation, the game's governing body, sponsors an annual Stratego World Championship.\nName and trademark.\n\"Stratego\" is from the French or Greek \"strategos\" (var. \"strategus\") for leader of an ancient (especially Greek) army: first general.\nThe name \"Stratego\" was first registered in 1942 in the Netherlands. The United States trademark was filed in 1958 and registered in 1960 to Jacques Johan Mogendorff and is presently owned by Jumbo Games as successors to Hausemann and Hotte, headquartered in the Netherlands. It has been licensed to manufacturers such as Milton Bradley, Hasbro and others, as well as retailers such as Barnes &amp; Noble, Target stores, etc.\nThe contents of the game.\nThis description is of the original and classic games; many variant shapes and colors of pieces and boards have been produced in the decades since.\nThe game box contents are a set of 40 gold-embossed red playing pieces, a set of silver-embossed blue playing pieces, and a folding rectangular cardboard playing board imprinted with a 10\u00d710 grid of spaces. The early sets featured painted wood pieces, later sets colored plastic. The pieces are small and roughly rectangular, tall and wide, and unweighted. More modern versions first introduced in Europe have cylindrical castle-shaped pieces. Some versions have a cardboard privacy screen to assist setup. A few versions have wooden boxes or boards.\nSetup.\nTypically, color is chosen by lot: one player uses red pieces, and the other uses blue pieces. Before the start of the game, players arrange their 40 pieces in a 4\u00d710 configuration at either end of the board. The ranks are printed on one side only and placed so that the players cannot identify the opponent's pieces. Players may not place pieces in the lakes or the 12 squares in the center of the board. Such pre-play distinguishes the fundamental strategy of particular players and influences the outcome of the game.\nGameplay.\nPlayers alternate moving; red moves first. The right to move first does not significantly affect game play (unlike chess). Each player moves one piece per turn. A player must move a piece in their turn; one cannot skip a turn. \nTwo zones in the middle of the board, each 2\u00d72, cannot be entered by either player's pieces at any time. They are shown as lakes on the battlefield and serve as choke points to make frontal assaults less direct.\nThe game can be won by capturing the opponent's \"Flag\" or all of their moveable pieces. It is possible to have ranked pieces that are not moveable because they are trapped behind \"bomb\"s. In unusual cases, it is possible to draw, for example, when both players' flags are protected by bombs and each player has one remaining piece which is not a miner.\nThe average game has 381 moves. The number of legal positions is 10115. The number of possible games is 10535. \"Stratego\" has many more moves and possible board states than other familiar games such as chess and backgammon; however, unlike those games where a single bad move at any point may result in loss of the game, most moves in \"Stratego\" are inconsequential as players think in \"games not moves\".\nRules of movement.\nAll movable pieces, with the exception of the \"Scout\", may move only one step to any adjacent space vertically or horizontally (but not diagonally). A piece may not move onto a space occupied by a like-color piece. \"Bomb\" and \"Flag\" pieces are not moveable. The \"Scout\" may move any number of spaces in a straight line (such as the rook in chess). In the older versions of \"Stratego\" the \"Scout\" could not move and strike in the same turn; in newer versions this was allowed. Even before that, sanctioned play usually amended the original \"Scout\" movement to allow moving and striking in the same turn because it facilitates gameplay.\nNo piece can move back and forth between the same two spaces for more than three consecutive turns (two square rule). Nor can a piece endlessly chase an opposing piece it has no hope of attacking (more square rule).\nWhen a player wants to attack, they \"strike\" by touching an opposing piece with their piece or by moving it onto the square the opposing piece occupies. Both players then reveal their piece's rank; the weaker piece (see exceptions below) is removed from the board. If the engaging pieces are of equal rank, both are removed. A piece may not move onto a square already occupied unless it attacks. The original rules also contained a provision that following a strike, the winning piece immediately occupies the space vacated by the losing piece.\nTwo pieces have special attack powers. One special piece is the \"Bomb\" which only \"Miners\" can defuse. It immediately eliminates any other piece striking it without being destroyed itself. Each player also has one \"Spy\", which succeeds only if it attacks the \"Marshal\" or the \"Flag\". If the \"Spy\" attacks any other piece, or is attacked by any piece (including the \"Marshal\"), the \"Spy\" is defeated.\nRecording the game.\nCompetitive play does not include recording the game, unlike chess. The game is fast-paced, no standard notation exists, and players keep their initial setups secret, so recording &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;over-the-board&lt;/dfn&gt; games is impractical.\nHowever, digital interfaces such as web-based gaming interfaces may have a facility for recording, replaying and downloading the game. Those interfaces use an algebraic-style notation that numbers the rows ('ranks') 1 to 10 from bottom to top and the columns ('files') A to J from left to right. Alternately, a few interfaces designate the files as A to K, omitting 'I'. Moves are recorded as source square followed by destination square separated by a \"-\" (move) or \"x\" (strike). Revealed pieces on strikes precede the square designation, and may be by either rank name or rank number for brevity, for example \"major B2xcaptain B3\". The bottom half of the board is by default considered to be the 'red' side, and the top half the 'blue' side.\nStrategy.\nUnlike chess, \"Stratego\" is a game of imperfect information. In addition to calculated sequences of moves, this gives rise to aspects of battle psychology such as concealment, bluffing, lying in wait and guessing.\nThere are also strategic and tactical elements in the initial setup of the pieces. Stylistic preferences (\"aggressive\" vs \"defensive\") also enter into setup.\nPieces.\nClassic pieces.\nThere are seven immobile pieces \u2013 six \"Bombs\" and one \"Flag\" \u2013 and 33 mobile pieces per player. They can move to the adjacent square in horizontal or vertical direction, with exception of the \"Scout\", which moves any distance. From highest rank to lowest the pieces are:\nThe higher ranked piece always captures the lower, except when stated otherwise. When a piece attacks another piece with equal rank, both are removed.\nIn the original versions published in the United States, the ranks were numbered with the most powerful \"Marshal\" piece ranked at 1, then numbers ascending as power fell until \"Scout\" was 9, and the \"Spy\" was not numbered but designated S. In 2000, this was inverted, with the \"Marshal\" ranked as 10, descending to 2 for the \"Scout\", and the \"Spy\" ranked with number 1. \"Classic\" versions have been released since then with the lower number strongest, as in prior versions of the game.\nVariant pieces.\nVariant versions of the game have a few different pieces with different rules of movement, such as the \"Cannon\", \"Archer\" (possibly a different name for the \"Cannon\"), \"Spotter\", \"Infiltrator\", \"Corporal\" and \"Cavalry Captain\". In one version, mobile pieces are allowed to \"carry\" the \"Flag\". In some variants such as \"Stratego Waterloo\" and \"Fire and Ice Stratego\", all or most of the pieces have substantially different moves.\nHistory.\nJapanese Military Chess.\nJapanese Military Chess (\"Gunjin Shogi\") has been sold and played since as early as 1895, although it is not known by whom and when it was invented. Dr. Christian Junghans reported this game in \"Monatshefte\" magazine in Germany in 1905. It seems, only after reading his article, Julie Berg took out a patent on a war game in London and Paris in 1907. Similarly, Hermance Edan took a patent for \"L'attaque\" game in 1909 and sold them in 1910.\nThe main differences between \"Gunjin Shogi\" and \"Stratego\" are:\nThere are at least three different versions of \"Gunjin Shogi\", distinguished by the number of pieces controlled by each player as well as the size of the board. The 23- and 31-piece versions are similar, influenced by the technology of World War I, and the 25-piece version is a more recent development, incorporating technologies developed during World War II.\nFrench \"L'Attaque\".\nIn nearly its present form \"Stratego\" appeared in France from La Samaritaine in 1910, and then in Britain before World War I, as a game called \"L'Attaque\". Historian and game collector Thierry Depaulis writes:\nIt was in fact designed by a lady, Mademoiselle Hermance Edan, who filed a patent for a \"jeu de bataille avec pi\u00e8ces mobiles sur damier\" (a battle game with mobile pieces on a gameboard) on 1908-11-26. The patent was released by the French Patent Office in 1909 (patent #396.795). Hermance Edan had given no name to her game but a French manufacturer named Au Jeu Retrouv\u00e9 was selling the game as \"L'Attaque\" as early as 1910.\nThe French patent has 36 pieces for each player and also has a slightly different board layout, but it introduced the same hierarchical rules of attack and movement followed by modern versions of the game. Depaulis further notes the 1910 version had two armies, divided into red and blue colors. The rules of \"L'attaque\" were basically the same as for the game we know as \"Stratego\". It featured standing cardboard rectangular pieces, color printed with soldiers who wore contemporary (to 1900) uniforms, not Napoleonic uniforms. In papers of her estate, Ms. Edan states that she developed the game in the 1880s.\nH. P. Gibson &amp; Sons games.\nThe publishing rights for \"L'Attaque\" were acquired for the United Kingdom by game maker H.P. Gibson and Sons in 1925, retaining the French name through at least the 1970s. Gibsons also produced several modified forms of the game, at least one of which predates the acquisition of the rights:\nIn 2019, Gibsons released a 100th anniversary edition of \"L'Attaque\". This edition included both the original and modern rules.\nStratego (classic).\n\"Stratego\" was created by Dutchman sometime before 1942. The name was registered as a trademark in 1942 by the Dutch company Van Perlstein &amp; Roeper Bosch N.V. (which also produced the first edition of \"Monopoly\"). After WW2, Mogendorff licensed Stratego to Smeets and Schippers, a Dutch company, in 1946. Hausemann and Hotte acquired a license in 1958 for European distribution, and in 1959 for global distribution. After Mogendorff's death in 1961, Hausemann and Hotte purchased the trademark from his heirs, and sublicensed it to Milton Bradley (which was acquired by Hasbro in 1984) in 1961 for United States distribution. It is introduced to the people of the United States as, \"the American version of the game now popular on the Continent.\" In 2009, Hausemann and Hotte was succeeded by Koninklijke Jumbo B.V. in the Netherlands.\nThe modern game of \"Stratego\", with its Napoleonic imagery, was originally manufactured in the Netherlands. Pieces were originally made of printed cardboard and inserted in metal clip stands. After World War II, painted wood pieces became standard. Starting in the early 1960s all versions switched to plastic pieces. The change from wood to plastic was made for economical reasons, as was the case with many products during that period, but with Stratego the change also served a structural function: Unlike the wooden pieces, the plastic pieces were designed with a small base. The wooden pieces had none, often resulting in pieces tipping over. This was disastrous for that player, since it often immediately revealed the piece's rank, as well as unleashing a literal domino effect by having a falling piece knock over other pieces. European versions introduced cylindrical castle-shaped pieces that proved to be popular. American editions later introduced new rectangular pieces with a more stable base and colorful stickers, not images directly imprinted on the plastic.\nEuropean versions of the game give the Marshal the highest number (10), while the initial American versions used the numbering system of \"L'Attaque\", giving the Marshal the lowest number (1) to show the highest value (i.e. it is the number 1, or most powerful, tile). More recent American versions of the game, which adopted the European system, caused considerable complaint among American players who grew up in the 1960s and 1970s. This may have been a factor in the release of a \"Nostalgia\" edition, in a wooden box, reproducing the classic edition of the early 1970s.\nModern Stratego variations.\nElectronic Stratego.\n\"Electronic Stratego\" was introduced by Milton Bradley in 1982. To promote the release, the company hired two actors to play Ronald Reagan and Leonid Brezhnev, who played a match at the New York Public Library Main Branch.\nIt has features that make many aspects of the game strikingly different from those of classic \"Stratego\". The board is 8 wide by 10 squares deep, instead of 10\u00d710. The blocked \"lake\" areas are therefore 1\u00d72 instead of 2\u00d72. Each side has 24 pieces, instead of 40, deployed in the three rows closest to the player; instead of six bomb pieces, \"Electronic Stratego\" uses hidden bomb pegs.\nEach type of playing piece in \"Electronic Stratego\" has a unique series of bumps on its bottom that are read by the game's battery-operated touch-sensitive \"board\". When attacking another piece, the attacking player hits their \"Strike\" button, presses their piece and then the targeted piece: the game either rewards a successful attack or punishes a failed strike with an appropriate bit of music. In this way the players never know for certain the rank of the piece that wins the attack, only whether the attack wins, fails, or ties (similar to the role of the referee in the Chinese game of \"Luzhanqi\"). Instead of choosing to move a piece, a player can opt to \"probe\" an opposing piece by hitting the \"Probe\" button and pressing down on the enemy piece: the game then beeps out a rough approximation of the strength of that piece.\nThere are no \"Bomb\" pieces: \"Bombs\" are set using pegs placed on a touch-sensitive \"peg board\" that is closed from view prior to the start of the game. Hence, it is possible for a player to have their piece occupying a square with a bomb on it. If an opposing piece lands on the seemingly empty square, the game plays the sound of an explosion and that piece is removed from play. As in classic \"Stratego\", only a \"Miner\" can remove a \"Bomb\" from play.\nThe \"Scout\" is allowed to move diagonally, in addition to its usual horizontal and vertical moves. Again, as with the non-electronic \"Stratego\", scouts are not allowed to jump over pieces.\nA player who successfully captures the opposing \"Flag\" is rewarded with a triumphant bit of music from the \"1812 Overture\".\nNew pieces and versions.\nIn the late 1990s, the Jumbo Company released several European variants, including a three- and four-player version, and a new \"Cannon\" piece (which jumps two squares to capture any piece, but loses to any attack against it). It also included some alternate rules such as \"Barrage\" (a quicker two-player game with fewer pieces) and \"Reserves\" (reinforcements in the three- and four-player games). The four-player version appeared in America in 1997.\nStarting in the 2000s, Hasbro, under its Milton Bradley label, released a series of popular media-themed Stratego editions.\nBesides themed variants with substantially different rules, current production includes three slightly different editions: sets with classic (1961) piece numbering (highest rank=1), sets with European piece numbering (highest rank=10), and sets that allow substitution of one or two variant pieces such as \"Cannons\", usually in place of scouts. Sets produced since 1970 or so have uniformly adopted the rule that scouts can move and strike in the same turn.\nStratego AI.\nIn July 2022, DeepMind announced the development of DeepNash, a model-free multi-agent reinforcement learning system capable of playing \"Stratego\" at the level of a human expert. \"Stratego\" has been difficult to model well because the opponent's pieces are hidden, making it a game of imperfect information, the initial setup has more than 1066 possible states, and the overall game tree has 10535 possible states. DeepNash was able to win 84% of 50 ranked matches in online matches hosted by Gravon over a period of two weeks in April 2022 against human players, and won at a minimum rate of 97% over hundreds of matches against previously-developed \"Stratego\"-playing programs including Probe, Master of the Flag, Demon of Ignorance, Asmodeus, Celsius, PeternLewis, and Vixen.\nRelated and derivative games.\n\"Stratego\" and its predecessor \"L'Attaque\" have spawned several derivative games, notably one 20th century Chinese game, \"Game of the fighting animals\" (\"Dou Shou Qi\") also known as Jungle or \"Animal Chess\".\nThe game Jungle also has pieces (but of animals rather than soldiers) with different ranks and pieces with higher rank capture the pieces with lower rank. The board, with two lakes in the middle, is also remarkably similar to that in \"Stratego\". The major differences between the two games is that in Jungle, the pieces are not hidden from the opponent, and the setup is fixed. According to historian R.C. Bell, this game is 20th century, and cannot have been a predecessor of \"L'Attaque\" or \"Stratego\".\nA more elaborate and complex Chinese game known as Land Battle Chess (Lu Zhan Qi) or Army Chess (Lu Zhan Jun Qi) is a similar board game to Stratego, with a few differences: It is played on a 5\u00d713 board with two un-occupiable spaces in the middle, and each player has 25 playing pieces. The setup is not fixed, both players keep their pieces hidden from their opponent, and the objective is to capture the enemy's flag.[2] Lu Zhan Jun Qi's basic gameplay is similar, though differences include \"missile\" pieces and a xiangqi-style board layout with the addition of railroads and defensive \"camps\". A third person is also typically used as a referee to decide battles between pieces without revealing their identities. An expanded version of the Land Battle Chess game also exists, adding naval and aircraft pieces and is known as Sea-Land-Air Battle Chess (Hai Lu Kong Zhan Qi).[3] There is also a 4-player version of Lu Zhan Jun Qi that has players opposite to each other on the board be on the same team and try to capture the opposite teams' flags and can defend each other from the opposition's attacks.\nA capture the flag game called \"Stratego\" and loosely based on the board game is played at summer camps. In this game, two teams of thirty to sixty players are assigned ranks by distribution of coloured objects such as pinnies or glowsticks, the colours representing rank, not team. Players can tag and capture lower-ranked opponents, with the exception that the lowest rank captures the highest. Players who do not know their teammates may not be able to tell which team other players are on, creating incomplete information and opportunities for bluffing.\nVersions.\nThe game remains in production, with new versions continuing to appear every few years. These are a few of the notable ones. The first U.S. edition (1961) Milton Bradley set, and a special edition 1963 set called \"Stratego Fine\", had wooden pieces. The 1961 wood pieces had a design that looked like vines scaling a castle wall on the back. But later 1961 productions featured plastic pieces (not true first editions). All other regular editions had plastic pieces. A few special editions as noted below had wooden or metal pieces.\nClassic versions.\nThese have 10\u00d710 boards, 40 pieces per side with classic pieces and rules of movement.\nOfficial Modern Version: Also known as Stratego Original. Redesigned pieces and game art. The pieces now use stickers attached to new \"castle-like\" plastic pieces. The stickers must be applied by the player after purchase. Rank numbering is reversed in European style (higher numbers equals higher rank). Comes with an optional alternate piece, the \"Infiltrator\".\nNostalgia Game Series Edition: Released 2002. Traditional stamped plastic pieces, although the metallic paint is dull and less reflective than some older versions, and the pieces are not engraved as some previous editions were. Wooden box, traditional board and piece numbering.\nStratego 50th Anniversary (2011) by Spin Master comes in both a book-style box and a cookie-tin-like metal box, with original new artwork, pieces and gameplay. It includes optional \"Cannons\" (2 per player) playing pieces.\nLibrary Edition: Hasbro's Library Series puts what appears to be the classic Stratego of the Nostalgia Edition into a compact, book-like design. The wooden box approximates the size of a book and is made to fit in a bookcase in one's library. In this version, the scout may not move and strike in the same turn.\nMichael Graves Design Stratego by Milton Bradley introduced in 2002 and sold exclusively through Target Stores. It features a finished wood box, wooden pedestal board, and closed black and white roughly wedge-shaped plastic pieces. Limited production, no longer available.\nStratego Onyx: Introduced in 2008, Stratego Onyx was sold exclusively by Barnes &amp; Noble. It includes foil-stamped wooden game pieces and a raised gameboard with a decorative wooden frame. One-time production, no longer available.\nFranklin Mint Civil War Collector's Edition: In the mid-1990s, Franklin Mint created a luxury version of Stratego with an American Civil War theme and gold- and silver-plated pieces. Due to a last-minute licensing problem, the set was never officially released and offered for sale. The only remaining copies are those sent to the company's retail stores for display.\nVariant Versions.\nThese have substantially different configurations and rules.\nUltimate Stratego: No longer in production, this version can still be found at some online stores and specialty gaming stores. This version is a variant of traditional \"Stratego\" and can accommodate up to 4 players simultaneously. The \"Ultimate Stratego\" board game contained four different Stratego versions: \"Ultimate Lightning\", \"Alliance Campaign\", \"Alliance Lightning\" and \"Ultimate Campaign\".\nScience Fiction Version: Jumbo B.V. / Spin Master version of \"Stratego\", common in North American department stores. The game has a futuristic science fiction theme. Played on a smaller 8\u00d710 board, with 30 pieces per player. Features unique \"Spotter\" playing pieces.\nStratego Waterloo: For the bicentenary of the Battle of Waterloo in June 2015, the Dutch publishing group Jumbo published \"Stratego Waterloo\". Instead of using ranks, the different historical units that had actually fought at the battle were added as \"Pawns\" (Old Guard, 95th Rifles...) \u2013 each with their own strengths and weaknesses. The \"Pawns\" are divided into light infantry, line infantry, light cavalry, heavy cavalry, artillery, commanders and commanders-in-chief (Wellington and Napoleon). Instead of capturing the \"Flag\", the players must get two of their pawns on the lines of communication of their opponent.\nFrom highest rank to lowest the pieces are:\nThe higher ranked piece always captures the lower\nStratego Conquest: 1996, two- to four-handed game played on world map; alternate pieces cannons and cavalry\nStratego Fortress: A 3D version of \"Stratego\" featuring a 3-level fortress and mystical themed pieces and maneuvers\nFire and Ice Stratego: The Hasbro version called Fire and Ice Stratego has different pieces and rules of movement. The game features a smaller 8\u00d710 board and each player has 30 magical and mythological themed pieces with special powers.\nPromotional.\nHertog Jan, a Dutch brand of beer, released \"Stratego Tournament\", a promotional version of \"Stratego\" with variant rules. It includes substantially fewer pieces, including only one Bomb and no Miners. Since each side has only about 18 pieces, the pieces are far more mobile. The scout in this version is allowed to move three squares in any combination of directions (including L-shapes) and there is a new piece called the \"Archer\", which is defeated by anything, but can defeat any piece other than the \"Bomb\" by shooting it from a two-square distance, in direct orthogonal, or straight, directions only. If one player is unable to move any more of his or her pieces, the game results in a tie because neither player's \"Flag\" was captured.\nThemed.\nThese variants are produced by the company with pop-culture-themed pieces licensed from their respective owners:\nProduced by Avalon Hill:\nProduced by USAopoly:\nCompetition.\nThere are now many \"Stratego\" competitions held throughout the world. The game is particularly popular in the Netherlands, Germany, Greece, USA and Belgium, where live and online championships are organized. The international \"Stratego\" sc\u00e8ne is at this moment dominated by players from The Netherlands and Greece. Stratego World Championships have been held since 1997 and continue to be held almost yearly around August; the latest was last year in N\u00fcrnberg in Germany. In August the next World Championships will be held in Avenches in Switzerland.\n\"Stratego\" competitions are now held in all four versions of the game:\nTournaments.\nWorld Championships Stratego Classic (40 pieces)\nWorld Championships Stratego Juniors Classic (40 pieces)\nWorld Championships Stratego Barrage (8 pieces)\nOther tournaments\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28972", "revid": "40043980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28972", "title": "Sindh", "text": "Province of Pakistan\nSindh ( ; ; , ; abbr. SD, historically romanized as Sind or Scinde) is a province of Pakistan. Located in the southeastern region of the country, Sindh is the third-largest province of Pakistan by land area and the second-largest province by population after Punjab. It is bordered by the Pakistani provinces of Balochistan to the west and north-west and Punjab to the north. It shares an International border with the Indian states of Gujarat and Rajasthan to the east; it is also bounded by the Arabian Sea to the south. Sindh's landscape consists mostly of alluvial plains flanking the Indus River, the Thar Desert in the eastern portion of the province along the international border with India, and the Kirthar Mountains in the western portion of the province.\nThe economy of Sindh is the second largest in Pakistan after the province of Punjab; its provincial capital Karachi is the most populous city in the country as well as its main financial hub. Sindh is home to a large portion of Pakistan's industrial sector and contains two of the country's busiest commercial seaports: Port Qasim and the Port of Karachi. The remainder of Sindh consists of an agriculture-based economy and produces fruits, consumer items and vegetables for other parts of the country.\nSindh is sometimes referred to as the \"Bab-ul Islam\" (transl.\u2009'Gateway of Islam'), as it was one of the first regions of the Indian subcontinent to fall under Islamic rule. The province is well known for its distinct culture, which is strongly influenced by Sufism, an important marker of Sindhi identity for both Hindus and Muslims. Sindh is prominent for its history during the Bronze Age under the Indus Valley civilization, and is home to two UNESCO-designated World Heritage Sites: the Makli Necropolis and Mohenjo-daro.\nEtymology.\nThe Greeks who conquered Sindh in 325 BC under the command of Alexander the Great referred to the Indus River as \"Ind\u00f3s\", hence the modern \"Indus\". The ancient Iranians referred to everything east of the river Indus as \"hind\". The word \"Sind\" is a Persian derivative of the Sanskrit term \"Sindhu,\" meaning \"river,\" a reference to vast Indus River.\nThe previous Perso-Arabic spelling \"Sind\" () was discontinued in 1988 by an amendment passed in the Sindh Assembly.\nHistory.\nAncient era.\nSindh and surrounding areas contain the ruins of the Indus Valley Civilization. There are remnants of thousand-year-old cities and structures, with a notable example in Sindh being that of Mohenjo Daro. Built around 2500 BC, it was one of the largest settlements of the ancient Indus civilization, with features such as standardized bricks, street grids, and covered sewerage systems. It was one of the world's earliest major cities, contemporaneous with the civilizations of ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, Minoan Crete, and Caral-Supe. Mohenjo-daro was abandoned in the 19th century BC as the Indus Valley Civilization declined, and the site was not rediscovered until the 1920s. Significant excavation has since been conducted at the site of the city, which was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1980. The site is currently threatened by erosion and improper restoration. A gradual drying of the region during the 3rd\u00a0millennium BC may have been the initial stimulus for its urbanisation. Eventually it also reduced the water supply enough to cause the civilisation's demise and to disperse its population to the east.\nDuring the Bronze Age, the territory of Sindh was known as Sindhu-Sauv\u012bra, covering the lower Indus Valley, with its southern border being the Indian Ocean and its northern border being the Pa\u00f1j\u0101b around Mult\u0101n. The capital of Sindhu-Sauv\u012bra was named Roruka and V\u012btabhaya or V\u012bt\u012bbhaya, and corresponds to the mediaeval Aroh\u1e5b and the modern-day Roh\u1e5b\u012b. The Achaemenids conquered the region and established the satrapy of Hindush. The territory may have corresponded to the area covering the lower and central Indus basin (present day Sindh and the southern Punjab regions of Pakistan). Alternatively, some authors consider that \"Hindush\" may have been located in the Punjab area. These areas remained under Persian control until the invasion by Alexander.\nAlexander conquered parts of Sindh after Punjab for few years and appointed his general Peithon as governor. He constructed a harbour at the city of Patala in Sindh. Chandragupta Maurya fought Alexander's successor in the east, Seleucus I Nicator, when the latter invaded. In a peace treaty, Seleucus ceded all territories west of the Indus River and offered a marriage, including a portion of Bactria, while Chandragupta granted Seleucus 500 elephants.\nFollowing a century of Mauryan rule which ended by 180 BC, the region came under the Indo-Greeks, followed by the Indo Scythians, who ruled with their capital at Minnagara. Later on, Sasanian rulers from the reign of Shapur I claimed control of the Sindh area in their inscriptions, known as Hind.\nThe local Rai dynasty emerged from Sindh and reigned for a period of 144 years, concurrent with the Huna invasions of North India. Aror was noted to be the capital. The Brahmin dynasty of Sindh succeeded the Rai dynasty. Most of the information about its existence comes from the \"Chach Nama\", a historical account of the Chach-Brahmin dynasty. After the empire's fall in 712, though the empire had ended, its dynasty's members administered parts of Sindh under the Umayyad Caliphate's Caliphal province of Sind.\nMedieval era.\nAfter the death of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, the Arab expansion towards the east reached the Sindh region beyond Persia. The connection between the Sindh and Islam was established by the initial Muslim invasions during the Rashidun Caliphate. Al-Hakim ibn Jabalah al-Abdi, who attacked Makran in the year 649, was an early partisan of Ali ibn Abu Talib. During the caliphate of Ali, many Jats of Sindh had come under the influence of Shi'ism and some even participated in the Battle of Camel and died fighting for Ali. Under the Arab Umayyads (661\u2013750), many Shias sought asylum in the region of Sindh, to live in relative peace in the remote area. Ziyad Hindi is one of those refugees. The first clash with the Hindu kings of Sindh took place in 636 (15 AH) under Caliph Umar ibn al-Khattab with the governor of Bahrain, Uthman ibn Abu-al-Aas, dispatching naval expeditions against Thane, Bharuch and Debal. Al-Baladhuri states they were victorious at Debal but doesn't mention the results of other two raids. However, the \"Chach Nama\" states that the raiders of Debal were defeated and its governor killed the leader of the raids. These raids were thought to be triggered by a later pirate attack on Umayyad ships. al-Baladhuri adds that this stopped any more incursions until the reign of Uthman.\nIn 712, Mohammed Bin Qasim defeated the Brahmin dynasty and annexed it to the Umayyad Caliphate. This marked the beginning of Islam in the Indian subcontinent. The Habbari dynasty ruled much of Greater Sindh, as a semi-independent \"emirate\" from 854 to 1024. Beginning with the rule of 'Umar bin Abdul Aziz al-Habbari in 854, the region became semi-independent from the Abbasid Caliphate in 861, while continuing to nominally pledge allegiance to the Abbasid Caliph in Baghdad. The Habbaris ruled Sindh until they were defeated by Sultan Mahmud Ghaznavi in 1026, who then went on to destroy the old Habbari capital of Mansura, and annex the region to the Ghaznavid Empire, thereby ending Arab rule of Sindh.\nThe Soomra dynasty was a local Sindhi Muslim dynasty that ruled between early 11th century and the 14th century. Later chroniclers like Ali ibn al-Athir (c. late 12th c.) and Ibn Khaldun (c. late 14th c.) attributed the fall of Habbarids to Mahmud of Ghazni, lending credence to the argument of Hafif being the last Habbarid. The Soomras appear to have established themselves as a regional power in this power vacuum. The Ghurids and Ghaznavids continued to rule parts of Sindh, across the eleventh and early twelfth century, alongside Soomras. The precise delineations are not yet known but Sommrus were probably centered in lower Sindh. Some of them were adherents of Isma'ilism. One of their kings Shimuddin Chamisar had submitted to Iltutmish, the Sultan of Delhi, and was allowed to continue on as a vassal.\nThe Sammas overthrew the Soomras soon after 1335 and established the Sindh Sultanate. The last Soomra ruler took shelter with the governor of Gujarat, under the protection of Muhammad bin Tughluq, the sultan of Delhi. Mohammad bin Tughlaq made an expedition against Sindh in 1351 and died at Sondha, possibly in an attempt to restore the Soomras. With this, the Sammas became independent. The next sultan, Firuz Shah Tughlaq attacked Sindh in 1365 and 1367, unsuccessfully, but with reinforcements from Delhi he later obtained Banbhiniyo's surrender. For a period the Sammas were therefore subject to Delhi again. Later, as the Sultanate of Delhi collapsed they became fully independent. Jam Unar was the founder of Samma dynasty mentioned by Ibn Battuta. The Samma civilization contributed significantly to the evolution of the Indo-Islamic architectural style. The city of Thatta is famous for its necropolis of erstwhile royals, the Makli Necropolis, which covers 10 square km on the Makli Hill. The Sammas have left a mark on Sindh with magnificent structures in Thatta. They were later overthrown by the Turkic Arghuns in the late 15th century.\nModern era.\nIn the late 16th century, Sindh was brought into the Mughal Empire by Akbar, himself born in the Sodha kingdom in Umerkot in Sindh. In 1591-1593, Akbar sent an army to conquer lower Sindh from the Tarkhan dynasty after defeating the last Tarkhan ruler, Mirza Jani Beg; Jani Beg and his son Mirza Ghazi Beg.\nMughal rule from their provincial capital of Thatta was to last in lower Sindh until the early 18th century, while upper Sindh was ruled by the indigenous Kalhora dynasty holding power, consolidating their rule from their capital of Khudabad, before shifting to Hyderabad from 1768 onwards.\nThe Talpurs succeeded the Kalhoras and four branches of the dynasty were established. One ruled lower Sindh from the city of Hyderabad, another ruled over upper Sindh from the city of Khairpur, a third ruled around the eastern city of Mirpur Khas, and a fourth was based in Tando Muhammad Khan. They were ethnically Baloch, and for most of their rule, they were subordinate to the Durrani Empire and were forced to pay tribute to them.\nThey ruled from 1783, until 1843, when they were in turn defeated by the British at the Battle of Miani and Battle of Dubbo. The northern Khairpur branch of the Talpur dynasty, however, continued to maintain a degree of sovereignty during British rule as the princely state of Khairpur, whose ruler elected to join the new Dominion of Pakistan in October 1947 as an autonomous region, before being fully amalgamated into West Pakistan in 1955.\nBritish Raj.\nThe British conquered Sindh in 1843. General Charles Napier is said to have reported victory to the Governor General with a one-word telegram, namely \"Peccavi\" \u2013 or \"I have sinned\" (Latin). The British had two objectives in their rule of Sindh: the consolidation of British rule and the use of Sindh as a market for British products and a source of revenue and raw materials. With the appropriate infrastructure in place, the British hoped to utilise Sindh for its economic potential. The British incorporated Sindh, some years later after annexing it, into the Bombay Presidency. Distance from the provincial capital, Bombay, led to grievances that Sindh was neglected in contrast to other parts of the Presidency. The merger of Sindh into Punjab province was considered from time to time but was turned down because of British disagreement and Sindhi opposition, both from Muslims and Hindus, to being annexed to Punjab.\nLater, desire for a separate administrative status for Sindh grew. At the annual session of the Indian National Congress in 1913, a Sindhi Hindu put forward the demand for Sindh's separation from the Bombay Presidency on the grounds of Sindh's unique cultural character. This reflected the desire of Sindh's predominantly Hindu commercial class to free itself from competing with the more powerful Bombay's business interests. Meanwhile, Sindhi politics was characterised in the 1920s by the growing importance of Karachi and the Khilafat Movement. A number of Sindhi pirs, descendants of Sufi saints who had proselytised in Sindh, joined the Khilafat Movement, which propagated the protection of the Ottoman Caliphate, and those pirs who did not join the movement found a decline in their following. The pirs generated huge support for the Khilafat cause in Sindh. Sindh came to be at the forefront of the Khilafat Movement.\nAlthough Sindh was less sectarian than other parts of India, the province's Muslim elite and emerging Muslim middle class demanded separation of Sindh from Bombay Presidency as a safeguard for their own interests. In this campaign, local Sindhi Muslims identified 'Hindu' with Bombay instead of Sindh. Sindhi Hindus were seen as representing the interests of Bombay instead of the majority of Sindhi Muslims. Sindhi Hindus, for the most part, opposed the separation of Sindh from Bombay. Although Sindh had a culture of religious syncretism, communal harmony and tolerance due to Sindh's strong Sufi culture in which both Sindhi Muslims and Sindhi Hindus partook, both the Muslim landed elite, \"waderas\", and the Hindu commercial elements, \"banias\", collaborated in oppressing the predominantly Muslim peasantry of Sindh who were economically exploited. Sindhi Muslims eventually demanded the separation of Sindh from the Bombay Presidency, a move opposed by Sindhi Hindus.\nIn Sindh's first provincial election after its separation from Bombay in 1936, economic interests were an essential factor of politics informed by religious and cultural issues. Due to British policies, much land in Sindh was transferred from Muslim to Hindu hands over the decades. Religious tensions rose in Sindh over the Sukkur Manzilgah issue where Muslims and Hindus disputed over an abandoned mosque in proximity to an area sacred to Hindus. The Sindh Muslim League exploited the issue and agitated for the return of the mosque to Muslims. Consequentially, a thousand members of the Muslim League were imprisoned. Eventually, due to panic the government restored the mosque to Muslims. The separation of Sindh from Bombay Presidency triggered Sindhi Muslim nationalists to support the Pakistan Movement. Even while the Punjab and North-West Frontier Province were ruled by parties hostile to the Muslim League, Sindh remained loyal to Jinnah. Although the prominent Sindhi Muslim nationalist G. M. Syed left the All India Muslim League in the mid-1940s and his relationship with Jinnah never improved, the overwhelming majority of Sindhi Muslims supported the creation of Pakistan, seeing in it their deliverance. Sindhi support for the Pakistan Movement arose from the desire of the Sindhi Muslim business class to drive out their Hindu competitors. The Muslim League's rise to becoming the party with the strongest support in Sindh was in large part linked to its winning over of the religious pir families. Although the Muslim League had previously fared poorly in the 1937 elections in Sindh, when local Sindhi Muslim parties won more seats, the Muslim League's cultivation of support from local pirs in 1946 helped it gain a foothold in the province, it didn't take long for the overwhelming majority of Sindhi Muslims to campaign for the creation of Pakistan.\nPartition (1947).\nIn 1947, violence did not constitute a major part of the Sindhi partition experience, unlike in Punjab. There were very few incidents of violence on Sindh, in part due to the Sufi-influenced culture of religious tolerance and in part that Sindh was not divided and was instead made part of Pakistan in its entirety. Sindhi Hindus who left generally did so out of a fear of persecution, rather than persecution itself, because of the arrival of Muslim refugees from India. Sindhi Hindus differentiated between the local Sindhi Muslims and the migrant Muslims from India. A large number of Sindhi Hindus travelled to India by sea, to the ports of Bombay, Porbandar, Veraval and Okha.\nIn November 2025, Indian defence minister Ranjath Singh said Sindh should return to India led commemoration from political figures..\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSindh has the second highest Human Development Index out of all of Pakistan's provinces at 0.628. The 2023 Census of Pakistan indicated a population of 55.7 million.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIslam in Sindh has a long history, starting with the capture of Sindh by Muhammad Bin Qasim in 712. Over time, the majority of the population in Sindh converted to Islam, especially in rural areas. Today, Muslims make up 90% of the population, and are more dominant in urban than rural areas. Islam in Sindh has a strong Sufi ethos with numerous Muslim saints and mystics, such as the Sufi poet Shah Abdul Latif Bhittai, having lived in Sindh historically. One popular legend that highlights the strong Sufi presence in Sindh is that 125,000 Sufi saints and mystics are buried on Makli Hill near Thatta. The development of Sufism in Sindh was similar to the development of Sufism in other parts of the Muslim world. In the sixteenth century two Sufi \"tareeqat\" (orders) \u2013 Qadria and Naqshbandia \u2013 were introduced in Sindh. Sufism continues to play an important role in the daily lives of Sindhis.\nIn 1941, the last census conducted prior to the partition of India, the total population of Sindh was 4,840,795 out of which 3,462,015 (71.5%) were Muslims, 1,279,530 (26.4%) were Hindus and the remaining were Tribals, Sikhs, Christians, Parsis, Jains, Jews, and Buddhists.\nSindh also has Pakistan's highest percentage of Hindus overall, accounting for 8.8% of the population, roughly around 4.9 million people, and 13.3% of the province's rural population as per 2023 Pakistani census report. These numbers also include the scheduled caste population, which stands at 1.7% of the total in Sindh (or 3.1% in rural areas), and is believed to have been under-reported, with some community members instead counted under the main Hindu category. Although, Pakistan Hindu Council claimed that there are 6,842,526 Hindus living in Sindh Province covering around 14.29% of the region's population. Umerkot district in the Thar Desert is Pakistan's only Hindu-majority district. The Shri Ramapir Temple in Tandoallahyar whose annual festival is the second largest Hindu pilgrimage in Pakistan is in Sindh. Sindh is also the only province in Pakistan to have a separate law for governing Hindu marriages.\n2020 community estimates indicated the Sikh population in Sindh stood at approximately 10,000, while the 2023 census indicated a population of 5,182 Sikhs.\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2023 census, the most widely spoken language in the province is Sindhi, the first language of 33,462,299 % of the population. It is followed by Urdu 12,409,745 (%), then Pashto 2,955,893 (%), Punjabi 2,265,471 (%), Balochi 1,208,147 (%), Saraiki 913,418 (%), and Hindko 830,581 (), Brahui 265,769, Mewati 57,059, Kashmiri 53,249, Balti 27,193, Shina 22,273, Koshistani 14,885, 777 Kalasha and others are 1,151,650,\nOther minority languages include Kutchi, Gujarati, Aer, Bagri, Bhaya, Brahui, Dhatki, Ghera, Goaria, Gurgula, Jadgali, Jandavra, Jogi, Kabutra, Kachi Koli, Parkari Koli, Wadiyari Koli, Loarki, Marwari, Sansi, and Vaghri.\nGeography and nature.\nSindh is in the western corner of South Asia, bordering the Iranian plateau in the west. Geographically it is the third largest province of Pakistan, stretching about from north to south and (extreme) or (average) from east to west, with an area of of Pakistani territory. Sindh is bounded by the Thar Desert to the east, the Kirthar Mountains to the west and the Arabian Sea and Rann of Kutch to the south. In the centre is a fertile plain along the Indus River.\nSindh is divided into three main geographical regions: \"Siro\" (\"upper country\"), aka Upper Sindh, which is above Sehwan; \"Vicholo\" (\"middle country\"), or Middle Sindh, from Sehwan to Hyderabad; and \"L\u0101\u1e5fu\" (\"sloping, descending country\"), or Lower Sindh, mostly consisting of the Indus Delta below Hyderabad.\nFlora.\nThe province is mostly arid with scant vegetation except for the irrigated Indus Valley. The dwarf palm, \"Acacia rupestris\" (kher), and \"Tecomella undulata\" (lohirro) trees are typical of the western hill region. In the Indus valley, the \"Acacia nilotica\" (babul) (babbur) is the most dominant and occurs in thick forests along the Indus banks. The \"Azadirachta indica\" (neem) (nim), \"Zizyphys vulgaris\" (bir) (ber), \"Tamarix orientalis\" (jujuba lai) and \"Capparis aphylla\" (kirir) are among the more common trees.\nMango, date palms and the more recently introduced banana, guava, orange and chiku are the typical fruit-bearing trees. The coastal strip and the creeks abound in semi-aquatic and aquatic plants and the inshore Indus delta islands have forests of \"Avicennia tomentosa\" (timmer) and \"Ceriops candolleana\" (chaunir) trees. Water lilies grow in abundance in the numerous lakes and ponds, particularly in the lower Sindh region.\nFauna.\nAmong the wild animals, the Sindh ibex (sareh), blackbuck, wild sheep (Urial or gadh) and wild bear are found in the western rocky range. The leopard is now rare and the Asiatic cheetah extinct. The Pirrang (large tiger cat or fishing cat) of the eastern desert region is also disappearing. Deer occur in the lower rocky plains and in the eastern region, as do the Striped hyena (charakh), jackal, fox, porcupine, common gray mongoose and hedgehog. The Sindhi phekari, red lynx or Caracal cat, is found in some areas. Phartho (hog deer) and wild bear occur, particularly in the central inundation belt. There are bats, lizards and reptiles, including the cobra, lundi (viper) and the mysterious Sindh krait of the Thar region, which is supposed to suck the victim's breath in his sleep.\nSome unusual sightings of Asian cheetah occurred in 2003 near the Balochistan border in Kirthar Mountains. The rare Houbara bustard finds Sindh's warm climate suitable to rest and mate. Unfortunately, it is hunted by locals and foreigners.\nCrocodiles are rare and inhabit only the backwaters of the Indus, eastern Nara channel and Karachi backwater. Besides a large variety of marine fish, the plumbeous dolphin, the beaked dolphin, rorqual or blue whale and skates frequent the seas along the Sindh coast. The Pallo (Sable fish), a marine fish, ascends the Indus annually from February to April to spawn. The Indus river dolphin is among the most endangered species in Pakistan and is found in the part of the Indus river in northern Sindh. Hog deer and wild bear occur, particularly in the central inundation belt.\nAlthough Sindh has a semi arid climate, through its coastal and riverine forests, its huge fresh water lakes and mountains and deserts, Sindh supports a large amount of varied wildlife. Due to the semi-arid climate of Sindh the left out forests support an average population of jackals and snakes. The national parks established by the Government of Pakistan in collaboration with many organizations such as World Wide Fund for Nature and Sindh Wildlife Department support a huge variety of animals and birds. The Kirthar National Park in the Kirthar range spreads over more than 3000\u00a0km2 of desert, stunted tree forests and a lake. The KNP supports Sindh ibex, wild sheep (urial) and black bear along with the rare leopard. There are also occasional sightings of The Sindhi phekari, ped lynx or Caracal cat. There is a project to introduce tigers and Asian elephants too in KNP near the huge Hub Dam Lake. Between July and November when the monsoon winds blow onshore from the ocean, giant olive ridley turtles lay their eggs along the seaward side. The turtles are protected species. After the mothers lay and leave them buried under the sands the SWD and WWF officials take the eggs and protect them until they are hatched to keep them from predators.\nClimate.\nSindh lies in a tropical to subtropical region; it is hot in the summer and mild to warm in winter. Temperatures frequently rise above between May and August, and the minimum average temperature of occurs during December and January in the northern and higher elevated regions. The annual rainfall averages about seven inches, falling mainly during July and August. The southwest monsoon wind begins in mid-February and continues until the end of September, whereas the cool northerly wind blows during the winter months from October to January.\nSindh lies between the two monsoons\u2014the southwest monsoon from the Indian Ocean and the northeast or retreating monsoon, deflected towards it by the Himalayan mountains\u2014and escapes the influence of both. The region's scarcity of rainfall is compensated by the inundation of the Indus twice a year, caused by the spring and summer melting of Himalayan snow and by rainfall in the monsoon season.\nSindh is divided into three climatic regions: Siro (the upper region, centred on Jacobabad), Wicholo (the middle region, centred on Hyderabad), and Lar (the lower region, centred on Karachi). The thermal equator passes through upper Sindh, where the air is generally very dry. Central Sindh's temperatures are generally lower than those of upper Sindh but higher than those of lower Sindh. Dry hot days and cool nights are typical during the summer. Central Sindh's maximum temperature typically reaches . Lower Sindh has a damper and humid maritime climate affected by the southwestern winds in summer and northeastern winds in winter, with lower rainfall than Central Sindh. Lower Sindh's maximum temperature reaches about . In the Kirthar range at and higher at Gorakh Hill and other peaks in Dadu District, temperatures near freezing have been recorded and brief snowfall is received in the winters.\nGovernment.\nSindh province.\nThe Provincial Assembly of Sindh is a unicameral and consists of 168 seats, of which 5% are reserved for non-Muslims and 17% for women. The provincial capital of Sindh is Karachi. The provincial government is led by Chief Minister who is directly elected by the popular and landslide votes; the Governor serves as a ceremonial representative nominated and appointed by the President of Pakistan. The administrative boss of the province who is in charge of the bureaucracy is the Chief Secretary Sindh, who is appointed by the Prime Minister of Pakistan. Most of the influential Sindhi tribes in the province are involved in Pakistan's politics.\nIn addition, Sindh's politics leans towards the left-wing and its political culture serves as a dominant place for the left-wing spectrum in the country. The province's trend towards the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) and away from the Pakistan Muslim League (N) can be seen in nationwide general elections, in which Sindh is a stronghold of the PPP. The PML(N) has a limited support due to its centre-right agenda.\nIn metropolitan cities such as Karachi and Hyderabad, the MQM (another party of the left with the support of \"Muhajirs\") has a considerable vote bank and support. Minor leftist parties such as the People's Movement also found support in rural areas of the province.\nDivisions.\nIn 2008, after the public elections, the new government decided to restore the structure of Divisions of all provinces. In Sindh after the lapse of the Local Governments Bodies term in 2010 the Divisional Commissioners system was to be restored.\nIn July 2011, following excessive violence in the city of Karachi and after the political split between the ruling PPP and the majority party in Sindh, the MQM and after the resignation of the MQM Governor of Sindh, PPP and the Government of Sindh decided to restore the commissionerate system in the province. As a consequence, the five divisions of Sindh were restored \u2013 namely Karachi, Hyderabad, Sukkur, Mirpurkhas and Larkana with their respective districts. Subsequently, a new division was added in Sindh, the Nawab Shah/Shaheed Benazirabad division.\nKarachi district has been de-merged into its five original constituent districts: Karachi East, Karachi West, Karachi Central, Karachi South and Malir. Recently Korangi has been upgraded to the status of the sixth district of Karachi. These six districts form the Karachi Division now. In 2020, the Kemari District was created after splitting Karachi West District. Currently the Sindh government is planning to divide the Tharparkar district into Tharparkar and Chhachro districts.\nLower-level subdivisions.\nIn Sindh, talukas are equivalent to the tehsils used elsewhere in the country, supervisory tapas correspond with the kanungo circles used elsewhere, tapas correspond with the patwar circles used in other provinces, and dehs are equivalent to the mouzas used elsewhere.\nEducation.\nUniversities.\nOther major public and private educational institutes in Sindh include:\nCulture.\nThe rich culture, art and architectural landscape of Sindh have fascinated historians. The culture, folktales, art and music of Sindh form a mosaic of human history.\nCultural heritage.\nThe work of Sindhi artisans was sold in ancient markets of Damascus, Baghdad, Basra, Istanbul, Cairo and Samarkand. Referring to the lacquer work on wood locally known as Jandi, T. Posten (an English traveller who visited Sindh in the early 19th century) asserted that the articles of Hala could be compared with exquisite specimens of China. Technological improvements such as the spinning wheel (charkha) and treadle (pai-chah) in the weaver's loom were gradually introduced and the processes of designing, dyeing and printing by block were refined. The refined, lightweight, colourful, washable fabrics from Hala became a luxury for people used to the woollens and linens of the age.\nNon-governmental organisations (NGOs) such as the World Wildlife Fund, Pakistan, play an important role to promote the culture of Sindh. They provide training to women artisans in Sindh so they get a source of income. They promote their products under the name of \"Crafts Forever\". Many women in rural Sindh are skilled in the production of caps. Sindhi caps are manufactured commercially on a small scale at New Saeedabad and Hala New. Sindhi people began celebrating Sindhi Topi Day on 6 December 2009, to preserve the historical culture of Sindh by wearing Ajrak and Sindhi topi.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n there is 90million only.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28975", "revid": "36941121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28975", "title": "Super Bowl III", "text": "Third AFL\u2013NFL Championship Game\nSuper Bowl III was an American football championship game played on January 12, 1969, at the Orange Bowl in Miami, Florida. It\u00a0was the third AFL\u2013NFL Championship Game in professional American football, and the first to officially bear the trademark name \"Super Bowl\". Super Bowl III is regarded as one of the greatest upsets in both American football history and in the history of professional sports. The 18.5-point underdog American Football League (AFL) champion New York Jets defeated the National Football League (NFL) champion Baltimore Colts by a score of 16\u20137.\nThe game was the first of two Super Bowl victories for the AFL over the NFL. Before the game many sports writers and fans believed that AFL teams were less talented than NFL clubs, and expected the Colts to defeat the Jets by a wide margin. The Colts posted a 13\u20131 record in the regular season and defeated the Minnesota Vikings 24\u201314 in the Western Conference championship game, then shut out the Cleveland Browns, the only team to beat the Colts in the regular season, 34\u20130 in the NFL Championship Game. The Jets were 11\u20133 in the regular season, and defeated the Oakland Raiders 27\u201323 in the AFL Championship Game.\nJets quarterback Joe Namath famously made an appearance three days before the Super Bowl at the Miami Touchdown Club in which he personally guaranteed his team's victory. His team backed up his words by controlling the majority of the game, building a 16\u20130 lead by the fourth quarter off of a touchdown run by Matt Snell and three field goals by Jim Turner. Colts quarterback Earl Morrall threw three interceptions before being replaced by Johnny Unitas, who then led the Colts to its only touchdown, during the last few minutes of the game. With the victory, the Jets were the only winning team to score only one touchdown (either offensive, defensive, or special teams) until the New England Patriots in Super Bowl LIII. Namath, who completed 17 out of 28 passes for 206 yards, was named as the Super Bowl's most valuable player, making him the first player in Super Bowl history to be declared MVP without personally scoring or throwing for a touchdown.\nThis is the only Super Bowl whose matchup cannot (barring a future realignment and/or change to the playoff format) occur in the Super Bowl again, as both the Jets and Colts play in the American Football Conference (AFC).\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nThe NFL awarded Super Bowl III to Miami on May 14, 1968, at the owners meetings held in Atlanta. It marked the second of eleven Super Bowls in the Miami area (as of 2022). It was also the second consecutive Super Bowl to be awarded to Miami (II and III), the only time that the Super Bowl has been hosted by the same stadium in back-to-back seasons. Two cities were considered for the game, New Orleans (Tulane Stadium) being the other.\nGoing into the meeting, several observers believed that New Orleans was the favorite. It had been reported that New Orleans was being promised the game by commissioner Pete Rozelle as a payback to Louisiana congressman Hale Boggs and senator Russell B. Long for being instrumental in passing crucial antitrust exemption legislation, which allowed for the AFL\u2013NFL merger. In selecting Miami, owners rejected any potential quid pro quo. Miami's hosting of sold-out Super Bowl II just four months earlier was seen by all accounts as a huge success, and owners elected to stick with a known commodity. The expansion Saints had lost money in their first season, and were publicly going through front office shakeups. Furthermore, during the presentation, a mix-up in the Tulane Stadium rental fee helped dissuade the league. Rozelle made it clear, however, that Miami was not positioned to become the permanent home for the Super Bowl.\nProfessional football.\nThe National Football League (NFL) had dominated professional football from its origins after World War I. Rival leagues had crumbled or merged with it, and when the American Football League (AFL) began to play in 1960, it was the fourth to hold that similar name to challenge the older NFL. Unlike its earlier namesakes, however, this AFL was able to command sufficient financial resources to survive; one factor in this was becoming the first league to sign a television contract\u2014previously, individual franchises had signed agreements with networks to televise games. The junior league proved successful enough, in fact, to make attractive offers to players. After the 1964 season, there had been a well-publicized bidding war which culminated with the signing, by the AFL's New York Jets (formerly Titans of New York), of Alabama quarterback Joe Namath for an unprecedented contract. Fearing that bidding wars over players would become the norm, greatly increasing labor costs, NFL owners, ostensibly led by league Commissioner Pete Rozelle, obtained a merger agreement with the AFL in June 1966, which provided for a common draft, interleague play in the pre-season, a world championship game to follow each season, and the integration of the two leagues into one in a way to be agreed at a future date. As the two leagues had an unequal number of teams (under the new merger agreement, the NFL expanded to sixteen in 1967, and the AFL to ten in 1968), realignment was advocated by some owners, but was opposed. Eventually, three NFL teams (Cleveland Browns, Pittsburgh Steelers, and the Baltimore Colts) agreed to move over to join the ten AFL franchises in the American Football Conference.\nDespite the ongoing merger, it was a commonly held view that the NFL was a far superior league. This was seemingly confirmed by the results of the first two interleague championship games, in January 1967 and 1968, in which the NFL champion Green Bay Packers, coached by the legendary Vince Lombardi, easily defeated the AFL's Kansas City Chiefs and Oakland Raiders. Although publicized as the inter-league championship games, it was not until later that the moniker for this championship contest between the now two conferences (National and American) began having the nickname of \"Super Bowl\" applied to it by the media and later began being counted by using Roman numerals, the creation of the term being credited to the founder of the AFL, Lamar Hunt.\nBaltimore Colts.\nThe Baltimore Colts had won the 1958 and 1959 NFL championships under Coach Weeb Ewbank. In the following years, however, the Colts failed to make the playoffs, and the Colts dismissed Ewbank after a 7\u20137 record in 1962. He was soon hired by New York's new AFL franchise, which had just changed its name from the Titans to the Jets. In Ewbank's place, Baltimore hired an untested young head coach, Don Shula, who would also go on to become one of the game's greatest coaches. The Colts did well under Shula, despite losing to the Cleveland Browns in the 1964 NFL Championship Game and, in 1965, losing in overtime to the Green Bay Packers in a tie-breaker game to decide the NFL Western Conference title. The Colts finished a distant second in the West to the Packers in 1966, and in 1967, with the NFL realigned into four divisions of four teams each, went undefeated with two ties through their first 13 games, but lost the game and the Coastal Division championship to the Los Angeles Rams on the final Sunday of the season\u2014under newly instituted tiebreakers procedures, L.A. won the division championship as it had better net points in the two games the teams played (the Rams win and an earlier tie). The Colts finished 11\u20131\u20132, tied for the best record in the league, but were excluded from the playoffs. In 1968, Shula and the Colts were considered a favorite to win the NFL championship again, which carried with it an automatic berth what was now becoming popularly known as the \"Super Bowl\" against the champion of the younger AFL. The NFL champion, in both cases the Green Bay Packers, had easily won the first two Super Bowls (1967 and 1968) over the AFL winner, establishing for a while then the superiority of the older NFL circuit.\nBaltimore's quest for a championship seemed doomed from the start when long-time starting quarterback Johnny Unitas suffered a pre-season injury to his throwing arm and was replaced by Earl Morrall, a veteran who had started inconsistently over the course of his 12 seasons with four teams. But Morrall would go on to have the best year of his career, leading the league in passer rating (93.2) during the regular season. His performance was so impressive that Colts coach Don Shula decided to keep Morrall in the starting lineup after Unitas was healthy enough to play. The Colts had won ten games in a row, including four shutouts, and finished the season with an NFL-best 13\u20131 record. In those ten games, they had allowed only seven touchdowns. Then, the Colts avenged their sole regular-season loss against the Cleveland Browns by crushing them 34\u20130 in the NFL Championship Game.\nThe Colts offense ranked second in the NFL in points scored (402; only behind the Cowboys 431 points scored). Wide receivers Jimmy Orr (29 receptions, 743 yards, 6 touchdowns) and Willie Richardson (37 receptions, 698 yards, 8 touchdowns) provided Baltimore with two deep threats, with Orr averaging 25.6 yards per catch, and Richardson averaging 18.9. Tight end John Mackey also recorded 45 receptions for 644 yards and 5 touchdowns. Pro Bowl running back Tom Matte was the team's top rusher with 662 yards and 9 touchdowns. He also caught 25 passes for 275 yards and another touchdown. Running backs Terry Cole and Jerry Hill combined for 778 rushing yards and 236 receiving yards.\nThe Colts defense led the NFL in fewest points allowed (144, tying the 1963 Bears for the then all-time league record), and ranked third in total rushing yards allowed (1,339), while also recording 29 interceptions (2nd in the league) and holding their opponents to an NFL-low 9 touchdown passes. Bubba Smith, a 6\u20327\u2033 295-pound defensive end considered the NFL's best pass rusher, anchored the line. Linebacker Mike Curtis, who intercepted two passes and recovered three fumbles, was considered one of the top linebackers in the NFL. Baltimore's secondary consisted of defensive backs Bobby Boyd (8 interceptions), Rick Volk (6 interceptions), Lenny Lyles (5 interceptions), and Jerry Logan (3 interceptions). The Colts were the only NFL team to routinely play a zone defense. That gave them an advantage in the NFL because the other NFL teams were inexperienced against a zone defense. (This would not give them an advantage over the upstart New York Jets, however, because zone defenses were common in the AFL and the Jets knew how to attack them.)\nNew York Jets.\nThe New York Jets, led by head coach Weeb Ewbank (who was the head coach of the Colts when they won the famous 1958 NFL Championship game and later the '59 title also), finished the season with an 11\u20133 regular season record (one of the losses was to the Oakland Raiders in the infamous \"Heidi Game\") and had to rally to defeat those same Raiders, 27\u201323, in a thrilling AFL Championship Game.\nJets quarterback Joe Namath threw for 3,147 yards during the regular season and completed 49.2 percent of his passes, but threw more interceptions (17) than touchdowns (15). Still, he led the offense effectively enough for them to finish the regular season with more total points scored (419) than Baltimore, and finished fourth in completion percentage, fifth in touchdown passes, and third in passing yards as one of only three quarterbacks to pass for over 3,000 yards in the AFL that season. Fundamentally, Namath usually found ways to win. For example, late in the fourth quarter of the AFL championship game, Namath threw an interception that allowed the Raiders to take the lead. But he then made up for his mistake by completing 3 consecutive passes on the ensuing drive, advancing the ball 68 yards in just 55 seconds to score a touchdown to regain the lead for New York. Future Hall of Fame wide receiver Don Maynard caught the game-winning pass in the end zone but strained his hamstring on the play.\nThe Jets had a number of offensive weapons that Namath used. Maynard had the best season of his career, catching 57 passes for 1,297 yards (an average of 22.8 yards per catch) and 10 touchdowns. Wide receiver George Sauer recorded 66 receptions for 1,141 yards and 3 touchdowns. Tight end Pete Lammons added 32 receptions for 400 yards and three touchdowns. The Jets rushing attack was also effective. Fullback Matt Snell, a power runner, was the top rusher on the team with 747 yards and 6 touchdowns, while elusive halfback Emerson Boozer contributed 441 yards and 5 touchdowns. Meanwhile, kicker Jim Turner made 34 field goals and 43 extra points for a combined total of 145 points.\nThe Jets defense led the AFL in total rushing yards allowed (1,195). Gerry Philbin, Paul Rochester, John Elliott, and Verlon Biggs anchored the defensive line. The Jets linebacking core was led by middle linebacker Al Atkinson. The secondary was led by defensive backs Johnny Sample (a former Colt who played on their 1958 NFL Championship team) who recorded 7 interceptions, and Jim Hudson, who recorded 5.\nSeveral of the Jets' players had been cut by NFL teams. Maynard had been cut by the New York Giants after they lost the 1958 NFL Championship Game to the Colts and had to spend one year playing Canadian football before the Jets (then called the Titans) enabled him to return to his home country. \"I kept a little bitterness in me,\" he says. Sample had been cut by the Colts. \"I was almost in a frenzy by the time the game arrived,\" he says. \"I held a private grudge against the Colts. I was really ready for that game. All of us were.\" Offensive tackle Winston Hill had been cut five years earlier by the Colts as a rookie in training camp. \"Ordell Braase kept making me look bad in practice,\" he says. Hill would be blocking Braase in Super Bowl III.\nAt an all-night party to celebrate the Jets' victory over the Raiders at Namath's nightclub, Bachelors III, Namath poured champagne over Johnny Carson as the comedian commented, \"First time I ever knew you to waste the stuff.\"\nPostseason.\nThe Colts advanced to the Super Bowl with two dominating wins. First, they jumped to a 21\u20130 fourth quarter lead against the Minnesota Vikings and easily held off their meager comeback attempt in the final period for a 24\u201314 win.\nThen they faced the Cleveland Browns, who had defeated them in week 5 of the regular season. But in this game, they proved to be no challenge as Baltimore held them to just 173 total yards and only allowed them to cross midfield twice in the entire game. Matte scored three of the Colts' four rushing touchdowns as the team won easily, 34\u20130.\nMeanwhile, New York in the AFL championship game faced a red hot Oakland Raiders team who had just defeated the Kansas City Chiefs 41\u20136 one week earlier, with quarterback Daryle Lamonica throwing five touchdown passes. The championship game was close and hard-fought the whole way through, with both teams trading scores at a relatively even pace. The momentum seemed to swing in the Raiders' favor when George Atkinson picked off a pass from Namath and returned it 32 yards to the Jets 5-yard line, setting up a touchdown that gave Oakland their first lead of the game at 23\u201320 with 8:18 left in regulation. But Namath quickly led the team back, completing a 10-yard pass to Sauer and a 52-yard pass to Maynard on the Raiders' six-yard line. On the next play, his six-yard touchdown pass to Maynard gave them a 27\u201323 lead they would never relinquish. Oakland's final three possessions of the game would result in a turnover on downs, a lost fumble, and time expiring in the game.\nSuper Bowl pregame news and notes.\nAfter the Jets' AFL championship victory, Namath stated to \"The New York Times\" sportswriter Dave Anderson, \"There are five quarterbacks in the AFL who are better than Morrall.\" The five were himself, his backup Babe Parilli, Lamonica, John Hadl of the San Diego Chargers, and Bob Griese of the Miami Dolphins. Namath added, \"You put Babe Parilli with Baltimore instead of Morrall and Baltimore might be better. Babe throws better than Morrall.\"\nTickets for the game were priced at $12, $8, and $6.\nNamath's guarantee.\nDespite the Jets' accomplishments, AFL teams were generally not regarded as having the same caliber of talent as NFL teams. However, three days before the game, an intoxicated Namath appeared at the Miami Touchdown Club and boldly predicted to the audience, \"We're gonna win the game. I guarantee it\". Coach Ewbank later joked that he \"could have shot\" Namath for the statement. Namath made his famous \"guarantee\" in response to a rowdy Colts supporter at the club, who boasted the Colts would easily defeat the Jets. Namath said he never intended to make such a public prediction, and would not have done so if he had not been confronted by the fan. Sportswriter Dave Anderson did not think that the remark was notable because, he recalled, Namath had said similar things during the week (\"I know we're gonna win\" for example), but an article by Luther Evans of the \"Miami Herald\" made the statement famous. Namath's comments and subsequent performance in the game itself are one of the more famous instances in NFL lore.\nThe Colts, linebacker Curtis recalled, \"sort of laughed at\" Namath's guarantee. The team did not adjust the defense it had used during the season against the Jets because \"that should be good enough,\" Curtis said. The AFL champions shared the confident feelings of their quarterback. According to Matt Snell, all of the Jets, not just Namath, were insulted and angry that they were 19.5-point underdogs. Most of the Jets considered the Raiders, whom they barely beat (27\u201323) in the AFL title game, a better team than the Colts. Indeed, watching films of the Colts and in preparation for the game, Jets coaching staff and offensive players noted that their offense was particularly suited against the Colts defense. The Colts defensive schemes relied on frequent blitzing, which covered up weak points in pass coverage. The Jets had an automatic contingency for such blitzes by short passing to uncovered tight ends or backs. After a film session the Wednesday prior to the game, Jets tight end Pete Lammons, a Texas native, was heard to drawl, \"Damn, y'all, we gotta stop watching these films. We gonna get overconfident\".\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by NBC. Curt Gowdy handled the play-by-play duties and was joined by color commentators Al DeRogatis and Kyle Rote in the broadcast booth. Also helping with NBC's coverage were Jim Simpson (reporting from the sidelines) and Pat Summerall, on loan from CBS (helping conduct player interviews for the pregame show, along with Rote). In an interview later done with NFL Films, Gowdy called it the most memorable game he ever called because of its historical significance.\nWhile the Orange Bowl was sold out for the game, the live telecast was not shown in Miami due to both leagues' unconditional blackout rules at the time.\n41.66 million people in the US watched the game on television, resulting in a rating of 36 and a market share of 70. The original NBC broadcast was later aired as part of the NFL Network \"Super Bowl Classics\" series.\nCeremonies and entertainment.\n\"Mr. Football\" was the title of the pregame show, which featured marching bands playing \"Mr. Touchdown, U.S.A.\" as people in walking footballs representing all NFL and AFL teams except the Jets and Colts were paraded, after which performers representing a Jets player and a Colts player appeared on top of a large, multi-layered, smoke topped cake. Astronauts of the Apollo 8 mission (Frank Borman, Jim Lovell, and William Anders), the first crewed flight around the Moon, which had returned to Earth just 18 days prior to the game, then led the Pledge of Allegiance. Lloyd Geisler, first trumpeter of the Washington National Symphony Orchestra, performed the national anthem. The Florida A&amp;M University band was featured during the \"America Thanks\" halftime show.\nGame summary.\nNew York entered the game with their primary deep threat, wide receiver Don Maynard, playing with a pulled hamstring. But his 112-yard, two touchdown performance against the Oakland Raiders in the AFL championship game made the Colts defense pay special attention to him, not realizing he was injured. Using Maynard as a decoy\u2014he had no receptions in the game\u2014Joe Namath was able to take advantage of single coverage on wide receiver George Sauer Jr. (After studying the Colts' zone defense, Ewbank had told his receivers, \"Find the dead spots in the zone, hook up, and Joe will hit you.\") The Jets had a conservative game plan, emphasizing the run as well as short high-percentage passes to minimize interceptions. Meanwhile, with the help of many fortunate plays, the Jets defense kept the Colts offense from scoring for most of the game. Also, Baltimore had a distinctly older group of players with 10+ years experience (Braase, Shinnick, Lyles, Boyd) on their defense's right side versus New York's younger, bigger left offensive side (Hill, Talamini, Schmitt, Sauer)--and back Snell when running left behind left tackle Hill, who thoroughly defeated defensive end Braase.\nFirst quarter.\nNamath recalled that he did not become \"dead serious\" until, on the sideline before the game, he saw Unitas. The Jets, led by captains Namath and Johnny Sample, and Colts, led by captains Preston Pearson, Unitas, and Lyles, met at midfield where referee Tom Bell announced that the Jets had won the coin toss and had elected to receive the football. The coin toss had been conducted an hour prior to kickoff but this was done for the benefit of the spectators. Colts kicker Lou Michaels (the younger brother of Jets defensive coordinator, Walt Michaels) kicked the ball off to cornerback Earl Christy, who returned the ball 25 yards to the Jets' 23-yard line. Namath handed the ball off to running back Matt Snell on first down who carried it 3 yards. On second down, Snell carried the ball for 9 yards, earning the Jets their first first down of the game. Colts safety Rick Volk sustained a concussion when he tackled Snell and was subsequently lost for the game. On the ensuing play, running back Emerson Boozer lost four yards when he was tackled behind the line of scrimmage by linebacker Don Shinnick. Namath threw his first pass to Snell that gained 9 yards on 2nd-and-14, but a 2-yard loss by Snell on the following play forced the Jets to punt the ball. The Jets noticed, however, from watching film the predictability of the Colts' defense based on how the defensive players lined up. Instead of calling plays in the huddle, Namath instead mostly gave formations and snap counts to the offense in the huddle, and then called plays from the line of scrimmage, after seeing what formation the Colts were lined up in. Center John Schmitt recalled that the Colts were \"in shock\" and \"it drove them crazy ... no matter what [the Colts] did, [Snell] would run it the other way\".\nThe Colts began their first offensive series on their own 27-yard line. Quarterback Earl Morrall completed a 19-yard pass to tight end John Mackey and then running back Tom Matte ran for 10 yards to place the ball on the Jets' 44-yard line. Running back Jerry Hill's runs of 7 and 5 yards picked up another Colts first down, then Morrall's pass to tight end Tom Mitchell gained 15 yards on 3rd-and-13 and saw the ball placed at the Jets' 19-yard line. In scoring position, Morrall attempted to score quickly against a reeling Jets defense. Wide receiver Willie Richardson dropped Morrall's pass on first down followed by an incompletion on second down after Mitchell was overthrown. On third down, none of his receivers were open and Morrall was tackled at the line of scrimmage by linebacker Al Atkinson. Michaels was brought out to attempt a 27-yard field goal, but he missed it wide right, keeping the game scoreless. \"You could almost feel the steam go out of them\", said Snell.\nThe Jets did not only rely on Snell; Namath said \"if they're going to blitz, then we're going to throw\". Shula said that Namath \"beat our blitz\" with his fast release, which let him quickly dump the football off to a receiver. On the Jets' second possession, Namath threw deep to Maynard, who, despite his pulled hamstring, was open by a step. The ball was overthrown, but this one play helped change the outcome of the game. Fearing the speedy Maynard, the Colts decided to rotate their zone defense to help cover Maynard, leaving Sauer covered one-on-one by cornerback Lenny Lyles, helping Sauer catch 8 passes for 133 yards, including a crucial third quarter 39-yard reception that kept a scoring drive alive. The Jets kept rushing Snell to their strong left, rushing off tackle with Boozer blocking the linebacker, and gained first down after first down as the Colts defense gave ground. The Colts defense was more concerned about Maynard, the passing game, and the deep threat of a Namath to Maynard touchdown. Although the Colts were unaware of Maynard's injury, the Jets were aware that Lyles had been weakened by tonsillitis all week, causing them great glee when they saw the one-on-one matchup with Sauer.\nWith less than two minutes left in the period, Colts punter David Lee booted a 51-yard kick that pinned the Jets back at their own 4-yard line. Three plays later, Sauer caught a 3-yard pass from Namath, but Lyles forced a fumble on Sauer, and Colts linebacker Ron Porter recovered it at New York's 12-yard line.\nSecond quarter.\nHowever, on third down (the second play of the second quarter), Morrall's pass was tipped by Atkinson, bounced crazily, high into the air off tight end Tom Mitchell, and was intercepted by Jets cornerback Randy Beverly in the end zone for a touchback. \"That was the game in a nutshell,\" says Matte. Starting from their own 20-yard line, Snell rushed on the next 4 plays, advancing the ball 26 yards. The Jets would have success all day running off left tackle behind the blocking of offensive tackle Winston Hill, who, according to Snell, was overpowering 36-year-old defensive end Ordell Braase, the man who had tormented the rookie Hill in Colts' training camp. Said Snell, \"Braase pretty much faded out.\" Namath later completed 3 consecutive passes, one of which was a 14-yard pass to Sauer, moving the ball to the Colts 23-yard line. Boozer gained just 2 yards on the next play, but Snell followed it up with a 12-yard reception at the 9-yard line and a 5-yard run to the 4-yard line, and capped the drive with a 4-yard touchdown run, once again off left tackle. The score gave the Jets a 7\u20130 lead, and marked the first time in history that an AFL team led in the Super Bowl.\nOn Baltimore's ensuing drive, a 30-yard completion from Morrall to running back Tom Matte helped the Colts advance to the Jets' 42-yard line, but they once again failed to score as Jets cornerback Johnny Sample broke up Morrall's third down pass and Michaels missed his second field goal attempt, this time from 46 yards. Two plays after the Jets took over following the missed field goal, Namath's 36-yard completion to Sauer enabled New York to eventually reach the Baltimore 32-yard line. But Namath then threw two incompletions, and was sacked on third down by Colts linebacker Dennis Gaubatz for a 2-yard loss. New York kicker Jim Turner tried to salvage the drive with a 41-yard field goal attempt, but he missed it wide left.\nOn their next possession, Baltimore went from their own 20-yard line to New York's 15-yard line in three plays, aided by Matte's 58-yard run (the longest play from scrimmage in the game). However, with 2 minutes left in the half, Morrall was intercepted again, this time by Sample at the Jets' 2-yard line, deflating the Colts considerably. The Jets then were forced to punt on their ensuing drive, and the Colts advanced the ball to New York's 41-yard line. What followed is one of the most famous plays in Super Bowl history. Baltimore tried a flea flicker play, which had a huge impact on the momentum of the game. Matte ran off right tackle after taking a handoff, then pitched the ball back to Morrall. The play completely fooled the NBC Camera Crew, and the Jets defense, leaving wide receiver Jimmy Orr wide open near the end zone. However, Morrall failed to spot him and instead threw a pass intended for running back Jerry Hill that was intercepted by Jets safety Jim Hudson as time expired, maintaining the Jets' 7\u20130 lead at halftime. Earlier in the season, against the Atlanta Falcons, on the same play, Morrall had completed the same pass for a touchdown to Orr, the play's intended target. \"I was the primary receiver,\" Orr said later. \"Earl said he just didn't see me. I was open from here to Tampa.\" \"I'm just a lineman, but I looked up and saw Jimmy open,\" added center Bill Curry. \"I don't know what happened.\" Some speculated that Morrall couldn't see Orr because the Florida A&amp;M marching band (in blue uniforms similar to those worn by the Colts) was gathering behind the end zone for the halftime show.\nThird quarter.\nThe third quarter belonged to the Jets, who controlled the ball for all but three minutes of the period. Baltimore ran only seven offensive plays all quarter, gaining only 11 yards. On the first play from scrimmage in the second half, Jets defensive end Verlon Biggs forced a fumble on Matte, yet another demoralizing event, which was recovered by linebacker Ralph Baker on the Colts' 33-yard line, leading to Turner's 32-yard field goal to increase the Jets' lead, 10\u20130. Then after forcing the Colts to punt again, Namath completed 4 passes for 40 yards to set up Turner's 30-yard field goal to increase the lead, 13\u20130. On that drive, Namath temporarily went out of the game after injuring his right thumb and was replaced by backup quarterback Babe Parilli for a few plays. Namath returned by the end of the third quarter, but the Jets would not run a pass play for the entire fourth quarter.\nMatt Snell said, \"By this time, the Colts were pressing. You saw the frustration and worry on all their faces.\" After Turner's second field goal, with 4 minutes left in the third quarter, Colts head coach Don Shula took Morrall out of the game and put in the sore-armed Johnny Unitas to see if he could provide a spark to Baltimore's offense. Unitas could not get the Colts offense moving on their next drive and they were forced to punt again after 3 plays.\nFourth quarter.\nAided by a 39-yard pass from Namath to Sauer, the Jets drove all the way to the Colts 2-yard line. Baltimore's defense would not quit, and kept them out of the end zone. Turner kicked his third field goal early in the final period to make the score a three-score lead, 16\u20130 (the two-point conversion, which would have made it a two-score game, was in use by the AFL at the time, but had not been adopted by the NFL yet and was not used for early Super Bowls).\nThe Colts' inability to score made Namath so confident by the fourth quarter, that he told Ewbank that he preferred to run out the clock instead of playing aggressively. Namath did not throw any passes in the quarter. On Baltimore's next possession, they managed to drive all the way to the Jets' 25-yard line. However, Beverly ended the drive by intercepting a pass intended for Orr from Unitas in the end zone, the Jets' fourth interception of the game, which was also his second interception of the game. New York then drove to the Colts 35-yard line with seven consecutive running plays, but ended up with no points after Turner missed a 42-yard field goal attempt wide left.\nUnitas started out the next drive with three incomplete passes, but completed a key 17-yard pass to Orr on fourth down. Ten plays later, aided by an 11-yard reception by Mackey, a 21-yard reception by Richardson, and an 11-yard reception by Orr, Baltimore finally got on the board with a 1-yard touchdown run by Hill to cut their deficit to 16\u20137, but with only 3:19 left in the game. The Colts then recovered an onside kick and drove to the Jets' 19-yard line with three consecutive completions by Unitas, but his next three passes fell incomplete. Instead of kicking a field goal to cut their deficit to one score and attempting another onside kick (which would have been necessary in the end), the Colts elected to convert 4th-and-5, but Unitas' pass to Orr fell incomplete, turning the ball over on downs, and essentially putting the game away in favor of the Jets. With possession of the ball and a two-score lead, New York ran the ball for six plays, during which Snell converted a 3rd-and-4 for a first down and which the Jets forced the Colts to use up all of their timeouts and ran the clock down to 15 seconds before being forced to punt.\nWhen Baltimore got the ball back, only 8 seconds remained in the game. The Colts then attempted two more passes before the game ended. Matt Snell said, \"Leaving the field, I saw the Colts were exhausted and in a state of shock. I don't remember any Colt coming over to congratulate me\". As he ran off the field, Namath, in a spontaneous show of defiance held up his index finger, signaling \"number one\"; \"the only time I ever did that in my life\", he said.\nNamath finished the game having completed 17 of his 28 passes for 206 yards. He is the only quarterback to win Super Bowl MVP without throwing a touchdown pass. Snell rushed for 121 yards on 30 carries with a touchdown, and caught 4 passes for 40 yards. Sauer caught eight passes for 133 yards. Beverly became the first player in Super Bowl history to record two interceptions. Morrall had a terrible game\u2014just 6 of 17 completions for 71 yards, with 3 interceptions. Through 58 games, he had the third worst passer rating in Super Bowl history, with a 9.3, one of only 3 ratings below 10. Despite not being put into the game until late in the third quarter, Unitas finished with more pass completions (11) and passing yards (110) than Morrall, but he also threw one interception. Matte was the Colts' top rusher with 116 yards on just 11 carries, an average of 10.5 yards per run, and caught 2 passes for 30 yards. The Colts were minus-4 in turnovers throwing four interceptions, all of which were deep in Jet territory.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl III: New York Jets 16, Baltimore Colts 7\n\"at Orange Bowl, Miami, Florida\nPostgame reactions.\nWhen Sal Marchiano asked Namath in the locker room if he was the \"king of the hill\", Namath replied \"No, no, we're king of the hill. We got the team, brother\". Morrall later said, \"I thought we would win handily. We'd only lost twice in our last 30 games. I'm still not sure what happened that day at the Orange Bowl, however; it's still hard to account for.\" Snell wrote, \"The most distinct image I have from that whole game is of Ordell Braase and some other guys\u2014not so much Mike Curtis\u2014having a bewildered look\".\nIn 1983 Bubba Smith contended that the game had been fixed, saying \"I knew something was wrong, you know, through the whole day, because if you look back at the films, we were inside the 20 five times in the first half and came away with no points\".\nIn an interview for the series \"\", Bill Curry, Mike Curtis, and Bubba Smith said they have never gotten over that loss and that they never will. Curtis said \"It was one of the best teams I ever played with, and we lost to somebody that we would beat a thousand times after the Super Bowl. It was humiliation to be kind.\" After the game, the team went to what was supposed to be an automatic victory party at owner Carroll Rosenbloom's house where Curry said to Rosenbloom, \"We will get back here and we will win. I promise.\"\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/Attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set or tied in Super Bowl III, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary. Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nUnlike the first two Super Bowls, officials wore their standard uniform. The AFL switched to the NFL uniform for 1968 in anticipation of the 1970 merger.\nJack Reader became the first official to work two Super Bowls. He was the only official to work two prior to the merger. He was promoted to referee in 1969.\nAftermath.\nThe following season, 1969, would be the last one before the AFL\u2013NFL merger. As part of the merger, the Colts were one of three NFL teams that moved to the newly formed American Football Conference (AFC) with the Jets and the other AFL teams. The Jets and Colts became divisional rivals in the AFC East until the 2002 realignment shifted the Colts, who had moved to Indianapolis in 1984, to the new AFC South; the teams would however not meet in the playoffs until the 2002 season. Due to being in the same conference, a Super Bowl rematch is no longer possible unless the NFL radically changes its conference alignment and/or its playoff structure.\nThe Jets have not played in the Super Bowl since the merger, losing the AFC Championship Game in the 1982, 1998, 2009 and 2010 seasons. On the other hand, the Colts won Super Bowl V (1970), then after relocating to Indianapolis, won Super Bowl XLI (2006) and lost Super Bowl XLIV (2009).\nHowever, teams representing Baltimore and New York have contested one Super Bowl since the merger: Super Bowl XXXV between the Jets' crosstown rival (the Giants) and Baltimore's replacement team (the Ravens), with the latter contest being won by Baltimore.\nThis was the first of three occasions in which a team from New York defeated one from Baltimore in postseason play during 1969, as the Knicks eliminated the Baltimore Bullets in the NBA playoffs before falling to the eventual NBA Champion Celtics in the Eastern Division finals. Then in baseball the Mets upset the heavily favored Orioles in the World Series. The Orioles and Mets seasons mirrored their NFL counterparts as the Orioles nabbed first place in the newly formed AL East for good on April 16th and would easily hold the lead for the rest of the season finishing 19 games ahead of the defending champion Detroit Tigers. Meanwhile the Mets were in third place in the NL East and 10 games behind the Chicago Cubs only to finish 8 games ahead of the Cubs while winning the division.\nThe Colts and Orioles would achieve redemption the following year with the Orioles winning the 1970 World Series over the Cincinnati Reds. Four months later, the Colts defeated the Dallas Cowboys 16-13 in Super Bowl V.\nThis was also the last postseason victory for the Jets until they beat the Cincinnati Bengals in the .\nIn his 1983 autobiography and in subsequent media interviews, Colts lineman Bubba Smith alleged that the game had been rigged to allow the Jets to win so the NFL\u2013AFL merger would proceed smoothly. Smith (who died in 2011) never offered evidence to support his claims, and his charges were never corroborated by anyone. His old coach Don Shula flatly rejected them, accusing Smith of making them up to sensationalize his book, stating \"The way I recall that Super Bowl is that everyone missed everybody all day long, including Bubba.\"\nBaltimore defensive back Bobby Boyd, who retired after the Super Bowl to join the Colts coaching staff, remained bitter about the Super Bowl loss for the rest of his life. In a 2010 interview, he said \"I had nightmares about it for a long time. Many a time, I'd wake up thinking, 'Why didn't we try this or that?' Then I'd get up, angry, drink a Coke, watch TV to calm down and then try to go back to sleep.\" Eventually, he said, the dreams stopped, \"but I'll be thinking about that game to the day I die.\" He died in 2017.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28976", "revid": "39999250", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28976", "title": "Super Bowl XX", "text": "1986 edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XX was an American football game between the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Chicago Bears and the American Football Conference (AFC) champion New England Patriots to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1985 season. The Bears defeated the Patriots by the score of 46\u201310, capturing their first NFL championship since 1963, three years prior to the birth of the Super Bowl. Super Bowl XX was played on January 26, 1986, at the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans.\nThis was the fourth Super Bowl and, to date, the last time in which both teams made their Super Bowl debuts. The Bears entered the game after becoming the second team in NFL history to win 15 regular season games. With their then-revolutionary 46 defense, Chicago led the league in several defensive categories, outscored their opponents with a staggering margin of 456\u2013198, and recorded two postseason shutouts. The Patriots were considered a Cinderella team during the 1985 season, and posted an 11\u20135 regular season record, but entered the playoffs as a wild card because of tiebreakers; defying the odds, New England posted three road playoff wins to advance to Super Bowl XX.\nIn their victory over the Patriots, the Bears set or tied Super Bowl records for sacks (seven), fewest rushing yards allowed (seven), and margin of victory (36 points). At the time, New England broke the record for the quickest lead in Super Bowl history, with Tony Franklin's 36-yard field goal 1:19 into the first quarter after a Chicago fumble. But the Patriots were eventually held to negative yardage (\u221219) throughout the entire first half, and finished with just 123 total yards from scrimmage, the second lowest total yards in Super Bowl history, behind the Minnesota Vikings (119 total yards) in Super Bowl IX. Bears defensive end Richard Dent, who had 1.5 quarterback sacks, forced two fumbles, and blocked a pass, was named the game's Most Valuable Player (MVP). Although he posted relatively mediocre game statistics and failed to score a touchdown himself, star running back Walter Payton was also later credited as being a major factor in the Bears' victory on account of the Patriots' heavy coverage of him giving other members of the team more and better opportunities to score.\nThe telecast of the game on NBC was watched by an estimated 92.57 million viewers. To commemorate the 20th Super Bowl, all previous Super Bowl MVPs were honored during the pregame ceremonies.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XX to New Orleans on December 14, 1982, at the owners' mid-season meeting held in Dallas. This would be the sixth time that New Orleans hosted the Super Bowl. Tulane Stadium was the site of IV, VI, and IX; while the Louisiana Superdome previously hosted XII and XV. Hosts for both XIX and XX would be selected, and potentially XXI as well. A total of ten cities put in bids: Palo Alto (Stanford Stadium), New Orleans (Superdome), Miami (Orange Bowl), Houston (Rice Stadium), Seattle (Kingdome), Detroit (Silverdome), Pasadena (Rose Bowl), Tampa (Tampa Stadium), Anaheim (Anaheim Stadium), and Jacksonville (Gator Bowl). As part of their pitch, the representatives from New Orleans stressed that if they were not selected for XX, due to scheduling conflicts, they would not be able to host the Super Bowl again until 1990. Stanford Stadium was picked for XIX, and Rice Stadium was speculated for XXI, but ultimately no decision was made for that game. Yet again, Miami was rejected, due to the aging condition of the Orange Bowl. A proposed sales tax levy to pay for a new stadium had failed at the ballot box on November 2, further sinking any chances for South Florida.\nChicago Bears.\nUnder head coach Mike Ditka, who won the 1985 NFL Coach of the Year Award, the Bears went 15\u20131 in the regular season, becoming the second NFL team to win 15 regular season games, while outscoring their opponents with a staggering margin of 456\u2013198.\nThe Bears' defense, the \"46 defense\", allowed the fewest points (198), fewest total yards (4,135), and fewest rushing yards of any team during the regular season (1,319). They also led the league in interceptions (34) and ranked third in sacks (64).\nPro Bowl quarterback Jim McMahon (who had the best season of his career) provided the team with a solid passing attack, throwing for 2,392 yards and 15 touchdowns (both career highs), while also rushing for 252 yards and three touchdowns. Running back Walter Payton, who was then the NFL's all-time leading rusher with 14,860 yards, rushed for 1,551 yards. He also caught 49 passes for 500 yards, and scored 11 touchdowns. Linebacker Mike Singletary won the NFL Defensive Player of the Year Award by recording three sacks, three fumble recoveries, and one interception.\nOne of the most distinguishable players on defense was rookie lineman William \"The Refrigerator\" Perry, who came into training camp before the season weighing over 380 pounds. However, after Bears defensive coordinator Buddy Ryan told the press that the team \"wasted\" their first round draft pick on him, Perry lost some weight and ended up being an effective defensive tackle, finishing the season with five sacks. He got even more attention when Ditka started putting him in the game at the fullback position during offensive plays near the opponent's goal line. During the regular season, Perry rushed for two touchdowns, caught a pass for another touchdown, and was frequently a lead blocker for Payton during goal line plays.\nIn addition to Singletary and Perry, the starting 11 in the Bears' \"46 defense\" were all impact players. The defensive line featured three future Hall of Famers: defensive end Richard Dent led the NFL in sacks (17), while tackle/end Dan Hampton recorded 6.5 sacks, and tackle Steve McMichael compiled eight. Outside linebacker Otis Wilson had 10.5 sacks and three interceptions, with fellow outside linebacker Wilber Marshall adding six sacks and four interceptions. In the secondary, cornerback Leslie Frazier (who would suffer a career-ending knee injury in the game) had six interceptions, cornerback Mike Richardson recorded four interceptions, strong safety Dave Duerson had five interceptions, and free safety Gary Fencik contributed five interceptions and a team-high 118 tackles.\nChicago's main offensive weapon was Payton and the running game. A big reason for Payton's success was fullback Matt Suhey as the primary lead blocker. Suhey was also a good ball carrier, rushing for 471 yards and catching 33 passes for 295 yards. The team's rushing was also aided by Pro Bowlers Jim Covert and Jay Hilgenberg and the rest of the Bears' offensive line including Mark Bortz, Keith Van Horne, and Tom Thayer.\nIn their passing game, the Bears' primary deep threat was wide receiver Willie Gault, who caught 33 passes for 704 yards, an average of 21.3 yards per catch, and returned 22 kickoffs for 557 yards and a touchdown. Tight end Emery Moorehead was another key contributor, catching 35 passes for 481 yards. Wide receiver Dennis McKinnon was another passing weapon, recording 31 receptions, 555 yards, and seven touchdowns. On special teams, Kevin Butler set a rookie scoring record with 144 points, making 31 of 37 field goals (83%) and 51 of 51 extra points.\nMeanwhile, the players brought their characterizations to the national stage with \"The Super Bowl Shuffle\", a rap song the Bears recorded for which they filmed a music video during the 1985 season. Although it was in essence a novelty song, it peaked at number 41 on the \"Billboard\" charts and even received a Grammy Award nomination for Best R&amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals in 1987.\nNew England Patriots.\nThe Patriots were a Cinderella team during the 1985 season because many sports writers and fans thought they were lucky to make the playoffs at all. New England began the season losing three of their first five games, but won six consecutive games to finish with an 11\u20135 record. However, the 11\u20135 mark only earned them third place in the AFC East behind the Miami Dolphins and the New York Jets.\nQuarterback Tony Eason, in his third year in the NFL, was inconsistent during the regular season, completing 168 out of 299 passes for 2,156 yards and 11 touchdowns, but also 17 interceptions. His backup, Steve Grogan, was considered one of the best reserve quarterbacks in the league. Grogan was the starter in six of the Patriots' games, and finished the regular season with 85 out of 156 completions for 1,311 yards, 7 touchdowns, and 5 interceptions.\nWide receiver Stanley Morgan provided the team with a good deep threat, catching 39 passes for 760 yards and 5 touchdowns. On the other side of the field, multi-talented wide receiver Irving Fryar was equally effective, catching 39 passes for 670 yards, while also rushing for 27 yards, gaining another 559 yards returning punts and kickoffs, and scoring 10 touchdowns. But like the Bears, the Patriots' main strength on offense was their rushing attack. Halfback Craig James rushed for 1,227 yards, caught 27 passes for 370 yards, and scored 7 touchdowns. Fullback Tony Collins rushed for 657 yards, recorded a team-leading 52 receptions for 549 yards, and scored 5 touchdowns. The Patriots also had an outstanding offensive line, led by Pro Bowl tackle Brian Holloway and future Hall of Fame guard John Hannah.\nNew England's defense ranked 5th in the league in fewest yards allowed (5,048). Pro Bowl linebacker Andre Tippett led the AFC with 16.5 sacks and recovered 3 fumbles. Pro Bowl linebacker Steve Nelson was also a big defensive weapon, excelling at pass coverage and run stopping. Also, the Patriots' secondary only gave up 14 touchdown passes during the season, second fewest in the league. Pro Bowl defensive back Raymond Clayborn recorded 6 interceptions for 80 return yards and 1 touchdown, while Pro Bowler Fred Marion had 7 interceptions for 189 return yards.\nPlayoffs.\nIn the playoffs, the Patriots qualified as the AFC's second wild card.\nBut the Patriots, under head coach Raymond Berry, defied the odds, beating the New York Jets 26\u201314, Los Angeles Raiders 27\u201320, and the Dolphins 31\u201314 \u2013 all on the road \u2013 to make it to the Super Bowl. The win against Miami had been especially surprising, not only because Miami was the only team to beat Chicago in the season, but also because New England had not won in the Orange Bowl (Miami's then-home field) since 1966, the Dolphins' first season (then in the AFL). The Patriots had lost to Miami there 18 consecutive times, including a 30\u201327 loss in their 15th game of the season. But New England dominated the Dolphins in the AFC Championship Game, recording two interceptions from quarterback Dan Marino and recovering 4 fumbles. New England remains the only team to finish third in their division and qualify for the Super Bowl in the same season.\nMeanwhile, the Bears became the first and only team in NFL history to shut out both of their opponents in the playoffs, beating the New York Giants 21\u20130 and the Los Angeles Rams 24\u20130.\nSuper Bowl pregame news.\nMuch of the Super Bowl pregame hype centered on Bears quarterback Jim McMahon. First, he was fined by the NFL during the playoffs for a violation of the league's dress code, wearing a head band from Adidas. He then started to wear a head band where he hand-wrote \"Rozelle\", after then-league commissioner Pete Rozelle.\nMcMahon suffered a strained glute as the result of a hit taken in the NFC Championship Game and flew his acupuncturist into New Orleans to get treatment. During practice four days before the Super Bowl, he wore a headband reading \"Acupuncture\". During a Bears practice before the Super Bowl, McMahon mooned a helicopter that was hovering over the practice.\nAnother anecdote involving McMahon during the Super Bowl anticipation involved WDSU sports anchor Buddy Diliberto reporting a quote attributed to McMahon, where he had allegedly referred to the women of New Orleans as \"sluts\" on a local morning sports talk show. This caused wide controversy among the women of New Orleans and McMahon began receiving calls from irate fans in his hotel. A groggy McMahon, who had not been able to sleep well because of all the calls he had gotten, was confronted by Mike Ditka later that morning and denied making the statement, saying he would not have even been awake to make the comment when he was said to have done so. He was supported in his claim by WLS reporter Les Grobstein, who was present when the alleged statements were made. WDSU would later retract the statement, have an on-air apology read by the station's general manager during the noon newscast on January 23, and suspend Diliberto.\nAs the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, the Patriots wore their red jerseys with white pants, even though they wore white jerseys with red pants for all home games during the regular season. New England made the switch for the Super Bowl after winning vs. the Jets and Dolphins wearing red jerseys. The Bears donned their road white uniforms with navy pants.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by NBC, with play-by-play announcer Dick Enberg, and color commentators Merlin Olsen and Bob Griese. Griese worked in a separate booth from Enberg and Olsen. Bob Costas and his \"NFL '85\" castmates, Ahmad Rashad and Pete Axthelm anchored the pregame, halftime and postgame coverage. Other contributors included Charlie Jones (recapping Super Bowl I), Larry King (interviewing Mike Ditka and Raymond Berry), and Bill Macatee (profiling Patriots owner Billy Sullivan and his family). The pregame coverage also included a skit featuring comedian Rodney Dangerfield, an interview by \"NBC Nightly News\" anchor Tom Brokaw of United States President Ronald Reagan at the White House (this would not become a regular Super Bowl pregame feature until Super Bowl XLIII, when \"Today show\" host Matt Lauer interviewed U.S. President Barack Obama) and a concept devised by then-NBC Sports executive Michael Weisman which became known as the \"Silent Minute,\" a one-minute countdown featuring a black screen with a digital clock which morphed into Roman numerals when it reached twenty seconds remaining and accompanied by Leroy Anderson's \"The Syncopated Clock.\"\nThe national radio broadcast was aired by NBC Radio, which outbid CBS Radio for the nationwide NFL contract in March 1985. Don Criqui was the play-by-play announcer, with Bob Trumpy as the color analyst. WGN-AM carried the game in the Chicago area (and thanks to WGN's 50,000-watt clear-channel signal, to much of the continental United States), with Wayne Larrivee on play-by-play, and Jim Hart and Dick Butkus providing commentary. WEEI carried the game in the Boston area, with John Carlson and Jon Morris on the call.\nNBC's broadcast garnered the third highest Nielsen rating of any Super Bowl to date at 48.3, but it ended up being the first Super Bowl to garner over 90 million viewers, the highest ever at that time.\nThe series premiere of \"The Last Precinct\" was NBC's Super Bowl lead-out program.\nSuper Bowl XX was simulcast in Canada on CTV and broadcast on Channel 4 in the United Kingdom. Canal 5 also had the game in Mexico, with play-by-play announcers To\u00f1o de Vald\u00e9s, Enrique Burak and color commentator Pepe Segarra. This was the first Super Bowl that this long lasting trio ever called together.\nSuper Bowl XX is featured on \"NFL's Greatest Games\" under the title \"Super Bears\" with narration by Don LaFontaine.\nEntertainment.\nThis was the first year that the NFL itself implemented the pregame entertainment. The pregame entertainment show began after the players left the field and ended with kick-off. Lesslee Fitzmorris created and directed the show. To celebrate the 20th Super Bowl game, the Most Valuable Players of the previous Super Bowls were featured during the pregame festivities. The number one song of the year coupled with video plays from each Super Bowl accompanied the presentation of each player. Performers formed the score of each championship game. The show concluded with the question of who would be the next Super Bowl Champions. This would start a tradition occurring every ten years (in Super Bowls XXX, XL and 50) in which past Super Bowl MVPs would be honored before the game.\nAfter trumpeter Wynton Marsalis performed the national anthem, Bart Starr, MVP of Super Bowl I and Super Bowl II, tossed the coin.\nThe performance event group Up with People performed during the halftime show titled \"Beat of the Future\". Up with People dancers portrayed various scenes into the future. This was the last Super Bowl to feature Up with People as a halftime show, though they later performed in the Super Bowl XXV pregame show. The halftime show was dedicated to the memory of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. (the first observance of Martin Luther King Jr. Day had been held the previous Monday).\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nThe Patriots took the then-quickest lead in Super Bowl history after linebacker Larry McGrew recovered a fumble by running back Walter Payton at the Bears 19-yard line on the second play of the game (the Bears themselves would break this record in Super Bowl XLI when Devin Hester ran back the opening kickoff for a touchdown). Bears quarterback Jim McMahon took responsibility for this fumble after the game, saying he had called the wrong play which left Payton alone with no blockers. This set up kicker Tony Franklin's 36-yard field goal 1:19 into the first quarter after three incomplete passes by quarterback Tony Eason (during the first of those three, tight end Lin Dawson went down with torn ligaments in his knee). \"I looked up at the message board\", said Chicago linebacker Mike Singletary, \"and it said that 15 of the 19 teams that scored first won the game. I thought, yeah, but none of those 15 had ever played the Bears.\" Chicago struck back with a 7-play, 59-yard drive, featuring a 43-yard pass completion from McMahon to wide receiver Willie Gault, to set up kicker Kevin Butler's 28-yard field goal, tying the score at 3\u20133.\nAfter both teams traded punts, defensive end Richard Dent and defensive tackle Steve McMichael forced a fumble on Eason that was recovered by defensive tackle Dan Hampton on the New England 13-yard line. Chicago then drove to the 3-yard line, but had to settle for a 24-yard field goal by Butler after defensive tackle William \"The Refrigerator\" Perry was tackled for a 1-yard loss while trying to throw his first NFL pass on a halfback option play. The score gave Chicago their first lead of the game, 6\u20133, and they would never trail New England again. On the Patriots' ensuing drive, Dent forced a fumble on running back Craig James, which was recovered by Singletary at the 13-yard line. Two plays later, Bears fullback Matt Suhey scored on an 11-yard touchdown run to increase the lead to 13\u20133.\nNew England took the ensuing kickoff and ran one play before the first quarter ended, which resulted in positive yardage for the first time in the game (a 3-yard run by James). James, who earlier gained 258 total rushing yards in the three AFC playoff games, only managed to gain one yard on five rushing attempts in the Super Bowl.\nSecond quarter.\nAfter an incomplete pass and a tackle for a 4-yard loss by Hampton on tight end Greg Hawthorne, the Patriots had to send in punter Rich Camarillo again, and wide receiver Keith Ortego returned the ball 12 yards to the 41-yard line. The Bears subsequently drove 59 yards in 10 plays, featuring a 24-yard reception by Suhey, to score on McMahon's 2-yard touchdown run to increase their lead, 20\u20133. After the ensuing kickoff, New England lost 13 yards in 3 plays and had to punt again, but got the ball back with great field position when linebacker Don Blackmon stripped the ball from Suhey and cornerback Raymond Clayborn recovered the fumble at the New England 46. During the punt, Ortego forgot what the play call was for the punt return, and the ensuing chaos resulted in him being penalized for handing off a fair catch to cornerback Leslie Frazier, who then suffered a career-ending knee injury while being tackled by Hawthorne.\nPatriots head coach Raymond Berry then replaced Eason with Steve Grogan, who had spent the previous week hoping he would have the opportunity to step onto the NFL's biggest stage. \"I probably won't get a chance\", he had told reporters a few days before the game. \"I just hope I can figure out some way to get on the field. I could come in on the punt-block team and stand behind the line and wave my arms, or something.\" But on his first drive, Grogan could only lead the Patriots to the Chicago 37-yard line, and they decided to punt rather than risk a long field goal attempt. The Bears then marched 72 yards in 11 plays, which included a 29-yard reception by wide receiver Ken Margerum, moving the ball inside the Patriots' 10-yard line. New England kept Chicago out of the end zone, but Butler kicked a 24-yard field goal on the last play of the half to give the Bears a 23\u20133 halftime lead.\nThe end of the first half was controversial. With 21 seconds left, McMahon scrambled to the Patriots' 3-yard line and was stopped inbounds. With the clock ticking down, players from both teams were fighting, and the Bears were forced to snap the ball before the officials formally put it back into play, allowing McMahon to throw the ball out of bounds and stop the clock with three seconds left. The Bears were penalized five yards for delay of game, but according to NFL rules, 10 seconds should have also been run off the clock during such a deliberate clock-stopping attempt in the final two minutes of a half. In addition, a flag should have been thrown for fighting (also according to NFL rules). This would have likely resulted in offsetting penalties, which would still allow for a field goal attempt. Meanwhile, the non-call on the illegal snap was promptly acknowledged by the officials and reported by NBC sportscasters during halftime, but the resulting field goal was not taken away from the Bears (because of this instance, the NFL instructed officials to strictly enforce the 10-second run-off rule at the start of the 1986 season).\nThe Bears had dominated New England in the first half, holding them to 21 offensive plays (only four of which resulted in positive yardage), \u221219 total offensive yards, two pass completions, one first down, and 3 points. While Eason was in the game, the totals were six possessions, one play of positive yardage out of 15 plays, no first downs, 3 points, 3 punts, 2 turnovers, no pass completions, and -36 yards of total offense. Meanwhile, Chicago gained 236 yards and scored 23 points themselves.\nThird quarter.\nAfter the Patriots received the second-half kickoff, they managed to get one first down, but then had to punt after Grogan was sacked twice, first by Dent for 5 yards, then by linebacker Otis Wilson for 10. Camarillo, who punted four times in the first half, managed to pin the Bears back at their own 4-yard line with a then-Super Bowl record 62-yard punt. But the Patriots' defense still could not stop the Bears' offense. On the first play, McMahon faked a handoff to Payton, then threw a 60-yard completion to Gault from his own end zone, followed by a 19-yard pass to tight end Emery Moorehead. Seven plays later, McMahon finished the Super Bowl-record 96-yard drive with a 1-yard touchdown run to increase Chicago's lead to 30\u20133. On the third play of the Patriots' second drive of the quarter, Grogan threw a pass that was tipped by tight end Derrick Ramsey and intercepted by Bears cornerback Reggie Phillips (who filled in for Frazier), who returned it 28 yards for a touchdown to increase the lead to 37\u20133.\nOn the second play of their ensuing possession, the Patriots turned the ball over yet again when wide receiver Cedric Jones lost a fumble after catching a 19-yard pass from Grogan and taking a hit by safety Gary Fencik, and linebacker Wilber Marshall returned the fumble 13 yards to New England's 37-yard line. Five plays later, McMahon's 27-yard pass to wide receiver Dennis Gentry moved the ball to the 1-yard line, setting up perhaps the most memorable moment of the game. Perry lined up as the running back in a power-I formation and scored on a 1-yard touchdown run, as he had done twice in the regular season. His touchdown (while plowing over McGrew in the process) made the score 44\u20133 in favor of Chicago. The Bears' three touchdowns is still a Super Bowl third quarter record for most points scored, while their 41-point lead is the record for largest margin going into the fourth quarter.\nPerry's unexpected touchdown cost Las Vegas sports books hundreds of thousands of dollars in losses from prop bets.\nFourth quarter.\nThe Patriots finally reached the end zone early in the fourth quarter, advancing the ball 76 yards in 12 plays and scoring on an 8-yard fourth-down touchdown pass from Grogan to wide receiver Irving Fryar. The Bears' defense dominated the Patriots for the rest of the game, and recorded a forced fumble by defensive back Shaun Gayle on Ramsey that was recovered by Singletary, followed by a 46-yard interception return to the New England 5-yard line by linebacker Jim Morrissey. The Bears then turned the ball over on downs, but nevertheless capitalized on Morrissey's interception when defensive lineman Henry Waechter tackled Grogan in the end zone for a safety to make the final score 46\u201310. After both teams exchanged punts, Chicago reached midfield to run out the clock and claim their first Super Bowl title.\nOne oddity in the Bears' victory was that Payton had a relatively poor performance running the football and did not score a touchdown in Super Bowl XX, his only Super Bowl appearance during his Hall of Fame career. Many people including Mike Ditka have claimed that the reason for this was due to the fact that the Patriots' defensive scheme was centered on stopping Payton. Although Payton was ultimately the Bears' leading rusher during the game, the Patriots' defense held him to only 61 yards on 22 carries, with his longest run being only 7 yards. He was given several opportunities to score near the goal line, but New England stopped him every time before he reached the end zone (such as his 2-yard loss from the New England 3-yard line a few plays before Butler's second field goal, and his 2-yard run from the 4-yard line right before McMahon's first rushing touchdown). Thus, Ditka opted to go for other plays to counter the Patriots' defense. Ditka has since stated that his biggest regret of his career was not creating a scoring opportunity for Payton during the game.\nMcMahon, who completed 12 out of 20 passes for 256 yards, became the first quarterback to score two rushing touchdowns in the Super Bowl. Gault finished the game with 129 receiving yards on just 4 receptions, an average of 32.3 yards per catch. He also gained 49 yards on four kickoff returns. The Patriots had the opening kickoff, two on scores and the last a free kick following the safety. Suhey had 11 carries for 52 yards rushing and a touchdown, and caught a pass for 24 yards. Singletary tied a Super Bowl record with 2 fumble recoveries.\nEason became the first Super Bowl starting quarterback without a pass completion, finishing 0 for 6 with no interceptions. Grogan completed 17 out of 30 passes for 177 yards, one touchdown, and two interceptions. Although fullback Tony Collins was the Patriots' leading rusher, he was limited to just 4 yards on 3 carries, and caught 2 passes for 19 yards. New England receiver wide Stephen Starring returned 7 kickoffs for 153 yards and caught 2 passes for 39 yards. The Patriots, as a team, only recorded 123 total offensive yards, the second-lowest total in Super Bowl history.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XX: Chicago Bears 46, New England Patriots 10\n\"at Louisiana Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XX, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nAftermath.\nThe nation's recognition of the Bears' accomplishment was overshadowed by the destruction of the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" shortly after launch on the STS 51-L mission two days later, an event which caused the cancellation of the Bears' post-Super Bowl White House visit. Jim McMahon drew controversy after Super Bowl XXXI by wearing a Bears jersey to the Green Bay Packers' visit following their championship, owing to his first official visit never having happened at the time. Twenty-five years after the championship, the surviving members of the team would be invited to the White House in 2011 by President Barack Obama, a Chicago Bears fan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28977", "revid": "40835523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28977", "title": "Salute", "text": "Gesture or action used to display respect\nA salute is usually a formal hand gesture or other action used to display respect in military situations. Salutes are primarily associated with the military and law enforcement, but many civilian organizations, such as Girl Guides, Boy Scouts and the Salvation Army use formal salutes. Ordinary civilians also salute informally to greet or acknowledge the presence of another person, such as a tip of the hat or a hand wave to a friend or neighbor.\nMilitary salutes.\nThroughout history, military organizations have used many methods to perform salutes. Depending on the situation a salute could be a hand or body gesture, cannon or rifle shots, hoisting of flags, removing headgear, or other means of showing respect or deference.\nHand salutes.\nOrigins.\nAccording to some modern military manuals, the modern Western salute originated in France when knights greeted each other to show friendly intentions by raising their visors to show their faces and show that they are not carrying a weapon (in their right hand). Others also note that the raising of one's visor was a way to identify oneself saying \"This is who I am, and I am not afraid.\" Medieval visors were, to this end, equipped with a protruding spike that allowed the visor to be raised using a saluting motion.\nThe US Army Quartermaster School provides another explanation of the origin of the hand salute: that it was a long-established military courtesy for subordinates to remove their headgear in the presence of superiors. As late as the American Revolution, a British Army soldier saluted by removing his hat. With the advent of increasingly cumbersome headgear in the 18th and 19th centuries, the act of removing one's hat was gradually converted into the simpler gesture of grasping or touching the visor and issuing a courteous salutation.\nAs early as 1745, a British order book stated that: \"The men are ordered not to pull off their hats when they pass an officer, or to speak to them, but only to clap up their hands to their hats and bow as they pass.\" Over time, it became conventionalized into something resembling the modern hand salute. In the Austrian Army the practice of making a hand salute replaced that of removing the headdress in 1790, although officers wearing cocked hats continued to remove them when greeting superiors until 1868.\nThe naval salute is said to have evolved because the palms of sailors were often covered with tar and pitch, so Queen Victoria required that palm be turned downwards. During the Napoleonic Wars, British crews saluted officers by touching a clenched fist to the brow as though grasping a hat-brim between fingers and thumb.\nHand salutes are normally carried out by bringing the right hand to the head in some way, the precise manner varying between countries and sometimes amongst various branches of the armed forces of the same country. The British Army's salute is almost identical to the French salute, with the palm facing outward. The customary salute in the Polish Armed Forces is the two-fingers salute, a variation of the British military salute with only two fingers extended. In the Russian military, the right hand, palm down, is brought to the right temple, almost, but not quite, touching; the head has to be covered. In the Hellenic Army salute, the palm is facing down and the fingers point to the coat of arms.\nIn many militaries, hand salutes are only given when a cover (headwear, usually a hat) is worn.\nSmall arms salutes.\nWhen carrying a sword, still done on ceremonial occasions, European military forces and their cultural descendants use a two-step gesture. The sword is first raised, in the right hand, to the level of and close to the front of the neck. The blade is inclined forward and up 30 degrees from the vertical; the true edge is to the left. Then the sword is slashed downward to a position with the point close to the ground in front of the right foot. The blade is inclined down and forward with the true edge to the left. This gesture originated in the Crusades. The hilt of a sword formed a cross with the blade, so if a crucifix was not available, a Crusader could kiss the hilt of his sword when praying, before entering battle, for oaths and vows, and so on. The lowering of the point to the ground is a traditional act of submission.\nIn fencing, the fencers salute each other before putting their masks on to begin a bout. There are several methods of doing this, but the most common is to bring the sword in front of the face so that the blade is pointing up in front of the nose. The fencers also salute the referee and the audience.\nWhen armed with a rifle, two methods are available when saluting. The usual method is called \"present arms\"; the rifle is brought to the vertical, muzzle up, in front of the center of the chest with the trigger away from the body. The hands hold the stock close to the positions they would have if the rifle were being fired, though the trigger is not touched. Less formal salutes include the \"order arms salute\" and the \"shoulder arms salutes.\" These are most often given by a sentry to a low-ranking superior who does not rate the full \"present arms\" salute. In the \"order arms salute,\" the rifle rests on its butt by the sentry's right foot, held near the muzzle by the sentry's right hand, and does not move. The sentry brings his flattened left hand across his body and touches the rifle near its muzzle. When the rifle is being carried on the shoulder, a similar gesture is used in which the flattened free hand is brought across the body to touch the rifle near the rear of the receiver.\nA different type of salute with a rifle is a ritual firing performed during military funerals, known as a three-volley salute. In this ceremonial act, an odd number of riflemen fire three blank cartridges in unison into the air over the casket. This originates from an old European tradition wherein a battle was halted to remove the dead and wounded, then three shots were fired to signal readiness to re-engage.\nBy country.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nIn the Commonwealth of Nations, only commissioned officers are saluted, and the salute is to the commission they carry from their respective commanders-in-chief representing the monarch, not the officers themselves.\nIn both countries, the right-hand salute is generally identical to, and drawn from the traditions of, the British armed forces. The salute of the Australian or New Zealand Army is best described as the right arm taking the path of the longest way up and then the shortest way down. Similar in many ways, the salute of the Royal Australian Air Force and Royal New Zealand Air Force takes the longest way up and the shortest way down. The Royal Australian Navy and Royal New Zealand Navy, however, take the shortest way up, palm down, and the shortest way down. The action of the arm rotating up is slower than the action of the conclusion of the salute which is the arm being quickly \"snapped\" down to the saluter's side. Junior members are required to salute first and the senior member is obliged to return the compliment. Protocol dictates that the monarch, members of the royal family, the governor-general, and state governors are to be saluted at all times by all ranks. Except where a drill manual (or parade) protocol dictates otherwise, the duration of the salute is timed at three beats of the quick-time march (approximately 1.5 seconds), timed from the moment the senior member first returns it. In situations where cover (or \"headdress\", as it is called in the Australian Army) is not being worn, the salute is given verbally; the junior party (or at least the senior member thereof) will first come to attention, then offer the salute \"Good morning/afternoon Your Majesty/Your Royal Highness/Prime Minister/Your Grace/Sir/Ma'am\", etc., as the case may be. It is this, rather than the act of standing to attention, which indicates that a salute is being offered. If either party consists of two or more members, all will come to attention, but only the most senior member of the party will offer (or return) the physical or verbal salute. The party wearing headdress must always offer, or respond with, a full salute. But within the Forward Edge of the Battle Area (FEBA) no salutes of any kind are given, under any circumstances; it is always sensible to assume that there are snipers in the area who may see or overhear. In this case, parties personally known to each other are addressed familiarly by their first or given names, regardless of rank; senior officers are addressed as one might address a stranger, courteously, but without any naming or mark of respect.\nCanada.\nMuch as the British salute described above (except the palm is level with the ground, without the U.S.A. slight over-rotation of the wrist), the Canadian military salutes to demonstrate a mark of respect and courtesy for the commissioned ranks. When in uniform and not wearing headdress one does not salute. Instead, compliments shall be paid by standing at attention. If on the march, arms shall be swung and the head turned to the left or right as required.\nOn Remembrance Day, 2009, The Prince of Wales attended the national ceremony in Ottawa with Governor General Micha\u00eblle Jean\u2014both wearing Canadian military dress. CBC live television coverage of the event noted that, when Prince Charles saluted, he performed the Canadian form of the salute with a cupped hand (the British \"naval salute\"\u2014appropriate, as he did his military service as an officer in the Royal Navy), adopted by all elements of the Canadian Forces after unification in 1968, rather than the British (Army) form with the palm facing forward.\nDenmark.\nIn the Danish military, there are two types of military salutes. The first type is employed by the Royal Danish Navy and Guard Hussar Regiment Mounted Squadron, and is the same as the one used by the U.S. The second is employed by the Royal Danish Army and Royal Danish Air Force, and goes as follows: Raise the right arm forward, as to have upper arm 90 degrees from the body. Move the right hand to the temple, and have it parallel to the ground.\nHand salutes are not performed if a member is not wearing a headdress or if he is holding a weapon.\nFrance.\nSubordinates salute superiors and every salute is given back. Hand salutes are not performed if a member is not wearing a headdress or if he is holding a weapon.\nThe French salute is performed with a flat hand, palm facing forwards; the upper arm is horizontal and the tips of the fingers come near the corner of the eyes. The hand, unlike the British salute, remains at a 45-degree angle in line with the lower arm. The five fingers are lined together. It mirrors the gesture made by knights greeting each other, raising their visors to show their faces. A crisp tension may be given when the salute is taken or broken.\nSome \"creative\" salutes are in use in certain mounted (cavalry) units. The fingers can be spread out with only the right thumb brushing the temple, or the hand can be cocked vertically along the cheek, with the little finger detached or not. These unusual regimental salutes are mannerisms which are lost during official ceremonies. A civilian (even if he has a hat) never salutes, but a nod to a patrolling soldier is generally appreciated.\nGermany.\nIn the German Bundeswehr, the salute is performed with a flat hand, with the thumb resting on the index finger. The hand is slightly tilted to the front so that the thumb can not be seen. The upper arm is horizontal and the fingers point to the temple but do not touch it or the headgear. Every soldier saluting another uniformed soldier is entitled to be saluted in return. Soldiers below the rank of Feldwebel are not permitted to speak while saluting. Since the creation of the Bundeswehr, soldiers are required to salute with and without headgear. Originally, in the Reichswehr it was not permitted to perform the salute when the soldier is not wearing uniform headgear. In the Wehrmacht, the traditional military salute was required when wearing headgear, but the Nazi salute was performed when not wearing headgear. The Wehrmacht eventually fully adopted the Nazi salute following the 20 July Plot. East German National People's Army followed the Reichswehr protocol.\nIndia.\nIn India, the three forces have different salutes with the Indian Army and the Indian Navy following the British tradition. In the Indian army, the salute is performed by keeping the open palm forward, with fingers and thumb together and middle finger almost touching the hatband or right eyebrow. This is often accompanied by the salutation \"Jai Hind\" which means long live India or Victory to India, or the regimental salutation, e.g. \"Sat Sri Akal\" in the Sikh Regiment. The Navy salute has the palm facing towards the ground at a 90-degree angle. The Indian Air Force salute involves the right arm being sharply raised from the front by the shortest possible way, with the plane of the palm at 45-degree angle to the forehead.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, executing a salute has its regulations. Members who are part of a uniformed institution and wearing a uniform will implement a gesture of salute according to the regulations of the institution the member is part of. In this case, personnel of the TNI and Indonesian National Police are to implement a hand salute by forming the right hand up making an angle of 90 degrees and is bent 45 degrees, fingers are pressed together and placed near the temple of the right eye, palm facing down. Personnel wearing a headdress place the tip of the right index finger touching the front right tip of the headdress. Other uniformed organizations/institutions which are not part of the military/police will implement a hand salute as done by members of the military/police.\nThe command for this gesture in Indonesian is \"Hormat, Gerak!\". Military and police personnel armed with a rifle during a ceremony will implement a present arms while personnel unarmed will execute the hand salute.\nThis is done during the raising and lowering of the national flag, rendition or singing of the national anthem, and when saluting a person or object worth saluting.\nIsrael.\nIn the Israel Defense Forces, saluting is normally reserved for special ceremonies.\nItaly.\nThe hand salute is still performed according to the army \"Infantry Training \u2013 Formal Instructions\" regulation, chapter II, section 12 (1939) \"The salute is completed sharply ... bringing the right hand vigorously to the visor of the headdress, with the tip of the fingers over the right eye; the hand in line with the forearm, with the palm facing downwards, the fingers joined and stretched, the index finger in contact with the edge of the visor; horizontal arm, forearm naturally inclined\". The air force and navy use the same procedure, with the single exception of the navy boatswains that salute left-handed while giving the traditional \"pipe aboard\", as their right hand is used to hold the boatswain's call.\nWhen given individually, the salute is given by inferior to superior ranks and is held until returned, and by word of command when given by a formed unit. For personnel not wearing hats, holding weapons or with otherwise encumbered hands, the salute is given by coming to attention. During marching armed parades only the officer in command salutes for the whole unit, briefly bringing the flat of his sword to his face if in full dress, or giving the standard hand salute if in combat uniform. During flag-rising and flag-lowering armed parades all officers and senior NCOs hand salute the flag, while other ranks present arms, and the whole unit sings the national anthem. Flag parties give salute by slightly inclining the flag only, with the flag-bearer and the escort not giving individual salutes.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, the angle of salute depends on the branch. In the Ground and the Air Self-Defense Forces, the salute is 90 degrees under the armpit like the U.S. Armed Forces. In the Maritime Self-Defense Forces, the salute is a 45-degree angle because of the narrowness of a ship's interior spaces. To prevent a member's elbow from hitting other members, subordinates may be given approval to not salute in a corridor inside the ship. Furthermore, in all the branches, if a member is not wearing their cap, then they should salute by bowing 10 degrees.\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan, the salute is generally identical to that of British armed forces. In the Army and Air Force, the salute is given with the right hand palm facing forward and fingers slightly touching the right side of the forehead, but not on the forehead. The Navy continues to salute palm down. The salute must be performed by the lower rank officials to the higher rank officials under all conditions except when the higher rank official is not in uniform or if the lower rank official is the driver and the vehicle is in motion. The salute is never performed by the left hand even if the right hand is occupied.\nPeople's Republic of China.\nMilitary personnel of the People's Liberation Army salute palm-down, similar to the Royal Navy or US Military salutes.\nPoland.\nPolish military personnel use two fingers to salute, with the middle and index fingers extended and touching each other, while the ring and little fingers are bent and touched by the thumb. The salute is only used while wearing a headdress with the emblem of the Polish eagle (such as military hat rogatywka) or without this emblem (such as Boonie hat or helmet).\nSweden.\nSalutes are similar to those of the Royal Navy. The official instruction for stationary salute states: \"The right hand is quickly raised straight up to the headgear. The fingers straight but not stiff next to each other, the little finger edge facing forward. One or two finger tips lightly resting against the right part of the headgear (visor), so that the hand does not obstruct the eye. The wrist straight, the elbow angled forward and slightly lower than the shoulder.\" Salutes to persons are normally not made when further away than 30 m. Hand salutes are performed only when carrying headgear, if bare headed (normally only indoors) a swift turning of the head towards the person that is being saluted is made instead. The same applies if the right hand is carrying any item that cannot easily be transferred to the left hand. During inspections and when on guard duty, the salute is made by coming to attention. Drivers of moving vehicles never salute. In formations, only the commander salutes.\nSwitzerland.\nSwiss soldiers are required to salute any higher-ranking military personnel whenever they encounter them. When the soldier announces to a higher-ranking person he has to state the superior's rank, his rank and his name. When a military formation encounters a superior, it has to state the name of the formation. The salute is given with the palm pointing towards the shoulder, the tips of the fingers pointing towards the temple.\nTurkey.\nWithin the Turkish military hand salutes are only given when a cover (protection for the head, usually a hat) is worn.\nIf the head is not covered or when the personnel is carrying a rifle on the shoulder the \"head salute\" is performed by nodding the head forward slightly while maintaining erect posture.\nThe salute (hand or head) must be performed first by the lower ranking personnel to the higher ranking personnel, and higher official is expected to return the salute, under all conditions except:\nThe casket of a soldier killed in the line of duty (irrespective of rank) has to be saluted by all ranks of personnel.\nUnited Kingdom.\nBritish Army.\nSince 1917, the British Army's salute has been given with the right hand palm facing forwards with the fingers almost touching the cap or beret. Before 1917, for Other Ranks (i.e. not officers) the salute was given with whichever hand was furthest from the person being saluted, whether that was the right or the left. Officers always saluted with the right hand (as the left, in theory, would always be required to hold the scabbard of their sword). The salute is given to acknowledge the King's commission. A salute may not be given unless a soldier is wearing his regimental headdress, for example a beret, caubeen, Tam o' Shanter, Glengarry, field service cap or peaked cap. This does not apply to members of The Blues and Royals (RHG/1stD) The Household Cavalry who, after The Battle of Warburg were allowed to salute without headdress. Soldiers or officers not wearing headdress must come to attention instead of giving/returning the salute. The subordinate salutes first and maintains the salute until the superior has responded in kind.\nThere is a widespread though erroneous belief that it is statutory for \"all ranks to salute a bearer of the Victoria Cross\". There is no official requirement that appears in the official Warrant of the VC, nor in King's Regulations and Orders, but tradition dictates that this occurs and as such the Chiefs of Staff will salute a Private awarded either a VC or George Cross.\nRoyal Air Force.\nThe custom of saluting commissioned officers relates wholly to the commission given by the King to that officer, not the person. Therefore, when a subordinate airman salutes an officer, he is indirectly acknowledging the King as Head of State. A salute returned by the officer is on behalf of the King.\nThe RAF salute is similar to the British Army, the hand is brought upwards in a circular motion out from the body, it is stopped 1 inch (25\u00a0mm) to the rear and to the right of the right eye, the elbow and wrist are kept in line with the shoulder. The hand is then brought straight down back to the position of attention, this movement is completed to the timing \"UP TWO-THREE CUT\".\nRoyal Navy.\nThe Naval salute differs in that the palm of the hand faces down towards the shoulder. This dates back to the days of sailing ships, when tar and pitch were used to seal a ship's timbers from seawater. To protect their hands, officers wore white gloves and it was considered most undignified to present a dirty palm in the salute, so the hand was turned through 90 degrees. A common story is that Queen Victoria, having been saluted by an individual with a dirty palm, decreed that in future sailors of the fleet would salute palm down, with the palm facing the ground.\nRoyal Marines.\nThough part of the Royal Navy, the Royal Marines salute in the style of the British Army, with the right hand palm facing forward.\nBritish Empire.\nIn the British Empire (originally in the maritime and hinterland sphere of influence of the East India Company, HEIC, later transformed into crown territories), mainly in British India, the numbers of guns fired as a \"gun salute\" to the ruler of a so-called princely state became a politically highly significant indicator of his status, not governed by objective rules, but awarded (and in various cases increased) by the British paramount power, roughly reflecting his state's socio-economic, political or military weight, but also as a prestigious reward for loyalty to the Raj, in classes (always odd numbers) from three to twenty-one (seven lacking), for the \"vassal\" indigenous rulers (normally hereditary with a throne, sometimes raised as a personal distinction for an individual ruling prince). Two sovereign monarchies officially outside the Empire were granted a higher honour: thirty-one guns for the royal houses of Afghanistan (under British and Russian influence), and Siam (which was then ruled by the Rattanakosin Kingdom).\nIn addition, the right to style himself \"Highness\" (Majesty, which since its Roman origin expresses the sovereign authority of the state, was denied to all \"vassals\"), a title of great importance in international relations, was formally restricted to rulers of relatively high salute ranks (originally only those with eleven guns or more, later also those with nine guns).\nUnited States.\nU.S. Armed Forces.\nWithin the United States military, the salute is a courteous exchange of greetings. With the HDB individual salute, the head and eyes are turned toward the colors or person saluted. Military personnel in uniform are required to salute when they meet and recognize persons entitled to a salute, except when it is inappropriate or impractical (in public conveyances such as planes and buses, in public places such as inside theaters, or when driving a vehicle).\nPersons entitled to the salute include commissioned officers, warrant officers, the President of the United States, officers of friendly foreign nations, and recipients of the Medal of Honor (including enlisted personnel). Additionally, the flag of the United States is saluted during parades and other ceremonial functions.\nThe U.S. military's salute, while influenced by that of the British military, differs slightly in that the palm of the hand faces down towards the shoulder. This difference may date back to the days of sailing ships, when tar and pitch were used to seal the timber from seawater. During such times, it was considered undignified to present a dirty palm in the salute, so the hand was turned through 90 degrees.\nSpecifically, a proper salute goes as follows: Raise the right hand sharply, fingers and thumb extended and joined, palm facing down, and place the tip of the right forefinger on the rim of the visor, slightly to the right of the eye. The outer edge of the hand is barely canted downward so that neither the back of the hand nor the palm is clearly visible from the front. The hand and wrist are straight, the elbow inclined slightly forward, and the upper arm is horizontal.\nMembers of the United States Army, United States Air Force, and United States Space Force give salutes with heads both covered and uncovered, but saluting indoors is forbidden except when formally reporting to a superior officer or during an indoor ceremony. When outdoors, a head cover is to be worn at all times when wearing Army Combat Uniforms, but is not required when wearing physical training (PT) gear. The United States Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard do not salute when the head is uncovered or out of uniform.\nUS state defense forces.\nState defense forces (SDF) in the United States are military units that operate under the sole authority of a state government. State defense forces are authorized by state and federal law and are under the command of the governor of each state.\nState defense forces soldiers are subject to the Uniform Code of Military Justice. They are also subject to their state military laws and regulations and render the same customs and courtesies as active duty, Reserve and National Guard personnel.\nZogist salute.\nThe Zogist salute is a military salute that was instituted by Zog I of Albania. It is a gesture whereby the right hand is placed over the heart, with the palm facing downwards. It was first widely used by Zog's personal police force and was later adopted by the Royal Albanian Army.\nIn Mexico, a salute similar to the Zogist salute is rendered by Mexican civilians during the playing of the Mexican national anthem.\nNon-military services.\nCanada.\nPolice services\nThe majority of police forces are taught to salute like the Canadian Armed Forces with a level palm and the middle finger aligned with the right eye, and not the brim of the hat.\nThe federal Royal Canadian Mounted Police salute according to the British Army tradition with the palm facing forward.\nNon-police.\nSimilar salutes are used by guards of honour for non-police services (e.g. Toronto Fire Services, Toronto Transit Commission, British Columbia Ambulance Service) during funerals or ceremonial events. Due to their close ties with the Canadian Armed Forces, the Royal Canadian Army Cadets, Royal Canadian Sea Cadets, and Royal Canadian Air Cadets are taught the Canadian Armed Forces salute.\nHong Kong.\nAll uniform branches of the Hong Kong Police, Police Auxiliary, Police Pipeband, Fire (including Ambulance service members), Immigration, Customs, Correctional Services, Government Flying Service, Civil Aid Service) saluted according to British Army traditions until 2021. Personnel stationed with the People's Liberation Army in Hong Kong salute using the Chinese military standards and similar to those used by the Royal Navy.\nNon-government organizations like Hong Kong Air Cadet Corps, Hong Kong Adventure Corps, the Boys' Brigade, Hong Kong, Hong Kong Sea Cadet Corps, Hong Kong Scout and St. John Ambulance all follow the same military salutes due to their ties with the British Armed Forces.\nCivilian military auxiliaries (U.S.).\nCivil Air Patrol.\nIn the United States, civilian military auxiliaries such as the Civil Air Patrol are required to salute all commissioned and warrant officers of higher rank and return the salute of those with lower ranks of the U.S. Uniformed Services (Army, Marine Corps, Navy, Air Force, Space Force, Coast Guard, PHS Commissioned Corps, NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps) senior in rank to them, as well as all friendly foreign officers, though military members are not required to reciprocate. CAP officers are required to salute one another though this is not uniformly observed throughout the CAP. Cadets are required to salute all CAP Senior Members and all commissioned and warrant officers of military/uniformed services.\nU.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary requires its members to salute all commissioned and warrant officers of higher rank and return the salute of those with lower ranks; since auxiliarists hold \"office\" rather than \"grade\" (indicated by modified military insignia), all auxiliarists are required to perform this courtesy. Saluting between auxiliarists is not usually the custom, but is not out of protocol to do so.\nCivilian salutes.\nIn most countries, civilians have their own form of salutes.\nAirline industry.\nIn most airlines' standard operating procedures, the ground crew that handles the departure of an aircraft from a gate are required to salute the captain before the aircraft is released for taxi, which is normally returned by the captain. The practice originated from the same ground ceremony found in military aviation.\nClenched fist salute.\nThe raised clenched fist, symbolizing unity in struggle, was popularized in the 19th century by the socialist, communist and anarchist movements, and is still used today by some people.\nIn the United States, the raised fist was associated with the Black Power movement, symbolized in the 1968 Olympics Black Power salute; a clenched-fist salute is also proper in many African nations, including South Africa.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, executing a salute is regulated for civilians according to the Constitution of Indonesia. Civilians in civilian clothing, officially, are expected to stand upright, straighten their arms down, and clench their palms with the thumbs facing forward against the thighs with a straight ahead gaze, however hand saluting in the case of performances of the National Anthem aside from flag ceremonies is encouraged. Members of a uniformed organization/institution not part of the military or police such as fire fighters, traffic wardens, municipal policemen, immigration officers, customs officers, Search and Rescue personnel, scouts, school students, etc. in uniform will implement a salute as done by members of the military and police.\nThis is done during the raising and lowering of the national flag, rendition or singing of the national anthem, and when saluting a person or object worth saluting.\nLatin America.\nIn Latin America, except in Mexico, a salute similar to the United States flag salute is used, with the hand over the heart.\nMarching bands and Drum and Bugle Corps.\nHand salutes similar to those used in the military are often rendered by the Drum Major of a marching band or drum corps just prior to beginning their performance and following completion of the performance. In all cases, the salute is rendered to the audience.\nThe classic \"corps style\" salute is often known as the \"punch\" type, where the saluting party will first punch their right arm straight forward from their body, arm parallel to the ground, hand in a fist, followed by the more traditional salute position with the right hand, left arm akimbo. Dropping the salute typically entails snapping the saluting hand to the side and clenching the fist, then dropping both arms to the sides.\nIn the US, a Drum Major carrying a large baton or mace will often salute by bringing the right hand to the left shoulder, holding the mace with the head upward,\nThere are occasional, more flamboyant variations, such as the windmill action of the saluting arm given by the Madison Scouts drum major, or the running of the saluting hand around the brim of the hat worn by the Cavaliers drum major.\nOne-finger salute.\nIn Islam raising the index finger signifies the Tawh\u012bd (\u062a\u064e\u0648\u0652\u062d\u0650\u064a\u062f), which denotes the indivisible oneness of God. It is used to express the unity of God (\"There is no god but God\").\nIn Arabic, the index or fore finger is called musabbi\u1e25a (\u0645\u064f\u0633\u064e\u0628\u0650\u0651\u062d\u0629), mostly used with the definite article: al-musabbi\u1e25a (\u0627\u0644\u0652\u0645\u064f\u0633\u064e\u0628\u0650\u0651\u062d\u0629). Sometimes also as-sabb\u0101\u1e25a (\u0627\u0644\u0633\u064e\u0651\u0628\u0651\u0627\u062d\u0629) is used. The Arabic verb \u0633\u064e\u0628\u064e\u0651\u062d\u064e (sabba\u1e25a), which has the same root as the Arabic word for index finger, means to praise or glorify God by saying: \"Sub\u1e25\u0101na All\u0101h\" (\u0633\u064f\u0628\u0652\u062d\u0627\u0646\u064e \u0627\u0644\u0644\u0647).\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, civilians salute the national flag during flag raising and upon hearing the Philippine National Anthem by standing at attention and doing the same hand-to-heart salute as their American, Italian, Nigerian, and South African counterparts. People wearing hats or caps must bare their heads and hold the headwear over their heart (excepting religious headwear). Those in the military or in security, as well as Boy Scouts of the Philippines, Girl Scouts of the Philippines, and sometimes ship or airline pilots, all perform traditional military salutes if they are in uniform and on duty; off-duty personnel do the hand-to-heart salutes. During the Martial Law years from 1972 to 1981 up to the 1986 EDSA Revolution, the \"raised clenched fist\" salute was done during the singing and playing of the National Anthem by some political and protest groups, especially opposition parties and activists.\nPeople whose religious beliefs prohibit them from singing the anthem or reciting the patriotic pledge (such as Jehovah's Witnesses) are exempted from salutes but are still required to show full respect when the anthem is being sung or played by standing at attention and not engaging in disruptive activities.\nRoman salute.\nThe Roman salute is a gesture in which the arm is held out forward straight, with palm down and fingers extended straight and touching. Sometimes the arm is raised upward at an angle, sometimes it is held out parallel to the ground. A well known symbol of Fascism, it is commonly perceived to be based on a classical Roman custom.p.\u00a02 but no known Roman work of art displays this salute, and no known Roman text describes it.\nBeginning with Jacques-Louis David's painting \"The Oath of the Horatii\" (1784), an association of the gesture with Roman republican and imperial culture emerged through 18th-century French art. The association with ancient Roman traditions was further developed in France during the Napoleonic era and again in popular culture through late 19th- and early 20th-century plays and films. These include the epic \"Cabiria\" (1914), whose screenplay was attributed to Italian nationalist Gabriele d'Annunzio. In a case of life imitating art, d'Annunzio appropriated the salute as a neo-imperial ritual when he led the occupation of Fiume in 1919. It was soon adopted by the Italian Fascist party, whose use of the salute inspired the Nazi party salute. However, the armed forces (\"Wehrmacht\") of the Third Reich used a German form of the military salute until, in the wake of the July 20 plot on Hitler's life in 1944, the Nazi salute or \"Hitlergruss\" was imposed on them.\nOther salutes derived from the Roman salute include the Olympic salute, used by athletes at the Olympic Games, and the Bellamy salute, used by civilians in the United States to salute the American flag. Both salutes fell out of use during WWII.\nIn Germany showing the Roman salute is today prohibited by law. Those rendering similar salutes, for example raising the left instead of the right hand, or raising only three fingers, are liable to prosecution. The punishment derives from \u00a7 86a of the German Criminal Code and can be up to three years imprisonment or a fine (in minor cases).\nIn Mexico, the Roman salute is still used during the \"Saludo a la Bandera\" (salute to the flag) and is even depicted on the 100 peso bill released to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the constitution.\nScouting.\nBoy Scouts and Girl Scouts meanwhile have their own form of salutes, which generally involve the right hand brought to either just above the right eye or to the right shoulder, with the thumb holding down the smallest finger and palm facing outwards. A variation with only two fingers is sometimes used for Cub scouts.\nThailand.\nThailand has a \"Flag Code\" that determines how the flag should be displayed and respected. Section 7 of the \"Flag Code\" mandates that, upon seeing the raising or lowering of the flag at 08:00 and 18:00, general civilians should stand at attention and face the flag. In cases where only the National Anthem is heard, or one is in a vehicle, one should come to a complete stop until the National Anthem ends. Uniformed government employees are further governed by their own regulations which define whether to salute the Flag while in formation for the enlisted and the officers. The laws themselves do not specify punishment for not respecting or saluting the flag, only for using illegal flags.\nIn addition to the National Anthem, the Royal Anthem Sansoen Phra Barami is also given a similar respect. The laws regarding l\u00e8se majest\u00e9 in Thailand do not contain punishment for merely refusing to stand or otherwise ignoring the Royal Anthem as it is not a direct threat against the royalty; it is, however, a serious criminal offense to make offensive gestures.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, certain civilians, such as officers of HM Revenue and Customs, salute the quarterdeck of Royal Navy vessels on boarding.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, civilians may salute the national flag by placing their right hand over their heart or by standing at attention during the playing of the national anthem or while reciting the U.S. Pledge of Allegiance, or when the flag is passing by, as in a parade. Men and boys remove their hats and other headgear during the salute; religious headdress (and military headdress worn by veterans in uniform, who are otherwise civilians) are exempt. The nature of the headgear determines whether it is held in the left or right hand, tucked under the left arm, etc. However, if it is held in the right hand, the headgear is not held over the heart but the hand is placed in the same position it would be if it were not holding anything.\nThe Defense Authorization Act of 2009, signed by President Bush, contained a provision that gave veterans and active-duty service members not in uniform the right to salute during the playing of the national anthem. Previous legislation authorized saluting when not in uniform during the raising, lowering and passing of the flag. However, because a salute is a form of communication protected by the Free Speech clause of the First Amendment, legislative authorization is not technically required for any civilian\u2014veteran or non-veteran\u2014to salute the U.S. flag. Whatever the legal status, to salute wrongly is disapproved by veterans' organizations. Civilians in some other countries, like Italy, South Africa, Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, South Korea, Croatia, Poland, Kazakhstan, and Nigeria also render the same civilian salute as their U.S. counterparts when hearing their respective national anthems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28979", "revid": "50519108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28979", "title": "Scopolamine", "text": "Tropane alkaloid &amp; anticholinergic drug\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nScopolamine, also known as hyoscine, or Devil's Breath, is a medication used to treat motion sickness and postoperative nausea and vomiting. It is also sometimes used before surgery to decrease saliva. When used by injection, effects begin after about 20\u00a0minutes and last for up to 8\u00a0hours. It may also be used orally and as a transdermal patch since it has been long known to have transdermal bioavailability.\nScopolamine is in the antimuscarinic family of drugs and works by blocking some of the effects of acetylcholine within the nervous system.\nScopolamine was first written about in 1881 and started to be used for anesthesia around 1900. Scopolamine is also the main active component produced by certain plants of the nightshade family, which historically have been used as psychoactive drugs, known as \"deliriants\", due to their antimuscarinic-induced hallucinogenic effects in higher doses. In these contexts, its mind-altering effects have been utilized for recreational and occult purposes. The name \"scopolamine\" is derived from one type of nightshade known as \"Scopolia\", while the name \"hyoscine\" is derived from another type known as \"Hyoscyamus niger\", or black henbane. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines.\nMedical uses.\nScopolamine has a number of formal uses in modern medicine where it is used in its isolated form and in low doses to treat:\nIt is sometimes used as a premedication, especially to reduce respiratory tract secretions in surgery, most commonly by injection. Common side effects include sleepiness, blurred vision, dilated pupils, and dry mouth. It is not recommended in people with angle-closure glaucoma or bowel obstruction. Whether its use during pregnancy is safe remains unclear, and use during breastfeeding is still cautioned by health professionals and manufacturers of the drug.\nBreastfeeding.\nScopolamine enters breast milk by secretion. Although no human studies exist to document the safety of scopolamine while nursing, the manufacturer recommends that caution be taken if scopolamine is administered to a breastfeeding woman.\nAdverse effects.\nAdverse effect incidence:\nUncommon (0.1\u20131% incidence) adverse effects include:\nRare (&lt;0.1% incidence) adverse effects include:\nUnknown frequency adverse effects include:\nOverdose.\nPhysostigmine, a cholinergic drug that readily crosses the blood\u2013brain barrier, has been used as an antidote to treat the central nervous system depression symptoms of a scopolamine overdose. Other than this supportive treatment, gastric lavage and induced emesis (vomiting) are usually recommended as treatments for oral overdoses. The symptoms of overdose include:\nRoute of administration.\nScopolamine can be taken by mouth, subcutaneously, in the eye, and intravenously, as well as via a transdermal patch.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nThe pharmacological effects of scopolamine are mediated through the drug's competitive antagonism of the peripheral and central muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. Scopolamine acts as a nonspecific muscarinic antagonist at all four (M1, M2, M3, and M4) receptor sites.\nIn doses higher than intended for medicinal use, the hallucinogenic alteration of consciousness, as well as the delirium in particular, are tied to the compound's activity at the M1 muscarinic receptor. M1 receptors are located primarily in the central nervous system and are involved in perception, attention, and cognitive functioning. Delirium is associated solely with the antagonism of postsynaptic M1 receptors; currently no other receptor subtypes have been implicated. \nPeripheral muscarinic receptors are part of the autonomic nervous system. M2 receptors are located in the brain and heart, M3 receptors are in salivary glands and M4 receptors are in the brain and lungs. Due to the drug's inhibition of various signal transduction pathways, the decrease in acetylcholine signaling is what leads to many of the cognitive deficits, mental impairments, and delirium associated with psychoactive doses. Medicinal effects appear to mostly be tied to activation of the peripheral receptors and only from marginal decreases in acetylcholine signaling.\nAlthough often broadly referred to as simply being 'anticholinergic', antimuscarinic would be more specific and accurate terminology to use for scopolamine, as, for example, it is not known to block nicotinic receptors.\nPharmacokinetics.\nScopolamine undergoes first-pass metabolism and about 2.6% is excreted unchanged in urine. It has a bioavailability of 20-40%, reaches peak plasma concentration in about 45 minutes, and in healthy subjects has an average half-life of 5 hours (observed range 2 - 10 hours). Scopolamine is primarily metabolized by the CYP3A4 enzyme, and grapefruit juice decreases metabolism of scopolamine, consequently increasing plasma concentration.\nChemistry.\nBiosynthesis in plants.\nScopolamine is among the secondary metabolites of plants from the Solanaceae (nightshade) family of plants, including henbane (\"Hyoscyamus niger\"), jimson weed (\"Datura\"), angel's trumpets (\"Brugmansia\"), deadly nightshade (\"Belladonna\"), mandrake (\"Mandragora officinarum\"), and corkwood (\"Duboisia\").\nThe biosynthesis of scopolamine begins with the decarboxylation of L-ornithine to putrescine by ornithine decarboxylase. Putrescine is methylated to N-methylputrescine by putrescine N-methyltransferase.\nA putrescine oxidase that specifically recognizes methylated putrescine catalyzes the deamination of this compound to 4-methylaminobutanal, which then undergoes a spontaneous ring formation to N-methyl-pyrrolium cation. In the next step, the pyrrolium cation condenses with acetoacetic acid yielding hygrine. No enzymatic activity could be demonstrated to catalyze this reaction. Hygrine further rearranges to tropinone.\nSubsequently, tropinone reductase I converts tropinone to tropine, which condenses with phenylalanine-derived phenyllactate to littorine. A cytochrome P450 classified as Cyp80F1 oxidizes and rearranges littorine to hyoscyamine aldehyde. In the final step, hyoscyamine undergoes epoxidation catalyzed by 6\u03b2-hydroxyhyoscyamine epoxidase yielding scopolamine.\nHistory.\nPlants naturally containing scopolamine such as \"Atropa belladonna\" (deadly nightshade), \"Brugmansia\" (angels trumpet), \"Datura\" (Jimson weed), \"Hyoscyamus niger\", \"Mandragora officinarum\", \"Scopolia carniolica\", \"Latua\" and \"Duboisia myoporoides\" have been known about and used for various purposes in both the New and Old Worlds since ancient times. Being one of the earlier alkaloids isolated from plant sources, scopolamine has been in use in its purified forms, such as various salts, including hydrochloride, hydrobromide, hydroiodide, and sulfate, since its official isolation by the German scientist Albert Ladenburg in 1880, and as various preparations from its plant-based form since antiquity and perhaps prehistoric times. \nIn 1899, Dr. Schneiderlin recommended the use of scopolamine and morphine for surgical anaesthesia, and it started to be used sporadically for that purpose. The use of this combination in obstetric anesthesiology (childbirth) was first proposed by Richard von Steinbuchel in 1902 and was picked up and further developed by Carl Gauss in Freiburg, Germany, starting in 1903. The method, which was based on a drug synergy between both scopolamine and morphine came to be known as \"D\u00e4mmerschlaf\" (\"twilight sleep\") or the \"Freiburg method\". It spread rather slowly, and different clinics experimented with different dosages and ingredients. In 1915, the \"Canadian Medical Association Journal\" reported, \"the method [was] really still in a state of development\". It remained widely used in the US until the 1960s, when growing chemophobia and a desire for more natural childbirth led to its abandonment.\nSociety and culture.\nNames.\nHyoscine hydrobromide is the international nonproprietary name, and scopolamine hydrobromide is the United States Adopted Name. Other names include \"levo\"-duboisine, devil's breath, and \"burundanga\".\nAustralian bush medicine.\nA bush medicine developed by Aboriginal peoples of the eastern states of Australia from the soft corkwood tree (\"Duboisia myoporoides\") was used by the Allies in World War II to stop soldiers from getting seasick when they sailed across the English Channel on their way to France during the Invasion of Normandy. Later, the same substance was found to be usable in the production of scopolamine and hyoscyamine, which are used in eye surgery, and a multimillion-dollar industry was built in Queensland based on this substance.\nRecreational and religious use.\nWhile it has been occasionally used recreationally for its hallucinogenic properties, the experiences are often unpleasant, mentally and physically. It is also physically dangerous and officially classified as a deliriant drug, so repeated recreational use is rare. In June 2008, more than 20 people were hospitalized with psychosis in Norway after ingesting counterfeit rohypnol tablets containing scopolamine. In January 2018, 9 individuals were hospitalized in Perth, Western Australia, after reportedly ingesting scopolamine. \nThe alkaloid scopolamine, when taken recreationally for its psychoactive effect, is usually taken in the form of preparations from plants of the genera \"Datura\" or \"Brugmansia\", often by adolescents or young adults in order to achieve hallucinations and an altered state of consciousness induced by muscarinic antagonism. In circumstances such as these, the intoxication is usually built on a synergistic, but even more toxic mixture of the additional alkaloids in the plants which includes atropine and hyoscyamine.\nHistorically, the various plants that produce scopolamine have been used psychoactively for spiritual and magical purposes, particularly by witches in western culture and indigenous groups throughout the Americas, such as Native American tribes like the Chumash. When entheogenic preparations of these plants were used, scopolamine was considered to be the main psychoactive compound and was largely responsible for the hallucinogenic effects, particularly when the preparation was made into a topical ointment, most notably flying ointment. \nScopolamine is reported to be the only active alkaloid within these plants that can effectively be absorbed through the skin to cause effects. Different recipes for these ointments were explored in European witchcraft at least as far back as the early modern period and included multiple ingredients to help with the transdermal absorption of scopolamine, such as animal fat, as well as other possible ingredients to counteract its noxious and dysphoric effects.\nIn the Bible, there are multiple mentions of Mandrake, a psychoactive and hallucinogenic plant root that contains scopolamine. It was associated with fertility and (sexual) desire for which it was yearned by Rachel, who was \"barren\" (infertile) but trying to conceive.\nInterrogation.\nThe effects of scopolamine were studied for use as a truth serum in interrogations in the early 20th century, but because of the side effects, investigations were dropped. In 2009, the Czechoslovak state security secret police were proven to have used scopolamine at least three times to obtain confessions from alleged antistate dissidents.\nUse in crime.\nIngestion of scopolamine can render a victim unconscious for 24 hours or more. In large doses, it can cause respiratory failure and death. The highest prevalence of misuse seems to be recorded in Colombia. Unofficial estimates there put the number of annual scopolamine incidents at approximately 50,000. A travel advisory published by the U.S. Overseas Security Advisory Council (OSAC) in 2012 stated: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One common and particularly dangerous method that criminals use to rob a victim is through the use of drugs. Scopolamine is most often administered in liquid or powder form in foods and beverages. The majority of these incidents occur in nightclubs and bars, and usually, men, perceived to be wealthy, are targeted by young, attractive women. It is recommended that to avoid becoming a victim of scopolamine, a person should never accept food or beverages offered by strangers or new acquaintances, nor leave food or beverages unattended in their presence. Victims of scopolamine or other drugs should seek immediate medical attention.\nBetween 1998 and 2004, 13% of emergency-room admissions for \"poisoning with criminal intentions\" in a clinic of Bogot\u00e1 have been attributed to scopolamine, and 44% to benzodiazepines. Most commonly, the person has been poisoned by a robber who gave the victim a scopolamine-laced beverage, in the hope that the victim would become unconscious or unable to effectively resist the robbery.\nBeside robberies, it is also allegedly involved in express kidnappings and sexual assault. In 2008, the Hospital Cl\u00ednic in Barcelona introduced a protocol to help medical workers identify cases. In February 2015, Madrid hospitals adopted a similar working document. Hospital Cl\u00ednic has found little scientific evidence to support this use and relies on the victims' stories to reach any conclusion. \nAlthough poisoning by scopolamine appears quite often in the media as an aid for raping, kidnapping, killing, or robbery, the effects of this drug and the way it is applied by criminals (transdermal injection, on playing cards and papers, etc.) are often exaggerated, especially skin exposure, as the dose that can be absorbed by the skin is too low to have any effect. Scopolamine transdermal patches must be used for hours to days. \nThere are certain other aspects of the usage of scopolamine in crimes. Powdered scopolamine is referred to as \"devil's breath\". In popular media and television, it is portrayed as a method to brainwash or control people into being defrauded by their attackers. There is debate whether these claims are true.\nResearch.\nScopolamine is used as a research tool to study memory encoding. Initially, in human trials, relatively low doses of the muscarinic receptor antagonist scopolamine were found to induce temporary cognitive defects. Since then, scopolamine has become a standard drug for experimentally inducing cognitive defects in animals. Results in primates suggest that acetylcholine is involved in the encoding of new information into long-term memory. Scopolamine has been shown to exert a greater impairment on episodic memory, event-related potentials, memory retention and free recall compared to diphenhydramine (an anticholinergic and antihistamine).\nScopolamine produces detrimental effects on short-term memory, memory acquisition, learning, visual recognition memory, visuospatial praxis, visuospatial memory, visuoperceptual function, verbal recall, and psychomotor speed. It does not seem to impair recognition and memory retrieval, though. Acetylcholine projections in hippocampal neurons, which are vital in mediating long-term potentiation, are inhibited by scopolamine. Scopolamine inhibits cholinergic-mediated glutamate release in hippocampal neurons, which assist in depolarization, potentiation of action potential, and synaptic suppression. Scopolamine's effects on acetylcholine and glutamate release in the hippocampus favor retrieval-dominant cognitive functioning. Scopolamine has been used to model the defects in cholinergic function for models of Alzheimer's, dementia, fragile X syndrome, and Down syndrome.\nScopolamine has been identified as a psychoplastogen, which refers to a compound capable of promoting rapid and sustained neuroplasticity in a single dose. It has been and continues to be investigated as a rapid-onset antidepressant, with many small studies finding positive results, particularly in female subjects.\nNASA agreed to develop a nasal administration method. With a precise dosage, the NASA spray formulation has been shown to work faster and more reliably than the oral form to treat motion sickness.\nAlthough a fair amount of research has been applied to scopolamine in the field of medicine, its hallucinogenic (psychoactive) effects as well as the psychoactive effects of other antimuscarinic deliriants have not been extensively researched or as well understood compared to other types of hallucinogens such as psychedelic and dissociative compounds, despite the alkaloid's long history of usage in mind-altering plant preparations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28981", "revid": "8087765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28981", "title": "Society for Creative Anachronism", "text": "International living history group\nThe Society for Creative Anachronism (SCA) is an international living history group with the aim of studying and recreating mainly Medieval European cultures and their histories before the 17th century. A quip often used within the SCA describes it as a group devoted to the Middle Ages \"as they ought to have been\", choosing to \"selectively recreate the culture, choosing elements of the culture that interest and attract us\". Founded in 1966, the non-profit educational corporation has over 20,000 paid members as of 2020 with about 60,000 total participants in the society, including members and non-member participants.\nHistory.\nThe SCA's roots can be traced to a backyard party of a UC Berkeley medieval studies graduate, the author Diana Paxson, in Berkeley, California, on May Day in 1966. The party began with a \"Grand Tournament\" in which the participants wore helmets, fencing masks, and usually some semblance of a costume, and sparred with each other using weapons such as plywood swords, padded maces, and fencing foils. It ended with a parade down Telegraph Avenue with everyone singing \"Greensleeves\". The SCA still measures dates within the society from the date of that party, calling the system \"Anno Societatis\" (Latin for \"in the Year of the Society\"). For example, 2009 May 1 to 2010 April 30 was A.S. XLIV (44). The name Berkeley Society for Creative Anachronism was coined by science fiction author Marion Zimmer Bradley, an early participant, when the nascent group needed an official name in order to reserve a park for a tournament. \"Berkeley\" was dropped as the group expanded. Three other co-founders were science fiction author Poul Anderson, his wife, writer Karen Kruse Anderson, and their daughter, Astrid.\nIn 1968, Bradley and her husband Walter Breen moved to Staten Island, New York where they co-founded the Kingdom of the East, holding a tournament that summer to determine the first Eastern King of the SCA. That September, a tournament was held at the 26th World Science Fiction Convention, which was in Berkeley that year. The SCA had produced a book for the convention called \"A Handbook for the Current Middle Ages\", which was a how-to book for people wanting to start their own SCA chapters. Convention goers purchased the book and the idea spread. Soon, other local chapters began to form. In October 1968, the SCA was incorporated as a 501(c)(3) non-profit corporation in California. By the end of 1969, the SCA's three original kingdoms had been established: West Kingdom, East, and Middle. All SCA kingdoms trace their roots to these original three. The number of SCA kingdoms has continued to grow by the expansion and division of existing kingdoms; for example, the kingdoms now called the Outlands, Artemisia, Ansteorra, Gleann Abhann, Meridies, and Trimaris all are made up of lands originally belonging to the fourth kingdom, Atenveldt, which began as a branch of the West Kingdom.\nActivities.\nThe SCA engages in a broad range of activities, including SCA armoured combat, SCA fencing, archery, equestrian activities, feasting, medieval dance and recreating medieval arts and sciences, including a broad range of crafts as well as medieval music and theatre. Other activities include the study and practice of heraldry and scribal arts (calligraphy and illumination). Members are afforded opportunities to register a medieval personal name and coat of arms (often colloquially called a \"device\" in SCA parlance). SCA scribes produce illuminated scrolls to be given by SCA royalty as awards for various achievements.\nMost local groups in the SCA hold weekly fighter practices, and many also hold regular archery practices, dance practices, A&amp;S (Arts &amp; Science) nights and other regular gatherings. Some kingdoms and regions also have occasional war practices, where fighters practice formations and group tactics in preparation for large scale \"war\" events.\nThe research and approach by members of the SCA toward the recreation of history has led to new discoveries about medieval life. The SCA does not require participants to wear historically accurate clothing or equipment. According to the newcomer's guide:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We request that all participants make \"an attempt\" at pre-17th-century clothing commonly referred to as \"Garb\"...As you pick items, always remember to try not to make them \"obtrusively modern\".\nEvents.\nThe SCA holds its own events as a non-profit education organization for the benefit of SCA members and their guests. This is unlike most Renaissance fairs, which are open to the public and held mainly as entertainment for profit. Another noticeable difference is that SCA events are historically earlier than most Renaissance fairs. Each kingdom in the SCA runs its own schedule of events, which are announced in their kingdom newsletters (and usually posted on the kingdom website), but some of the largest SCA-sanctioned events, often called \"wars\", attract members from many kingdoms. Pennsic War, fought annually between the East Kingdom and Middle Kingdom, is the biggest event in the SCA. Likewise, Estrella War was held for over thirty years, mainly between two large regional SCA groups: the Kingdom of Atenveldt and the Kingdom of the Outlands. Most Estrella Wars were held near Phoenix, Arizona in late February and would last around 7\u20139 days. Several thousand people attended each year, some from as far as Sweden, Germany, France, Italy, Greece, and Australia. On July 13, 2021 it was announced that Estrella War was cancelled permanently. Other annual SCA wars include Gulf Wars in Gleann Abhann (formerly Meridies), Great Western War in Caid, War of the Lillies in Calontir and others. Other annual or semi-annual Kingdom-level events held analogously by most or all SCA kingdoms include Crown Tournament, Coronation, Kingdom Arts and Sciences competition and Queen's Prize. Additionally, most baronies in the SCA have their own traditional annual events such as Baronial Arts and Sciences competitions, championship tournaments, and often a Yule or Twelfth Night feast. Various SCA groups sometimes host collegia or symposia, where members gather for classes on various medieval arts and sciences and other SCA-related topics.\nThe minimum standard for attendance at an SCA event is \"an attempt at pre-17th century clothing\", and there is a general goal of maintaining a historical atmosphere. However, SCA members will use modern elements when necessary for personal comfort, medical needs, or to promote safety (e.g. wearing prescription eye-wear, using rattan for swords or shear thickening substances for padding). Unlike some other living history groups, most SCA gatherings do not reenact a specific time or place in history, leaving members free to dress as any culture within the SCA's time period.\nCollegiums, symposiums and universities.\nMany branches of the SCA organize in-person and virtual events with peer-to-peer learning opportunities. Classes, lectures, and workshops may be offered as part of a local branch's regular scheduled activities or at a full-day or multi-day event. Some educational events are virtual or hybrid and many of the lectures are recorded and available to the public.\nEducational events in the SCA may be referred to as academies, collegiums, schola or universities. A collegium is a local in-person or virtual event offering multiple classes. A symposium is a society-wide event that focuses on a specific area of the SCA. A university in the SCA is an organized series of courses set up in the style of a modern university.\nPublications.\nThe SCA produces two quarterly publications, \"The Compleat Anachronist\" and \"Tournaments Illuminated\", and each kingdom publishes a monthly newsletter.\n\"The Compleat Anachronist\" is a quarterly monographic series, each issue focused on a specific topic related to the period of circa 600\u20131600 in history. Issues are written by SCA members and have covered a wide range of topics.\n\"Tournaments Illuminated\" is a quarterly magazine, each issue covering a range of topics and including several features such as news, a humor column, book reviews, war reports and various articles on SCA-related topics of interest.\nOrganization.\nCorporate organization.\nThe SCA is incorporated as a 501(c)(3) non-profit corporation in California, with its current headquarters in the city of Milpitas, California. It is headed by a board of directors, each of whom is nominated by the membership of the SCA, selected by sitting directors, and elected to serve for 3.5 years. Each director serves as an ombudsman for various kingdoms and society officers. The BoD, as it is called, is responsible for handling the corporate affairs of the SCA and is also in charge of certain disciplinary actions, such as revoking the membership status of participants who have broken Corpora regulations or modern law while participating in SCA activities. Because the SCA now has groups all over the world, it has also been incorporated in other countries, e.g. SCAA in Australia, SCANZ in New Zealand, SKA Nordmark in Sweden, SKA in Finland, and the UK CIC which covers both the UK and Ireland. These affiliated bodies work with the U.S. BoD with regards to Societal issues, but make all decisions affected by local law independently of the U.S. parent body. Although they agree to work in unity with the U.S. SCA board of directors, they are autonomous and are not bound by any ruling of the U.S. body.\nBranches.\nThe SCA is divided into administrative regions that it calls \"kingdoms\". Smaller branches within those kingdoms include \"Principalities\", \"Regions\", \"Baronies\", and \"Provinces\"; and local chapters are known as \"Cantons\", \"Ridings\", \"Shires\", \"Colleges\", \"Strongholds\", and \"Ports\". Kingdoms, principalities, and baronies have ceremonial rulers who preside over activities and issue awards to individuals and groups. Colleges, strongholds, and ports are local chapters (like a shire) that are associated with an institution, such as a school, military base, or even a military ship at sea.\nAll SCA branches are organized in descending order as follows:\nGroups are active all over the United States, Canada, Europe, Australia, Japan, South Africa, and New Zealand, with scattered groups elsewhere, including China, Israel, Panama and Thailand. At one time there was even a group on the aircraft carrier USS \"Nimitz\", known as the \"Shire of Curragh Mor\" (anglicized Irish for \"Big Boat\"), and the shire's arms played on the \"Nimitz's\" ship's badge. There is also an active chapter in South Korea, the Stronghold of Warrior's Gate, with a mix of active duty military personnel from the several services and military-connected civilians. There are also non-territorial groups, usually called \"households\", which are not part of the Society's formal organization, the largest of which is the Mongol Empire-themed Great Dark Horde.\nKingdoms.\nThe twenty SCA Kingdoms and the geographic areas they cover are (in order of founding)\nOfficers.\nThe Society as a whole, each kingdom, and each local group within a kingdom, all have a standard group of officers with titles loosely based on medieval equivalents.\nCulture of the group.\nMembers of the SCA study and take part in a variety of activities, including combat and chivalry, archery, heraldry, equestrian activities, costuming, cooking, metalworking, woodworking, leather crafting, music, dance, calligraphy, fiber arts, and others as practiced during the member's time period.\nPersonae.\nTo aid historical recreation, participants in the SCA create historically plausible characters known individually as \"personae\". To new members, a persona can simply be a costume and a name used for weekend events, while other members may study and create an elaborate personal history. The goal of a well-crafted persona is a historically accurate person who might have lived in a particular historical time and place. The SCA has members with an interest in onomastics who assist in creating appropriate persona names. \nIn addition, claiming to be a specific historical individual, especially a familiar one such as Genghis Khan, Julius Caesar, or Queen Elizabeth I, is not permitted. Likewise, one is not allowed to claim the \"persona\" of a fellow SCA member, or of a familiar fictional character such as Robin Hood or Aladdin.\nHeraldry.\nA major dimension to the SCA is its internal system of Heraldry. Any member of the society may apply to register a name and device for their persona, which are checked by the heralds for uniqueness and period authenticity, before being blazoned and recorded in the society's Armorial. The system has evolved since the formation of the society; and now has three Sovereigns of Arms, with \"Principal Heralds\" for each Kingdom, who oversee deputy officers for matters such as heraldic education and processing registrations, and local officers (generally one for each local chapter) who assist the local participants. In addition to design of arms, heralds in the Society also provide services such as voice heraldry (similar to a master of ceremonies) at tournaments and official functions, and organizing tournament brackets or \"lists.\"\nRoyalty.\nThe SCA has ceremonial rulers chosen by winning tournaments (Kings/Queens, Princes/Princesses) in SCA armoured combat. Barons and Baronesses are appointed by Royalty, although some baronies hold elections or competitions to choose their preferred Baron and/or Baroness. One of the primary functions of state for reigning monarchs is to recognize participant achievement through awards. Most awards denote excellence in a specific pursuit such as local service, arts and sciences, and combat. Some awards change the precedence and title of the recipient, giving him or her the privilege of being known as \"Lord\"/\"Lady\", \"Baron\", \"Duchess\", \"Master\", and so forth. High level awards are often given with the consultation of the other people who have received the award, such as peerages and consulting orders. The Crown has some authority over other matters relating to leadership, but the extent of this varies from kingdom to kingdom.\nRule by right of arms.\nEach SCA kingdom is \"ruled\" by a king and queen chosen by winning a Crown Tournament in armored combat. Corpora require this to be held as a \"properly constituted armored combat\" tournament. The winner of the Crown Tournament and his/her consort are styled \"Crown Prince and Princess\" and serve an advisory period (three to six months, depending upon the scheduling of the Crown Tournament) under the current king and queen prior to acceding to the throne and ruling in their turn.\nThis selection method is not based on how actual medieval monarchs were chosen, as there is no record of one being selected by tournament combat in this manner. There are, however, literary and historical bases for the custom, most famously the tournament in Sir Walter Scott's \"Ivanhoe\". In the Middle Ages, there were a number of different \"mock king\" games, some of which involved some form of combat, such as King of the Mountain or the King of Archers. In the 17th century the Cotswold Games were developed, the winner of which was declared to be \"king\". Also, the medieval sagas contain accounts of uniting petty kingdoms under a single king through \"actual\" combat.\nThe SCA's first event did not choose a \"king\". Fighters vied for the right to declare their ladies (only men fought at the first event) \"fairest\", later called the \"Queen of Love and Beauty\".\nPeerage orders.\nThe highest ranking titles in the SCA belong to the royalty, followed by the former royalty. Former kings and queens become counts and countesses (dukes and duchesses if they have reigned more than once), and former princes and princesses of principalities become viscounts and viscountesses. This system is not historically based, but was developed out of practical necessity early in the Society's history.\nDirectly beneath this \"landed\" nobility (current and former royalty) rank the highest awards, the peerages. The SCA has five orders of peerage with one split into two parts: the Order of the Chivalry, awarded for skill at arms in armored combat, split into the knights and the masters of arms; the Order of the Laurel, awarded for skill in the arts and sciences; the Order of the Pelican, awarded for outstanding service to the Society; the Order of Defense, awarded for skill at arms in rapier combat; and the Order of the Mark, awarded for ranged combat prowess, such as archery. In several kingdoms the Order of the Rose, made up of former consorts, is considered a peerage equal to the other five.\nElevation to peerage.\nPeerages are bestowed by the Crown (the sovereign and consort) of a kingdom. In most cases, this is done with the consent of the members of a given peerage, often at their suggestion. The Society's Bylaws state that \"the Crown may elevate subjects to the peerage by granting membership in one of the orders conferring a Patent of Arms, after consultation with the members of the Order within the kingdom, and in accordance with the laws and customs of the kingdom. Restriction: to advance a candidate to the Order of the Chivalry, a knight of the Society (usually the king) must bestow the accolade\".\nCultural impact.\nIn \"Number of the Beast\" (1980), Robert A. Heinlein portrayed an SCA tournament where live weapons were used and the battles actually fought to the \"death\". The defeated combatants were either transported to an alternate reality where medical technology was advanced enough that they could be revived from any wound or transported to the alternate reality that was Valhalla. The contestants' desires were placed in sealed envelopes prior to the tournament, which were destroyed if the competitor won and obeyed if a competitor lost.\nIn \"Ariel\" (1983), a post-apocalyptic fantasy by Steven R. Boyett, technology suddenly stops working and sorcery and sword fight take over. Several characters who are former SCA members attribute their survival to their SCA experience.\nThe 1986 fantasy novel \"The Folk of the Air\" by Peter S. Beagle was written after the author attended a few early SCA events \"circa\" 1968; but he has repeatedly stated that he then studiously avoided any contact with the SCA itself for almost two decades, so that his description of a fictitious \"League for Archaic Pleasures\" would not be \"contaminated\" by contact with the actual real-life organization.\nMembers of the SCA are given pivotal roles in S. M. Stirling's Emberverse series, where their skills in pre-industrial technology and warfare become invaluable in helping humanity adapt when all modern technology (including firearms) ceases working.\nThe novel \"Murder at the War\" (\"Knightfall\" in paperback edition) by Mary Monica Pulver is a murder mystery set entirely at the SCA's largest annual event, Pennsic War.\nIn David Weber's 1996 science fiction novel \"Honor Among Enemies\", main character Honor Harrington mentions that her uncle is a member of the SCA and that he taught her to shoot from the hip (the time the SCA covers having been moved up to the 19th century in the future era in which the novel is set, to include cowboy and Civil War reenactors).\nIn May 1999, \"The Onion\" ran a front-page article headlined \"Society for Creative Anachronism Seizes Control of Russia\" featuring photos of actual SCA participants from the Barony of Jaravellir (Madison, Wisconsin).\nIn Christopher Stasheff's \"Warlock\" series, the inhabitants of the planet Gramarye are revealed to be descended from SCA participants. A prequel, \"Escape Velocity\", describes how the SCAdians first came to Gramarye, and how lands were assigned to the royal peers.\nIn John Ringo's \"The Council Wars\" science fiction series, characters with SCA or SCA-like experience help their society recover from a catastrophic loss of technology.\nControversies and deaths.\nIn 2012, the SCA agreed to pay $1.3 million to settle a lawsuit brought on behalf of 11 victims of child sexual abuse. The abuse was committed in Pennsylvania at the private residence of Ben Schragger, who pleaded guilty to criminal charges in 2004. Schragger was a member of the SCA at the time of the abuse. His membership was suspended on his arrest and permanently revoked after his plea. The lawsuit contended that the SCA had not conducted a background check on Schragger, though at the time the organization did not perform background checks in general and there is no legal requirement to do so.\nIn 2018, Peter Barclay died after being impaled by a lance during equestrian activities at an SCA event. Barclay was an experienced equestrian and his death was deemed an accident.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28982", "revid": "962462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28982", "title": "Snowball Earth", "text": "Worldwide glaciation episodes during the Proterozoic eon\nThe Snowball Earth is a geohistorical hypothesis that proposes that during one or more of Earth's icehouse climates, the planet's surface became nearly entirely frozen with no liquid oceanic or surface water exposed to the atmosphere. The most academically mentioned period of such a global ice age is believed to have occurred some time before 650 mya during the Cryogenian period, which included at least two large glacial periods, the Sturtian and Marinoan glaciations.\nProponents of the hypothesis argue that it best explains sedimentary deposits that are generally believed to be of glacial origin at tropical palaeolatitudes and other enigmatic features in the geological record. Opponents of the hypothesis contest the geological evidence for global glaciation and the geophysical feasibility of an ice- or slush-covered ocean, \nand they emphasize the difficulty of escaping an all-frozen condition. Several unanswered questions remain, including whether Earth was a full \"snowball\" or a \"slushball\" with a thin equatorial band of open (or seasonally open) water. The Snowball Earth episodes are proposed to have occurred before the sudden radiations of multicellular bioforms known as the Avalon and Cambrian explosions; the most recent Snowball episode may have triggered the evolution of multicellularity.\nHistory.\nFirst evidence for ancient glaciation.\nLong before the idea of a global glaciation was first proposed, a series of discoveries occurred that accumulated evidence for ancient Precambrian glaciations. The first of these discoveries was published in 1871 by J. Thomson, who found ancient glacier-reworked material (tillite) in Islay, Scotland. Similar findings followed in Australia (1884) and India (1887). A fourth and very illustrative finding, which came to be known as \"Reusch's Moraine,\" was reported by Hans Reusch in northern Norway in 1891. Many other findings followed, but their understanding was hampered by the rejection (at the time) of continental drift.\nGlobal glaciation proposed.\nDouglas Mawson, an Australian geologist and Antarctic explorer, spent much of his career studying the stratigraphy of the Neoproterozoic in South Australia, where he identified thick and extensive glacial sediments. As a result, late in his career, he speculated about the possibility of global glaciation.\nMawson's ideas of global glaciation, however, were based on the mistaken assumption that the geographic position of Australia, and those of other continents where low-latitude glacial deposits are found, have remained constant through time. With the advancement of the continental drift hypothesis, and eventually plate tectonic theory, came an easier explanation for the glaciogenic sediments\u2014they were deposited at a time when the continents were at higher latitudes.\nIn 1964, the idea of global-scale glaciation reemerged when W. Brian Harland published a paper in which he presented palaeomagnetic data showing that glacial tillites in Svalbard and Greenland were deposited at tropical latitudes. From this data and the sedimentological evidence that the glacial sediments interrupt successions of rocks commonly associated with tropical to temperate latitudes, he argued that an ice age occurred that was so extreme that it resulted in marine glacial rocks being deposited in the tropics.\nIn the 1960s, Mikhail Budyko, a Soviet climatologist, developed a simple energy-balance climate model to investigate the effect of ice cover on global climate. Using this model, Budyko found that if ice sheets advanced far enough out of the polar regions, a feedback loop ensued where the increased reflectiveness (albedo) of the ice led to further cooling and the formation of more ice, until the entire Earth was covered in ice and stabilized in a new ice-covered equilibrium. While Budyko's model showed that this ice-albedo stability could happen, he concluded that it had, in fact, never happened, as his model offered no way to escape from such a feedback loop.\nIn 1971, Aron Faegre, an American physicist, showed that a similar energy-balance model predicted three stable global climates, one of which was snowball Earth. This model introduced Edward Norton Lorenz's concept of intransitivity, indicating that there could be a major jump from one climate to another, including to snowball Earth.\nThe term \"snowball Earth\" was coined by Joseph Kirschvink in a short paper published in 1992 within a lengthy volume concerning the biology of the Proterozoic eon. The major contributions from this work were: (1) the recognition that the presence of banded iron formations is consistent with such a global glacial episode, and (2) the introduction of a mechanism by which to escape from a completely ice-covered Earth\u2014specifically, the accumulation of CO2 from volcanic outgassing leading to an ultra-greenhouse effect.\nFranklyn Van Houten's discovery of a consistent geological pattern in which lake levels rose and fell is now known as the \"Van Houten cycle\". His studies of phosphorus deposits and banded iron formations in sedimentary rocks made him an early adherent of the snowball Earth hypothesis postulating that the planet's surface froze more than 650 Ma.\nInterest in the notion of a snowball Earth increased dramatically after Paul F. Hoffman and his co-workers applied Kirschvink's ideas to a succession of Neoproterozoic sedimentary rocks in Namibia and elaborated upon the hypothesis in the journal \"Science\" in 1998 by incorporating such observations as the occurrence of cap carbonates.\nIn 2010, Francis A. Macdonald, assistant professor at Harvard in the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, and others, reported evidence that Rodinia was at equatorial latitude during the Cryogenian period with glacial ice at or below sea level, and that the associated Sturtian glaciation was global.\nEvidence.\nThe snowball Earth hypothesis was originally devised to explain geological evidence for the apparent presence of glaciers at tropical latitudes. According to modelling, an ice\u2013albedo feedback would result in glacial ice rapidly advancing to the equator once the glaciers spread to within 25\u00b0 to 30\u00b0 of the equator. Therefore, the presence of glacial deposits within the tropics suggests global ice cover.\nCritical to an assessment of the validity of the theory, therefore, is an understanding of the reliability and significance of the evidence that led to the belief that ice ever reached the tropics. This evidence must prove three things:\nThis last point is very difficult to prove. Before the Ediacaran, the biostratigraphic markers usually used to correlate rocks are absent; therefore there is no way to prove that rocks in different places across the globe were deposited at the same time. The best that can be done is to estimate the age of the rocks using radiometric dating, which are rarely accurate to better than a million years or so.\nThe first two points are often the source of contention on a case-to-case basis. Many glacial features can also be formed by non-glacial means, and estimating the approximate latitudes of landmasses even as recently as 200 Ma can be riddled with difficulties.\nPalaeomagnetism.\nThe snowball Earth hypothesis was first posited to explain what were then considered to be glacial deposits near the equator. Since tectonic plates move slowly over time, ascertaining their position at a given point in Earth's long history is not easy. In addition to considerations of how the recognizable landmasses could have fit together, the latitude at which a rock was deposited can be constrained by palaeomagnetism.\nWhen sedimentary rocks form, magnetic minerals within them tend to align with Earth's magnetic field. Through the precise measurement of this palaeomagnetism, it is possible to estimate the latitude (but not the longitude) where the rock matrix was formed. Palaeomagnetic measurements have indicated that some sediments of glacial origin in the Neoproterozoic rock record were deposited within 10 degrees of the equator, although the accuracy of this reconstruction is in question. This palaeomagnetic location of apparently glacial sediments (such as dropstones) has been taken to suggest that glaciers extended from land to sea level in tropical latitudes at the time the sediments were deposited. It is not clear whether this implies a global glaciation or the existence of localized, possibly land-locked, glacial regimes. Others have even suggested that most data do not constrain any glacial deposits to within 25\u00b0 of the equator.\nSkeptics suggest that the palaeomagnetic data could be corrupted if Earth's ancient magnetic field was substantially different from today's. Depending on the rate of cooling of Earth's core, it is possible that during the Proterozoic, the magnetic field did not approximate a simple dipolar distribution, with north and south magnetic poles roughly aligning with the planet's axis as they do today. Instead, a hotter core may have circulated more vigorously and given rise to 4, 8 or more poles. Palaeomagnetic data would then have to be re-interpreted, as the sedimentary minerals could have aligned pointing to a \"west pole\" rather than the north magnetic pole. Alternatively, Earth's dipolar field could have been oriented such that the poles were close to the equator. This hypothesis has been posited to explain the extraordinarily rapid motion of the magnetic poles implied by the Ediacaran palaeomagnetic record; the alleged motion of the north magnetic pole would occur around the same time as the Gaskiers glaciation.\nAnother weakness of reliance on palaeomagnetic data is the difficulty in determining whether the magnetic signal recorded is original, or whether it has been reset by later activity. For example, a mountain-building orogeny releases hot water as a by-product of metamorphic reactions; this water can circulate to rocks thousands of kilometers away and reset their magnetic signature. This makes the authenticity of rocks older than a few million years difficult to determine without painstaking mineralogical observations. Moreover, further evidence is accumulating that large-scale remagnetization events have taken place which may necessitate revision of the estimated positions of the palaeomagnetic poles.\nThere is currently only one deposit, the Elatina deposit of Australia, that was indubitably deposited at low latitudes; its depositional date is well-constrained, and the signal is demonstrably original.\nLow-latitude glacial deposits.\nSedimentary rocks that are deposited by glaciers have distinctive features that enable their identification. Long before the advent of the snowball Earth hypothesis, many Neoproterozoic sediments had been interpreted as having a glacial origin, including some apparently at tropical latitudes at the time of their deposition. However, many sedimentary features traditionally associated with glaciers can also be formed by other means. Thus the glacial origin of many of the key occurrences for snowball Earth has been contested.\nAs of 2007, there was only one \"very reliable\"\u2014still challenged\u2014datum point identifying tropical tillites, which makes statements of equatorial ice cover somewhat presumptuous. However, evidence of sea-level glaciation in the tropics during the Sturtian glaciation is accumulating.\nEvidence of possible glacial origin of sediment includes:\nOpen-water deposits.\nIt appears that some deposits formed during the snowball period could only have formed in the presence of an active hydrological cycle. Bands of glacial deposits up to 5,500 meters thick, separated by small (meters) bands of non-glacial sediments, demonstrate that glaciers melted and re-formed repeatedly for tens of millions of years; solid oceans would not permit this scale of deposition. It is considered possible that ice streams such as seen in Antarctica today could have caused these sequences.\nFurther, sedimentary features that could only form in open water (for example: wave-formed ripples, far-traveled ice-rafted debris and indicators of photosynthetic activity) can be found throughout sediments dating from the snowball-Earth periods. While these may represent \"oases\" of meltwater on a completely frozen Earth, computer modelling suggests that large areas of the ocean must have remained ice-free, arguing that a \"hard\" snowball is not plausible in terms of energy balance and general circulation models.\nCarbon isotope ratios.\nThere are two stable isotopes of carbon in sea water: carbon-12 (12C) and the rare carbon-13 (13C), which makes up about 1.109 percent of carbon atoms. Biochemical processes, of which photosynthesis is one, tend to preferentially incorporate the lighter 12C isotope. Thus ocean-dwelling photosynthesizers, both protists and algae, tend to be very slightly depleted in 13C, relative to the abundance found in the primary volcanic sources of Earth's carbon. Therefore, an ocean with photosynthetic life will have a lower 13C/12C ratio within organic remains and a higher ratio in corresponding ocean water. The organic component of the lithified sediments will remain very slightly, but measurably, depleted in 13C.\nSilicate weathering, an inorganic process by which carbon dioxide is drawn out of the atmosphere and deposited in rock, also fractionates carbon. The emplacement of several large igneous provinces shortly before the Cryogenian and the subsequent chemical weathering of the enormous continental flood basalts produced by them, aided by the breakup of Rodinia that exposed many of these flood basalts to warmer, moister conditions closer to the coast and accelerated chemical weathering, is also believed to have caused a major positive shift in carbon isotopic ratios and contributed to the beginning of the Sturtian glaciation.\nDuring the proposed episode of snowball Earth, there are rapid and extreme negative excursions in the ratio of 13C to 12C. Close analysis of the timing of 13C 'spikes' in deposits across the globe allows the recognition of four, possibly five, glacial events in the late Neoproterozoic.\nBanded iron formations.\nBanded iron formations (BIF) are sedimentary rocks of layered iron oxide and iron-poor chert. In the presence of oxygen, iron naturally rusts and becomes insoluble in water. The banded iron formations are commonly very old and their deposition is often related to the oxidation of Earth's atmosphere during the Palaeoproterozoic era, when dissolved iron in the ocean came in contact with photosynthetically produced oxygen and precipitated out as iron oxide.\nThe bands were produced at the tipping point between an anoxic and an oxygenated ocean. Since today's atmosphere is oxygen-rich (nearly 21% by volume) and in contact with the oceans, it is not possible to accumulate enough iron oxide to deposit a banded formation. The only extensive iron formations that were deposited after the Palaeoproterozoic (after 1.8 billion years ago) are associated with Cryogenian glacial deposits.\nFor such iron-rich rocks to be deposited there would have to be anoxia in the ocean, so that much dissolved iron (as ferrous oxide) could accumulate before it met an oxidant that would precipitate it as ferric oxide. For the ocean to become anoxic it must have limited gas exchange with the oxygenated atmosphere. Proponents of the hypothesis argue that the reappearance of BIF in the sedimentary record is a result of limited oxygen levels in an ocean sealed by sea-ice. Near the end of a glaciation period, a reestablishment of gas exchange between the ocean and atmosphere oxidised seawater rich in ferrous iron would occur. A positive shift in \u03b456FeIRMM-014 from the lower to upper layers of Cryogenian BIFs may reflect an increase in ocean acidification, as the upper layers were deposited as more and more oceanic ice cover melted away and more carbon dioxide was dissolved by the ocean. \nOpponents of the hypothesis suggest that the rarity of the BIF deposits may indicate that they formed in inland seas. Being isolated from the oceans, such lakes could have been stagnant and anoxic at depth, much like today's Black Sea; a sufficient input of iron could provide the necessary conditions for BIF formation. A further difficulty in suggesting that BIFs marked the end of the glaciation is that they are found interbedded with glacial sediments; such interbedding has been suggested to be an artefact of Milankovitch cycles, which would have periodically warmed the seas enough to allow gas exchange between the atmosphere and ocean and precipitate BIFs.\nCap carbonate rocks.\nAround the top of Neoproterozoic glacial deposits there is commonly a sharp transition into a chemically precipitated sedimentary limestone or dolomite metres to tens of metres thick. These cap carbonates sometimes occur in sedimentary successions that have no other carbonate rocks, suggesting that their deposition is result of a profound aberration in ocean chemistry.\nThese cap carbonates have unusual chemical composition as well as strange sedimentary structures that are often interpreted as large ripples.\nThe formation of such sedimentary rocks could be caused by a large influx of positively charged ions, as would be produced by rapid weathering during the extreme greenhouse following a snowball Earth event. The \u03b413C isotopic signature of the cap carbonates is near \u22125\u00a0\u2030, consistent with the value of the mantle\u2014such a low value could be taken to signify an absence of life, since photosynthesis usually acts to raise the value; alternatively the release of methane deposits could have lowered it from a higher value and counterbalance the effects of photosynthesis.\nThe mechanism involved in the formation of cap carbonates is not clear, but the most cited explanation suggests that at the melting of a snowball Earth, water would dissolve the abundant CO2 from the atmosphere to form carbonic acid, which would fall as acid rain. This would weather exposed silicate and carbonate rock (including readily attacked glacial debris), releasing large amounts of calcium, which when washed into the ocean would form distinctively textured layers of carbonate sedimentary rock. Such an abiotic \"cap carbonate\" sediment can be found on top of the glacial till that gave rise to the snowball Earth hypothesis.\nHowever, there are some problems with the designation of a glacial origin to cap carbonates. The high carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere would cause the oceans to become acidic and dissolve any carbonates contained within\u2014starkly at odds with the deposition of cap carbonates. The thickness of some cap carbonates is far above what could reasonably be produced in the relatively quick deglaciations. The cause is further weakened by the lack of cap carbonates above many sequences of clear glacial origin at a similar time and the occurrence of similar carbonates within the sequences of proposed glacial origin. An alternative mechanism, which may have produced the Doushantuo cap carbonate at least, is the rapid, widespread release of methane. This accounts for incredibly low\u2014as low as \u221248\u00a0\u2030\u2014\u03b413C values\u2014as well as unusual sedimentary features which appear to have been formed by the flow of gas through the sediments.\nChanging acidity.\nIsotopes of boron suggest that the pH of the oceans dropped dramatically before and after the Marinoan glaciation.\nThis may indicate a buildup of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, some of which would dissolve into the oceans to form carbonic acid. Although the boron variations may be evidence of extreme climate change, they need not imply a global glaciation.\nSpace dust.\nEarth's surface is very depleted in iridium, which primarily resides in Earth's core. The only significant source of the element at the surface is cosmic particles that reach Earth. During a snowball Earth, iridium would accumulate on the ice sheets, and when the ice melted the resulting layer of sediment would be rich in iridium. An iridium anomaly has been discovered at the base of the cap carbonate formations and has been used to suggest that the glacial episode lasted for at least 3 million years, but this does not necessarily imply a \"global\" extent to the glaciation; indeed, a similar anomaly could be explained by the impact of a large meteorite.\nCyclic climate fluctuations.\nUsing the ratio of mobile cations to those that remain in soils during chemical weathering (the chemical index of alteration), it has been shown that chemical weathering varied in a cyclic fashion within a glacial succession, increasing during interglacial periods and decreasing during cold and arid glacial periods. This pattern, if a true reflection of events, suggests that the \"snowball Earths\" bore a stronger resemblance to Pleistocene ice age cycles than to a completely frozen Earth.\nIn addition, glacial sediments of the Port Askaig Tillite Formation in Scotland clearly show interbedded cycles of glacial and shallow marine sediments. The significance of these deposits is highly reliant upon their dating. Glacial sediments are difficult to date, and the closest dated bed to the Port Askaig group is 8\u00a0km stratigraphically above the beds of interest. Its dating to 600\u00a0Ma means the beds can be tentatively correlated to the Sturtian glaciation, but they may represent the advance or retreat of a snowball Earth.\nMechanisms.\nThe initiation of a snowball Earth event would involve some initial cooling mechanism, which would result in an increase in Earth's coverage of snow and ice. The increase in Earth's coverage of snow and ice would in turn increase Earth's albedo, which would result in positive feedback for cooling. If enough snow and ice accumulates, run-away cooling would result. This positive feedback is facilitated by an equatorial continental distribution, which would allow ice to accumulate in the regions closer to the equator, where solar radiation is most direct.\nMany possible triggering mechanisms could account for the beginning of a snowball Earth, such as a reduction in the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases including methane and/or carbon dioxide, the eruption of a supervolcano, changes in Solar energy output, or perturbations of Earth's orbit. The start of the Cryogenian period is known to correspond with a rapid rise in atmospheric oxygen known as the Neoproterozoic Oxygenation Event (NOE). This rise in atmospheric oxygen resulted in a reduction in atmospheric methane, a potent greenhouse gas. Regardless of the trigger, initial cooling results in an increase in the area of Earth's surface covered by ice and snow, and the additional ice and snow reflects more solar energy back to space, further cooling Earth and further increasing the area of Earth's surface covered by ice and snow. This positive feedback loop could eventually produce a frozen equator as cold as modern Antarctica.\nGlobal warming associated with large accumulations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere over millions of years, emitted primarily by volcanic activity, is the proposed trigger for melting a snowball Earth. Due to positive feedback for melting, the eventual melting of the snow and ice covering most of Earth's surface would require as little as a millennium.\nInitiation of glaciation.\nA tropical distribution of the continents is, perhaps counter-intuitively, necessary to allow the initiation of a snowball Earth. Tropical continents are more reflective than open ocean and so absorb less of the Sun's heat: most absorption of solar energy on Earth today occurs in tropical oceans. Further, tropical continents are subject to more rainfall, which leads to increased river discharge and erosion. When exposed to air, silicate rocks undergo weathering reactions which remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. These reactions proceed in the general form\n Rock-forming mineral + CO2 + H2O \u2192 cations + bicarbonate + SiO2\nAn example of such a reaction is the weathering of wollastonite:\n CaSiO3 + 2 CO2 + H2O \u2192 Ca2+ + SiO2 + 2 HCO3\u2212\nThe released calcium cations react with the dissolved bicarbonate in the ocean to form calcium carbonate as a chemically precipitated sedimentary rock. This transfers carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, from the air into the geosphere, and, in steady-state on geologic time scales, offsets the carbon dioxide emitted from volcanoes into the atmosphere.\nAs of 2003, a precise continental distribution during the Neoproterozoic was difficult to establish because there were too few suitable sediments for analysis. Some reconstructions point towards polar continents\u2014which have been a feature of all other major glaciations, providing a point upon which ice can nucleate. Changes in ocean circulation patterns may then have provided the trigger of snowball Earth.\nAdditional factors that may have contributed to the onset of the Neoproterozoic snowball include the introduction of atmospheric free oxygen, which may have reached sufficient quantities to react with methane in the atmosphere, oxidizing it to carbon dioxide, a much weaker greenhouse gas, and a younger\u2014thus fainter\u2014Sun, which would have emitted 6 percent less radiation in the Neoproterozoic.\nNormally, as Earth gets colder due to natural climatic fluctuations and changes in incoming solar radiation, the cooling slows these weathering reactions. As a result, less carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere and Earth warms as this greenhouse gas accumulates\u2014this 'negative feedback' process limits the magnitude of cooling. During the Cryogenian, however, Earth's continents were all at tropical latitudes, which made this moderating process less effective, as high weathering rates continued on land even as Earth cooled. This caused ice to advance beyond the polar regions. Once ice advanced to within 30\u00b0 of the equator, a positive feedback could ensue such that the increased reflectiveness (albedo) of the ice led to further cooling and the formation of more ice, until the whole Earth is ice-covered.\nPolar continents, because of low rates of evaporation, are too dry to allow substantial carbon deposition\u2014restricting the amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide that can be removed from the carbon cycle. A gradual rise of the proportion of the isotope 13C relative to 12C in sediments pre-dating \"global\" glaciation indicates that CO2 draw-down before snowball Earths was a slow and continuous process. The start of snowball Earths are marked by a sharp downturn in the \u03b413C value of sediments, a hallmark that may be attributed to a crash in biological productivity as a result of the cold temperatures and ice-covered oceans.\nIn January 2016, Gernon et al. proposed a \"shallow-ridge hypothesis\" involving the breakup of Rodinia, linking the eruption and rapid alteration of hyaloclastites along shallow ridges to massive increases in alkalinity in an ocean with thick ice cover. Gernon et al. demonstrated that the increase in alkalinity over the course of glaciation is sufficient to explain the thickness of cap carbonates formed in the aftermath of Snowball Earth events.\nDating of the Sturtian glaciation's onset has found it to be coeval with the emplacement of a large igneous province in the tropics. Weathering of this equatorial large igneous province is believed to have sucked enough carbon dioxide out of the air to enable the development of major glaciation.\nDuring the frozen period.\nGlobal temperature fell so low that the equator was as cold as modern-day Antarctica. This low temperature was maintained by the high albedo of the ice sheets, which reflected most incoming solar energy into space. A lack of heat-retaining clouds, caused by water vapor freezing out of the atmosphere, amplified this effect. Degassing of carbon dioxide has been speculated to have been unusually low during the Cryogenian, enabling the persistence of global glaciation.\nBreaking out of global glaciation.\nThe carbon dioxide levels necessary to thaw Earth have been estimated as being 350 times what they are today, about 13% of the atmosphere. Since Earth was almost completely covered with ice, carbon dioxide could not be withdrawn from the atmosphere by release of alkaline metal ions weathering out of siliceous rocks. Over 4 to 30 million years, enough CO2 and methane, mainly emitted by volcanoes but also produced by microbes converting organic carbon trapped under the ice into the gas, would accumulate to finally cause enough greenhouse effect to make surface ice melt in the tropics until a band of permanently ice-free land and water developed; this would be darker than the ice and thus absorb more energy from the Sun\u2014initiating a \"positive feedback\".\nThe first areas to become free of permanent ice cover may have been in the mid-latitudes rather than in the tropics, because a rapid hydrological cycle would have inhibited the melting of ice at low latitudes. As these mid-latitude regions became ice free, dust from them blew over onto ice sheets elsewhere, decreasing their albedo and accelerating the process of deglaciation. Destabilization of substantial deposits of methane hydrates locked up in low-latitude permafrost may also have acted as a trigger and/or strong positive feedback for deglaciation and warming.\nMethanogens were an important contributor to the deglaciation of the Marinoan Snowball Earth. The return of high primary productivity in surficial waters fueled extensive microbial sulphur reduction, causing deeper waters to become highly euxinic. Euxinia caused the formation of large amounts of methyl sulphides, which in turn was converted into methane by methanogens. A major negative nickel isotope excursion confirms high methanogenic activity during this period of deglaciation and global warming.\nOn the continents, the melting of glaciers would release massive amounts of glacial deposit, which would erode and weather. The resulting sediments supplied to the ocean would be high in nutrients such as phosphorus, which combined with the abundance of CO2 would trigger a cyanobacteria population explosion, which would cause a relatively rapid reoxygenation of the atmosphere and may have contributed to the rise of the Ediacaran biota and the subsequent Cambrian explosion\u2014a higher oxygen concentration allowing large multicellular lifeforms to develop. Although the positive feedback loop would melt the ice in geological short order, perhaps less than 1,000 years, replenishment of atmospheric oxygen and depletion of the CO2 levels would take further millennia. \nIt is possible that carbon dioxide levels fell enough for Earth to freeze again; this cycle may have repeated until the continents had drifted to more polar latitudes. More recent evidence suggests that with colder oceanic temperatures, the resulting higher ability of the oceans to dissolve gases led to the carbon content of sea water being more quickly oxidized to carbon dioxide. This leads directly to an increase of atmospheric carbon dioxide, enhanced greenhouse warming of Earth's surface, and the prevention of a total snowball state.\nDuring millions of years, cryoconite would have accumulated on and inside the ice. Psychrophilic microorganisms, volcanic ash and dust from ice-free locations would settle on ice covering several million square kilometers. Once the ice started to melt, these layers would become visible and darken the icy surfaces, helping to accelerate the process. Also, ultraviolet light from the Sun produced hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) when it hit water molecules. Normally H2O2 breaks down in sunlight, but some would have been trapped inside the ice. When the glaciers started to melt, it would have been released in both the ocean and the atmosphere, where it was split into water and oxygen molecules, increasing atmospheric oxygen.\nSlushball Earth hypothesis.\nWhile the presence of glaciers is not disputed, the idea that the entire planet was covered in ice is more contentious, leading some scientists to posit a \"slushball Earth\", in which a band of ice-free, or ice-thin, waters remains around the equator, allowing for a continued hydrologic cycle. This hypothesis appeals to scientists who observe certain features of the sedimentary record that can only be formed under open water or rapidly moving ice (which would require somewhere ice-free to move to). Recent research observed geochemical cyclicity in clastic rocks, showing that the snowball periods were punctuated by warm spells, similar to ice age cycles in recent Earth history. Attempts to construct computer models of a snowball Earth have struggled to accommodate global ice cover without fundamental changes in the laws and constants which govern the planet.\nA less extreme snowball Earth hypothesis involves continually evolving continental configurations and changes in ocean circulation. Synthesised evidence has produced slushball Earth models where the stratigraphic record does not permit postulating complete global glaciations. Kirschvink's original hypothesis had recognised that warm tropical puddles would be expected to exist in a snowball Earth.\nA more extreme hypothesis, the Waterbelt Earth hypothesis, suggests that ice-free areas of ocean continued to exist even as tropical continents were glaciated.\nScientific dispute.\nThe argument against the hypothesis is evidence of fluctuation in ice cover and melting during \"snowball Earth\" deposits. Evidence for such melting comes from evidence of glacial dropstones, geochemical evidence of climate cyclicity, and interbedded glacial and shallow marine sediments. A longer record from Oman, constrained to 13\u00b0N, covers the period from 712 to 545 million years ago\u2014a time span containing the Sturtian and Marinoan glaciations\u2014and shows both glacial and ice-free deposition. The snowball Earth hypothesis does not explain the alternation of glacial and interglacial events, nor the oscillation of glacial sheet margins.\nThere have been difficulties in recreating a snowball Earth with global climate models. Simple GCMs with mixed-layer oceans can be made to freeze to the equator; a more sophisticated model with a full dynamic ocean (though only a primitive sea ice model) failed to form sea ice to the equator. In addition, the levels of CO2 necessary to melt a global ice cover have been calculated to be 130,000 ppm, which is considered by some to be unreasonably large.\nStrontium isotopic data have been found to be at odds with proposed snowball Earth models of silicate weathering shutdown during glaciation and rapid rates immediately post-glaciation. Therefore, methane release from permafrost during marine transgression was proposed to be the source of the large measured carbon excursion in the time immediately after glaciation.\n\"Zipper rift\" hypothesis.\nNick Eyles suggests that the Neoproterozoic Snowball Earth was in fact no different from any other glaciation in Earth's history, and that efforts to find a single cause are likely to end in failure. The \"zipper rift\" hypothesis proposes two pulses of continental \"unzipping\"\u2014first, the breakup of Rodinia, forming the proto-Pacific Ocean; then the splitting of the continent Baltica from Laurentia, forming the proto-Atlantic\u2014coincided with the glaciated periods.\nThe associated tectonic uplift would form high plateaus, just as the East African Rift is responsible for high topography; this high ground could then host glaciers.\nBanded iron formations have been taken as unavoidable evidence for global ice cover, since they require dissolved iron ions and anoxic waters to form; however, the limited extent of the Neoproterozoic banded iron deposits means that they may have formed in inland seas rather than in frozen oceans. Such seas can experience a wide range of chemistries; high rates of evaporation could concentrate iron ions, and a periodic lack of circulation could allow anoxic bottom water to form. Continental rifting, with associated subsidence, tends to produce such landlocked water bodies. This rifting, and associated subsidence, would produce the space for the fast deposition of sediments, negating the need for an immense and rapid melting to raise the global sea levels.\nHigh-obliquity hypothesis.\nA competing hypothesis to explain the presence of ice on the equatorial continents was that Earth's axial tilt was quite high, in the vicinity of 60\u00b0, which would place Earth's land in high \"latitudes\", although supporting evidence is scarce. A less extreme possibility would be that it was merely Earth's magnetic pole that wandered to this inclination, as the magnetic readings which suggested ice-filled continents depend on the magnetic and rotational poles being relatively similar. In either of these two situations, the freeze would be limited to relatively small areas, as is the case today; severe changes to Earth's climate are not necessary.\nInertial interchange true polar wander.\nThe evidence for low-latitude glacial deposits during the supposed snowball Earth episodes has been reinterpreted via the concept of inertial interchange true polar wander.\nThis hypothesis, created to explain palaeomagnetic data, suggests that Earth's orientation relative to its axis of rotation shifted one or more times during the general time-frame attributed to snowball Earth. This could feasibly produce the same distribution of glacial deposits without requiring any of them to have been deposited at equatorial latitude. While the physics behind the proposition is sound, the removal of one flawed data point from the original study rendered the application of the concept in these circumstances unwarranted.\nSurvival of life through frozen periods.\nA tremendous glaciation would curtail photosynthetic life on Earth, thus depleting atmospheric oxygen, and thereby allowing non-oxidized iron-rich rocks to form. Detractors argue that this kind of glaciation would have made life extinct entirely. However, microfossils such as stromatolites and oncolites prove that, in shallow marine environments at least, life did not suffer any perturbation. Instead life developed a trophic complexity and survived the cold period unscathed. Proponents counter that it may have been possible for life to survive in these ways:\nHowever, organisms and ecosystems, as far as it can be determined by the fossil record, do not appear to have undergone the significant change that would be expected by a mass extinction. With the advent of more precise dating, a phytoplankton extinction event which had been associated with snowball Earth was shown to precede glaciations by 16\u00a0million years. Even if life were to cling on in all the ecological refuges listed above, a whole-Earth glaciation would result in a biota with a noticeably different diversity and composition. This change in diversity and composition has not yet been observed\u2014in fact, the organisms which should be most susceptible to climatic variation emerge unscathed from the snowball Earth. One rebuttal to this is the fact that in many of these places where an argument is made against a mass extinction caused by snowball Earth, the Cryogenian fossil record is impoverished. Sponges, a basal group of animals managed to survive the glaciations after having emerged in the Tonian period. The diversity of animals would later grow dramatically during the Ediacaran.\nImplications.\nA snowball Earth has profound implications in the history of life on Earth. While many refugia have been postulated, global ice cover would certainly have ravaged ecosystems dependent on sunlight. Geochemical evidence from rocks associated with low-latitude glacial deposits have been interpreted to show a crash in oceanic life during the glacials. High magnitude glacial retreats favoured the survival of macroalgae. \nBecause about half of the oceans' water was frozen solid as ice, the remaining water would be twice as salty as it is today, lowering its freezing point. When the ice sheet melted under a hot atmosphere rich in carbon dioxide, it would cover the oceans with a layer of warm (50\u00b0C) freshwater up to 2 kilometres thick. Only after the warm surface water mixed with the colder and deeper saltwater did the sea return to a warmer and less salty state. The melting of the ice may have presented many new opportunities for diversification, and may indeed have driven the rapid evolution which took place at the end of the Cryogenian period. Global ice cover, if it existed, may\u2014in concert with geothermal heating\u2014have led to a lively, well mixed ocean with great vertical convective circulation.\nEffect on early evolution.\nThe Neoproterozoic was a time of remarkable diversification of multicellular organisms, including animals. Organism size and complexity increased considerably after the end of the snowball glaciations. This rapid development of multicellular organisms may have been the result of increased evolutionary pressures resulting from multiple icehouse-hothouse cycles; in this sense, snowball Earth episodes may have \"pumped\" evolution, much as glaciations during the Pleistocene are known to have acted as a diversity pump in Antarctica. Alternatively, fluctuating copper levels and rising oxygen may have played a part. Many Sturtian diamictites unconformably overlie copper-mineralised strata in Greenland, North America, Australia, and Africa; the glacial breakup and erosion of rocks heavily enriched in copper during the Sturtian glaciation, combined with the chemical weathering of the Franklin Large Igneous Province, greatly elevated copper concentrations in the ocean. Because copper is an essential component of many proteins involved in mitigating oxygen toxicity, synthesising adenosine triphosphate, and producing elastin and collagen, among other biological functions, this spike in copper concentrations was essential to the explosive evolution of multicellular life throughout the latter portion of the Neoproterozoic. Elevated copper concentrations persisted into the Cambrian explosion at the beginning of the Phanerozoic and likely influenced its course too.\nOne hypothesis which has been gaining currency in recent years: that early snowball Earths did not so much \"affect\" the evolution of life on Earth as result from it. In fact the two hypotheses are not mutually exclusive. The idea is that Earth's life forms affect the global carbon cycle and so major evolutionary events alter the carbon cycle, redistributing carbon within various reservoirs within the biosphere system and in the process temporarily lowering the atmospheric (greenhouse) carbon reservoir until the revised biosphere system settled into a new state. The cool period of the Huronian glaciation is speculated to be linked to the decline in the atmospheric content of greenhouse gases during the Great Oxygenation Event. Similarly, the possible snowball Earth of the Precambrian's Cryogenian between 580 and 850 million years ago (and which itself had a number of distinct episodes) could be related to the rise of more advanced multicellular animal life and life's colonisation of the land. However, a 2022 study, based on findings of previous studies, suggested land plant evolution was driven by the Cryogenian glaciations, which they also theorized to be the reason why the Zygnematophyceae (sister group of land plants) became unicellular and cryophilic, lost their flagella and evolved sexual conjugation.\nOccurrence and timing.\nPalaeoproterozoic.\nThe Snowball Earth hypothesis has been invoked to explain glacial deposits in the Huronian Supergroup of Canada, though the palaeomagnetic evidence that suggests ice sheets at low latitudes is contested, and stratigraphic evidence clearly shows only three distinct depositions of glacial material (the Ramsay, Bruce and Gowganda Formations) separated by significant periods without. The glacial sediments of the Makganyene formation of South Africa are slightly younger than the Huronian glacial deposits (~2.25 billion years old) and were possibly deposited at tropical latitudes. It has been proposed that rise of free oxygen that occurred during the Great Oxygenation Event removed atmospheric methane through oxidation. As the solar irradiance was notably weaker at the time, Earth's climate may have relied on methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, to maintain surface temperatures above freezing. In the absence of this methane greenhousing, temperatures plunged and a global glaciation could have occurred between 2.5 and 2.2 Gya, during the Siderian and Rhyacian periods of the Paleoproterozoic era.\nNeoproterozoic.\nThere were three or four significant ice ages during the late Neoproterozoic. Of these, the Marinoan was the most significant, and the Sturtian glaciations were also widespread. Even the leading snowball proponent Hoffman agrees that the 350 thousand-year-long Gaskiers glaciation did not lead to global glaciation, although it was probably as intense as the late Ordovician glaciation. The status of the Kaigas \"glaciation\" or \"cooling event\" is currently unclear; some scientists do not recognise it as a glacial, others suspect that it may reflect poorly dated strata of Sturtian association, and others believe it may indeed be a third ice age. It was certainly less significant than the Sturtian or Marinoan glaciations, and probably not global in extent. Emerging evidence suggests that Earth underwent a number of glaciations during the Neoproterozoic, which would stand strongly at odds with the snowball hypothesis.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nReview of late Ediacaran glacial deposits: "}
{"id": "28984", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28984", "title": "SS Lazio", "text": "Association football club in Italy\nFootball club\n (; BIT:\u00a0https://; \"Lazio Sport Club\") is an Italian professional sports club based in Rome, most known for its football activity. The society, founded in 1900, plays in the Serie A and have spent most of their history in the top tier of Italian football. Lazio were Italian champions in 1974 and 2000. They have won the Coppa Italia seven times, the Supercoppa Italiana five times, and both the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup and UEFA Super Cup on one occasion. They also won the 1968\u201369 Serie B. Lazio share the 70,634 capacity Stadio Olimpico with Roma.\nThe club's earliest major honour was a domestic cup win in 1958. In 1974, they won their first Serie A title. The 1990s were the most successful period in Lazio's history: they reached the UEFA Cup final in 1998; won the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup and UEFA Super Cup in 1999; and clinched the Serie A title in 2000. Due to a severe economic crisis in 2002 that forced the departure of president Sergio Cragnotti and the selling of several star players, Lazio's success in the league declined. In spite of the lower funds, the club has won four Coppa Italia titles since then: 2004, 2009, 2013 and 2019. Current president Claudio Lotito took charge of the club in 2004 following a two-year vacancy in the position.\nLazio's traditional kit colours are sky blue shirts and white shorts with white socks; these reflect Rome's ancient Hellenic legacy. Sky blue socks have also been interchangeably used as home colours. Lazio share a long-standing and fierce rivalry with Roma, against whom they have contested the \"Derby della Capitale\" (\"Derby of the capital city\") since 1929.\nDespite initially not having any parent\u2013subsidiary relation with the male and female professional team (that was incorporated as S.S. Lazio S.p.A.), the founding of allowed the club to participate in over 40 different sports disciplines in total.\nHistory.\n\"Societ\u00e0 Podistica Lazio\" was founded on 9 January 1900 in the Prati district of Rome. Until 1910, the club played at an amateur level until it officially joined the league competition in 1912 as soon as the Italian Football Federation began organising championships in the center and south of Italy, and reached the final of the national championship playoff three times, but never won, losing in 1913 to Pro Vercelli, in 1914 to Casale and in 1923 to Genoa 1893. In 1927, Lazio was the only major Roman club which resisted the Fascist regime's attempts to merge all the city's teams into what would become Roma the same year. The club played in the first organised Serie A in 1929 and, led by legendary Italian striker Silvio Piola, achieved a second-place finish in 1937\u00a0\u2013 its highest pre-war result.\nThe 1950s produced a mix of mid and upper table results, with a Coppa Italia win in 1958. Lazio was relegated for the first time in 1961 to Serie B, but returned in the top flight two years later. After a number of mid-table placements, another relegation followed in 1970\u201371. Back to Serie A in 1972\u201373, Lazio immediately emerged as surprise challengers for the \"Scudetto\" to Milan and Juventus in 1972\u201373, only losing out on the final day of the season, with a team comprising captain Giuseppe Wilson, as well as midfielders Luciano Re Cecconi and Mario Frustalupi, striker Giorgio Chinaglia, and head coach Tommaso Maestrelli. Lazio improved such successes the following season, ensuring its first title in 1973\u201374. However, tragic deaths of Re Cecconi and \"Scudetto\" trainer Maestrelli, as well as the departure of Chinaglia, would be a triple blow for Lazio. The emergence of Bruno Giordano during this period provided some as he finished League top scorer in 1979, when Lazio finished eighth.\nLazio were forcibly relegated to Serie B in 1980, due to a remarkable scandal concerning illegal bets on their own matches, along with Milan. They remained in Italy's second division for three seasons, in what would mark the darkest period in Lazio's history. They would return in 1983 and manage a last-day escape from relegation the following season. The 1984\u201385 season would prove harrowing, with a pitiful 15 points and bottom place finish.\nIn 1986, Lazio was hit with a nine-point deduction (a true back in the day of the two-point win) for a betting scandal involving player Claudio Vinazzani. An epic struggle against relegation followed the same season in Serie B, with the club led by trainer Eugenio Fascetti only avoiding relegation to the Serie C after play-off wins over Taranto and Campobasso. This would prove a turning point in the club's history, with Lazio returning to Serie A in 1988 and, under the careful financial management of Gianmarco Calleri, the consolidation of the club's position as a solid top-flight club.\nThe arrival of Sergio Cragnotti in 1992 changed the club's history, due to his long-term investments in new players to make the team a \"Scudetto\" competitor. A notable early transfer during his tenure was the capture of English midfielder Paul Gascoigne from Tottenham Hotspur for \u00a35.5\u00a0million. Gascoigne's transfer to Lazio is credited with the increase of interest in Serie A in the United Kingdom during the 1990s. Cragnotti repeatedly broke transfer records in pursuit of players who were considered major stars\u00a0\u2013 Juan Sebasti\u00e1n Ver\u00f3n for \u00a318\u00a0million, Christian Vieri for \u00a319\u00a0million and breaking the world transfer record, albeit only for a matter of weeks, to sign Hern\u00e1n Crespo from Parma for \u00a335\u00a0million.\nLazio were Serie A third in 1995 and 1996, and fourth in 1997, then losing the championship just by one point to Milan on the last championship's match in 1999 before, with the likes of Sini\u0161a Mihajlovi\u0107, Alessandro Nesta, Marcelo Salas and Pavel Nedv\u011bd in the side, winning its second \"Scudetto\" in 2000, as well as the Coppa Italia double with Sven-G\u00f6ran Eriksson (1997\u20132001) as manager.\nLazio had two more Coppa Italia triumphs in 1998 and 2004, as well as the last UEFA Cup Winners' Cup in 1999. They also reached the UEFA Cup final, but lost 0\u20133 against Internazionale. In addition, Lazio won the Supercoppa Italiana twice and defeated Manchester United in 1999 to win the UEFA Super Cup. In 2000, Lazio became also the first Italian football club to be quoted on the Italian Piazza Affari stock market.\nWith money running out, Lazio's results slowly worsened in the years. In 2002, a financial scandal involving Cragnotti and his food products multinational Cirio forced him to leave the club, and Lazio was controlled until 2004 by caretaker financial managers and a bank pool. This forced the club to sell their star players and even fan favourite captain Alessandro Nesta. In 2004, entrepreneur Claudio Lotito acquired the majority of the club. In 2006, the club qualified to the 2006\u201307 UEFA Cup under coach Delio Rossi. The club, however, was excluded from European competitions due to their involvement in the 2006 Italian football scandal.\nIn the 2006\u201307 season, despite a later-reduced points deduction, Lazio achieved a third-place finish, thus gaining qualification to the UEFA Champions League third qualifying round, where they defeated Dinamo Bucure\u0219ti to reach the group phase, and ended fourth place in the group composed of Real Madrid, Werder Bremen and Olympiacos. Things in the league did not go much better, with the team spending most of the season in the bottom half of the table, sparking the protests of the fans, and eventually ending the Serie A season in 12th place. In the 2008\u201309 season, Lazio won their fifth Coppa Italia, beating Sampdoria in the final.\nLazio started the 2009\u201310 season playing the Supercoppa Italiana against Inter in Beijing and winning the match 2\u20131, with goals from Matuzal\u00e9m and Tommaso Rocchi. \nLazio won the 2012\u201313 Coppa Italia 1\u20130 over rivals Roma, with the lone goal coming from Senad Luli\u0107 in the 71st minute. \nLazio won the 2018\u201319 Coppa Italia 2\u20130 over Atalanta, winning their seventh title overall. Sergej Milinkovic-Savic (82') and Joaquin Correa (90') were the goalscorers in this match. \nLazio won the 2019 Supercoppa Italiana 3-1 over Juventus in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, winning their fifth title overall. Luis Alberto (16'), Senad Lulic (73'), and Danilo Cataldi (90+4') were the goalscorers for Lazio, while Paulo Dybala (45') was the lone goalscorer for Juventus.\nIn the 2024-25 UEFA Europa League group stage, Lazio topped the 36-club table with 19 points. They reached the quarter-finals of the competition after defeating Viktoria Plzen 3-2 on aggregate in the round of 16.\nColours, badge and nicknames.\n First kit ever worn by the club\nLazio's colours of white and sky blue were inspired by the national emblem of Greece, due to the fact that Lazio is a mixed sports club this was chosen in recognition of the fact that the Ancient Olympic Games and along with it the sporting tradition in Europe is linked to Greece.\nOriginally, Lazio wore a shirt which was divided into white and sky blue quarters, with black shorts and socks. After a while of wearing a plain white shirt very early on, Lazio reverted to the colours which they wear today. Some seasons Lazio have used a sky blue and white shirt with stripes, but usually it is sky blue with a white trim, with the white shorts and socks. The club's colours have led to their Italian nickname of \"Biancocelesti\".\nLazio's traditional club badge and symbol is the eagle, which was chosen by founding member Luigi Bigiarelli. A symbol of the Roman legions and emperor, it was chosen to represent power and victory; it also identifies the club with its origin city. Lazio's use of the symbol has led to two of their nicknames; \"le Aquile\" (\"the Eagles\") and \"gli Aquilotti\" (\"the Young Eagles\"). The current club badge features a golden eagle above a white shield with a blue border; inside the shield is the club's name and a smaller tripartite shield with the colours of the club.\nStadium.\nStadio Olimpico, located on the Foro Italico, is the major stadium of Rome. It is the home of the Italy national football team as well as of both local teams Lazio and Roma. It was opened in 1937 and after its latest renovation in 2008, the stadium has a capacity of 70,634 seats. It was the site of the 1960 Summer Olympics, but has also served as the location of the 1987 World Athletics Championships, the 1980 European Championship final, the 1990 World Cup and the Champions League Final in 1996 and 2009.\nAlso on the Foro Italico lies the Stadio dei Marmi, or \"marble stadium\", which was built in 1932 and designed by Enrico Del Debbio. It has tiers topped by 60 white marble statues that were gifts from Italian cities in commemoration of 60 athletes.\nDuring the 1989\u201390 season, Lazio and Roma played their games at the Stadio Flaminio of Rome, located in the district Flaminio, because of the renovation works carried out at the Stadio Olimpico.\nIn June 2018, Lazio President Claudio Lotito stated that the Biancocelesti \"should be granted the same favour and treatment as Roma \u2013 the ability to also build a new stadium. He also added that \"Lazio's stadium will be built before Roma's stadium.\" In June 2019, Lotito was set to present the designs of a potential future stadium for Lazio, named the Stadio delle Aquile. However, this did not occur for reasons unknown, and in July 2021, Lotito pivoted from the creation of the Stadio delle Aquile to the idea of moving the club\u2019s home to a renovated Stadio Flaminio.\nIn October 2022, Lotito provided an update on his Stadio Flaminio project, stating that he is \"very attached\" to the hope that Lazio will play there again, as having it as their home is \"something that evokes our history and our roots.\" In November 2022, Lotito discussed his plans for the Stadio Flaminio at the \u2018Sing a Song\u2019 charity event at the Auditorium della Conciliazione in Rome. He stated that he \"would like to increase the stadium from a capacity of around 18,000 to 45,000\" and that \"it is a problem\" for Lazio to \"remain without a stadium of their own.\"\nIn September 2024, Lazio made concrete steps in their plans to own and renovate the Stadio Flaminio. The club were looking to team up with a famous company named \u201cLegend\u201d that specializes in building and maintaining sports venues - they would then become the project manager and take care of the ticketing service, merchandising management, retail sales and the search to find a naming sponsor; with Emirates reportedly interested in the project. The total cost of the operation was said to be between \u20ac250 and \u20ac300 million.\nIn December 2024, Lotito and his collaborators held a meeting with Mayor Roberto Gualtieri and Councilor Alessandro Onorato at the Municipality of Rome in Campidoglio to present their project for the new Stadio Flaminio. He envisioned developing a state-of-the-art stadium with a capacity of 40,000 to 50,000 spectators and a retractable roof; he also outlined plans for the comprehensive redevelopment of the surrounding Flaminio district. He stated that the project was well-received, while revealing that acquiring the necessary paperwork could require another three years. However, shortly after, \"Roma Nuoto\" received approval from the Conference of Services after threatening legal action following the long and unjustified delay in the process for their plans for the abandoned stadium; they envision a multi-sport facility for the future of the Stadio Flaminio, including an Olympic-sized swimming pool, padel courts, and a hockey rink, thus competing with Lazio.\nIn March 2025, Lotito officially deposited his proposal for the currently-defunct Stadio Flaminio to the Municipality of Rome to become Lazio's new home. The Biancocelesti will be looking to finalize the bureaucratic procedures by the start of 2026 and are aiming to finish the renovation work by the summer of 2029. There will be 50,750 seats, and renovating this ground - and the surrounding area - will cost them circa \u20ac438 million, as per Calcio e Finanza.\nIn April 2025, the \"Roma Nuoto\" project for the Stadio Flaminio was turned down by the Municipality Council of Rome, after they unanimously deemed it ill-suited for the venue\u2019s purpose, which is hosting domestic and international events within a large stadium. The doomed project sought to reduce the stadium capacity from 42,000 to just 7,500, which would have diminished the value of the stadium according to the Municipality Council.\nSupporters and rivalries.\nLazio is the sixth-most supported football club in Italy and the second in Rome, with around 2% of Italian football fans supporting the club (according to \"La Repubblica's\" research of August 2008). Historically, the largest section of Lazio supporters in the city of Rome has come from the far northern section, creating an arch-like shape across Rome with affluent areas such as Parioli, Prati, Flaminio, Cassia and Monte Mario.\nFounded in 1987, \"Irriducibili Lazio\" were the club's biggest ultras group for over 30 years. They typically create traditional Italian ultra displays during the \"Derby della Capitale\" (Rome Derby), the match between Lazio and their main rivals, Roma. It is amongst the most heated and emotional footballing rivalries in the world, such as where Lazio fan Vincenzo Paparelli was killed at one of the derby games during the 1979\u201380 season after being hit in the eye by an emergency rocket thrown by a Roma fan. A minority of Lazio's ultras used to use swastikas and fascist symbols on their banners, and they have displayed racist behaviour in several occasions during the derbies. Most notably, at a derby of the season 1998\u201399, laziali unfurled a 50-metre banner around the Curva Nord that read, \"Auschwitz is your town, the ovens are your houses\". Black players of Roma have often been receivers of racist and offensive behaviour. After 33 years, the Irriducibili disbanded on 27 February 2020, citing \"too much blood, too many banning orders, too many arrests. This all happened after Raul Esteban https:// murdered Fabrizio Piscitelli in Parco degli Acquedotti a Roma on 7th of August 2019. Lazio fans praised him calling him \"il capitano\" meaning the captain and calling him \"Diabolik\" which is a nickname taking from the famous comics in italy. After all this \"Irriducibili\" lost it's name but fans still use it today on flags and scarfs to remember the good times . Lazio's ultras now go by the name \"Ultras Lazio\". Lazio also have a strong rivalry with Napoli and Livorno, as well as with Pescara and Atalanta. The club also maintains strong competitive rivalries with Fiorentina, Juventus and Milan.\nConversely, the ultras have friendly relationships with Internazionale, Triestina and Hellas Verona. Internationally, Lazio's fans maintain a long-standing strong friendship with the supporters of the Bulgarian club Levski Sofia and as such, Lazio were invited to participate in the centenary football match honouring the birthday of the Bulgarian club.\n \"As of 17 August 2025\"\nPlayers.\nCurrent squad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLazio Primavera.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"As of 2 October 2025\"\nOther players under contract.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"As of 2 October 2025\"\nOut on loan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRetired numbers.\n12\u00a0\u2013 Since the 2003\u201304 season, the Curva Nord of Stadio Olimpico, as a sign of recognition, is considered the 12th man on the pitch.\nClub officials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable managers.\nThe following managers have all won at least one trophy when in charge of Lazio:\nStatistics and records.\n\u0218tefan Radu holds Lazio's official appearance record, having played 416 appearances. The record for total appearances by a goalkeeper is held by Luca Marchegiani, with 339 appearances, while the record for most league appearances is held by Aldo Puccinelli with 339.\nThe all-time leading goalscorer for Lazio is Ciro Immobile, with 206 goals scored, followed by Silvio Piola with 159 goals. Piola, who played also with Pro Vercelli, Torino, Juventus and Novara, is also the highest goalscorer in Serie A history, with 274 goals. Immobile is also the all-time top goalscorer in European competitions, with 26 goals.\nOfficially, Lazio's highest home attendance is approximately 80,000 for a Serie A match against Foggia on 12 May 1974, the match that awarded to Lazio their first \"Scudetto\". This is also the record for the Stadio Olimpico, including matches held by Roma and the Italy national football team.\nSociet\u00e0 Sportiva Lazio as a company.\nIn 1998, during Sergio Cragnotti's period in charge as the chairman, Societ\u00e0 Sportiva Lazio S.p.A. became a listed company: Lazio were the first Italian club to do so. However, Cragnotti resigned as chairman in 2001, after a \"huge hole in the budget\" of the club.\nClaudio Lotito, the current chairman of Lazio, purchased the club from Cragnotti in 2004, but owned just 26.969% of shares as the largest shareholders at that time. It was followed by banking group Capitalia (and its subsidiaries Mediocredito Centrale, Banca di Roma and Banco di Sicilia) as the second largest shareholders for 17.717%. Capitalia also hold 49% stake of Italpetroli (via Capitalia's subsidiary Banca di Roma), the parent company of city rival Roma (via Italpetroli's subsidiary \"Roma 2000\"). Lotito later purchased the minority stake from Capitalia.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], Claudio Lotito owns just over two-thirds of the shares of Lazio. Lazio is one of only three Italian clubs listed on the Borsa Italiana, the others being Juventus and Roma. In the past, Lazio was the only one with a single primary share holder (Lotito). However, following several capital increases by Roma and Juventus, they also are significantly owned by a shareholder. According to The Football Money League, published by consultants Deloitte, in the 2004\u201305 season, Lazio was the 20th highest earning football club in the world with an estimated revenue of \u20ac83 million; the 2005 ranking of the club was 15th. However, in 2016 ranking (the rank used data in 2014\u201315 season), Lazio was not in the top 20.\nLazio was one of the few clubs that self-sustain from the financial support of a shareholder, and also consistently make an aggregate profit after every season. Unlike Internazionale, Roma and Milan, who were sanctioned by UEFA due to breaches of Financial Fair Play, Lazio passed the regulations held by the administrative body with the high achievements. Lotito also received a prize that joint awarded by and DGS Sport&amp;Cultura, due to Lazio's financial health.\nIn 2017, the club renewed their sponsorship deal with shirt manufacturer Macron. It was worth \u20ac16 million a season, plus variables of about \u20ac9 million stemming from league and European competition finishes.\nIn February 2022, Lazio announced that they had parted ways with Macron after 10 years. Mizuno would become the team's new sportswear and technical gear provider, with the Biancocelesti receiving \u20ac20 million over the next five years as a result of their new agreement with the Japanese company.\nIn March 2022, Lazio released their financial reports from June to December 2021 which showed a decrease in revenue (from \u20ac106.66 to \u20ac71.56 million) but an increase in profit (from -\u20ac0.12 million to \u20ac4.6 million) compared to the previous six months.\nIn March 2025, Italian Newspaper Il Messaggero reported that Lazio could soon have their own docu-series on Netflix dedicated to the history of the club; from the foundation in 1900 all the way to the modern era. This multi-season series would not only focus on Lazio\u2019s triumphs on the pitch, but also on the club\u2019s elusive fanbase. Several legendary figures would appear in the series, including Giuseppe Signori, Miroslav Klose, and Paolo Di Canio.\nIn March 2025, Lazio released their financial reports from June to December 2024 which yielded \u20ac87.5 million in overall revenues. On the other hand, the club reduced its costs from \u20ac97.2 million in the year prior to just under \u20ac87 million this time around.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28986", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28986", "title": "Spinoza", "text": ""}
{"id": "28987", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28987", "title": "Jesuit", "text": ""}
{"id": "28989", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28989", "title": "Simple machines", "text": ""}
{"id": "28990", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28990", "title": "Ninian", "text": "5th-century bishop, missionary, and saint\nNinian is a Christian saint, first mentioned in the 8th century as being an early missionary among the Pictish peoples of what is now Scotland. For this reason, he is known as the Apostle to the Southern Picts, and there are numerous dedications to him in those parts of Scotland with a Pictish heritage, throughout the Scottish Lowlands, and in parts of Northern England with a Northumbrian heritage. He is also known as Ringan in Scotland, and as Trynnian in Northern England.\nNinian's major shrine was at Whithorn in Galloway, where he is associated with the Candida Casa (Latin for 'White House'). Nothing is known about his teachings, and there is no unchallenged authority for information about his life.\nNinian's identity is uncertain, and historians have identified the name \"Ninian\" with other historical figures. A popular hypothesis proposed by Thomas Owen Clancy, a researcher and professor of Celtic studies, posits that Ninian can be identified with three other historical figures: Saint Finnian of Moville, Saint Finnian of Clonard, and Saint Finbarr of Cork. Linguistic variations across the territories associated with each saint have provided evidence that the Ninian preserved in literary tradition originated from this individual. This article discusses the particulars and origins of what has come to be known as the \"traditional\" stories of Saint Ninian.\nBackground.\nThe Southern Picts, for whom Ninian is held to be the apostle, were the Picts south of the mountains known as the Mounth, which cross Scotland north of the Firths of Clyde and Forth. In the 4th century, the southern boundaries of their territory were with British kingdoms.\nIn his \"Letter to Coroticus\", Saint Patrick mentions 'apostate Picts'. Patrick is generally considered to be a 5th century individual and Ninian is conventionally taken to have been 4th/5th century.\nBy 681, the southern Picts were firmly Christian and Northumbria established a bishopric at Abercorn, under Bishop Trumwine. This effort was abandoned shortly after the Picts defeated the Northumbrians at the Battle of Dun Nechtain in 685.\nChristianity was present in Galloway by the 5th century and continued into the 6th century. By the time of Bede's account in 731, the Northumbrians had enjoyed an unbroken relationship with Galloway for a century or longer, beginning with the Northumbrian predecessor state of Bernicia. The full nature of the relationship is uncertain. Also at this time, Northumbria was establishing bishoprics in its sphere of influence, to be subordinate to the Northumbrian Archbishop of York. One such bishopric was established at Whithorn in 731, and Bede's account serves to support the legitimacy of the new Northumbrian bishopric. The Bernician name \"hwit \u00e6rn\" is Old English for the Latin \"candida casa\", or 'white house' in modern English, and it has survived as the modern name of Whithorn.\nThere is as yet no unchallenged connection of the historical record to the person who was Bede's Ninian. However, the unlikelihood that the reputable historian Bede invented Ninian without some basis in the historical record, combined with an increased knowledge of Ireland's early saints and Whithorn's early Christian connections, has led to serious scholarly efforts to find Bede's basis. James Henthorn Todd, in his 1855 publication of the \"Leabhar Imuinn\" (The Book of Hymns of the Ancient Church of Ireland), suggested that it was Finnian of Moville, and that view has gained traction among modern scholars.\nTraditional story.\nThe earliest mention of Ninian of Whithorn is in a short passage of \"The Ecclesiastical History of the English People\" by the Northumbrian monk Bede in c.\u2009731. The 8th-century poem \"Miracula Nyniae Episcopi\" records some of the miracles attributed to him. A \"Life of Saint Ninian\" (\"Vita Sancti Niniani\") was written around 1160 by Ailred of Rievaulx, and in 1639 James Ussher discusses Ninian in his \"Brittanicarum Ecclesiarum Antiquitates\". These are the sources of information about Ninian of Whithorn, and all provide seemingly innocuous personal details about his life. However, there is no unchallenged historical evidence to support any of their stories, and all sources had political and religious agendas that were served by their accounts of Saint Ninian (discussed below).\nTradition holds that Ninian was a Briton who had studied in Rome, that he established an episcopal see at the \"Candida Casa\" in Whithorn, that he named the see for Saint Martin of Tours, that he converted the southern Picts to Christianity, and that he is buried at Whithorn. Variations of the story add that he had actually met St Martin, that his father was a Christian king, and that he was buried in a stone sarcophagus near the altar of his church. Further variations assert that he left for Ireland, and died there in 432. Dates for his birth are derived from the traditional mention of St Martin, who died in 397.\nBede (c.\u2009731).\nBede says that Ninian (whose name he only renders in the ablative case \"Nynia\") was a Briton who had been instructed in Rome; that he made his church of stone, which was unusual among the Britons; that his episcopal see was named after Saint Martin of Tours; that he preached to and converted the southern Picts; that his base was called \"Ad Candidam Casam\", which was in the province of the Bernicians; and that he was buried there, along with many other saints.\nAelred (c.\u20091160).\nLeaving aside the stories regarding miracles, in the \"Vita Sancti Niniani\" Aelred includes the following incidental information regarding Saint Ninian: that his father was a Christian king; that he was consecrated a bishop in Rome and that he met Saint Martin in Tours; that Saint Martin sent masons with him on his homeward journey, at his request; that these masons built a church of stone, situated on the shore, and that on learning of Saint Martin's death, Ninian dedicated the church to him; that a certain rich and powerful \"King Tuduvallus\" was converted by him; that he died after having converted the Picts and returned home, being buried in a stone sarcophagus near the altar of his church; and that he had once travelled with his brother, named \"Plebia\".\nAelred said that in addition to finding information about Ninian in Bede, he took much additional information for his \"Life of S. Ninian\" from a source written in a \"barbarous language\"; there is no further information about this text. Aelred wrote his \"Life of S. Ninian\" sometime after spending ten years at the Scottish court and thus had close connections both to the Scottish royal family and to Fergus of Galloway (who would resurrect the Bishopric of Galloway), all of whom would have been pleased to have a manuscript with such a glowing description of a Galwegian and Scottish saint. His work is what Thomas Heffernan refers to as a \"sacred biography\", probably intended for a politically ambitious audience.\nUssher (1639).\nJames Ussher wrote that Ninian left Candida Casa for \"Cluayn-coner\" in Ireland, and eventually died in Ireland; that his mother was a Spanish princess; that his father wished to regain him after having assented to his training for an ecclesiastical state; that a bell comes from heaven to call together his disciples; that a wooden church was raised by him, with beams delivered by stags; and that a harper with no experience at architecture was the builder of the church. He adds that a smith and his son, named respectively \"Terna\" and \"Wyn\", witnessed a miracle by Ninian and that the saint was granted lands to be called \"Wytterna\".\nIn addition, Skene attributes the \"traditional\" date of Ninian's death (16 September 432) ultimately to Ussher's \"Life of Ninian\", noting that the date is \"without authority\".\nUssher's contribution is often disparaged, as he both invented fictitious histories and misquoted legitimate manuscripts to suit his own purposes. Still, he had access to legitimate manuscripts, and he has contributed to some versions of the traditional stories.\nOther sources.\nOthers who wrote of Saint Ninian used the accounts of Bede, Aelred, or Ussher, or used derivatives of them in combination with information from various manuscripts. This includes John Capgrave (1393\u20131464), John of Tinmouth (fl.), John Colgan (died c.\u20091657), and many others, up to the present day.\nThe anonymously written 8th-century hagiographic \"Miracula Nynie Episcopi\" (\"Miracles of Bishop Ninian\") is discounted as a non-historical account, and copies are not widely extant.\nDedications to St Ninian.\nDedications to Saint Ninian are expressions of respect for the good works that are attributed to him, and the authenticity of the stories about him are not relevant to that point. Almost all of the dedications have their origins in the medieval era, after Aelred wrote his account.\nThe dedications are found throughout the lands of the ancient Picts of Scotland, throughout Scotland south of the Firths of Clyde and Forth, in Orkney and Shetland, and in parts of northern England. \nDedications on the Isle of Man date from the time of medieval Scottish dominance, and are not natively inspired.\nThere are dedications to Ninian in East Donegal including the Parish Church in Convoy, and also in Belfast; and a spot formerly on the shore of Belfast Lough was traditionally known as St Ninian's Point, where the missionary reputedly landed after a voyage from Scotland. These connections reflect a strong Ulster-Scots heritage in both areas of Ulster.\nThere are also dedications elsewhere in the world where there is a Scottish heritage, such as Nova Scotia. St Ninian's Cathedral is located in Antigonish, Nova Scotia.\nThere is a noticeable lack of dedications in the Scottish Highlands and Isles, save for Kilninian and the Holy Spring of St Ninian of the Orthodox Mull Monastery on the Isle of Mull.\nIn the modern era, the first cathedral built in Scotland after the Protestant Reformation, St Ninian's Cathedral, Perth, was dedicated to the saint in 1850. St Ninian and Triduana's Church, Edinburgh is a Roman Catholic church constructed in 1932 that is dedicated to Ninian. St Martin and St Ninian is a Catholic church in Whithorn, constructed in 1959\u201360 in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Galloway. The architect was Harry Stuart Goodhart-Rendel (1887\u20131959).\nIn Scotland the date 16 September is celebrated as St Ninian's Feast Day. Ninian is honoured in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 16 September.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28993", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28993", "title": "Steam power", "text": ""}
{"id": "28994", "revid": "24157476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28994", "title": "Standard Generalized Markup Language", "text": "Markup language\nThe Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML; ISO 8879:1986) is a standard for defining generalized markup languages for documents. ISO 8879 Annex A.1 states that generalized markup is \"based on two postulates\":\nDocBook SGML and LinuxDoc are examples which used SGML tools.\nStandard versions.\nSGML is an ISO standard: \"ISO 8879:1986 Information processing\u00a0\u2013 Text and office systems\u00a0\u2013 Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML)\", of which there are three versions:\nSGML is part of a trio of enabling ISO standards for electronic documents developed by ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 34 (ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee 1, Subcommittee 34\u00a0\u2013 Document description and processing languages) :\nSGML is supported by various technical reports, in particular\nHistory.\nSGML descended from IBM's Generalized Markup Language (GML), which Charles Goldfarb, Edward Mosher, and Raymond Lorie developed in the 1960s. Goldfarb, editor of the international standard, coined the \"GML\" term using their surname initials. Goldfarb also wrote the definitive work on SGML syntax in \"The SGML Handbook\". The syntax of SGML is closer to the COCOA format. As a document markup language, SGML was originally designed to enable the sharing of machine-readable large-project documents in government, law, and industry. Many such documents must remain readable for several decades\u2014a long time in the information technology field. SGML also was extensively applied by the military, and the aerospace, technical reference, and industrial publishing industries. The advent of the XML profile has made SGML suitable for widespread application for small-scale, general-purpose use.\nDocument validity.\nSGML (ENR+WWW) defines two kinds of validity. According to the revised Terms and Definitions of ISO 8879 (from the public draft):\nA conforming SGML document must be either a type-valid SGML document, a tag-valid SGML document, or both. Note: A user may wish to enforce additional constraints on a document, such as whether a document instance is integrally-stored or free of entity references.\nA \"type-valid\" SGML document is defined by the standard as:\nAn SGML document in which, for each document instance, there is an associated document type declaration (DTD) to whose DTD that instance conforms.\nA \"tag-valid\" SGML document is defined by the standard as:\nAn SGML document, all of whose document instances are fully tagged. There need not be a document type declaration associated with any of the instances. Note: If there is a document type declaration, the instance can be parsed with or without reference to it.\nTerminology.\n\"Tag-validity\" was introduced in SGML (ENR+WWW) to support XML which allows documents with no DOCTYPE declaration but which can be parsed without a grammar, or documents which have a DOCTYPE declaration that makes no XML Infoset contributions to the document. The standard calls this \"fully tagged\". \"Integrally stored\" reflects the XML requirement that elements end in the same entity in which they started. \"Reference-free\" reflects the HTML requirement that entity references are for special characters and do not contain markup. SGML validity commentary, especially commentary that was made before 1997 or that is unaware of SGML (ENR+WWW), covers \"type-validity\" only.\nThe SGML emphasis on validity supports the requirement for generalized markup that \"markup should be rigorous.\" (ISO 8879 A.1)\nSyntax.\nAn SGML document may have three parts:\nAn SGML document may be composed from many entities (discrete pieces of text). In SGML, the entities and element types used in the document may be specified with a DTD, the different character sets, features, delimiter sets, and keywords are specified in the SGML Declaration to create the \"concrete syntax\" of the document.\nAlthough full SGML allows implicit markup and some other kinds of tags, the XML specification (s4.3.1) states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Each XML document has both a logical and a physical structure. Physically, the document is composed of units called entities. An entity may refer to other entities to cause their inclusion in the document. A document begins in a \"root\" or document entity. Logically, the document is composed of declarations, elements, comments, character references, and processing instructions, all of which are indicated in the document by explicit markup.\nFor introductory information on a basic, modern SGML syntax, see XML. The following material concentrates on features not in XML and is not a comprehensive summary of SGML syntax.\nOptional features.\nSGML generalizes and supports a wide range of markup languages as found in the mid 1980s. These ranged from terse Wiki-like syntaxes to RTF-like bracketed languages to HTML-like matching-tag languages. SGML did this by a relatively simple default \"reference concrete syntax\" augmented with a large number of optional features that could be enabled in the SGML Declaration. Not every SGML parser can necessarily process every SGML document. Because each processor's \"System Declaration\" can be compared to the document's \"SGML Declaration\" it is always possible to know whether a document is supported by a particular processor.\nMany SGML features relate to markup minimization. Other features relate to concurrent (parallel) markup (CONCUR), to linking processing attributes (LINK), and to embedding SGML documents within SGML documents (SUBDOC).\nThe notion of customizable features was not appropriate for Web use, so one goal of XML was to minimize optional features. However, XML's well-formedness rules cannot support Wiki-like languages, leaving them unstandardized and difficult to integrate with non-text information systems.\nConcrete and abstract syntaxes.\nThe usual (default) SGML \"concrete syntax\" resembles this example, which is the default HTML concrete syntax:\n&lt;QUOTE TYPE=\"example\"&gt;\n typically something like &lt;ITALICS&gt;this&lt;/ITALICS&gt;\n&lt;/QUOTE&gt;\nSGML provides an \"abstract syntax\" that can be implemented in many different types of \"concrete syntax\". Although the markup norm is using angle brackets as start- and end-tag delimiters in an SGML document (per the standard-defined \"reference concrete syntax\"), it is possible to use other characters\u2014provided a suitable concrete syntax is defined in the document's SGML declaration. For example, an SGML interpreter might be programmed to parse GML, wherein the tags are delimited with a left colon and a right full stop, and an codice_1 prefix denotes an end tag: codice_2. According to the reference syntax, letter case (upper- or lower-case) is not distinguished in tag names, so the three tags codice_3, codice_4, and codice_5 are equivalent. (A concrete syntax might change this rule via the NAMECASE NAMING declarations.)\nMarkup minimization.\nSGML has features for reducing the number of characters required to mark up a document, which must be enabled in the SGML Declaration. SGML processors need not support every available feature, thus allowing applications to tolerate many types of inadvertent markup omissions; however, SGML systems usually are intolerant of invalid structures. XML is intolerant of syntax omissions, and does not require a DTD for checking well-formedness.\nOMITTAG.\nBoth start tags and end tags may be omitted from a document instance, provided:\nFor example, if OMITTAG YES is specified in the SGML Declaration (enabling the OMITTAG feature), and the DTD includes the following declarations:\n&lt;!ELEMENT chapter - - (title, section+)&gt;\n&lt;!ELEMENT title o o (#PCDATA)&gt;\n&lt;!ELEMENT section - - (title, subsection+)&gt;\nthen this excerpt:\n&lt;chapter&gt;Introduction to SGML\n&lt;section&gt;The SGML Declaration\n&lt;subsection&gt;\nwhich omits two codice_7 tags and two codice_8 tags, would represent valid markup.\nOmitting tags is optional\u00a0\u2013 the same excerpt could be tagged like this:\n&lt;chapter&gt;&lt;title&gt;Introduction to SGML&lt;/title&gt;\n&lt;section&gt;&lt;title&gt;The SGML Declaration&lt;/title&gt;\n&lt;subsection&gt;\nand would still represent valid markup.\nNote: The OMITTAG feature is unrelated to the tagging of elements whose declared content is codice_9 as defined in the DTD:\n&lt;!ELEMENT image - o EMPTY&gt;\nElements defined like this have no end tag, and specifying one in the document instance would result in invalid markup. This is syntactically different from XML empty elements in this regard.\nSHORTREF.\nTags can be replaced with delimiter strings, for a terser markup, via the SHORTREF feature. This markup style is now associated with wiki markup, e.g. wherein two equals-signs (==), at the start of a line, are the \"heading start-tag\", and two equals signs (==) after that are the \"heading end-tag\".\nSHORTTAG.\nSGML markup languages whose concrete syntax enables the SHORTTAG VALUE feature, do not require attribute values containing only alphanumeric characters to be enclosed within quotation marks\u2014either double codice_10 (LIT) or single codice_11 (LITA)\u2014so that the previous markup example could be written:\n&lt;QUOTE TYPE=example&gt;\n typically something like &lt;ITALICS&gt;this&lt;/&gt;\n&lt;/QUOTE&gt;\nOne feature of SGML markup languages is the \"presumptuous empty tagging\", such that the empty end tag codice_12 in codice_13 \"inherits\" its value from the nearest previous full start tag, which, in this example, is codice_14 (in other words, it closes the most recently opened item). The expression is thus equivalent to codice_15.\nNET.\nAnother feature is the \"NET\" (Null End Tag) construction: codice_16, which is structurally equivalent to codice_15.\nOther features.\nAdditionally, the SHORTTAG NETENABL IMMEDNET feature allows shortening tags surrounding an empty text value, but forbids shortening full tags:\n&lt;QUOTE&gt;&lt;/QUOTE&gt;\ncan be written as\n &lt;QUOTE// \nwherein the first slash ( / ) stands for the NET-enabling \"start-tag close\" (NESTC), and the second slash stands for the NET. NOTE: XML defines NESTC with a /, and NET with an &gt; (angled bracket)\u2014hence the corresponding construct in XML appears as &lt;QUOTE/&gt;.\nThe third feature is 'text on the same line', allowing a markup item to be ended with a line-end; especially useful for headings and such, requiring using either SHORTREF or DATATAG minimization. For example, if the DTD includes the following declarations:\n&lt;!ELEMENT lines (line*)&gt;\n&lt;!ELEMENT line O - (#PCDATA)&gt;\n&lt;!ENTITY line-tagc \"&lt;/line&gt;\"&gt;\n&lt;!SHORTREF one-line \"&amp;#RE;&amp;#RS;\" line-tagc&gt;\n&lt;!USEMAP one-line line&gt;\n(and \"&amp;#RE;&amp;#RS;\" is a short-reference delimiter in the concrete syntax), then:\n&lt;lines&gt;\nfirst line\nsecond line\n&lt;/lines&gt;\nis equivalent to:\n&lt;lines&gt;\n&lt;line&gt;first line&lt;/line&gt;\n&lt;line&gt;second line&lt;/line&gt;\n&lt;/lines&gt;\nFormal characterization.\nSGML has many features that defied convenient description with the popular formal automata theory and the contemporary parser technology of the 1980s and the 1990s. The standard warns in Annex H:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The SGML \"model group\" notation was deliberately designed to resemble the regular expression notation of automata theory, because automata theory provides a theoretical foundation for some aspects of the notion of conformance to a content model. No assumption should be made about the general applicability of automata to content models.\nA report on an early implementation of a parser for basic SGML, the Amsterdam SGML Parser, notes &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the DTD-grammar in SGML must conform to a notion of unambiguity which closely resembles the LL(1) conditions and specifies various differences.\nThere appears to be no definitive classification of full SGML against a known class of formal grammar. Plausible classes may include tree-adjoining grammars and adaptive grammars.\nXML is described as being generally parsable like a two-level grammar for non-validated XML and a Conway-style pipeline of coroutines (lexer, parser, validator) for valid XML. The SGML productions in the ISO standard are reported to be LL(3) or LL(4). XML-class subsets are reported to be expressible using a W-grammar. According to one paper, probably considered at an \"information set\" or parse tree level rather than a character or delimiter level:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; The class of documents that conform to a given SGML document grammar forms an LL(1) language. ... The SGML document grammars by themselves are, however, not LL(1) grammars. \nThe SGML standard does not define SGML with formal data structures, such as parse trees; however, an SGML document is constructed of a rooted directed acyclic graph (RDAG) of physical storage units known as \"entities\", which is parsed into a RDAG of structural units known as \"elements\". The physical graph is loosely characterized as an \"entity tree\", but entities might appear multiple times. Moreover, the structure graph is also loosely characterized as an \"element tree\", but the ID/IDREF markup allows arbitrary arcs.\nThe results of parsing can also be understood as a data tree in different notations; where the document is the root node, and entities in other notations (text, graphics) are child nodes. SGML provides apparatus for linking to and annotating external non-SGML entities.\nThe SGML standard describes it in terms of \"maps\" and \"recognition modes\" (s9.6.1). Each entity, and each element, can have an associated \"notation\" or \"declared content type\", which determines the kinds of references and tags which will be recognized in that entity and element. Also, each element can have an associated \"delimiter map\" (and \"short reference map\"), which determines which characters are treated as delimiters in context. The SGML standard characterizes parsing as a state machine switching between recognition modes. During parsing, there is a stack of maps that configure the scanner, while the tokenizer relates to the recognition modes.\nParsing involves traversing the dynamically-retrieved entity graph, finding/implying tags and the element structure, and validating those tags against the grammar. An unusual aspect of SGML is that the grammar (DTD) is used both passively\u00a0\u2014 to \"recognize\" lexical structures, and actively\u00a0\u2014 to \"generate\" missing structures and tags that the DTD has declared optional. End- and start- tags can be omitted, because they can be inferred. Loosely, a series of tags can be omitted only if there is a single, possible path in the grammar to imply them. It was this active use of grammars that made concrete SGML parsing difficult to formally characterize.\nSGML uses the term \"validation\" for both recognition and generation. XML does not use the grammar (DTD) to change delimiter maps or to inform the parse modes, and does not allow tag omission; consequently, XML validation of elements is not active in the sense that SGML validation is active. SGML \"without\" a DTD (e.g. simple XML), is a grammar or a language; SGML \"with\" a DTD is a metalanguage. SGML with an SGML declaration is, perhaps, a meta-metalanguage, since it is a metalanguage whose declaration mechanism \"is\" a metalanguage.\nSGML has an abstract syntax implemented by many possible concrete syntaxes; however, this is not the same usage as in an abstract syntax tree and as in a concrete syntax tree. In the SGML usage, a concrete syntax is a set of specific delimiters, while the abstract syntax is the set of names for the delimiters. The XML Infoset corresponds more to the programming language notion of abstract syntax introduced by John McCarthy.\nDerivatives.\nXML.\nThe W3C XML (Extensible Markup Language) is a profile (subset) of SGML designed to ease the implementation of the parser compared to a full SGML parser, primarily for use on the World Wide Web. In addition to disabling many SGML options present in the reference syntax (such as omitting tags and nested subdocuments) XML adds a number of additional restrictions on the kinds of SGML syntax. For example, despite enabling SGML shortened tag forms, XML does not allow unclosed start or end tags. It also relied on many of the additions made by the WebSGML Annex. XML currently is more widely used than full SGML. XML has lightweight internationalization based on Unicode. Applications of XML include XHTML, XQuery, XSLT, XForms, XPointer, JSP, SVG, RSS, Atom, XML-RPC, RDF/XML, and SOAP.\nHTML.\nWhile HTML (Hyper Text Markup Language) was developed partially independently and in parallel with SGML, its creator, Tim Berners-Lee, intended it to be an application of SGML. The design of HTML was therefore inspired by SGML tagging, but, since no clear expansion and parsing guidelines were established, most actual HTML documents are not valid SGML documents. Later, HTML was reformulated (version 2.0) to be more of an SGML application; however, the HTML markup language has many legacy- and exception-handling features that differ from SGML's requirements. HTML 4 is an SGML application that fully conforms to ISO 8879\u00a0\u2013 SGML.\nThe charter for the 2006 revival of the World Wide Web Consortium HTML Working Group says, \"the Group will not assume that an SGML parser is used for 'classic HTML'\". Although HTML syntax closely resembles SGML syntax with the default \"reference concrete syntax\", HTML5 abandons any attempt to define HTML as an SGML application, explicitly defining its own parsing rules, which more closely match existing implementations and documents. It does, however, define an alternative XHTML serialization, which conforms to XML and therefore to SGML as well.\nOED.\nThe second edition of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" (OED) is entirely marked up with an SGML-based markup language using the LEXX text editor.\nThe third edition is marked up as XML.\nOthers.\nOther document markup languages are partly related to SGML and XML, but\u2014because they cannot be parsed or validated or otherwise processed using standard SGML and XML tools\u2014they are not considered either SGML or XML languages; the Z Format markup language for typesetting and documentation is an example.\nSeveral modern programming languages support tags as primitive token types, or now support Unicode and regular expression pattern-matching. An example is the Scala programming language.\nApplications.\nDocument markup languages defined using SGML are called \"applications\" by the standard; many pre-XML SGML applications were proprietary property of the organizations which developed them, and thus unavailable in the World Wide Web. The following list is of pre-XML SGML applications.\nOpen-source implementations.\nSignificant open-source implementations of SGML have included:\nSP and Jade, the associated DSSSL processors, are maintained by the https:// project, and are common parts of Linux distributions. A general archive of SGML software and materials resides at http://. The original HTML parser class, in Sun System's implementation of Java, is a limited-features SGML parser, using SGML terminology and concepts.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29000", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29000", "title": "Speciation", "text": "Evolutionary process\nSpeciation is the evolutionary process by which populations evolve to become distinct species. The biologist Orator F. Cook coined the term in 1906 for cladogenesis, the splitting of lineages, as opposed to anagenesis, phyletic evolution within lineages. Charles Darwin was the first to describe the role of natural selection in speciation in his 1859 book \"On the Origin of Species\". He also identified sexual selection as a likely mechanism, but found it problematic.\nThere are four geographic modes of speciation in nature, based on the extent to which speciating populations are isolated from one another: allopatric, peripatric, parapatric, and sympatric. Whether genetic drift is a minor or major contributor to speciation is the subject of much ongoing discussion.\nRapid sympatric speciation can take place through polyploidy, such as by doubling of chromosome number; the result is progeny which are immediately reproductively isolated from the parent population. New species can also be created through hybridization, followed by reproductive isolation, if the hybrid is favoured by natural selection.\nHistorical background.\nIn addressing the origin of species, there are two key issues:\nSince Charles Darwin's time, efforts to understand the nature of species have primarily focused on the first aspect, and it is now widely agreed that the critical factor behind the origin of new species is reproductive isolation.\nDarwin's dilemma: why do species exist?\nIn \"On the Origin of Species\" (1859), Darwin interpreted biological evolution in terms of natural selection, but was perplexed by the clustering of organisms into species. Chapter 6 of Darwin's book is entitled \"Difficulties of the Theory\". In discussing these \"difficulties\" he noted\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Firstly, why, if species have descended from other species by insensibly fine gradations, do we not everywhere see innumerable transitional forms? Why is not all nature in confusion instead of the species being, as we see them, well defined?\u2014\u200a\nThis dilemma can be described as the absence or rarity of transitional varieties in habitat space.\nAnother dilemma, related to the first one, is the absence or rarity of transitional varieties in time. Darwin pointed out that by the theory of natural selection \"innumerable transitional forms must have existed\", and wondered \"why do we not find them embedded in countless numbers in the crust of the earth\". That clearly defined species actually do exist in nature in both space and time implies that some fundamental feature of natural selection operates to generate and maintain species.\nEffect of sexual reproduction on species formation.\nIt has been argued that the resolution of Darwin's first dilemma lies in the fact that out-crossing sexual reproduction has an intrinsic cost of rarity. The cost of rarity arises as follows. If, on a resource gradient, a large number of separate species evolve, each exquisitely adapted to a very narrow band on that gradient, each species will, of necessity, consist of very few members. Finding a mate under these circumstances may present difficulties when many of the individuals in the neighborhood belong to other species. Under these circumstances, if any species' population size happens, by chance, to increase (at the expense of one or other of its neighboring species, if the environment is saturated), this will immediately make it easier for its members to find sexual partners. The members of the neighboring species, whose population sizes have decreased, experience greater difficulty in finding mates, and therefore form pairs less frequently than the larger species. This has a snowball effect, with large species growing at the expense of the smaller, rarer species, eventually driving them to extinction. Eventually, only a few species remain, each distinctly different from the other. Rarity not only imposes the risk of failure to find a mate, but it may also incur indirect costs, such as the resources expended or risks taken to seek out a partner at low population densities.\nRarity brings with it other costs. Rare and unusual features are very seldom advantageous. In most instances, they indicate a (non-silent) mutation, which is almost certain to be deleterious. It therefore behooves sexual creatures to avoid mates sporting rare or unusual features (koinophilia). Sexual populations therefore rapidly shed rare or peripheral phenotypic features, thus canalizing the entire external appearance, as illustrated in the accompanying image of the African pygmy kingfisher, \"Ispidina picta\". This uniformity of all the adult members of a sexual species has stimulated the proliferation of field guides on birds, mammals, reptiles, insects, and many other taxa, in which a species can be described with a single illustration (or two, in the case of sexual dimorphism). Once a population has become as homogeneous in appearance as is typical of most species (and is illustrated in the photograph of the African pygmy kingfisher), its members will avoid mating with members of other populations that look different from themselves. Thus, the avoidance of mates displaying rare and unusual phenotypic features inevitably leads to reproductive isolation, one of the hallmarks of speciation.\nIn the contrasting case of organisms that reproduce asexually, there is no cost of rarity; consequently, there are only benefits to fine-scale adaptation. Thus, asexual organisms very frequently show the continuous variation in form (often in many different directions) that Darwin expected evolution to produce, making their classification into \"species\" (more correctly, morphospecies) very difficult.\nModes.\nAll forms of natural speciation have taken place over the course of evolution; however, debate persists as to the relative importance of each mechanism in driving biodiversity.\nOne example of natural speciation is the diversity of the three-spined stickleback, a marine fish that, after the last glacial period, has undergone speciation into new freshwater colonies in isolated lakes and streams. Over an estimated 10,000 generations, the sticklebacks show structural differences that are greater than those seen between different genera of fish including variations in fins, changes in the number or size of their bony plates, variable jaw structure, and color differences.\nAllopatric.\nDuring allopatric (from the ancient Greek \"allos\", \"other\" + \"patr\u0101\", \"fatherland\") speciation, a population splits into two geographically isolated populations (for example, by habitat fragmentation due to geographical change such as mountain formation). The isolated populations then undergo genotypic or phenotypic divergence as: (a) they become subjected to dissimilar selective pressures; (b) different mutations arise in the two populations. When the populations come back into contact, they have evolved such that they are reproductively isolated and are no longer capable of exchanging genes. Island genetics is the term associated with the tendency of small, isolated genetic pools to produce unusual traits. Examples include insular dwarfism and the radical changes among certain famous island chains, for example on Komodo. The Gal\u00e1pagos Islands are particularly famous for their influence on Charles Darwin. During his five weeks there he heard that Gal\u00e1pagos tortoises could be identified by island, and noticed that finches differed from one island to another, but it was only nine months later that he speculated that such facts could show that species were changeable. When he returned to England, his speculation on evolution deepened after experts informed him that these were separate species, not just varieties, and famously that other differing Gal\u00e1pagos birds were all species of finches. Though the finches were less important for Darwin, more recent research has shown the birds now known as Darwin's finches to be a classic case of adaptive evolutionary radiation.\nPeripatric.\nIn peripatric speciation, a subform of allopatric speciation, new species are formed in isolated, smaller peripheral populations that are prevented from exchanging genes with the main population. It is related to the concept of a founder effect, since small populations often undergo bottlenecks. Genetic drift is often proposed to play a significant role in peripatric speciation.\nCase studies include Ernst Mayr's investigation of bird fauna; the Australian bird \"Petroica multicolor\"; and reproductive isolation in populations of \"Drosophila\" subject to population bottlenecking.\nParapatric.\nIn parapatric speciation, there is only partial separation of the zones of two diverging populations afforded by geography; individuals of each species may come in contact or cross habitats from time to time, but reduced fitness of the heterozygote leads to selection for behaviours or mechanisms that prevent their interbreeding. Parapatric speciation is modelled on continuous variation within a \"single\", connected habitat acting as a source of natural selection rather than the effects of isolation of habitats produced in peripatric and allopatric speciation.\nParapatric speciation may be associated with differential landscape-dependent selection. Even if there is a gene flow between two populations, strong differential selection may impede assimilation and different species may eventually develop. Habitat differences may be more important in the development of reproductive isolation than the isolation time. Caucasian rock lizards \"Darevskia rudis\", \"D. valentini\" and \"D. portschinskii\" all hybridize with each other in their hybrid zone; however, hybridization is stronger between \"D. portschinskii\" and \"D. rudis\", which separated earlier but live in similar habitats than between \"D. valentini\" and two other species, which separated later but live in climatically different habitats.\nEcologists refer to parapatric and peripatric speciation in terms of ecological niches. A niche must be available in order for a new species to be successful. Ring species such as \"Larus\" gulls have been claimed to illustrate speciation in progress, though the situation may be more complex. The grass \"Anthoxanthum odoratum\" may be starting parapatric speciation in areas of mine contamination.\nSympatric.\nSympatric speciation is the formation of two or more descendant species from a single ancestral species all occupying the same geographic location.\nOften-cited examples of sympatric speciation are found in insects that become dependent on different host plants in the same area.\nThe best known example of sympatric speciation is that of the cichlids of East Africa inhabiting the Rift Valley lakes, particularly Lake Victoria, Lake Malawi and Lake Tanganyika. There are over 800 described species, and according to estimates, there could be well over 1,600 species in the region. Their evolution is cited as an example of both natural and sexual selection. A 2008 study suggests that sympatric speciation has occurred in Tennessee cave salamanders. Sympatric speciation driven by ecological factors may also account for the extraordinary diversity of crustaceans living in the depths of Siberia's Lake Baikal.\nBudding speciation has been proposed as a particular form of sympatric speciation, whereby small groups of individuals become progressively more isolated from the ancestral stock by breeding preferentially with one another. This type of speciation would be driven by the conjunction of various advantages of inbreeding such as the expression of advantageous recessive phenotypes, reducing the recombination load, and reducing the cost of sex.\nThe hawthorn fly (\"Rhagoletis pomonella\"), also known as the apple maggot fly, appears to be undergoing sympatric speciation. Different populations of hawthorn fly feed on different fruits. A distinct population emerged in North America in the 19th century some time after apples, a non-native species, were introduced. This apple-feeding population normally feeds only on apples and not on the historically preferred fruit of hawthorns. The current hawthorn feeding population does not normally feed on apples. Some evidence, such as that six out of thirteen allozyme loci are different, that hawthorn flies mature later in the season and take longer to mature than apple flies; and that there is little evidence of interbreeding (researchers have documented a 4\u20136% hybridization rate) suggests that sympatric speciation is occurring.\nMethods of selection.\nReinforcement.\nReinforcement, also called the Wallace effect, is the process by which natural selection increases reproductive isolation. It may occur after two populations of the same species are separated and then come back into contact. If their reproductive isolation was complete, then they will have already developed into two separate incompatible species. If their reproductive isolation is incomplete, then further mating between the populations will produce hybrids, which may or may not be fertile. If the hybrids are infertile, or fertile but less fit than their ancestors, then there will be further reproductive isolation and speciation has essentially occurred, as in horses and donkeys.\nOne reasoning behind this is that if the parents of the hybrid offspring each have naturally selected traits for their own certain environments, the hybrid offspring will bear traits from both, therefore would not fit either ecological niche as well as either parent (ecological speciation). The low fitness of the hybrids would cause selection to favor assortative mating, which would control hybridization. This is sometimes called the Wallace effect after the evolutionary biologist Alfred Russel Wallace who suggested in the late 19th century that it might be an important factor in speciation. Conversely, if the hybrid offspring are more fit than their ancestors, then the populations will merge back into the same species within the area they are in contact.\nAnother important theoretical mechanism is the arise of intrinsic genetic incompatibilities, addressed in the Bateson-Dobzhansky-Muller model. Genes from allopatric populations will have different evolutionary backgrounds and are never tested together until hybridization at secondary contact, when negative epistatic interactions will be exposed. In other words, new alleles will emerge in a population and only pass through selection if they work well together with other genes in the same population, but it may not be compatible with genes in an allopatric population, be those other newly derived alleles or retained ancestral alleles. This is only revealed through new hybridization. Such incompatibilities cause lower fitness in hybrids regardless of the ecological environment, and are thus intrinsic, although they can originate from the adaptation to different environments. The accumulation of such incompatibilities increases faster and faster with time, creating a \"snowball\" effect. There is a large amount of evidence supporting this theory, primarily from laboratory populations such as \"Drosophila\" and \"Mus\", and some genes involved in incompatibilities have been identified.\nReinforcement favoring reproductive isolation is required for both parapatric and sympatric speciation. Without reinforcement, the geographic area of contact between different forms of the same species, called their \"hybrid zone\", will not develop into a boundary between the different species. Hybrid zones are regions where diverged populations meet and interbreed. Hybrid offspring are common in these regions, which are usually created by diverged species coming into secondary contact. Without reinforcement, the two species would have uncontrollable inbreeding. Reinforcement may be induced in artificial selection experiments as described below.\nEcological.\nEcological selection is \"the interaction of individuals with their environment during resource acquisition\". Natural selection is inherently involved in the process of speciation, whereby, \"under ecological speciation, populations in different environments, or populations exploiting different resources, experience contrasting natural selection pressures on the traits that directly or indirectly bring about the evolution of reproductive isolation\". Evidence for the role ecology plays in the process of speciation exists. Studies of stickleback populations support ecologically linked speciation arising as a by-product, alongside numerous studies of parallel speciation, where isolation evolves between independent populations of species adapting to contrasting environments than between independent populations adapting to similar environments. Ecological speciation occurs with much of the evidence, \"...accumulated from top-down studies of adaptation and reproductive isolation\".\nSexual selection.\nSexual selection can drive speciation in a clade, independently of natural selection. However the term \"speciation\", in this context, tends to be used in two different, but not mutually exclusive senses. The first and most commonly used sense refers to the \"birth\" of new species. That is, the splitting of an existing species into two separate species, or the budding off of a new species from a parent species, both driven by a biological \"fashion fad\" (a preference for a feature, or features, in one or both sexes, that do not necessarily have any adaptive qualities). In the second sense, \"speciation\" refers to the wide-spread tendency of sexual creatures to be grouped into clearly defined species, rather than forming a continuum of phenotypes both in time and space \u2013 which would be the more obvious or logical consequence of natural selection. This was indeed recognized by Darwin as problematic, and included in his \"On the Origin of Species\" (1859), under the heading \"Difficulties with the Theory\". There are several suggestions as to how mate choice might play a significant role in resolving . If speciation takes place in the absence of natural selection, it might be referred to as nonecological speciation.\nArtificial speciation.\nNew species have been created by animal husbandry, but the dates and methods of the initiation of such species are not clear. Often, the domestic counterpart can still interbreed and produce fertile offspring with its wild ancestor. This is the case with domestic cattle, which can be considered the same species as several varieties of wild ox, gaur, and yak; and with domestic sheep that can interbreed with the mouflon.\nThe best-documented creations of new species in the laboratory were performed in the late 1980s. William R. Rice and George W. Salt bred \"Drosophila melanogaster\" fruit flies using a maze with three different choices of habitat such as light/dark and wet/dry. Each generation was placed into the maze, and the groups of flies that came out of two of the eight exits were set apart to breed with each other in their respective groups. After thirty-five generations, the two groups and their offspring were isolated reproductively because of their strong habitat preferences: they mated only within the areas they preferred, and so did not mate with flies that preferred the other areas. The history of such attempts is described by Rice and Elen E. Hostert (1993).\nDiane Dodd used a laboratory experiment to show how reproductive isolation can develop in \"Drosophila pseudoobscura\" fruit flies after several generations by placing them in different media, starch- and maltose-based media.\nDodd's experiment has been replicated many times, including with other kinds of fruit flies and foods. Such rapid evolution of reproductive isolation may sometimes be a relic of infection by \"Wolbachia\" bacteria.\nAn alternative explanation is that these observations are consistent with sexually-reproducing animals being inherently reluctant to mate with individuals whose appearance or behavior is different from the norm. The risk that such deviations are due to heritable maladaptations is high. Thus, if an animal, unable to predict natural selection's future direction, is conditioned to produce the fittest offspring possible, it will avoid mates with unusual habits or features. Sexual creatures then inevitably group themselves into reproductively isolated species.\nGenetics.\nSpecies barriers.\nIn evolutionary biology, a \"species barrier\" is any genetic difference that reduces gene flow between diverging lineages. In Darwin's framework, natural selection acting in heterogeneous environments drives phenotypic divergence; hybrids with intermediate phenotypes may suffer reduced fitness where parental populations are locally adapted. The genetic basis of such barriers was first mapped using crosses between closely related species; for example, Dobzhansky showed in \"Drosophila\" that some chromosomal regions contribute disproportionately to hybrid sterility, establishing that reproductive isolation has a genomic basis rather than a single-locus cause.\nThese findings motivated the Dobzhansky\u2013Muller model: hybrid dysfunction arises from negative epistasis between derived alleles that evolved separately in each lineage, without either lineage having to cross a low-fitness state. Subsequent theory formalized how selected loci impede introgression at nearby neutral loci, quantifying the \"barrier to gene flow\" and showing that many loci are typically required to strongly reduce exchange across most of the genome. In parallel, the \"genic view\" of speciation argued that differentiation and isolation often begin at a subset of loci under divergent or sexual selection, while the remainder of the genome can remain permeable for long periods.\nAccumulation of species barriers.\nExperimental crosses across clades show that overall postzygotic isolation increases with genetic divergence, but the architecture is typically polygenic, asymmetric, and often involves complex (\u22653-locus) Dobzhansky\u2013Muller incompatibilities. Theory predicts different accumulation dynamics: under the classic \"snowball\" model, the number of pairwise incompatibilities grows roughly with the square of substitutions, whereas alternative models (e.g. Fisher's geometric model) can yield more linear behavior depending on trait architecture and selection.\nBecause barrier loci impede nearby introgression, genomes of diverging lineages often become mosaics with semipermeable regions during \"semi-isolated\" stages; linkage disequilibria and parallel clines in hybrid zones provide estimates of selection and dispersal maintaining such barriers. Population-genomic inference now makes it possible to quantify how gene flow declines with molecular divergence and to identify when genomic heterogeneity of introgression arises, thereby enabling cross-taxon comparisons along the speciation continuum to uncover the factors driving the accumulation of species barriers.\nFew speciation genes have been found. They usually involve the reinforcement process of late stages of speciation. In 2008, a speciation gene causing reproductive isolation was reported. It causes hybrid sterility between related subspecies. The order of speciation of three groups from a common ancestor may be unclear or unknown; a collection of three such species is referred to as a \"trichotomy\".\nSpeciation via polyploidy.\nPolyploidy is a mechanism that has caused many rapid speciation events in sympatry because offspring of, for example, tetraploid x diploid matings often result in triploid sterile progeny. However, among plants, not all polyploids are reproductively isolated from their parents, and gene flow may still occur, such as through triploid hybrid x diploid matings that produce tetraploids, or matings between meiotically unreduced gametes from diploids and gametes from tetraploids (see also hybrid speciation).\nIt has been suggested that many of the existing plant and most animal species have undergone an event of polyploidization in their evolutionary history. Reproduction of successful polyploid species is sometimes asexual, by parthenogenesis or apomixis, as for unknown reasons many asexual organisms are polyploid. Rare instances of polyploid mammals are known, but most often result in prenatal death.\nHybrid speciation.\nHybridization between two different species sometimes leads to a distinct phenotype. This phenotype can also be fitter than the parental lineage and as such natural selection may then favor these individuals. Eventually, if reproductive isolation is achieved, it may lead to a separate species. However, reproductive isolation between hybrids and their parents is particularly difficult to achieve and thus hybrid speciation is considered an extremely rare event. The Mariana mallard is thought to have arisen from hybrid speciation.\nHybridization is an important means of speciation in plants, since polyploidy (having more than two copies of each chromosome) is tolerated in plants more readily than in animals. Polyploidy is important in hybrids as it allows reproduction, with the two different sets of chromosomes each being able to pair with an identical partner during meiosis. Polyploids also have more genetic diversity, which allows them to avoid inbreeding depression in small populations.\nHybridization without change in chromosome number is called homoploid hybrid speciation. It is considered very rare but has been shown in \"Heliconius\" butterflies and sunflowers. Polyploid speciation, which involves changes in chromosome number, is a more common phenomenon, especially in plant species. \nGene transposition.\nTheodosius Dobzhansky, who studied fruit flies in the early days of genetic research in 1930s, speculated that parts of chromosomes that switch from one location to another might cause a species to split into two different species. He mapped out how it might be possible for sections of chromosomes to relocate themselves in a genome. Those mobile sections can cause sterility in inter-species hybrids, which can act as a speciation pressure. In theory, his idea was sound, but scientists long debated whether it actually happened in nature. Eventually a competing theory involving the gradual accumulation of mutations was shown to occur in nature so often that geneticists largely dismissed the moving gene hypothesis. However, 2006 research shows that jumping of a gene from one chromosome to another can contribute to the birth of new species. This validates the reproductive isolation mechanism, a key component of speciation.\nRates.\nThere is debate as to the rate at which speciation events occur over geologic time. While some evolutionary biologists claim that speciation events have remained relatively constant and gradual over time (known as \"Phyletic gradualism\" \u2013 see diagram), some palaeontologists such as Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould have argued that species usually remain unchanged over long stretches of time, and that speciation occurs only over relatively brief intervals, a view known as \"punctuated equilibrium\". (See diagram, and .) \nPunctuated evolution.\nEvolution can be extremely rapid, as shown in the creation of domesticated animals and plants in a very short geological space of time, spanning only a few tens of thousands of years. Maize (\"Zea mays\"), for instance, was created in Mexico in only a few thousand years, starting about 7,000 to 12,000 years ago. This raises the question of why the long term rate of evolution is far slower than is theoretically possible.\nEvolution is imposed on species or groups. It is not planned or striven for in some Lamarckist way. The mutations on which the process depends are random events, and, except for the \"silent mutations\" which do not affect the functionality or appearance of the carrier, are thus usually disadvantageous, and their chance of proving to be useful in the future is vanishingly small. Therefore, while a species or group might benefit from being able to adapt to a new environment by accumulating a wide range of genetic variation, this is to the detriment of the \"individuals\" who have to carry these mutations until a small, unpredictable minority of them ultimately contributes to such an adaptation. Thus, the \"capability\" to evolve would require group selection, a concept discredited by (for example) George C. Williams, John Maynard Smith and Richard Dawkins as selectively disadvantageous to the individual.\nThe resolution to Darwin's second dilemma might thus come about as follows:\nIf sexual individuals are disadvantaged by passing mutations on to their offspring, they will avoid mutant mates with strange or unusual characteristics. Mutations that affect the external appearance of their carriers will then rarely be passed on to the next and subsequent generations. They would therefore seldom be tested by natural selection. Evolution is, therefore, effectively halted or slowed down considerably. The only mutations that can accumulate in a population, on this punctuated equilibrium view, are ones that have no noticeable effect on the outward appearance and functionality of their bearers (i.e., they are \"silent\" or \"neutral mutations\", which can be, and are, used to trace the relatedness and age of populations and species.)\nThis argument implies that evolution can only occur if mutant mates cannot be avoided, as a result of a severe scarcity of potential mates. This is most likely to occur in small, isolated communities. These occur most commonly on small islands, in remote valleys, lakes, river systems, or caves, or during the aftermath of a mass extinction. Under these circumstances, not only is the choice of mates severely restricted but population bottlenecks, founder effects, genetic drift and inbreeding cause rapid, random changes in the isolated population's genetic composition. Furthermore, hybridization with a related species trapped in the same isolate might introduce additional genetic changes. If an isolated population such as this survives its genetic upheavals, and subsequently expands into an unoccupied niche, or into a niche in which it has an advantage over its competitors, a new species, or subspecies, will have come into being. In geological terms, this will be an abrupt event. A resumption of avoiding mutant mates will thereafter result, once again, in evolutionary stagnation.\nIn apparent confirmation of this punctuated equilibrium view of evolution, the fossil record of an evolutionary progression typically consists of species that suddenly appear, and ultimately disappear, hundreds of thousands or millions of years later, without any change in external appearance. Graphically, these fossil species are represented by lines parallel with the time axis, whose lengths depict how long each of them existed. The fact that the lines remain parallel with the time axis illustrates the unchanging appearance of each of the fossil species depicted on the graph. During each species' existence new species appear at random intervals, each also lasting many hundreds of thousands of years before disappearing without a change in appearance. The exact relatedness of these concurrent species is generally impossible to determine. This is illustrated in the diagram depicting the distribution of hominin species through time since the hominins separated from the line that led to the evolution of their closest living primate relatives, the chimpanzees.\nFor similar evolutionary time lines see, for instance, the paleontological list of African dinosaurs, Asian dinosaurs, the Lampriformes and Amiiformes. \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29004", "revid": "37978251", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29004", "title": "SQL", "text": "Relational database programming language\nStructured Query Language (SQL) ( \"S-Q-L\"; \"sequel\") is a domain-specific language used to manage data, especially in a relational database management system (RDBMS). It is particularly useful in handling structured data, i.e., data incorporating relations among entities and variables.\nIntroduced in the 1970s, SQL offered two main advantages over older read\u2013write APIs such as ISAM or VSAM. Firstly, it introduced the concept of accessing many records with one single command. Secondly, it eliminates the need to specify \"how\" to reach a record, i.e., with or without an index.\nOriginally based upon relational algebra and tuple relational calculus, SQL consists of many types of statements, which may be informally classed as sublanguages, commonly: data query language (DQL), data definition language (DDL), data control language (DCL), and data manipulation language (DML).\nThe scope of SQL includes data query, data manipulation (insert, update, and delete), data definition (schema creation and modification), and data access control. Although SQL is essentially a declarative language (4GL), it also includes procedural elements.\nSQL was one of the first commercial languages to use Edgar F. Codd's relational model. The model was described in his influential 1970 paper, \"A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks\". Despite not entirely adhering to the relational model as described by Codd, SQL became the most widely used database language.\nSQL became a standard of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in 1986 and of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in 1987. Since then, the standard has been revised multiple times to include a larger set of features and incorporate common extensions. Despite the existence of standards, virtually no implementations in existence adhere to it fully, and most SQL code requires at least some changes before being ported to different database systems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nSQL was initially developed at IBM by Donald D. Chamberlin and Raymond F. Boyce after learning about the relational model from Edgar F. Codd in the early 1970s. This version, initially called SEQUEL (Structured English Query Language), was designed to manipulate and retrieve data stored in IBM's original quasirelational database management system, System R, which a group at IBM San Jose Research Laboratory had developed during the 1970s.\nChamberlin and Boyce's first attempt at a relational database language was SQUARE (Specifying Queries in A Relational Environment), but it was difficult to use due to subscript/superscript notation. After moving to the San Jose Research Laboratory in 1973, they began work on a sequel to SQUARE. The original name SEQUEL, which is widely regarded as a pun on QUEL, the query language of Ingres, was later changed to SQL (dropping the vowels) because \"SEQUEL\" was a trademark of the UK-based Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Engineering Limited company. The label SQL later became the acronym for Structured Query Language.\nAfter testing SQL at customer test sites to determine the usefulness and practicality of the system, IBM began developing commercial products based on their System R prototype, including System/38, SQL/DS, and IBM Db2, which were commercially available in 1979, 1981, and 1983, respectively. IBM's endorsement caused the industry to move to SQL from alternatives like QUEL.\nIn the late 1970s, Relational Software, Inc. (now Oracle Corporation) saw the potential of the concepts described by Codd, Chamberlin, and Boyce, and developed their own SQL-based RDBMS with aspirations of selling it to the U.S. Navy, Central Intelligence Agency, and other U.S. government agencies. In June 1979, Relational Software introduced one of the first commercially available implementations of SQL, Oracle V2 (Version2) for VAX computers.\nBy 1986, ANSI and ISO standard groups officially adopted the standard \"Database Language SQL\" language definition. New versions of the standard were published in 1989, 1992, 1996, , , , , , and, most recently, .\nInteroperability and standardization.\nOverview.\nSQL implementations are incompatible between vendors and do not necessarily completely follow standards. In particular, date and time syntax, string concatenation, codice_1s, and comparison case sensitivity vary from vendor to vendor. PostgreSQL and Mimer SQL strive for standards compliance, though PostgreSQL does not adhere to the standard in all cases. For example, the folding of unquoted names to lower case in PostgreSQL is incompatible with the SQL standard, which says that unquoted names should be folded to upper case. Thus, according to the standard, codice_2 should be equivalent to codice_3, not codice_4.\nPopular implementations of SQL commonly omit support for basic features of Standard SQL, such as the codice_5 or codice_6 data types. The most obvious such examples, and incidentally the most popular commercial and proprietary SQL DBMSs, are Oracle (whose codice_5 behaves as codice_8, and lacks a codice_6 type) and MS SQL Server (before the 2008 version). As a result, SQL code can rarely be ported between database systems without modifications.\nReasons for incompatibility.\nSeveral reasons for the lack of portability between database systems include:\nStandardization history.\nSQL was adopted as a standard by the ANSI in 1986 as SQL-86 and the ISO in 1987. It is maintained by \"ISO/IEC JTC 1, Information technology, Subcommittee SC 32, Data management and interchange\".\nUntil 1996, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) data-management standards program certified SQL DBMS compliance with the SQL standard. Vendors now self-certify the compliance of their products.\nThe original standard declared that the official pronunciation for \"SQL\" was an initialism: (\"ess cue el\"). Regardless, many English-speaking database professionals (including Donald Chamberlin himself) use the acronym-like pronunciation of (\"sequel\"), mirroring the language's prerelease development name, \"SEQUEL\".&lt;br&gt; The SQL standard has gone through a number of revisions:\nCurrent standard.\nThe standard is commonly denoted by the pattern: \"ISO/IEC 9075-n:yyyy Part n: title\", or, as a shortcut, \"ISO/IEC 9075\". Interested parties may purchase the standards documents from ISO,&lt;ref name=\"ISO/IEC 9075\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; IEC, or ANSI. Some old drafts are freely available.\n\"ISO/IEC 9075\" is complemented by \"ISO/IEC 13249: SQL Multimedia and Application Packages\" and some \"Technical reports\".\nSyntax.\nformula_1\nThe SQL language is subdivided into several language elements, including:\nProcedural extensions.\nSQL is designed for a specific purpose: to query data contained in a relational database. SQL is a set-based, declarative programming language, not an imperative programming language like C or BASIC. However, extensions to Standard SQL add procedural programming language functionality, such as control-of-flow constructs.\nIn addition to the standard SQL/PSM extensions and proprietary SQL extensions, procedural and object-oriented programmability is available on many SQL platforms via DBMS integration with other languages. The SQL standard defines SQL/JRT extensions (SQL Routines and Types for the Java Programming Language) to support Java code in SQL databases. Microsoft SQL Server 2005 uses the SQLCLR (SQL Server Common Language Runtime) to host managed .NET assemblies in the database, while prior versions of SQL Server were restricted to unmanaged extended stored procedures primarily written in C. PostgreSQL lets users write functions in a wide variety of languages\u2014including Perl, Python, Tcl, JavaScript (PL/V8) and C.\nAlternatives.\nA distinction should be made between alternatives to SQL as a language, and alternatives to the relational model itself. Below are proposed relational alternatives to the SQL language. See navigational database and NoSQL for alternatives to the relational model.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDistributed SQL processing.\nDistributed Relational Database Architecture (DRDA) was designed by a workgroup within IBM from 1988 to 1994. DRDA enables network-connected relational databases to cooperate to fulfill SQL requests.\nAn interactive user or program can issue SQL statements to a local RDB and receive tables of data and status indicators in reply from remote RDBs. SQL statements can also be compiled and stored in remote RDBs as packages and then invoked by package name. This is important for the efficient operation of application programs that issue complex, high-frequency queries. It is especially important when the tables to be accessed are located in remote systems.\nThe messages, protocols, and structural components of DRDA are defined by the Distributed Data Management Architecture. Distributed SQL processing ala DRDA is distinctive from contemporary distributed SQL databases.\nCriticisms.\nDesign.\nSQL deviates in several ways from its theoretical foundation, the relational model and its tuple calculus. In that model, a table is a set of tuples, while in SQL, tables and query results are lists of rows; the same row may occur multiple times, and the order of rows can be employed in queries (e.g., in the codice_10 clause).\nCritics argue that SQL should be replaced with a language that returns strictly to the original foundation: for example, see \"The Third Manifesto\" by Hugh Darwen and C.J. Date (2006, ).\nOrthogonality and completeness.\nEarly specifications did not support major features, such as primary keys. Result sets could not be named, and subqueries had not been defined. These were added in 1992.\nThe lack of sum types has been described as a roadblock to full use of SQL's user-defined types. JSON support, for example, needed to be added by a new standard in 2016.\nNull.\nThe concept of Null is the subject of some debate. The Null marker indicates the absence of a value, and is distinct from a value of 0 for an integer column or an empty string for a text column. The concept of Nulls enforces the 3-valued-logic in SQL, which is a concrete implementation of the general 3-valued logic.\nDuplicates.\nAnother popular criticism is that it allows duplicate rows, making integration with languages such as Python, whose data types might make accurately representing the data difficult, in terms of parsing and by the absence of modularity. This is usually avoided by declaring a primary key, or a unique constraint, with one or more columns that uniquely identify a row in the table.\nImpedance mismatch.\nIn a sense similar to object\u2013relational impedance mismatch, a mismatch occurs between the declarative SQL language and the procedural languages in which SQL is typically embedded.\nSQL data types.\nThe SQL standard defines three kinds of data types (chapter 4.1.1 of SQL/Foundation):\n\"Constructed types\" are one of codice_11, codice_12, codice_13 (reference), or codice_14. \"User-defined types\" are comparable to classes in object-oriented language with their own constructors, observers, mutators, methods, inheritance, overloading, overwriting, interfaces, and so on. \"Predefined data types\" are intrinsically supported by the implementation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29005", "revid": "45167885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29005", "title": "Strait of Hormuz", "text": "Strait between the Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf\nThe Strait of Hormuz ( \"Tangeh-ye Hormoz\" , \"Ma\u1e0d\u012bq Hurmuz\") is a strait between the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman. It provides the only sea passage from the Persian Gulf to the open ocean and is one of the world's most strategically important choke points. It has been so for centuries, with vast hinterlands rich in luxury trade good, but no easy access to lucrative trading ports. Babur's memoirs recount how almonds had to be carried from the distant Ferghana region in Central Asia to Hormuz to reach markets.\nOn the north coast lies Iran, and on the south coast lies the Musandam Peninsula, shared by the United Arab Emirates and the Musandam Governorate, an exclave of Oman. The strait is about long, with a width varying from about to .\nDuring 2023\u20132025, 20% of the world's liquefied natural gas and 25% of seaborne oil trade passes through the strait annually. As of June 2025[ [update]], the strait has never been closed during Middle East conflicts, unlike the Straits of Tiran, though Iran threatens to close the strait, and preparations to mine it have been undertaken.\nEtymology.\nPopular etymology derives \"Hormuz\" from the Middle Persian pronunciation of the name of the Zoroastrian god Ahura Mazda. Alternatively, it has been suggested that the name derives from Hur-Muz 'Place of Dates'. Yet another possibility is that it comes from \u1f45\u03c1\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2 \"hormos\", the Greek word for 'cove, bay'. A theory claims that the strait of Hormuz may have been named after Ifra Hormizd, the mother of King Shapur II of Persia, who ruled between 309 and 379 AD.\nThe opening to the Persian Gulf was described, but not given a name, in the \"Periplus of the Erythraean Sea\", a 1st-century mariner's guide:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the upper end of these Calaei islands is a range of mountains called Calon, and there follows not far beyond, the mouth of the Persian Gulf, where there is much diving for the pearl-mussel. To the left of the straits are great mountains called Asabon and to the right there rises in full view another round and high mountain called Semiramis; between them the passage across the strait is about six hundred stadia; beyond which that very great and broad sea, the Persian Gulf, reaches far into the interior. At the upper end of this gulf, there is a market-town designated by law called Apologus, situated near Charaex Spasini and the River Euphrates.\u2014\u200a\nIn the 10th\u201317th centuries AD, the Kingdom of Ormus, which seems to have given the strait its name, was located here. Scholars, historians and linguists derive the name \"Ormuz\" from the local Persian word \"Hur-mogh\" meaning date palm. The resemblance of this word to the name of the Zoroastrian god \"Hormoz\" (a variant of \"Ahura Mazda\") has resulted in the belief that these words are related.\nNavigation.\nTo reduce the risk of collision, ships moving through the Strait follow a traffic separation scheme (TSS): inbound ships use one lane, outbound ships another, each lane being two miles wide. The lanes are separated by a two-mile-wide \"median\".\nTo traverse the Strait, ships pass through the territorial waters of Iran and Oman under the transit passage provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Although not all countries have ratified the convention, most countries, including the U.S., accept these customary navigation rules as codified in the convention.\nIn 1959, Iran altered the legal status of the strait by expanding its territorial sea to and declaring it would recognize only transit by innocent passage through the newly expanded area. In 1972, Oman also expanded its territorial sea to by decree. Thus, by 1972, the Strait of Hormuz was completely \"closed\" by the combined territorial waters of Iran and Oman. During the 1970s, neither Iran or Oman attempted to impede the passage of warships, but in the 1980s, both countries asserted claims that were different from customary (old) law. Upon ratifying UNCLOS in 1989, Oman submitted declarations confirming its 1981 royal decree that only innocent passage is permitted through its territorial sea. The declarations further asserted that prior permission was required before foreign warships could pass through Omani territorial waters. Upon signing the convention in 1982, Iran entered a declaration stating \"that only states parties to the Law of the Sea Convention shall be entitled to benefit from the contractual rights created therein\", including \"the right of transit passage through straits used for international navigation\". In 1993, Iran enacted a comprehensive law on maritime areas, provisions of which conflict with UNCLOS provisions, including a requirement that warships, submarines, and nuclear-powered ships obtain permission before exercising innocent passage through Iran's territorial waters. The US does not recognize any of the claims by Oman and Iran and has contested each of them.\nOman has a radar site Link Quality Indicator (LQI) to monitor the TSS in the Strait. This site is on a small island on the peak of Musandam Governorate.\nOil trade flow.\nDuring 2023\u20132025, 20% of the world's liquefied natural gas and 25% of seaborne oil trade passes through the Strait, illustrating its important location for trade.\nAccording to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, in 2011, an average of 14 tankers per day passed out of the Persian Gulf through the Strait carrying of crude oil. More than 85% of these crude oil exports went to Asian markets, with Japan, India, South Korea and China the largest destinations. In 2018, 21 million barrels a day passed through the Strait, worth $1.2 billion at 2019 prices.\nEvents.\nTanker War.\nThe Tanker War phase of the Iran\u2013Iraq War started when Iraq attacked the oil terminal and oil tankers at Iran's Kharg Island in early 1984. Saddam Hussein's aim in attacking Iranian shipping was, among other things, to provoke the Iranians to retaliate with extreme measures, such as closing the Strait of Hormuz to all maritime traffic, thereby bringing American intervention. Iran limited the retaliatory attacks to Iraqi shipping, leaving the strait open.\nOperation Praying Mantis.\nOperation Praying Mantis was an attack on 18 April 1988 by the United States Armed Forces within Iranian territorial waters in retaliation for the Iranian naval mining of international waters in the Persian Gulf during the Iran\u2013Iraq War and the subsequent damage to an American warship. The U.S. Navy attacked with several groups of surface warships, plus aircraft from the aircraft carrier USS \"Enterprise\", and her cruiser escort, USS \"Truxtun\". The attack began with coordinated strikes by two surface groups.\nDowning of Iran Air 655.\nOn 3 July 1988, 290 people were killed when an Iran Air Airbus A300 was shot down over the strait by the United States Navy guided missile cruiser USS \"Vincennes\" (CG-49) when it was wrongly identified as a jet fighter.\nCollisions.\nIn January 2007, the nuclear submarine USS \"Newport News\", struck , a 300,000-ton Japanese-flagged crude tanker, south of the strait. There were no injuries, and no oil leaked. On 20 March 2009, United States Navy collided with the in the strait. The collision ruptured a fuel tank aboard \"New Orleans\", spilling of marine diesel fuel.\nIranian navy problems.\nIn May 2020, Iran launched missiles at one of their own ships in a friendly fire accident, killing 19 sailors. On 2 June 2021, the IRIS \"Kharg\", a modified Ol-class replenishment oiler of the Iran Navy, sank in the Strait of Hormuz after catching fire. It was the navy's largest vessel.\nIranian ship seizures.\nOn 28 April 2015, IRGCN patrol boats contacted the Marshall Islands-flagged container ship \"Maersk Tigris\", which was westbound through the strait, and directed the ship to proceed further into Iranian territorial waters, according to a spokesman for the U.S. Defense Department. When the ship's master declined, one of the Iranian craft fired shots across the bridge of \"Maersk Tigris\". The captain complied and proceeded into Iranian waters near Larak Island. The US Navy sent aircraft and a destroyer, USS \"Farragut\", to monitor the situation. Maersk says it agreed to pay an Iranian company $163,000 after an Iranian court ruling over a dispute about 10 container boxes transported to Dubai in 2005. An appeal court raised the fine to $3.6 million.\nOn 4 January 2021, the Tasnim News Agency reported that a South Korea-flagged oil vessel headed from Saudi Arabia to the United Arab Emirates was seized for allegedly causing pollution violations. The ship was said to be carrying roughly 7,000 tons of ethanol. South Korea refused to comment on the accusation of causing oil pollution in the Strait of Hormuz. The ship, \"Hankuk Chemi\", was headed to the UAE port Fujairah after loading oil from Jubail, Saudi Arabia on 2 January 2021, as per ship-tracking data gathered by Bloomberg.\nIn April 2024, the Iranian Navy seized \"MSC Aries\", a Portuguese-flagged container ship sailing through the Gulf of Oman off the UAE coast of the Emirati port city of Fujairah, then steered the container ship through the strait, with 25 personnel on board, claiming that it had violated maritime laws. The 25 crew aboard includes 17 Indian nationals, Filipinos, Pakistanis, a Russian, and an Estonian.\nIranian preparations to mine the strait.\nAs of 2019, the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency estimated that Iran possessed over 5,000 naval mines capable of rapid deployment via high-speed boats. In June 2025, it was reported that U.S. intelligence detected, possibly through satellite imagery or human informants, that Iranian military forces loaded naval mines onto vessels in the Persian Gulf, an act which was interpreted as a preliminary step to blockading the strait. The mines were ultimately not deployed, though their presence raised alarms in Washington about Tehran's intent to escalate the conflict. It is unclear whether the mines were later removed.\nUS\u2013Iran disputes, threats to close the Strait.\n2008.\nNaval stand-offs between Iranian speedboats and US warships in the Strait occurred in December 2007 and January 2008. U.S. officials accused Iran of harassing and provoking their naval vessels, but Iran denied the allegations. On 14 January, U.S. Navy officials appeared to contradict the Pentagon version of the 16 January event, in which the Pentagon had reported that U.S. vessels had almost fired on approaching Iranian boats. The Navy's regional commander, Vice Admiral Kevin Cosgriff, said the Iranians had \"neither anti-ship missiles nor torpedoes\" and he \"wouldn't characterize the posture of the US 5th Fleet as afraid of these small boats\". On 29 June, the commander of Iran's Revolutionary Guard, Mohammad Ali Jafari, said that if either Israel or the US attacked Iran, it would seal off the Strait to wreak havoc in the oil markets. Cosgriff warned that such Iranian action would be considered an act of war, and the U.S. would not allow Iran to hold hostage a third of the world's oil supply. On 8 July, Ali Shirazi, a mid-level clerical aide to Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, was quoted telling the Revolutionary Guards, \"The Zionist regime is pressuring White House officials to attack Iran. If they commit such a stupidity, Tel Aviv and U.S. shipping in the Persian Gulf will be Iran's first targets and they will be burned.\"\nIn the last week of July, in Operation Brimstone, dozens of US, and naval ships from other countries, came to undertake joint exercises for possible military activity in the shallow waters off the coast of Iran. By 11 August, more than 40 U.S. and allied ships were en route to the Strait.\n2011\u201312.\nOn 27 December 2011, Iranian Vice President Mohammad Reza Rahimi threatened to cut off oil supply from the strait should economic sanctions limit, or cut off, Iranian oil exports. A US Fifth Fleet spokeswoman said the Fleet was \"always ready to counter malevolent actions\", whilst Admiral Habibollah Sayyari of the Iran Navy claimed cutting off oil shipments would be \"easy\". Despite an initial 2% rise in oil prices, markets ultimately did not react significantly to Iran's threat, with oil analyst Thorbjoern Bak Jensen concluding \"they cannot stop the flow for a longer period due to the amount of U.S. hardware in the area\".\nOn 3 January 2012, Iran threatened to take action if the U.S. Navy moved an aircraft carrier back into the Persian Gulf. Iranian Army chief Ataollah Salehi said the US had moved a carrier out of the Persian Gulf because of Iran's naval exercises, and Iran would take action if the ship returned. \"Iran will not repeat its warning...the enemy's carrier has been moved to the Gulf of Oman because of our drill. I recommend and emphasize to the American carrier not to return to the Persian Gulf\", he said. U.S. Navy spokesman Commander Bill Speaks responded that deployment of U.S. military assets would continue as has been the custom stating: \"The U.S. Navy operates under international maritime conventions to maintain a constant state of high vigilance in order to ensure the continued, safe flow of maritime traffic in waterways critical to global commerce.\" While earlier statements from Iran had little effect on oil markets, coupled with new sanctions, later comments drove crude futures higher, up over 4%. Pressure on prices reflected a combination of uncertainty driven further by China's response \u2013 reducing oil January 2012 purchases from Iran by 50% compared to 2011.\nBy January 2012, U.S.-led sanctions began to show economic effects, as the Iranian currency lost 12% of its value. Further pressure on Iranian currency was added by French Foreign Minister Alain Jupp\u00e9 who was quoted as calling for more \"strict sanctions\" and urged EU countries to follow the US in freezing Iranian central bank assets and imposing an embargo on oil exports.\nOn 9 January 2012, Iranian Defense Minister Ahmad Vahidi denied that Iran had ever claimed it would close the Strait, saying that \"Iran is the most important provider of security in the Strait... if one threatens the security of the Persian Gulf, then all are threatened.\" Iran's Foreign Ministry confirmed on 16 January it had received a letter from the US. Authorities were considering whether to reply, although the contents of the letter were not divulged. The US had previously announced its intention to warn Iran that closing the Strait is a \"red line\" that would provoke an American response. Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the US would \"take action and re-open the Strait\", which could be accomplished only by military means, including minesweepers, warship escorts and potentially airstrikes. Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta told troops that the US would not tolerate Iran closing the Strait. Nevertheless, Iran continued to discuss the impact of shutting the Strait on oil markets, saying any disruption of supply would cause a shock \"no country\" could manage.\nBy 23 January, a flotilla had been established by countries opposing Iran's threats to close the Strait. These ships operated in the Persian Gulf and Arabian Sea off the coast of Iran. The flotilla included three American aircraft carriers, three destroyers, seven British warships, including the destroyer and 4 Type 23 frigates, and a French warship, frigate \"La Motte-Picquet\". On 24 January, tensions rose further after the European Union imposed sanctions on Iranian oil. A member of Iran's parliament said, \"If any disruption happens regarding the sale of Iranian oil, the Strait...will definitely be closed\".\n2018 and 2019.\nIn July 2018, Iran again made threats to close the Strait, citing looming American sanctions after the U.S. withdrew from the JCPOA deal. In August, Iran test-fired a ballistic missile. According to the officials, the anti-ship Fateh-110 Mod 3 flew over 100 miles on a flight path over the Strait to a test range in the Iranian desert. \"It was shore-to-shore\", said a U.S. official.\nOn 22 April 2019, the U.S. ended the oil waivers, which had allowed some of Iran's customers to import Iranian oil, without risking financial penalties as part of U.S. economic sanctions. Aljazeera quoted Major-General Mohammad Bagheri of the Iranian Armed Forces, stating \"We are not after closing the Strait of Hormuz but if the hostility of the enemies increases, we will be able to do so... If our oil does not pass, the oil of others shall not pass the Strait of Hormuz either\".\n2019 attacks on oil tankers.\nIran has persistently attacked vessels and seized ships amidst political issues. On 13 June 2019, the oil tankers \"Front Altair\" and \"Kokuka Courageous\" were rocked by explosions shortly before dawn, the crew of the latter reported seeing a flying object strike the ship; the crew were rescued by the destroyer while the crew of the \"Front Altair\" were rescued by Iranian ships. U.S. secretary of state Mike Pompeo issued a statement accusing Iran of the attacks, Iran denied this calling it a false-flag attack.\nIn July 2019, a Stena Bulk Tanker, \"Stena Impero\", sailing under a British flag, was boarded and captured by Iranian forces. The spokesman for Iran's Guardian Council, Abbas Ali Kadkhodaei, was quoted as describing the seizure as a \"reciprocal action\". This was presumed to be in reference to the seizure of an Iranian tanker, \"Grace 1\", bound for Syria in Gibraltar a few days prior.\nIn 2020, France deployed about 600 troops at sea and in the air under the CTF474 to protect maritime trade, regional business, and to ease local tensions. Since the first week of April 2020, the operation combines the Dutch frigate Ruyter, the French frigate Forbin, and one French airplane ATLANTIC2 (ATL2).\n2025.\nOn 14 June, Iran reportedly issued a threat to block the Strait in response to Israeli attacks targeting its military and nuclear infrastructure. The \"Financial Times\" reported that such action could cause oil prices to surge beyond the recent 7\u201314% increases, possibly exceeding $100 to $150 per barrel. This would likely fuel global inflation and contribute to an economic downturn. Analysts emphasized the vulnerability of regional exporters, noting that \"Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq and Iran are wholly locked into one tiny passage for exports.\" The Strait handles 18-19 million barrels per day, nearly 20% of global oil consumption, including crude, condensates, and fuel. Analysts have warned that Iran could suffer severe consequences from any attempt to block the Strait. \"Iran's economy heavily relies on the free passage of goods and vessels through the seaway, as its oil exports are entirely sea-based,\" analysts from JP Morgan explained. Closing the Strait could strain Iran's crucial energy trade with China, its only major oil customer. U.S. Secretary of State Marco Rubio also warned Iran against attempting to shut down the Strait, stating that such a move would be \"economic suicide\" for the Islamic Republic, as the waterway is vital for its exports. On 17 June, two oil tankers collided in the Strait, though reports did not suggest that this was a security-related incident. The vessels involved were the \"Front Eagle\", carrying crude oil from Iraq to China, and the \"Adalynn\", which was unladen and en route to the Suez Canal. Both caught fire on deck, but no oil spill occurred. All crew members aboard the \"Adalynn\" were safely evacuated by the UAE coast guard.\nAfter the United States strikes on Iranian nuclear sites on 22 June, the Iranian Parliament voted to close the Strait. A final decision rests with Iran's Supreme National Security Council. Revolutionary Guards commander Esmaeil Kousari confirmed that shutting the Strait would be executed \"whenever necessary\", to protect national sovereignty and deter further foreign aggression. The potential closure of the Strait, through which 20% of the world's oil supply transits, would significantly disrupt global energy markets. Such a move could cause oil prices to increase and risk destabilizing the global economy, given the Strait's critical role as a maritime chokepoint for crude oil, liquefied natural gas, and other petroleum products. On 23 June 2025, oil prices were below $70 again (7% lower than on 20 June), indicating that the oil market viewed the US strikes, and Iran's response (the Strait remaining open, and 2025 Iranian strikes on Al Udeid Air Base), as inconsequential.\nAbility of Iran to hinder shipping.\nMillennium Challenge 2002 was a major war game exercise conducted by US armed forces in 2002. It simulated an attempt by a country (likely to be Iran) to close the Strait. The assumptions and results were controversial. Iran's simulated strategy beat the materially superior US armed forces.\nA 2008 article in \"International Security\" contended that Iran could seal off or impede traffic in the Strait for a month, and an attempt by the U.S. to reopen it would be likely to escalate the conflict. In a later issue, however, the journal published a response which questioned key assumptions and suggested a much shorter timeline for re-opening.\nIn December 2011, Iran's Navy began a ten-day exercise in international waters along the Strait. Iranian Rear Admiral Habibollah Sayyari stated that the Strait would not be closed during the exercise; Iranian forces could easily accomplish that but such a decision must be made at a political level. Captain John Kirby, a Pentagon spokesman, was quoted in December 2011 saying: \"Efforts to increase tension in that part of the world are unhelpful and counter-productive. For our part, we are comfortable that we have in the region sufficient capabilities to honor our commitments to our friends and partners, as well as the international community.\" Suzanne Maloney, an expert at the Brookings Institution, said, \"The expectation is that the U.S. military could address any Iranian threat relatively quickly.\" General Martin Dempsey, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in 2012 that Iran \"has invested in capabilities that could, in fact, for a period of time block the Strait of Hormuz.\" He stated, \"We've invested in capabilities to ensure that if that happens, we can defeat that.\"\nA May 2012 article by Nilufer Oral, a Turkish researcher of maritime law, concludes that both the UNCLOS and the 1958 Convention on the High Seas would be violated if Iran followed through on its threat to block passage of vessels such as oil tankers, and that the act of passage is not related in law to the imposition of economic sanctions. The article further asserts that a coastal state may prevent \"transit or non-suspendable innocent passage\" only if: 1) there is threatened or actual use of force, occurring during passage, against the sovereignty, territorial integrity, or political independence of a state bordering the strait; or 2) the vessel in any other way violates the principles of international law as embodied in the Charter of the United Nations.\nAs of 2013, the treaty had been ratified by 63 states, including most NATO-bloc and Soviet-bloc nations but with the notable exceptions of most of the OPEC and Arab League nations like Syria, Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Iran, as well as China, North Korea, and South Korea.\nAlternative shipping routes.\nIn June 2012, Saudi Arabia reopened the Iraq Pipeline through Saudi Arabia (IPSA), which was confiscated from Iraq in 2001 and travels from Iraq across Saudi Arabia to a Red Sea port. It will have a capacity of per day.\nIn July 2012, the UAE began using the new Habshan\u2013Fujairah oil pipeline from the Habshan fields in Abu Dhabi to the Fujairah oil terminal on the Gulf of Oman, effectively bypassing the Strait of Hormuz. It has a maximum capacity of around per day, over three-quarters of the UAE's 2012 production rate. The UAE is also increasing Fujairah's storage and off-loading capacities. The UAE is building the world's largest crude oil storage facility in Fujairah with a capacity of holding to enhance Fujairah's growth as a global oil and trading hub. The Habshan \u2013 Fujairah route secures the UAE's energy security and has the advantage of being a ground oil pipeline transportation which is considered the cheapest form of oil transportation and also reduces insurance costs as oil tankers would no longer enter the Persian Gulf.\nIn a July 2012 \"Foreign Policy\" article, Gal Luft compared Iran and the Strait of Hormuz to the Ottoman Empire and the Dardanelles, a choke point for shipments of Russian grain a century ago. He indicated that tensions involving the Strait of Hormuz are leading those currently dependent on shipments from the Persian Gulf to find alternative shipping capabilities. He stated that Saudi Arabia was considering building new pipelines to Oman and Yemen, and that Iraq might revive the disused Iraq\u2013Syria pipeline to transport crude oil to the Mediterranean. Luft stated that reducing Hormuz traffic \"presents the West with a new opportunity to augment its current Iran containment strategy.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29006", "revid": "234689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29006", "title": "Space telescope", "text": "Instrument in space to study astronomical objects\nA space telescope (also known as space observatory) is a telescope in outer space used to observe astronomical objects. Suggested by Lyman Spitzer in 1946, the first operational telescopes were the American Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, OAO-2 launched in 1968, and the Soviet Orion 1 ultraviolet telescope aboard space station Salyut 1 in 1971. Space telescopes avoid several problems caused by the atmosphere, including the absorption or scattering of certain wavelengths of light, obstruction by clouds, and distortions due to atmospheric refraction such as twinkling. Space telescopes can also observe dim objects during the daytime, and they avoid light pollution which ground-based observatories encounter. They are divided into two types: Satellites which map the entire sky (astronomical survey), and satellites which focus on selected astronomical objects or parts of the sky and beyond. Space telescopes are distinct from Earth imaging satellites, which point toward Earth for satellite imaging, applied for weather analysis, espionage, and other types of information gathering.\nHistory.\nIn 1946, American theoretical astrophysicist Lyman Spitzer, \"father of Hubble\" proposed to put a telescope in space. Spitzer's proposal called for a large telescope that would not be hindered by Earth's atmosphere. After lobbying in the 1960s and 70s for such a system to be built, Spitzer's vision ultimately materialized into the Hubble Space Telescope, which was launched on April 24, 1990, by the Space Shuttle \"Discovery\" (STS-31). This was launched due to many efforts by Nancy Grace Roman, \"mother of Hubble\", who was the first Chief of Astronomy and first female executive at NASA. She was a program scientist that worked to convince NASA, Congress, and others that Hubble was \"very well worth doing\".\nThe first operational space telescopes were the American Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, OAO-2 launched in 1968, and the Soviet Orion 1 ultraviolet telescope aboard space station Salyut 1 in 1971.\nAdvantages.\nPerforming astronomy from ground-based observatories on Earth is limited by the filtering and distortion of electromagnetic radiation (scintillation or twinkling) due to the atmosphere. A telescope orbiting Earth outside the atmosphere is subject neither to twinkling nor to light pollution from artificial light sources on Earth. As a result, the angular resolution of space telescopes is often much higher than a ground-based telescope with a similar aperture. Many larger terrestrial telescopes, however, reduce atmospheric effects with adaptive optics.\nSpace-based astronomy is more important for frequency ranges that are outside the optical window and the radio window, the only two wavelength ranges of the electromagnetic spectrum that are not severely attenuated by the atmosphere. Since the Earth's atmosphere blocks X-rays, and also largely blocks infrared and ultraviolet radiation, telescopes and observatories such as the Chandra X-ray Observatory, the James Webb Space Telescope, the XMM-Newton observatory and the (now deactivated) International Ultraviolet Explorer are stationed above the Earth's atmosphere.\nFurthermore atmospheric refraction is proposed to be used as a lense in a so-called \"terrascope\", or gravitational lensing for a telescope using the Solar gravitational lens, both approaches having the potential for extraordenary telescopic resolution.\nDisadvantages.\nSpace telescopes are much more expensive to build than ground-based telescopes. Due to their location, space telescopes are also extremely difficult to maintain. The Hubble Space Telescope was serviced by the Space Shuttle, but most space telescopes cannot be serviced at all.\nFuture of space observatories.\nSatellites have been launched and operated by NASA, ISRO, ESA, CNSA, JAXA and the Soviet space program (later succeeded by Roscosmos of Russia). As of 2022, many space observatories have already completed their missions, while others continue operating on extended time. However, the future availability of space telescopes and observatories depends on timely and sufficient funding. While future space observatories are planned by NASA, JAXA and the CNSA, scientists fear that there would be gaps in coverage that would not be covered immediately by future projects and this would affect research in fundamental science.\nOn 16 January 2023, NASA announced preliminary considerations of several future space telescope programs, including the Great Observatory Technology Maturation Program, Habitable Worlds Observatory, and New Great Observatories.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29007", "revid": "317194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29007", "title": "Saint David", "text": "Patron saint of Wales (c. 500 \u2013 c. 589)\nDavid (; ; c.\u2009500\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009589) was a Welsh Christian prelate who served as Bishop of Mynyw during the 6th century. He is the patron saint of Wales.\nDavid was a native of Wales, and tradition has preserved a large amount of detail about his life. His birth date, however, is uncertain: suggestions range from 462 to 512. He is traditionally believed to be the son of Non and the grandson of Ceredig ap Cunedda, king of Ceredigion. The Welsh annals placed his death 569 years after the birth of Christ, but Phillimore's dating revised this to 601.\nHagiography.\nMany of the traditional tales about David are found in the \"Buchedd Dewi\" (\"Life of David\"), a hagiography written by Rhygyfarch around 1090. Rhygyfarch claimed it was based on documents found in the cathedral archives. Modern historians are sceptical of some of its claims: one of Rhygyfarch's aims was to establish some independence for the Welsh church, which had refused the Roman rite until the 8th century and now sought a metropolitan status equal to that of Canterbury (this may apply to the supposed pilgrimage to Jerusalem where he is said to have been anointed as an archbishop by the patriarch).\nThe tradition that he was born at Henfynyw (Vetus-Menevia) in Ceredigion is not improbable. He became renowned as a teacher and preacher, founding monastic settlements and churches in Wales, Dumnonia, and Brittany. St David's Cathedral stands on the site of the monastery he founded in the Glyn Rhosyn valley of Pembrokeshire. Around 550, he attended the Synod of Brefi, where his eloquence in opposing Pelagianism caused his fellow monks to elect him primate of the region. As such he presided over the synod of Caerleon (the \"Synod of Victory\") around 569.\nHis best-known miracle is said to have taken place when he was preaching in the middle of a large crowd at the Synod of Brefi: the village of Llanddewi Brefi stands on the spot where the ground on which he stood is reputed to have risen up to form a small hill. A white dove, which became his emblem, was seen settling on his shoulder. John Davies notes that one can scarcely \"conceive of any miracle more superfluous\" in that part of Wales than the creation of a new hill. David is said to have denounced Pelagianism during this incident and he was declared archbishop by popular acclaim according to Rhygyfarch, bringing about the retirement of Dubricius. St David's metropolitan status as an archbishopric was later supported by Bernard, Bishop of St David's, Geoffrey of Monmouth, and Gerald of Wales.\nThe Monastic Rule of David prescribed that monks had to pull the plough themselves without draught animals, and must eat only bread with salt and herbs and drink only water getting them the name \"watermen\". The monks spent their evenings in prayer, reading and writing. No personal possessions were allowed: even to say \"my book\" was considered an offence. He lived a simple life and practised asceticism, teaching his followers to refrain from eating meat and drinking beer. His symbol, also the symbol of Wales, is the leek (this inspires a reference in Shakespeare's Henry V, Act IV scene 7):\nFluellen: \"If your Majesty is remembered of it, the Welshmen did good service in a garden where leeks did grow, wearing leeks in their Monmouth caps, which your Majesty knows, to this hour is an honourable badge of the service, and I do believe, your Majesty takes no scorn to wear the leek upon Saint Tavy's day\". King Henry: \"I wear it for a memorable honour; for I am Welsh, you know, good countryman\".\nConnections to Glastonbury.\nRhigyfarch counted Glastonbury Abbey among the churches David founded. Around forty years later William of Malmesbury, believing the Abbey older, said that David visited Glastonbury only to rededicate the Abbey and to donate a travelling altar including a great sapphire. He had had a vision of Jesus who said that \"the church had been dedicated long ago by Himself in honour of His Mother, and it was not seemly that it should be re-dedicated by human hands\". So David instead commissioned an extension to be built to the abbey, east of the Old Church. (The dimensions of this extension given by William were verified archaeologically in 1921.) One manuscript indicates that a sapphire altar was among the items Henry VIII of England confiscated from the abbey during the Dissolution of the Monasteries a thousand years later.\nDeath.\nThough the exact date of his death is not certain, tradition holds that it was on 1 March, which is the date now marked as Saint David's Day. The two most common years given for his death are 601 and 589. The monastery is said to have been \"filled with angels as Christ received his soul\". His last words to his followers were in a sermon on the previous Sunday. The Welsh Life of St David gives these as, \"Arglwyddi, brodyr, a chwiorydd, Byddwch lawen a chadwch eich ffyd a'ch credd, a gwnewch y petheu bychain a glywsoch ac y welsoch gennyf i. A mwynhau a gerdaf y fford yd aeth an tadeu idi\", which translates as, \"Lords, brothers and sisters, Be joyful, and keep your faith and your creed, and do the little things that you have seen me do and heard about. And as for me, I will walk the path that our fathers have trod before us.\" \"Do ye the little things in life\" (\"\"Gwnewch y pethau bychain mewn bywyd\") is today a very well known phrase in Welsh. The same passage states that he died on a Tuesday, from which attempts have been made to calculate the year of his death.\nDavid was buried at St David's Cathedral at St Davids, Pembrokeshire, where his shrine was a popular place of pilgrimage throughout the Middle Ages. During the 10th and 11th centuries the Cathedral was regularly raided by Vikings, who removed the shrine from the church and stripped off the precious metal adornments. In 1275 a new shrine was constructed, the ruined base of which remains to this day (see photo), which was originally surmounted by an ornamental wooden canopy with murals of David, Patrick and Denis. The relics of David and Justinian of Ramsey Island were kept in a portable casket on the stone base of the shrine. It was at this shrine that Edward I came to pray in 1284. During the reformation Bishop Barlow (1536\u201348), a staunch Protestant, stripped the shrine of its jewels and confiscated the relics of David and Justinian.\nVeneration.\nDavid was officially recognised at the Holy See by Pope Callixtus II in 1120, thanks to the work of Bernard, Bishop of St David's. Music for his Liturgy of the Hours has been edited by O. T. Edwards in \"Matins, Lauds and Vespers for St David's Day: the Medieval Office of the Welsh Patron Saint in National Library of Wales MS 20541 E\" (Cambridge, 1990). David was also canonized by the Eastern Orthodox Church at an unknown date.\nOver 50 churches in South Wales were dedicated to him in pre-Reformation days.\nIn the 2004 edition of the Roman Martyrology, David is listed under 1 March with the Latin name \"D\u00e1vus\". He is recognised as bishop of Menevia in Wales who governed his monastery following the example of the Eastern Fathers. Through his leadership, many monks went forth to evangelise Wales, Ireland, Cornwall and Armorica (Brittany and surrounding provinces).\nThe restored Shrine of Saint David was unveiled and rededicated by the Right Reverend Wyn Evans, Bishop of St David's, at a Choral Eucharist on Saint David's Day, 2012.\nA broadside ballad published around 1630 claimed that the Welsh wore a leek in their hats to commemorate a battle fought on St David's Day. So as to recognise friend from foe, the Welsh had pulled up leeks from a garden and put them in their hats, before going on to win the battle.\nSaint David is usually represented standing on a hill with a dove on his shoulder.\nDavid is remembered in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival and on the Episcopal Church liturgical calendar on 1 March.\nReputation.\nHe was not explicitly named by contemporary sources although David may have been criticised without being named by Gildas the first explicit reference is in the Irish Martyrology of Tallaght in the early ninth century.\nDavid's popularity in Wales is shown by the \"Armes Prydein\" of around 930, a poem which prophesied that in the future, when all might seem lost, the \"Cymry\" (Welsh people) would unite behind the standard of David to defeat the English; \"A lluman gl\u00e2n Dewi a ddyrchafant\"\" (\"And they will raise the pure banner of Dewi\").\nDavid is said to have played a role in spreading Christianity on the continent, inspiring numerous place names in Brittany including Saint-Divy, Saint-Yvi and Landivy.\nDavid's life and teachings have inspired a choral work by Welsh composer Karl Jenkins, \"Dewi Sant\". It is a seven-movement work best known for the classical crossover series Adiemus, which intersperses movements reflecting the themes of David's last sermon with those drawing from three Psalms. An oratorio by another Welsh composer Arwel Hughes, also entitled \"Dewi Sant\", was composed in 1950.\nSaint David is also thought to be associated with corpse candles, lights that would warn of the imminent death of a member of the community. The story goes that David prayed for his people to have some warning of their death, so that they could prepare themselves. In a vision, David's wish was granted and told that from then on, people who lived in the land of Dewi Sant (Saint David) \"would be forewarned by the dim light of mysterious tapers when and where the death might be expected\". The colour and size of the tapers indicated whether the person to die would be a woman, man, or child.\nHe was also mentioned in Irish writings in connection with Irish saints.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29010", "revid": "50678112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29010", "title": "Saint George", "text": "Christian saint and martyr (died 303)\nSaint George (; died 23 April 303), also George of Lydda, was an early Christian martyr, born in Cappadocia in Anatolia, who is venerated as a saint in Christianity. According to holy tradition, he was a soldier in the Roman army. Saint George\u2019s mother Saint Polychronia is believed to have come from Syria Palaestina and his father Saint Gerontios is believed to be of Syrian Cappadocian origin. He became a member of the Praetorian Guard for Roman emperor Diocletian, but was executed as part of the Diocletianic persecution. He is one of the most venerated saints, heroes, and megalomartyrs in Christianity, and he has been especially venerated as a military saint since the Crusades. He is also prominently venerated by the Druze, and by some Muslim groups, as a martyr of monotheistic faith.\nIn hagiography, he is immortalised in the legend of Saint George and the Dragon and as one of the most prominent military saints. In Roman Catholicism, he is also venerated as one of the Fourteen Holy Helpers. His feast day, Saint George's Day, is traditionally celebrated on 23 April. Historically, the countries of Portugal, England, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Georgia, Ukraine, Malta, Ethiopia, the regions of Catalonia and Aragon, and the cities of Moscow and Beirut have claimed George as their patron saint, as have several other regions, cities, universities, professions, and organizations. The Church of Saint George in Lydda, now Lod in Israel, has a sarcophagus traditionally believed to contain St. George's relics.\nHistory.\nThe English historian Edward Gibbon (1737 \u2013 1794) argued that George, or at least the legend from which the above is distilled, is based on George of Cappadocia, a notorious 4th-century Arian bishop who was Athanasius of Alexandria's most bitter rival, and that it was he who in time became George of England. This identification is seen as highly improbable. Bishop George was slain by Gentile Greeks for exacting onerous taxes, especially inheritance taxes. J. B. Bury, who edited the 1906 edition of Gibbon's \"The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\", wrote \"this theory of Gibbon's has nothing to be said for it\". He adds that \"the connection of St. George with a dragon-slaying legend does not relegate him to the region of the myth\". Saint George in all likelihood was martyred before the year 290.\nLegend.\nChristian traditions.\nLittle is known about George's life. According to Christian tradition, his father was Saint Gerontios from Cappadocia and his mother Saint Polychronia was from Lydda of Palestine.\nBefore the Aswan Dam was flooded, excavations were carried out in Qasr Ibrim in Nubia. In 1964, a Coptic manuscript was discovered under a column in the ruins of the cathedral of Qasr Ibrim. This manuscript is dated between 350 and 500 and represents the oldest tradition of the legend of St George. According to this text, St George's father Gerontius was from Cappadocia and was in the service of the Roman Empire in Nobatia. His wife Polychronia was a Christian. George is said to have been born during the reign of Aurelian, i.e. between 270 and 275. Polychronia raised George as a Christian and had him baptised in secret, as Gerontius disapproved of this as he was a pagan.\nIt is thought that he was, like his father, a Roman military officer, who was martyred under Roman emperor Diocletian in one of the pre-Constantinian persecutions of the 3rd or early 4th century. Beyond this, early sources give conflicting information.\nHerbert Thurston in \"The Catholic Encyclopedia\" states that, based upon an ancient cultus, narratives of the early pilgrims, and the early dedications of churches to George, going back to the fourth century, \"there seems, therefore, no ground for doubting the historical existence of St. George\", although no faith can be placed in either the details of his history or his alleged exploits.\nThe Diocletianic Persecution of 303, associated with military saints because the persecution was aimed at Christians among the professional soldiers of the Roman army, is of undisputed historicity. According to Donald Attwater,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No historical particulars of his life have survived,\u00a0... The widespread veneration for St George as a soldier saint from early times had its centre in Palestine at Diospolis, now Lydda. St George was apparently martyred there, at the end of the third or the beginning of the fourth century; that is all that can be reasonably surmised about him.\nThe saint's veneration dates to the 5th century with some certainty, and possibly even to the 4th, while the collection of his intercessory miracles gradually began during the medieval times. The story of the defeat of the dragon is not part of Saint George's earliest hagiographies, and seems to have been a later addition.\nThe earliest text which preserves fragments of George's narrative is in a Greek hagiography which is identified by Hippolyte Delehaye of the scholarly Bollandists to be a palimpsest of the 5th century. An earlier work by Eusebius, \"Church History\", written in the 4th century, contributed to the legend but did not name George or provide significant detail. The work of the Bollandists Daniel Papebroch, Jean Bolland, and Godfrey Henschen in the 17th century was one of the first pieces of scholarly research to establish the saint's historicity, via their publications in . Pope Gelasius I stated in 494 that George was among those saints \"whose names are justly reverenced among men, but whose actions are known only to God\".\nThe most complete version, based upon the 5th-century Greek text but in a later form, survives in a translation into Syriac from around 600. Text fragments preserved in the British Library enabled an English translation in 1925.\nIn the Greek tradition, George was born to noble Christian parents, in Cappadocia, Greater Syria. After his father died, his mother, who was from Lydda, in Palestine, Greater Syria, returned with George to her hometown. He went on to become a soldier in the Roman army; but, because of his Christian faith, he was arrested and tortured, \"at or near Lydda, also called Diospolis\"; on the following day, he was paraded and then beheaded, and his body was buried in Lydda. According to other sources, after his mother's death, George travelled to the eastern imperial capital, Nicomedia, where he was persecuted by one \"Dadianus\". In later versions of the Greek legend, this name is rationalised to Diocletian, and George's martyrdom is placed in the Diocletian persecution of AD 303. The setting in Nicomedia is also secondary, and inconsistent with the earliest cults of the saint being located in Diospolis.\nGeorge was executed by decapitation on 23 April 303. A witness of his suffering convinced Empress Alexandra of Rome to become a Christian as well, so she joined George in martyrdom. His body was buried in Diospolis, Palestine where Christians soon came to honour him as a martyr.\nThe Latin (6th century) follows the general course of the Greek legend, but Diocletian here becomes \"Dacian, Emperor of the Persians\". His martyrdom was greatly extended to more than twenty separate tortures over the course of seven years. Over the course of his martyrdom, 40,900 pagans were converted to Christianity, including the Empress Alexandra. When George finally died, the wicked Dacian was carried away in a whirlwind of fire. In later Latin versions, the persecutor is the Roman emperor Decius, or a Roman judge named Dacian serving under Diocletian.\nSt. George and the Dragon.\nThe earliest known record of the legend of Saint George and the Dragon occurs in the 11th century, in a Georgian source, reaching Latin Europe in the 12th century. In the \"Golden Legend\", by 13th-century Archbishop of Genoa Jacobus de Voragine, George's death was at the hands of Dacian, and around the year 287.\nThe tradition tells that a fierce dragon was causing panic at the city of Silene, Libya, at the time George arrived there. To prevent the dragon from devastating people from the city, they gave two sheep each day to the dragon, but when the sheep were not enough they were forced to sacrifice humans, elected by the city's own people. Eventually, the king's daughter was chosen to be sacrificed, and no one was willing to take her place. George saved the girl by slaying the dragon with a lance. The king was so grateful that he offered him treasures as a reward for saving his daughter's life, but George refused it and insisted he give them to the poor. The people of the city were so amazed at what they had witnessed that they all became Christians and were baptised.\nSaint George's encounter with a dragon, as narrated in the \"Golden Legend\", would go on to become very influential, as it remains the most familiar version in English owing to William Caxton's 15th-century translation.\nIn the medieval romances, the lance with which George slew the dragon was named Ascalon, after the Levantine city of Asqalan/Ascalon in southern Palestine, Greater Syria. The name \"Ascalon\" was used by Winston Churchill for his personal aircraft during World War II, according to records at Bletchley Park. Iconography of the horseman with spear overcoming evil was widespread throughout the Christian period.\nMuslim legends.\nGeorge (, or \"\") is included in some Muslim texts as a prophetic figure. The Islamic sources state that he lived among a group of believers who were in direct contact with the last apostles of Jesus. He is described as a rich merchant who opposed the erection of Apollo's statue by Dadan, the king of Mosul. After confronting the king, George was tortured many times to no effect, was imprisoned and was aided by angels. Eventually, he exposed that the idols were possessed by Satan, but was martyred when the city was destroyed by God in a rain of fire.\nMuslim scholars have tried to find a historical connection of the saint due to his popularity. According to Muslim legend, he was martyred under the rule of Diocletian and was killed three times but was resurrected every time. The legend is more developed in the Persian version of al-Tabari wherein he resurrects the dead, makes trees sprout and pillars bear flowers. After one of his deaths, the world is covered by darkness which is lifted only when he is resurrected. He is able to convert the queen but she is put to death. He then prays to God to allow him to die, which is granted.\nAl-Tha\u02bflabi states that George was from Palestine and lived in the times of some disciples of Jesus. He was killed many times by the king of Mosul, and resurrected each time. When the king tried to starve him, he touched a piece of dry wood brought by a woman and turned it green, with varieties of fruits and vegetables growing from it. After his fourth death, the city was burnt along with him. Ibn al-Athir's account of one of his deaths is parallel to the apparent crucifixion of Jesus stating, \"When he died, God sent stormy winds and thunder and lightning and dark clouds, so that darkness fell between heaven and earth, and people were in great wonderment.\" The account adds that the darkness was lifted after his resurrection.\nVeneration.\nHistory.\nA titular church built in Diospolis during the reign of Constantine the Great (r.\u2009306\u00a0\u2013\u00a0337) was consecrated to \"a man of the highest distinction\", according to the \"Church History\" of Eusebius; the name of the \"patron\" was not indicated. The Church of Saint George and Mosque of Al-Khadr located in the city is believed to have housed his relics. Nowadays, in the basement of the monastery, pilgrims find the tomb and fragments of saint's relics.\nThe veneration of George spread from Syria Palaestina through Lebanon to the rest of the Byzantine Empire \u2013 though the martyr is not mentioned in the Syriac \"Breviarium\" \u2013 and the region east of the Black Sea. By the 5th century, the veneration of George had reached the Christian Western Roman Empire, as well: in 494, George was canonised as a saint by Pope Gelasius I, among those \"which are known better to God than to human beings.\"\nThe early cult of the saint was localised in Diospolis (Greek: City of God), in Syria Palaestina. The first description of Diospolis as a pilgrimage site where George's relics were venerated is \"De Situ Terrae Sanctae\" by the archdeacon Theodosius, written between 518 and 530. By the end of the 6th century, the center of his veneration appears to have shifted to Cappadocia. The \"Life\" of Saint Theodore of Sykeon, written in the 7th century, mentions the veneration of the relics of the saint in Cappadocia.\nBy the time of the early Muslim conquests of the mostly Christian and Zoroastrian Middle East, a basilica in Lydda dedicated to George existed. A new church was erected in 1872 and is still standing, where the feast of the translation of the relics of Saint George to that location is celebrated on 3 November each year. In England, he was mentioned among the martyrs by the 8th-century monk Bede. The \"Georgslied\" is an adaptation of his legend in Old High German, composed in the late 9th century. The earliest dedication to the saint in England is a church at Fordington, Dorset, that is mentioned in the will of Alfred the Great. George did not rise to the position of \"patron saint\" of England, however, until the 14th century, and he was still obscured by Edward the Confessor, the traditional patron saint of England, until in 1552 during the reign of Edward VI all saints' banners other than George's were abolished in the English Reformation.\nBelief in an apparition of George heartened the Franks at the Battle of Antioch in 1098, and a similar appearance occurred the following year at Jerusalem. The chivalric military Order of Sant Jordi d'Alfama was established by king Peter the Catholic from the Crown of Aragon in 1201, Republic of Genoa, Kingdom of Hungary (1326), and by Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor.\nEdward III of England put his Order of the Garter under the banner of George, probably in 1348. The chronicler Jean Froissart observed the English invoking George as a battle cry on several occasions during the Hundred Years' War. In his rise as a national saint, George was aided by the very fact that the saint had no legendary connection with England, and no specifically localised shrine, as that of Thomas Becket at Canterbury: \"Consequently, numerous shrines were established during the late fifteenth century,\" Muriel C. McClendon has written, \"and his did not become closely identified with a particular occupation or with the cure of a specific malady.\"\nIn the wake of the Crusades, George became a model of chivalry in works of literature, including medieval romances. In the 13th century, Jacobus de Voragine, Archbishop of Genoa, compiled the \"Legenda Sanctorum\", (\"Readings of the Saints\") also known as \"Legenda Aurea\" (the \"Golden Legend\"). Its 177 chapters (182 in some editions) include the story of George, among many others. After the invention of the printing press, the book became a best seller.\nThe establishment of George as a popular saint and protective giant in the West, that had captured the medieval imagination, was codified by the official elevation of his feast to a \"festum duplex\" at a church council in 1415, on the date that had become associated with his martyrdom, 23 April. There was wide latitude from community to community in celebration of the day across late medieval and early modern England, and no uniform \"national\" celebration elsewhere, a token of the popular and vernacular nature of George's \"cultus\" and its local horizons, supported by a local guild or confraternity under George's protection, or the dedication of a local church. When the English Reformation severely curtailed the saints' days in the calendar, Saint George's Day was among the holidays that continued to be observed.\nIn April 2019, the parish church of S\u00e3o Jorge, in S\u00e3o Jorge, Madeira Island, Portugal, solemnly received the relics of George, patron saint of the parish. During the celebrations the 504th anniversary of its foundation, the relics were brought by the new Bishop of Funchal, D. Nuno Br\u00e1s.\nVeneration in the Levant.\nGeorge is renowned throughout the Middle East, as both saint and prophet. His veneration by Christians and Muslims lies in his composite personality combining several biblical, Quranic and other ancient mythical heroes. Saint George is the patron saint of Lebanese Christians, Palestinian Christians and Syrian Christians.\nWilliam Dalrymple, who reviewed the literature in 1999, tells us that J. E. Hanauer in his 1907 book \"Folklore of the Holy Land: Muslim, Christian and Jewish\" \"mentioned a shrine in the village of Beit Jala, beside Bethlehem, Palestine which at the time was frequented by Christians who regarded it as the birthplace of St. George.\nAccording to Hanauer, in his day the monastery was \"a sort of madhouse. Deranged persons of all the three faiths are taken thither and chained in the court of the chapel, where they are kept for forty days on bread and water, the Eastern Orthodox priest at the head of the establishment now and then reading the Gospel over them, or administering a whipping as the case demands.\" In the 1920s, according to Tawfiq Canaan's \"Mohammedan Saints and Sanctuaries in Palestine\", nothing seemed to have changed, and all three communities were still visiting the shrine and praying together.\"\nDalrymple visited the place in 1995. \"I asked around in the Christian Quarter in Jerusalem, and discovered that the place was very much alive. With all the greatest shrines in the Christian world to choose from, it seemed that when the local Palestinian Christians had a problem \u2013 an illness, or something more complicated \u2013 they preferred to seek the intercession of George in his grubby little shrine at Beit Jala rather than praying at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem or the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem.\" Dalrymple's visit to the shrine of Beit Jala there in the same orthodox church Christians venerate Saint George and Muslims Al-Khadr. And Dalrymple attests to a certain fusion of these two figures with both Christians and Muslims referring to him Al-Khadr and a Muslim happy to have received a cure from the oil from the lamp burning in front of an icon of Saint George. He asked the priest at the shrine \"Do you get many Muslims coming here?\" The priest replied, \"We get hundreds! Almost as many as the Christian pilgrims. Often, when I come in here, I find Muslims all over the floor, in the aisles, up and down.\"\nThe \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" from 1911 quoted the Scottish theologian G. A. Smith in his \"Historic Geography of the Holy Land\" (1894), assuming: \"The Mahommedans who usually identify St. George with the prophet Elijah, at Lydda confound his legend with one about Christ himself. Their name for Antichrist is Dajjal, and they have a tradition that Jesus will slay Antichrist by the gate of Lydda. The notion sprang from an ancient bas-relief of George and the Dragon on the Lydda church. But Dajjal may be derived, by a very common confusion between \"n\" and \"l\", from Dagon, whose name two neighbouring villages bear to this day, while one of the gates of Lydda used to be called the Gate of Dagon.\" The connection of Saint George with a dragon was familiar since the Golden Legend of Jacobus de Voragine and can be traced to the close of the 6th century. At Apollonia\u2013Arsuf or Joppa \u2014 neither of them far from Lydda \u2014 the mythological hero Perseus had slain the sea-monster that threatened the virgin Andromeda, and George, like many other Christian saints, entered into the inheritance of veneration previously enjoyed by a pagan hero as the French archaeologist Charles Simon Clermont-Ganneau wrote. Apollonia\u2013Arsuf was one of several places where pagan imagination placed the exposure of Andromeda. Clermont-Ganneau derives Arsuf from Reseph, the Phoenician deity whom he identifies with Perseus. The myth travelled to Lydda (al-Lydd), where Perseus became George; and from there, mainly by the influence of the crusaders, Perseus and his dragon walked into the medieval European imagination.\nDue to the Christian influence on the Druze faith, two Christian saints have become among the Druze's most venerated figures: Saint George and Saint Elias. Thus, in all the villages inhabited by Druze and Christians in central Mount Lebanon a Christian church or Druze maqam is dedicated to either one of them. According to scholar Ray Jabre Mouawad the Druzes appreciated the two saints for their bravery: Saint George because he confronted the dragon and Saint Elias because he competed with the pagan priests of Baal and won over them. In both cases the explanations provided by Christians is that Druzes were attracted to warrior saints that resemble their own militarised society.\nVeneration in the Muslim world.\nGeorge is described as a prophetic figure in Islamic sources. George is venerated by some Christians and Muslims because of his composite personality combining several biblical, Quranic and other ancient mythical heroes. In some sources, he is identified with Elijah or Mar Elis, George or Mar Jirjus and in others as al-Khidr. The last epithet meaning the \"verdant prophet\", is common to Christian, Muslim, and Druze folk piety. Samuel Curtiss who visited an artificial cave dedicated to him where he is identified with Elijah, reports that childless Muslim women used to visit the shrine to pray for children. Per tradition, he was brought to his place of martyrdom in chains, thus priests of Church of St. George chain the sick especially the mentally ill to a chain for overnight or longer for healing. This is sought after by both Muslims and Christians.\nAccording to Elizabeth Anne Finn's \"Home in the Holy land\" (1866):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;St George killed the dragon in this country; and the place is shown close to Beyroot. Many churches and convents are named after him. The church at Lydda is dedicated to George; so is a convent near Bethlehem, and another small one just opposite the Jaffa Gate, and others beside. The Arabs believe that George can restore mad people to their senses, and to say a person has been sent to St. George's is equivalent to saying he has been sent to a madhouse. It is singular that the Moslem Arabs adopted this veneration for St George, and send their mad people to be cured by him, as well as the Christians, but they commonly call him El Khudder \u2013 The Green Man \u2013 according to their favourite manner of using epithets instead of names.\nThe mosque of Nabi Jurjis, which was restored by Timur in the 14th century, was located in Mosul and supposedly contained the tomb of George. It was destroyed in July 2014 by the occupying Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, who also destroyed the Mosque of the Prophet Sheeth (Seth) and the Mosque of the Prophet Younis (Jonah). The militants claimed that such mosques have become places for apostasy instead of prayer.\nGeorge or \"Hazrat\" Jurjays was the patron saint of Mosul. Along with Theodosius, he was revered by both Christian and Muslim communities of Jazira and Anatolia. The wall paintings of K\u0131rk Dam Alt\u0131 Kilise at Belis\u0131rma dedicated to him are dated between 1282 and 1304. These paintings depict him as a mounted knight appearing between donors including a Georgian lady called Thamar and her husband, the Emir and Consul Basil, while the Seljuk Sultan Mesud II and Byzantine Emperor Andronicus II are also named in the inscriptions.\nA shrine attributed to prophet George can be found in Diyarbak\u0131r, Turkey. Evliya \u00c7elebi states in his \"Seyahatname\" that he visited the tombs of prophet Jonah and prophet George in the city.\nThe reverence for Saint George, who is often identified with Al-Khidr, is deeply integrated into various aspects of Druze culture and religious practices. He is seen as a guardian of the Druze community and a symbol of their enduring faith and resilience. Additionally, Saint George is regarded as a protector and healer in Druze tradition. The story of Saint George slaying the dragon is interpreted allegorically, representing the triumph of good over evil and the protection of the faithful from harm.\nFeast days.\nIn the General Roman Calendar, the feast of George is on 23 April. In the Tridentine calendar of 1568, it was given the rank of \"Semidouble\". In Pope Pius XII's 1955 calendar this rank was reduced to \"Simple\", and in Pope John XXIII's 1960 calendar to a \"Commemoration\". Since Pope Paul VI's 1969 revision, it appears as an \"optional memorial\". In some countries such as England, the rank is higher \u2013 it is a Solemnity (Roman Catholic) or Feast (Church of England): if it falls between Palm Sunday and the Second Sunday of Easter inclusive, it is transferred to the Monday after the Second Sunday of Easter.\nGeorge is very much honoured by the Eastern Orthodox Church, wherein he is referred to as a \"Great Martyr\", and in Oriental Orthodoxy overall. His major feast day is on 23 April (Julian calendar 23 April currently corresponds to Gregorian calendar 6 May). If, however, the feast occurs before Easter, it is celebrated on Easter Monday, instead. The Russian Orthodox Church also celebrates two additional feasts in honour of George. One is on 3 November, commemorating the consecration of a cathedral dedicated to him in Lydda during the reign of Constantine the Great (305\u2013337). When the church was consecrated, the relics of George were transferred there. The other feast is on 26 November for a church dedicated to him in Kyiv, c.\u20091054.\nIn Bulgaria, George's day () is celebrated on 6 May, when it is customary to slaughter and roast a lamb. George's day is also a public holiday.\nIn Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Serbian Orthodox Church refers to George as \"Sveti Djordje\" (\"\u0421\u0432\u0435\u0442\u0438 \u0402\u043e\u0440\u0452\u0435\") or \"Sveti Georgije\" (\"\u0421\u0432\u0435\u0442\u0438 \u0413\u0435\u043e\u0440\u0433\u0438\u0458\u0435\"). George's day (\"\u0110ur\u0111evdan\") is celebrated on 6 May, and is a common \"slava\" (patron saint day) among ethnic Serbs.\nIn Egypt, the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria refers to George () as the \"Prince of Martyrs\" and celebrates his martyrdom on the 23rd of Paremhat of the Coptic calendar, equivalent to 1 May. The Copts also celebrate the consecration of the first church dedicated to him on the seventh of the month of Hatour of the Coptic calendar usually equivalent to 17 November.\nIn India, the Syro-Malabar Catholic Church, one of the oriental catholic churches (Eastern Catholic Churches), and Malankara Orthodox Church venerate George. The main pilgrim centres of the saint in India are at Aruvithura and Puthuppally in Kottayam District, Edathua in Alappuzha district, and Edappally in Ernakulam district of the southern state of Kerala. The saint is commemorated each year from 27 April to 14 May at Edathua. On 27 April after the flag hoisting ceremony by the parish priest, the statue of the saint is taken from one of the altars and placed at the extension of the church to be venerated by devotees till 14 May. The main feast day is 7 May, when the statue of the saint along with other saints is taken in procession around the church. Intercession to George of Edathua is believed to be efficacious in repelling snakes and in curing mental ailments. The sacred relics of George were brought to Antioch from Mardin in 900 and were taken to Kerala, India, from Antioch in 1912 by Mar Dionysius of Vattasseril and kept in the Orthodox seminary at Kundara, Kerala. H.H. Mathews II Catholicos had given the relics to St. George churches at Puthupally, Kottayam District, and Chandanappally, Pathanamthitta district.\nGeorge is remembered in the Church of England with a Festival on 23 April.\nCatholic Church feast days:\nEastern Orthodox Church feast days:\nPatronages.\nGeorge is a highly celebrated saint in both the Western and Eastern Christian churches, and many patronages of Saint George exist throughout the world.\nGeorge is the patron saint of England. His cross forms the national flag of England, which overlaps with Scotland's St Andrew's flag to establish the Union Jack, which is contained in other national flags, such as those of Australia and New Zealand. By the 14th century, the saint had been declared both the patron saint and the protector of the British royal family.\nThe country of Georgia, where devotions to the saint date back to the fourth century, is not technically named after the saint, but is a well-attested back-formation of the English name. However, many towns and cities around the world are. George is one of the patron saints of Georgia. Exactly 365 Orthodox churches in Georgia are named after George according to the number of days in a year. According to legend, George was cut into 365 pieces after he fell in battle and every single piece was spread throughout the entire country.\nGeorge is the patron saint of Ethiopia. He is also the patron saint of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church; George slaying the dragon is one of the most frequently used subjects of icons in the church.\nGeorge is also one of the patron saints of the Mediterranean island of Gozo, part of the Maltese archipelago. In a battle between the Maltese and the Moors, St. George was alleged to have been seen with St. Paul and St. Agatha, protecting the Maltese. George is the protector of the island of Gozo and the patron of Gozo's largest city, Victoria. St. George's Basilica in Victoria is dedicated to him.\nIn Portugal devotions to Saint George date back to the 12th century. Nuno \u00c1lvares Pereira attributed the victory of the Portuguese in the battle of Aljubarrota in 1385 to Saint George. During the reign of D. John I of Portugal (1357\u20131433), Saint George became the patron saint of Portugal and the king ordered that the saint's image on the horse be carried in the \"Corpus Christi\" procession. The flag of George (white with red cross) was also carried by the Portuguese troops and hoisted in the fortresses, during the 15th century. \"Portugal and Saint George\" () became the battle cry of the Portuguese troops, being still today the battle cry of the Portuguese Army, with simply \"Saint George\" () being the battle cry of the Portuguese Navy.\nDevotions to Saint George in Brazil was influenced by the Portuguese colonisation. Saint George is the unofficial patron saint of the city of Rio de Janeiro (the official patron being St. Sebastian) and of the city of (Saint George of ). Additionally, Saint George is the patron saint of the Scouts and Cavalry of the Brazilian Army. In May 2019, he was made official as the patron saint of the State of Rio de Janeiro, next to St. Sebastian. George is also revered in several Afro-Brazilian religions, such as Umbanda, where it is syncretised in the form of the orisha Ogun. However, the connection of George with the Moon is purely Brazilian, with a strong influence of African culture. Tradition says that the spots at the Moon's surface represent the miraculous saint, his horse and his sword slaying the dragon and ready to defend those who seek his help.\nGeorge is also the patron saint of the region of Aragon, in Spain, where his feast day is celebrated on 23 April and is known as \"Aragon Day\", or in Spanish. He became the patron saint of the former Kingdom of Aragon and Crown of Aragon when King Pedro I of Aragon won the battle of Alcoraz in 1096. Legend has it that victory eventually fell to the Christian armies when George appeared to them on the battlefield, helping them secure the conquest of the city of Huesca which had been under the Muslim control of the Taifa of Zaragoza. The battle, which had begun two years earlier in 1094, was long and arduous, and had also taken the life of King Pedro's own father, King Sancho Ramirez. With the Aragonese spirits flagging, it is said that George descending from heaven on his charger and bearing a dark red cross, appeared at the head of the Christian cavalry leading the knights into battle. Interpreting this as a sign of protection from God, the Christian militia returned emboldened to the battle field, more energised than ever, convinced theirs was the banner of the one true faith. Defeated, the Moors rapidly abandoned the battlefield. After two years of being locked down under siege, Huesca fell and King Pedro made his triumphal entry into the city. To celebrate this victory, the cross of St. George was adopted as the personal coat of arms of Huesca and Aragon. After the fall of Huesca, King Pedro aided the military leader and nobleman, Rodrigo D\u00edaz de Vivar, otherwise known as El Cid, with a coalition army from Aragon in the long conquest of the Kingdom of Valencia.\nTales of King Pedro's success at Huesca and in leading his expedition of armies with El Cid against the Moors, under the auspices of George on his standard, spread quickly throughout the realm and beyond the Crown of Aragon, and Christian armies throughout Europe quickly began adopting George as their protector and patron, during all subsequent Crusades to the Holy Land. By 1117, the military order of Templars adopted the Cross of St. George as a simple, unifying sign for international Christian militia embroidered on the left hand side of their tunics, placed above the heart.\nThe Cross of St. George, also known in Aragon as the Cross of Alcoraz, continues to emblazon the flags of all of Aragon's provinces.\nThe association of St. George with chivalry and noblemen in Aragon continued through the ages. Indeed, even the author Miguel de Cervantes, in his book on the adventures of Don Quixote, also mentions the jousting events that took place at the festival of St. George in Zaragoza in Aragon where one could gain international renown in winning a joust against any of the knights of Aragon.\nSaint George () is also the patron saint of Catalonia. His cross appears in many buildings and local flags, including the flag of Barcelona, the Catalan capital, the crest of FC Barcelona as well as in the ancient emblem of the Generalitat. The first references of devotion to Saint George in Catalonia came back to the 11th century. The legend of the saint spread throughout the Principality of Catalonia until, in 1456, he was officially named by the Catalan Courts (the parliament) as the patron saint of Catalonia, and the annual commemoration involving roses began. A Catalan variation to the traditional legend places George's life story as having occurred in the town of Montblanc, near Tarragona. One of the highest civil distinctions awarded by the Government of Catalonia is the St. George's Cross (\"Creu de Sant Jordi\"). The Sant Jordi Awards have been awarded in Barcelona since 1957.\nIn Valencia, Catalonia, the Balearics, Malta, Sicily and Sardinia, the origins of the veneration of St. George go back to their shared history as territories under the Crown of Aragon, thereby sharing the same legend.\nIn 1469, the Order of St. George (Habsburg-Lorraine) was founded in Rome by Emperor Frederick III of Habsburg in the presence of Pope Paul II. The order was continued and promoted by his son, Emperor Maximilian I of Habsburg. The later history of the order was eventful, in particular the order was dissolved by Nazi Germany. Only after the fall of the Iron Curtain and the collapse of communism in Central and Eastern Europe was the order reactivated as a European association in association with Saint George by the Habsburg family.\nArms and flag.\nIt became fashionable in the 15th century, with the full development of classical heraldry, to provide attributed arms to saints and other historical characters from the pre-heraldic ages. The widespread attribution to George of the red cross on a white field in Western art \u2013 \"Saint George's Cross\" \u2013 probably first arose in Genoa, which had adopted this image for their flag and George as their patron saint in the 12th century. A \"vexillum beati Georgii\" is mentioned in the Genovese annals for the year 1198, referring to a red flag with a depiction of George and the dragon. An illumination of this flag is shown in the annals for the year 1227. The Genovese flag with the red cross was used alongside this \"George's flag\", from at least 1218, and was known as the \"insignia cruxata comunis Janue\" (\"cross ensign of the commune of Genoa\"). The flag showing the saint himself was the city's principal war flag, but the flag showing the plain cross was used alongside it in the 1240s.\nIn 1348, Edward III of England chose George as the patron saint of his Order of the Garter, and also took to using a red-on-white cross in the hoist of his Royal Standard.\nThe term \"Saint George's cross\" was at first associated with any plain Greek cross touching the edges of the field (not necessarily red on white). Thomas Fuller in 1647 spoke of \"the plain or St George's cross\" as \"the mother of all the others\" (that is, the other heraldic crosses).\nIconography.\nGeorge is most commonly depicted in early icons, mosaics, and frescos wearing armour contemporary with the depiction, executed in gilding and silver colour, intended to identify him as a Roman soldier. Particularly after the Fall of Constantinople and George's association with the crusades, he is often portrayed mounted upon a white horse. Thus, a 2003 Vatican stamp (issued on the anniversary of the Saint's death) depicts an armoured George atop a white horse, killing the dragon.\nEastern Orthodox iconography also permits George to ride a white horse, as in a Russian icon in the British museum collection.\nIn the south Lebanese village of Mieh Mieh, the Saint George Church for Melkite Catholics commissioned for its 75th jubilee in 2012 (under the guidance of Mgr Sassine Gregoire) the only icons in the world portraying the whole life of George, as well as the scenes of his torture and martyrdom (drawn in eastern iconographic style).\nGeorge may also be portrayed with Saint Demetrius, another early soldier saint. When the two saintly warriors are together and mounted upon horses, they may resemble earthly manifestations of the archangels Michael and Gabriel. Eastern traditions distinguish the two as George rides a white horse and Demetrius a red horse (the red pigment may appear black if it has bituminised). George can also be identified by his spearing a dragon, whereas Demetrius may be spearing a human figure, representing Maximian.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29013", "revid": "665998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29013", "title": "Scientific creationism", "text": ""}
{"id": "29017", "revid": "47033785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29017", "title": "Sebastian Castello", "text": "Sebastian Castello may refer:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "29018", "revid": "3409455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29018", "title": "Sarah Lawrence (disambiguation)", "text": "Sarah Lawrence is a Liberal Arts college in Westchester County, New York.\nSarah Lawrence may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "29020", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29020", "title": "Spaniard", "text": ""}
{"id": "29021", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29021", "title": "Secular humanism", "text": "Life stance that embraces human reason, secular ethics, and philosophical naturalism\nSecular humanism is a philosophy, belief system, or life stance that embraces human reason, logic, secular ethics, and philosophical naturalism, while specifically rejecting religious dogma, supernaturalism, and superstition as the basis of morality and decision-making. \nSecular humanism posits that human beings are capable of being ethical and moral without religion or belief in a deity. It does not, however, assume that humans are either inherently good or evil, nor does it present humans as being superior to nature. Rather, the humanist life stance emphasizes the unique responsibility facing humanity and the ethical consequences of human decisions. Fundamental to the concept of secular humanism is the strongly held viewpoint that ideology\u2014be it religious or political\u2014must be thoroughly examined by each individual and not simply accepted or rejected on faith. Along with this, an essential part of secular humanism is a continually adapting search for truth, primarily through science and philosophy. Many secular humanists derive their moral codes from a philosophy of utilitarianism, ethical naturalism, or evolutionary ethics, and some advocate a science of morality.\nHumanists International, founded by Julian Huxley and Jaap van Praag, is the world union of more than one hundred humanist, rationalist, irreligious, atheist, Bright, secular, Ethical Culture, and freethought organizations in more than 40 countries. The \"Happy Human\" is recognized as the official symbol of humanism internationally, used by secular humanist organizations in every part of the world. \nThe term itself is not uncontested. \"Secular humanism\" is not a universally used phrase, and is most prevalent in the United States; it's considered an Americanism, as most European, African, and Asian countries use \"humanism\" without an adjective to refer to the same concept. Some international use of qualifying adjectives, including \"secular\" and \"religious\", has also been based on \"false etymological and historical assumptions\" about humanism. Humanist commentators have remarked that \"'hyphenated humanism' easily becomes more about the adjective than its referent\".\nTerminology.\nThe meaning of the phrase \"secular humanism\" has evolved over time. The phrase has been used since at least the 1930s by Anglican priests, and in 1943 the Archbishop of Canterbury, William Temple, was reported as warning that the \"Christian tradition... was in danger of being undermined by a 'Secular Humanism' which hoped to retain Christian values without Christian faith.\" During the 1960s and 1970s the term was embraced by some humanists who considered themselves anti-religious, as well as those who, although not critical of religion in its various guises, preferred a non-religious approach. The release in 1980 of \"A Secular Humanist Declaration\" by the newly formed Council for Democratic and Secular Humanism (CODESH, later the Council for Secular Humanism, which with CSICOP in 1991 jointly formed the Center for Inquiry and in 2015 both ceased separate operations, becoming CFI programs) gave secular humanism an organisational identity within the United States; but no overall organisation involved currently uses a name featuring \"secular humanism\".\nHowever, many adherents of the approach reject the use of the word \"secular\" as obfuscating and confusing, and consider that the term \"secular humanism\" has been \"demonized by the religious right... All too often secular humanism is reduced to a sterile outlook consisting of little more than secularism slightly broadened by academic ethics. This kind of 'hyphenated humanism' easily becomes more about the adjective than its referent\". Adherents of this view, including Humanists International and the American Humanist Association, consider that the unmodified but capitalized word Humanism should be used. The endorsement by the International Humanist and Ethical Union (IHEU) of the capitalization of the word \"Humanism\", and the dropping of any adjective such as \"secular\", is quite recent. The American Humanist Association began to adopt this view in 1973, and the IHEU formally endorsed the position in 1989. In 2002 the IHEU General Assembly unanimously adopted the Amsterdam Declaration, which represents the official defining statement of World Humanism for Humanists. This declaration makes exclusive use of capitalized \"Humanist\" and \"Humanism\", which is consistent with IHEU's general practice and recommendations for promoting a unified Humanist identity. To further promote Humanist identity, these words are also free of any adjectives, as recommended by prominent members of IHEU. Such usage is not universal among IHEU member organizations, though most of them do observe these conventions.\nHistory.\nThe historical use of the term humanism (reflected in some current academic usage), is related to the writings of pre-Socratic philosophers. These writings were lost to European societies until Renaissance scholars rediscovered them through Muslim sources and translated them from Arabic into European languages. Thus the term humanist can mean a humanities scholar, as well as refer to The Enlightenment/ Renaissance intellectuals, and those who have agreement with the pre-Socratics, as distinct from the later secular humanists.\nAs a term, \"humanism\" did not enter into the English language until the 19th century and indicates the difference between the Renaissance humanist scholars on the one hand and the secular humanist movements of the 20th and 21st centuries on the other, which are explicitly non-religious or atheistic. \nSecularism.\nIn 1851 George Holyoake coined the term \"secularism\" to describe \"a form of opinion which concerns itself only with questions, the issues of which can be tested by the experience of this life\".\nThe modern secular movement coalesced around Holyoake, Charles Bradlaugh and their intellectual circle. The first secular society, the Leicester Secular Society, dates from 1851. Similar regional societies came together to form the National Secular Society in 1866.\nPositivism and the Church of Humanity.\nHolyoake's secularism was strongly influenced by Auguste Comte, the founder of positivism and of modern sociology. Comte believed human history would progress in a \"law of three stages\" from a theological phase, to the \"metaphysical\", toward a fully rational \"positivist\" society. In later life, Comte had attempted to introduce a \"religion of humanity\" in light of growing anti-religious sentiment and social malaise in revolutionary France. This religion would necessarily fulfil the functional, cohesive role that supernatural religion once served.\nAlthough Comte's religious movement was unsuccessful in France, the positivist philosophy of science itself played a major role in the proliferation of secular organizations in the 19th century in England. Richard Congreve visited Paris shortly after the French Revolution of 1848 where he met Auguste Comte and was heavily influenced by his positivist system. He founded the London Positivist Society in 1867, which attracted Frederic Harrison, Edward Spencer Beesly, Vernon Lushington, and James Cotter Morison amongst others.\nIn 1878, the Society established the Church of Humanity under Congreve's direction. There they introduced sacraments of the Religion of Humanity and published a co-operative translation of Comte's Positive Polity. When Congreve repudiated their Paris co-religionists in 1878, Beesly, Harrison, Bridges, and others formed their own positivist society, with Beesly as president, and opened a rival centre, Newton Hall, in a courtyard off Fleet Street.\nThe New York City version of the church was established by English immigrant Henry Edger. The American version of the \"Church of Humanity\" was largely modeled on the English church. Like the English version, it was not atheistic and had sermons and sacramental rites. At times the services included readings from conventional religious works like the Book of Isaiah. It was not as significant as the church in England, but did include several educated people.\nEthical movement.\nAnother important precursor was the ethical movement of the 19th century. The South Place Ethical Society was founded in 1793 as the South Place Chapel on Finsbury Square, on the edge of the City of London, and in the early nineteenth century was known as \"a radical gathering-place\". At that point it was a Unitarian chapel, and that movement, like Quakers, supported female equality. Under the leadership of Reverend William Johnson Fox, it lent its pulpit to activists such as Anna Wheeler, one of the first women to campaign for feminism at public meetings in England, who spoke in 1829 on \"rights of women\". In later decades, the chapel changed its name to the South Place Ethical Society, now the Conway Hall Ethical Society. Today Conway Hall explicitly identifies itself as a humanist organisation, albeit one primarily focused on concerts, events, and the maintenance of its humanist library and archives. It bills itself as \"The landmark of London's independent intellectual, political and cultural life.\"\nIn America, the ethical movement was propounded by Felix Adler, who established the New York Society for Ethical Culture in 1877. By 1886, similar societies had sprouted up in Philadelphia, Chicago and St. Louis.\nThese societies all adopted the same statement of principles:\nIn effect, the movement responded to the religious crisis of the time by replacing theology with unadulterated morality. It aimed to \"disentangle moral ideas from religious doctrines, metaphysical systems, and ethical theories, and to make them an independent force in personal life and social relations.\" Adler was also particularly critical of the religious emphasis on creed, believing it to be the source of sectarian bigotry. He therefore attempted to provide a universal fellowship devoid of ritual and ceremony, for those who would otherwise be divided by creeds. Although the organisation was overwhelmingly made up of (and entirely led by) atheists, and were many of the same people as in the secular movement, Ethical organisations at that time publicly avoided debate about religious beliefs, publicly advocating neither atheism nor theism, agnosticism nor deism, instead stressing \"deed without creed\" and a \"purely human basis\" for morality.\nThe first ethical society along these lines in Britain was founded in 1886. By 1896 the four London societies formed the Union of Ethical Societies, and between 1905 and 1910 there were over fifty societies in Great Britain, seventeen of which were affiliated with the Union. The Union of Ethical Societies would later incorporate as the Ethical Union, a registered charity, in 1928. Under the leadership of Harold Blackham, it renamed itself the British Humanist Association in 1967. It became the Humanists UK in 2017.\nSecular humanism.\nIn the 1930s, \"humanism\" was generally used in a religious sense by the Ethical movement in the United States, and not much favoured among the non-religious in Britain. Yet \"it was from the Ethical movement that the non-religious philosophical sense of \"Humanism\" gradually emerged in Britain, and it was from the convergence of the Ethical and Rationalist movements that this sense of \"Humanism\" eventually prevailed throughout the Freethought movement\".\nAs an organised movement in its own right, humanism emerged from vibrant non-religious movements of the 18th and 19th centuries such as the Owenites, Ethical Culture, the freethinkers, secularists, and positivists, as well as a few non-religious radical Unitarian congregations. The first Humanist Manifesto announced the humanist movement by that name to the public in 1933, following work at the University of Chicago across the 1920s. The American Humanist Association was incorporated as an Illinois non-profit organization in 1943. The International Humanist and Ethical Union was founded in 1952, when a gathering of world Humanists met under the leadership of Sir Julian Huxley. The British Humanist Association took that name in 1967, but had developed from the Union of Ethical Societies which had been founded by Stanton Coit in 1896.\nManifestos and declarations.\nHumanists have put together various Humanist Manifestos, in attempts to unify the Humanist identity.\nThe original signers of the first Humanist Manifesto of 1933, declared themselves to be religious humanists. Because, in their view, traditional religions were failing to meet the needs of their day, the signers of 1933 declared it a necessity to establish a religion that was a dynamic force to meet the needs of the day. However, this \"religion\" did not profess a belief in any god. Since then two additional Manifestos were written to replace the first. In the Preface of Humanist Manifesto II, in 1973, the authors Paul Kurtz and Edwin H. Wilson assert that faith and knowledge are required for a hopeful vision for the future. Manifesto II references a section on religion and states traditional religion renders a disservice to humanity. Manifesto\u00a0II recognizes the following groups to be part of their naturalistic philosophy: \"scientific\", \"ethical\", \"democratic\", \"religious\", and \"Marxist\" humanism.\nHumanists International.\nHumanist beliefs and values are as old as civilization and have a history in most societies around the world. Modern humanism is the culmination of these long traditions of reasoning about meaning and ethics, the source of inspiration for many of the world\u2019s great thinkers, artists, and humanitarians, and is interwoven with the rise of modern science. \u2014\u200aHumanists International, Amsterdam Declaration 2022\nThe Amsterdam Declaration is the name of an attempt by humanist organisations around the world to define humanism. First passed in 1952 at the inaugural general assembly of Humanists International (then known as the International Humanist and Ethical Union), it was subsequently revised in 2002 and again in 2022. The wording of the 1952 declaration reflected some contemporary anxieties relating to the Cold War, while the 2002 Declaration was an attempt to substantially simplify the statement and make it less time-bound and more internationally accessible. \nThe 2022 declaration mentions religion only once, and explains that its purpose is to \"make people aware of these essentials of the humanist worldview,\" which it details under four headings.\nSince 1996, all member organisations of Humanist International have been required to accept the organisation's definition of humanism, which is as follows:\nHumanism is a democratic and ethical life stance, which affirms that human beings have the right and responsibility to give meaning and shape to their own lives. It stands for the building of a more humane society through an ethic based on human and other natural values in the spirit of reason and free inquiry through human capabilities. It is not theistic, and it does not accept supernatural views of reality.\nTraditionally, Humanists International policy also encouraged its members to take steps to promote a uniform global identity for humanism, including by discouraging the use of \"hyphenated adjectives\" (such as \"secular\" humanism or \"religious humanism\") and instead refer simply to \"Humanism\" with a capital H, and through global usage of the Happy Human symbol to represent humanism.\nCouncil for Secular Humanism.\nAccording to the Council for Secular Humanism, within the United States, the term \"secular humanism\" describes a world view with the following elements and principles:\n\"A Secular Humanist Declaration\" was issued in 1980 by the Council for Secular Humanism's predecessor, CODESH. It lays out ten ideals: Free inquiry as opposed to censorship and imposition of belief; separation of church and state; the ideal of freedom from religious control and from jingoistic government control; ethics based on critical intelligence rather than that deduced from religious belief; moral education; religious skepticism; reason; a belief in science and technology as the best way of understanding the world; evolution; and education as the essential method of building humane, free, and democratic societies.\nAmerican Humanist Association.\nA general outline of Humanism is also set out in the \"Humanist Manifesto\" prepared by the American Humanist Association.\nEthics and relationship to religious belief.\nIn the 20th and 21st centuries, members of Humanist organizations have disagreed as to whether Humanism is a religion. They categorize themselves in one of three ways. Religious (or ethical) humanism, in the tradition of the earliest humanist organizations in the UK and US, attempts to fulfil the traditional social role of religion. Contemporary use of the word \"religious\" did not have the same connotations as its today. Secular humanism considers all forms of religion, including religious humanism, to be superseded.\nHowever, distinctions between \"ethical\" and \"secular\" humanists are for the most part historical, and practically meaningless in the present day or to contemporary individuals who identify with humanism. Since the mid-20th century, the development of new concepts such as the \"life stance\" (which encompasses both humanist views and religious outlooks) has defused this conflict. Most humanist organisations identify with \"humanism\" without a pre-modifier (such a \"secular\" or \"ethical\") and assert humanism as a non-religious philosophy or approach to life. Generally speaking, all humanists, including religious humanists, reject deference to supernatural beliefs; promote the practical, methodological naturalism of science; and largely endorse the stance of metaphysical naturalism. The result is an approach to issues in a secular way. Humanism addresses ethics without reference to the supernatural as well, attesting that ethics is a human enterprise (see naturalistic ethics).\nAccounts of humanism are also careful not to treat secular humanism analogously with religions, which implies a community who strictly attempt to adhere to the same obligations or beliefs. Holding a secular humanist philosophy does not prescribe a specific theory of morality or code of ethics. As stated by the Council for Secular Humanism,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecular humanists affirm that with the present state of scientific knowledge, dogmatic belief in an absolutist moral or ethical system (e.g. Kantian, Islamic, Christian) is unreasonable. However, it affirms that individuals engaging in rational moral/ethical deliberations can discover some universal \"objective standards\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMany humanists adopt principles of the Golden Rule. Some believe that universal moral standards are required for the proper functioning of society. However, they believe such necessary universality can and should be achieved by developing a richer notion of morality through reason, experience and scientific inquiry rather than through faith in a supernatural realm or source.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Fundamentalists correctly perceive that universal moral standards are required for the proper functioning of society. But they erroneously believe that God is the only possible source of such standards. Philosophers as diverse as Plato, Immanuel Kant, John Stuart Mill, George Edward Moore, and John Rawls have demonstrated that it is possible to have a universal morality without God. Contrary to what the fundamentalists would have us believe, then, what our society really needs is not more religion but a richer notion of the nature of morality.\nHumanists Andrew Copson and Alice Roberts, in their casual introduction to humanism \"The Little Book of Humanism\", propose that a distinctive aspect of humanist morality is its recognition that every moral situation is in some sense unique, and so potentially calls for different approach than the last (i.e. the ability to vacillate situationally between consequentialism and virtue ethics). In the book, they quote from Kristen Bell's advocacy of moral particularism as developed by Jonathan Dancy.\nHumanism is compatible with atheism, and by definition usually entails at least a form of weak or agnostic atheism, and agnosticism,\nbut being atheist or agnostic does not automatically make one a humanist. Nevertheless, humanism is diametrically opposed to state atheism.\nAccording to Paul Kurtz, considered by some to be the founder of the American secular humanist movement, one of the differences between Marxist\u2013Leninist atheists and humanists is the latter's commitment to \"human freedom and democracy\" while stating that the militant atheism of the Soviet Union consistently violated basic human rights.\nKurtz also stated that the \"defense of religious liberty is as precious to the humanist as are the rights of the believers\". Greg M. Epstein states that, \"modern, organized Humanism began, in the minds of its founders, as nothing more nor less than a religion without a God\".\nMany humanists address ethics from the point of view of ethical naturalism, and some support an actual science of morality.\nModern context.\nSecular humanist organizations are found in all parts of the world. Those who call themselves humanists are estimated to number between four and five million people worldwide in 31 countries, but there is uncertainty because of the lack of universal definition throughout censuses. Humanism is a non-theistic belief system and, as such, it could be a sub-category of \"Religion\" only if that term is defined to mean \"Religion and (any) belief system\". This is the case in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on freedom of religion \"and\" beliefs. Many national censuses contentiously define Humanism as a further sub-category of the sub-category \"No Religion\", which typically includes atheist, rationalist and agnostic thought. In England, Wales 25% of people specify that they have 'No religion' up from 15% in 2001 and in Australia, around 30% of the population specifies \"No Religion\" in the national census. In the US, the decennial census does not inquire about religious affiliation or its lack; surveys report the figure at roughly 13%. In the 2001 Canadian census, 16.5% of the populace reported having no religious affiliation. In the 2011 Scottish census, 37% stated they had no religion up from 28% in 2001. One of the largest Humanist organizations in the world (relative to population) is Norway's \"Human-Etisk Forbund\", which had over 86,000 members out of a population of around 4.6 million in 2013 \u2013 approximately 2% of the population.\nThe International Humanist and Ethical Union (IHEU) is the worldwide umbrella organization for those adhering to the Humanist life stance. It represents the views of over three million Humanists organized in over 100 national organizations in 30 countries. Originally based in the Netherlands, the IHEU now operates from London. Some regional groups that adhere to variants of the Humanist life stance, such as the humanist subgroup of the Unitarian Universalist Association, do not belong to the IHEU. Although the European Humanist Federation is also separate from the IHEU, the two organisations work together and share an agreed protocol.\nStarting in the mid-20th century, religious fundamentalists and the religious right began using the term \"secular humanism\" in hostile fashion. Francis A. Schaeffer, an American theologian based in Switzerland, seizing upon the exclusion of the divine from most humanist writings, argued that rampant secular humanism would lead to moral relativism and ethical bankruptcy in his book \"How Should We Then Live: The Rise and Decline of Western Thought and Culture\" (1976). Schaeffer portrayed secular humanism as pernicious and diabolical, and warned it would undermine the moral and spiritual tablet of America. His themes have been very widely repeated in Fundamentalist preaching in North America. Toumey (1993) found that secular humanism is typically portrayed as a vast evil conspiracy, deceitful and immoral, responsible for feminism, pornography, abortion, homosexuality, and New Age spirituality. In certain areas of the world, Humanism finds itself in conflict with religious fundamentalism, especially over the issue of the separation of church and state. Many Humanists see religions as superstitious, repressive and closed-minded, while religious fundamentalists may see Humanists as a threat to the values set out in their sacred texts.\nIn recent years, humanists such as Dwight Gilbert Jones and R. Joseph Hoffmann have decried the over-association of Humanism with affirmations of non-belief and atheism. Jones cites a lack of new ideas being presented or debated outside of secularism, while Hoffmann is unequivocal: \"I regard the use of the term 'humanism' to mean secular humanism or atheism to be one of the greatest tragedies of twentieth century movementology, perpetrated by second-class minds and perpetuated by third-class polemicists and village atheists. The attempt to sever humanism from the religious and the spiritual was a flatfooted, largely American way of taking on the religious right. It lacked finesse, subtlety, and the European sense of history.\"\nHumanist celebrations.\nHumanism, as a term which describes a person's non-religious views, comes with no obligation to celebrate or revere specific days in the year as a religion would. As a result, individual humanists choose of their own accord whether to take part in prevailing national holidays where they live. For example, humanists in Europe and North America typically celebrate holidays, such as Christmas, but as secular holidays rather than Christian festivals. Other humanists choose to mark the winter and summer solstices and the equinoxes. European humanists may often emphasise the fact that human beings have found reasons to celebrate at these times in the Northern Hemisphere for thousands of years before the arrival of Christianity. Humanists may also identify culturally with religious traditions and holidays celebrated in their family in the community. For example, humanists with a Jewish identity will often celebrate most Jewish holidays in a secular manner.\nHumanists International endorses World Humanist Day (21 June), Darwin Day (12 February), Human Rights Day (10 December) and HumanLight (23 December) as official days of humanist celebration, though none are yet a public holiday. Humanist organisations typically organise events around these dates which draw attention to their programmes of activities.\nIn many countries, humanist celebrants (officiants) perform celebrancy services for weddings, funerals, child namings, coming of age ceremonies, and other rituals. In countries like Scotland and Norway, these are extremely popular. In Scotland, more people have a humanist wedding than are married by any religious denomination, including Scotland's largest churches; over 20% of Scottish weddings are humanist. In Norway, over 20% of young people choose humanist coming-of-age ceremonies every year.\nLegal mentions in the United States.\nThe issue of whether and in what sense secular humanism might be considered a religion, and what the implications of this would be, has become the subject of legal maneuvering and political debate in the United States. The first reference to \"secular humanism\" in a US legal context was in 1961, although church-state separation lawyer Leo Pfeffer had referred to it in his 1958 book, \"Creeds in Competition\".\nHatch amendment.\nThe Education for Economic Security Act of 1984 included a section, Section 20 U.S.C.A. 4059, which initially read: \"Grants under this subchapter ['Magnet School Assistance'] may not be used for consultants, for transportation or for any activity which does not augment academic improvement.\" With no public notice, Senator Orrin Hatch tacked onto the proposed exclusionary subsection the words \"or for any course of instruction the substance of which is Secular Humanism\". Implementation of this provision ran into practical problems because neither the Senator's staff, nor the Senate's Committee on Labor and Human Resources, nor the Department of Justice could propose a definition of what would constitute a \"course of instruction the substance of which is Secular Humanism\". So, this determination was left up to local school boards. The provision provoked a storm of controversy which within a year led Senator Hatch to propose, and Congress to pass, an amendment to delete from the statute all reference to secular humanism. While this episode did not dissuade fundamentalists from continuing to object to what they regarded as the \"teaching of Secular Humanism\", it did point out the vagueness of the claim.\nCase law.\n\"Torcaso v. Watkins\".\nThe phrase \"secular humanism\" became prominent after it was used in the United States Supreme Court case \"Torcaso v. Watkins.\" In the 1961 decision, Justice Hugo Black commented in a footnote, \"Among religions in this country which do not teach what would generally be considered a belief in the existence of God are Buddhism, Taoism, Ethical Culture, Secular Humanism, and others.\"\n\"Fellowship of Humanity v. County of Alameda\".\nThe footnote in \"Torcaso v. Watkins\" referenced \"Fellowship of Humanity v. County of Alameda\", a 1957 case in which an organization of humanists sought a tax exemption on the ground that they used their property \"solely and exclusively for religious worship.\" Despite the group's non-theistic beliefs, the court determined that the activities of the \"Fellowship of Humanity\", which included weekly Sunday meetings, were analogous to the activities of theistic churches and thus entitled to an exemption. The \"Fellowship of Humanity\" case itself referred to \"Humanism\" but did not mention the term \"secular humanism\". Nonetheless, this case was cited by Justice Black to justify the inclusion of secular humanism in the list of religions in his note. Presumably Justice Black added the word \"secular\" to emphasize the non-theistic nature of the \"Fellowship of Humanity\" and distinguish their brand of humanism from that associated with, for example, Christian humanism.\n\"Washington Ethical Society v. District of Columbia\".\nAnother case alluded to in the \"Torcaso v. Watkins\" footnote, and said by some to have established secular humanism as a religion under the law, is the 1957 tax case of \"\", 249 F.2d 127 (D.C. Cir. 1957). The \"Washington Ethical Society\" functions much like a church, but regards itself as a non-theistic religious institution, honoring the importance of ethical living without mandating a belief in a supernatural origin for ethics. The case involved denial of the Society's application for tax exemption as a religious organization. The U.S. Court of Appeals reversed the Tax Court's ruling, defined the Society as a religious organization, and granted its tax exemption. The Society terms its practice Ethical Culture. Though Ethical Culture is based on a humanist philosophy, it is regarded by some as a type of religious humanism. Hence, it would seem most accurate to say that this case affirmed that a religion need not be theistic to qualify as a religion under the law, rather than asserting that it established generic secular humanism as a religion.\nIn the cases of both the \"Fellowship of Humanity\" and the \"Washington Ethical Society,\" the court decisions turned not so much on the particular beliefs of practitioners as on the function and form of the practice being similar to the function and form of the practices in other religious institutions.\n\"Peloza v. Capistrano School District\".\nThe implication in Justice Black's footnote that secular humanism is a religion has been seized upon by religious opponents of the teaching of evolution, who have made the argument that teaching evolution amounts to teaching a religious idea. The claim that secular humanism could be considered a religion for legal purposes was examined by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in \"Peloza v. Capistrano School District\", 37 F.3d 517 (9th Cir. 1994), \"cert. denied\", 515 U.S. 1173 (1995). In this case, a science teacher argued that, by requiring him to teach evolution, his school district was forcing him to teach the \"religion\" of secular humanism. The Court responded, \"We reject this claim because neither the Supreme Court, nor this circuit, has ever held that evolutionism or Secular Humanism are 'religions' for Establishment Clause purposes.\" The Supreme Court refused to review the case.\nThe decision in a subsequent case, \"Kalka v. Hawk et al.\", offered this commentary:\nThe Court's statement in \"Torcaso\" does not stand for the proposition that humanism, no matter in what form and no matter how practiced, amounts to a religion under the First Amendment. The Court offered no test for determining what system of beliefs qualified as a \"religion\" under the First Amendment. The most one may read into the \"Torcaso\" footnote is the idea that a particular non-theistic group calling itself the \"Fellowship of Humanity\" qualified as a religious organization under California law.\nControversy.\nDecisions about tax status have been based on whether an organization functions like a church. On the other hand, Establishment Clause cases turn on whether the ideas or symbols involved are inherently religious. An organization can function like a church while advocating beliefs that are not necessarily inherently religious. Author Marci Hamilton has pointed out: \"Moreover, the debate is not between secularists and the religious. The debate is believers and non-believers on the one side debating believers and non-believers on the other side. You've got citizens who are [...] of faith who believe in the separation of church and state and you have a set of believers who do not believe in the separation of church and state.\"\nIn the 1987 case of \"Smith v. Board of School Commissioners of Mobile County\" a group of plaintiffs brought a case alleging that the school system was teaching the tenets of an anti-religious religion called \"secular humanism\" in violation of the Establishment Clause. The complainants asked that 44 different elementary through high school level textbooks (including books on home economics, social science and literature) be removed from the curriculum. Federal judge William Brevard Hand ruled for the plaintiffs agreeing that the books promoted secular humanism, which he ruled to be a religion. The Eleventh Circuit Court unanimously reversed him, with Judge Frank stating that Hand held a \"misconception of the relationship between church and state mandated by the establishment clause,\" commenting also that the textbooks did not show \"an attitude antagonistic to theistic belief. The message conveyed by these textbooks is one of neutrality: the textbooks neither endorse theistic religion as a system of belief, nor discredit it\".\nManifestos.\nThere are numerous Humanist Manifestos and Declarations, including the following:\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29025", "revid": "14893258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29025", "title": "Sega Master", "text": ""}
