{"id": "29922", "revid": "43320205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29922", "title": "Thomas Jefferson", "text": "Founding Father, U.S. president from 1801 to 1809\nThomas Jefferson (April 13\u00a0[O.S. April 2], 1743\u00a0\u2013 July 4, 1826) was an American Founding Father and the third president of the United States from 1801 to 1809. He was the primary author of the Declaration of Independence. Jefferson was the nation's first U.S. secretary of state under George Washington and then the nation's second vice president under John Adams. Jefferson was a leading proponent of democracy, republicanism, and natural rights, and he produced formative documents and decisions at the state, national, and international levels.\nJefferson was born into the Colony of Virginia's planter class, dependent on slave labor. During the American Revolution, Jefferson represented Virginia in the Second Continental Congress, which unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence. Jefferson's advocacy for individual rights, including freedom of thought, speech, and religion, helped shape the ideological foundations of the revolution. This inspired the Thirteen Colonies in their revolutionary fight for independence, which culminated in the establishment of the United States as a free and sovereign nation.\nJefferson served as the second governor of revolutionary Virginia from 1779 to 1781. In 1785, Congress appointed Jefferson as U.S. Minister to France, where he served from 1785 to 1789. President Washington then appointed Jefferson the nation's first secretary of state, where he served from 1790 to 1793. In 1792, Jefferson and political ally James Madison organized the Democratic-Republican Party to oppose the Federalist Party during the formation of the nation's First Party System. Jefferson and Federalist John Adams became both personal friends and political rivals. In the 1796 U.S. presidential election between the two, Jefferson came in second, which made him Adams' vice president under the electoral laws of the time. Four years later, in the 1800 presidential election, Jefferson again challenged Adams and won the presidency. In 1804, Jefferson was reelected overwhelmingly to a second term, crushing his main opposition, the Federalists' Charles Cotesworth Pinckney of South Carolina.\nJefferson's presidency assertively defended the nation's shipping and trade interests against Barbary pirates and aggressive British trade policies, promoted a western expansionist policy with the Louisiana Purchase, which doubled the nation's geographic size, and reduced military forces and expenditures following successful negotiations with France. In his second presidential term, Jefferson was beset by difficulties at home, including the trial of his former vice president Aaron Burr. In 1807, Jefferson implemented the Embargo Act to defend the nation's industries from British threats to U.S. shipping, limit foreign trade, and stimulate the birth of the American manufacturing.\nJefferson is ranked among the upper tier of U.S. presidents both by scholars and in public opinion. Presidential scholars and historians have praised Jefferson's advocacy of religious freedom and tolerance, his peaceful acquisition of the Louisiana Territory from France, and his leadership in supporting the Lewis and Clark Expedition. They acknowledge his lifelong ownership of large numbers of slaves, but offer varying interpretations of his views on and relationship with slavery.\nEarly life and education.\nJefferson was born on April 13, 1743 (April 2, 1743, Old Style, Julian calendar), at the family's Shadwell Plantation in the Colony of Virginia, then one of the Thirteen Colonies of British America. He was the third of ten children. His father, Peter Jefferson, was a planter and surveyor; his mother was Jane Randolph. Peter Jefferson moved his family to Tuckahoe Plantation in 1745 following the death of William Randolph III, the plantation's owner and Jefferson's friend, who in his will had named Peter guardian of Randolph's children. The Jeffersons returned to Shadwell before October 1753.\nJefferson began his education together with the Randolph children at Tuckahoe under tutors. Thomas' father Peter, who was self-taught and regretted not having a formal education, entered Thomas into an English school at age five. In 1752, at age nine, he attended a local school run by a Presbyterian minister and also began studying the natural world, which he grew to love. He studied Latin, Greek, and French, and began learning to ride horses. Thomas read books from his father's modest library. He was taught from 1758 to 1760 by the Reverend James Maury near Gordonsville, Virginia, where he studied history, science, and the classics while boarding with Maury's family. Jefferson came to know various American Indians, including Cherokee chief Ostenaco, who often stopped at Shadwell to visit on their way to Williamsburg to trade. In Williamsburg, the young Jefferson met and came to admire Patrick Henry.\nThomas's father died in 1757, and his estate was divided between his sons, Thomas and Randolph. John Harvie Sr. became 14-year-old Thomas' guardian. Thomas inherited approximately , which included the land on which he later built Monticello in 1772.\nIn 1761, at the age of eighteen, Jefferson entered the College of William &amp; Mary in Williamsburg, where he studied mathematics and philosophy with William Small. Under Small's tutelage, Jefferson encountered the ideas of British empiricists, including John Locke, Francis Bacon, and Isaac Newton. Small also introduced Jefferson to George Wythe and Francis Fauquier. Small, Wythe, and Fauquier recognized Jefferson as a man of exceptional ability and included him in their inner circle, where he became a regular member of their Friday dinner parties. Jefferson later wrote that, while there, he \"heard more common good sense, more rational &amp; philosophical conversations than in all the rest of my life\".\nDuring his first year in college, Jefferson spent considerable time attending parties and dancing and was not very frugal with his expenditures; in his second year, regretting that he had squandered away time and money in his first year, he committed to studying fifteen hours a day. While at William &amp; Mary, Jefferson became a member of the Flat Hat Club, the nation's oldest secret society, a small group whose members included St. George Tucker, Edmund Randolph, and James Innes.\nJefferson concluded his formal studies in April 1762. He read the law under Wythe's tutelage while working as a law clerk in his office. Jefferson was well-read in a broad variety of subjects, including law, philosophy, history, natural law, natural religion, ethics, and several areas of science, including astronomy and agriculture.\nJefferson kept two commonplace books: from about age 15 to 30, he compiled a book of sayings and quotations, published in the 20th century as \"Jefferson's Literary Commonplace Book\". During his years of legal study under Wythe, Jefferson began recording his notes on law, history, and philosophy, and continued to do so until the end of his life; his \"Legal Commonplace Book\" was also published in the 20th century.\nOn July 20, 1765, Jefferson's sister Martha married his close friend and college companion Dabney Carr, which greatly pleased Jefferson. In October of that year, however, Jefferson mourned his sister Jane's unexpected death at age 25.\nJefferson treasured his books and amassed three sizable libraries in his lifetime. He began assembling his first library, which grew to 200 volumes, in his youth. Wythe was so impressed with Jefferson that he later bequeathed his entire library to him. In 1770, however, Jefferson's first library was destroyed in a fire at his Shadwell home. His second library, which replenished the first, grew to nearly 6,500 volumes by 1814. Jefferson organized his books into three broad categories of the human mind: memory, reason, and imagination. After British forces set the Library of Congress on fire in the Burning of Washington in 1814, Jefferson sold his second library to the U.S. government for $23,950, hoping to help jumpstart the Library of Congress's rebuilding. Jefferson used a portion of the proceeds to pay off some of his large debt. Jefferson soon resumed collecting his third personal library. In a letter to John Adams, Jefferson wrote, \"I cannot live without books.\" By the time of Jefferson's death a decade later, his third and final library had grown to nearly 2,000 volumes.\nCareer.\nLawyer and House of Burgesses.\nIn 1767, Jefferson was granted admission to the Virginia bar, and lived with his mother at Shadwell. Between 1769 and 1775, he represented Albemarle County in Virginia's House of Burgesses. While serving in the House of Burgesses, Jefferson pursued reforms to slavery, including writing and sponsoring legislation in 1769 to strip power from the royal governor and courts, instead providing masters of slaves with the discretion to emancipate them. Jefferson persuaded his cousin Richard Bland to spearhead the legislation's passage, but it faced strong opposition in a state whose economy was largely agrarian.\nAs a lawyer, Jefferson took on seven freedom-seeking enslaved people as clients and waived his fee for one he claimed should be freed before the minimum statutory age for emancipation. Jefferson invoked natural law, arguing \"everyone comes into the world with a right to his own person and using it at his own will\u00a0... This is what is called personal liberty, and is given him by the author of nature, because it is necessary for his own sustenance.\" The judge cut him off and ruled against his client. As a consolation, Jefferson gave his client some money, which was conceivably used to aid his escape shortly thereafter. Jefferson's underlying intellectual argument that all people were entitled by their creator to what he labeled a \"natural right\" to liberty is a theme that he later prominently incorporated into the Declaration of Independence. In 1767, Jefferson took on 68 cases for the General Court of Virginia and was counsel in three notable cases of that era, \"Howell v. Netherland\" (1770), \"Bolling v. Bolling\" (1771), and \"Blair v. Blair\" (1772).\nIn 1774, Jefferson authored a resolution calling for a boycott of all British goods in protest of the British Parliament's passing of the Intolerable Acts. Jefferson's resolution was later expanded into \"A Summary View of the Rights of British America\", published that year in which he argued that people have the right to govern themselves.\nMonticello, marriage, and family.\nIn 1768, Jefferson began constructing his primary residence, Monticello near present-day Charlottesville, Virginia. Its Italian name means \"Little Mountain\" in English. Monticello is located on a hilltop overlooking his plantation. He spent most of his adult life designing Monticello as an architect and was quoted as saying, \"Architecture is my delight, and putting up, and pulling down, one of my favorite amusements.\" Construction was done mostly by local masons and carpenters, assisted by Jefferson's slaves. He moved into the South Pavilion in 1770. Turning Monticello into a neoclassical masterpiece in the Palladian style became Jefferson's lifelong project.\nOn January 1, 1772, Jefferson married his third cousin, Martha Wayles Skelton, a 23-year-old widow of Bathurst Skelton. She was a frequent hostess for Jefferson, and managed the large household. Historian Dumas Malone described the marriage as the happiest period of Jefferson's life. Martha was a skilled pianist; Jefferson often accompanied her on the violin or cello. During their ten-year marriage, Martha bore six children: Martha \"Patsy\" (1772\u20131836); Jane Randolph (1774\u20131775); an unnamed son who lived for only a few weeks in 1777; Mary \"Polly\" (1778\u20131804); Lucy Elizabeth (1780\u20131781); and another Lucy Elizabeth (1782\u20131784). Only Martha and Mary survived to adulthood. Martha's father, John Wayles, died in 1773, and the couple inherited 135 enslaved people, , and the estate's debts. The debts took Jefferson years to satisfy, contributing to his financial problems.\nMartha later suffered from ill health, including diabetes, and frequent childbirth weakened her. A few months after the birth of her last child, she died on September 6, 1782, with Jefferson at her bedside. Shortly before her death, Martha made Jefferson promise never to marry again, telling him that she could not bear to have another mother raise her children. Jefferson was grief-stricken by her death, relentlessly pacing back and forth for roughly three weeks, and finally emerging to take long rambling rides on secluded roads with his daughter, Martha, who said she was \"a solitary witness to many a violent burst of grief\".\nRevolutionary War.\nDeclaration of Independence.\nJefferson was the primary author of the Declaration of Independence. At age 33, he was one of the youngest delegates to the Second Continental Congress, which convened in the colonial capital of Philadelphia following the Battles of Lexington and Concord, which launched the American Revolutionary War in 1775. Delegates to the Congress overwhelmingly favored authoring, ratifying, and issuing a formal declaration of independence from Britain. Jefferson was inspired by the Enlightenment ideals of the sanctity of the individual, and the writings of Locke and Montesquieu.\nJefferson sought out John Adams, a Continental Congress delegate from Massachusetts and an emerging leader in the Congress. They became close friends, and Adams supported Jefferson's appointment to the Committee of Five, which the Congress charged with authoring the Declaration: Adams, Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Robert R. Livingston, and Roger Sherman. The committee initially thought that Adams should write the document, but Adams persuaded the committee to choose Jefferson due to Jefferson being a Virginian, popular, and a good writer by Adams.\nJefferson consulted with his fellow committee members, but mostly wrote the Declaration of Independence in isolation between June 11 and 28, 1776. Jefferson drew considerably on his proposed draft of the Virginia Constitution, George Mason's draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights, and other sources. Other committee members made some changes, and a final draft was presented to Congress on June 28, 1776. Congress began debate over its contents on Monday, July 1, resulting in the removal of roughly a fourth of Jefferson's original draft. Jefferson resented the changes, but he did not speak publicly about them. On July 4, 1776, the Congress voted unanimously to ratify the Declaration, and delegates signed it on August 2. Jefferson and the other delegates knew they were committing high treason against the Crown, which was punishable by torture and death.\nFollowing its ratification, the Declaration was released publicly. Two days after its ratification, on July 6, \"The Pennsylvania Evening Post\", was the first newspaper to publish it. On July 8 at noon, it was read publicly and simultaneously for the first time at three designated locations: Trenton, New Jersey; Easton, Pennsylvania; and Philadelphia.\nContemporary historians generally view the Declaration of Independence as one of the most significant and influential written documents in world history, and Jefferson's preamble is regarded as an enduring statement on individual and human rights. Jefferson's phrase \"all men are created equal\" has been called \"one of the best-known sentences in the English language\". Harvard University history chairman David Armitage has written that, \"No American document has had a greater global impact than the Declaration of Independence\", and historian Joseph Ellis has written that the Declaration includes \"the most potent and consequential words in American history\".\nVirginia state legislator and governor.\nAt the start of the American Revolution, Colonel Jefferson was named commander of the Albemarle County Militia on September 26, 1775. He was then elected to the Virginia House of Delegates for Albemarle County in September 1776, when finalizing the state constitution was a priority. For nearly three years, Jefferson assisted with the constitution and was especially proud of his Bill for Establishing Religious Freedom, which prohibited state support of religious institutions or enforcement of religious doctrine. The bill failed to pass, as did his legislation to disestablish the Anglican Church, but both were later revived by James Madison.\nIn 1778, Jefferson was given the task of revising the state's laws. He drafted 126 bills in three years, including laws to streamline the judicial system. He proposed statutes that provided for general education, which he considered the basis of \"republican government\". Jefferson also was concerned that Virginia's powerful landed gentry were becoming a hereditary aristocracy and took the lead in abolishing what he called \"feudal and unnatural distinctions\". He targeted laws such as entail and primogeniture by which a deceased landowner's oldest son was vested with all land ownership and power.\nJefferson was elected governor for one-year terms in 1779 and 1780. He transferred the state capital from Williamsburg to Richmond, and introduced additional measures for public education, religious freedom, and inheritance.\nDuring General Benedict Arnold's 1781 invasion of Virginia, Jefferson escaped Richmond just ahead of the British forces, which razed the city. He sent emergency dispatches to Colonel Sampson Mathews and other commanders in an attempt to repel Arnold's efforts. When the British occupied Norfolk, Jefferson had caused patriots to burn and destroy it in 1776. General Charles Cornwallis that spring dispatched a cavalry force led by Banastre Tarleton to capture Jefferson and members of the Assembly at Monticello, but Jack Jouett of the Virginia militia thwarted the British plan. Jefferson escaped to Poplar Forest, his plantation to the west. When the General Assembly reconvened in June 1781, it conducted an inquiry into Jefferson's actions which eventually concluded that Jefferson had acted with honor, but Jefferson was not reelected.\nIn April of the same year, his daughter Lucy died at age one. A second daughter of that name was born the following year, but she died at age two.\nIn 1782, Jefferson refused a partnership offer by North Carolina Governor Abner Nash, in a profiteering scheme involving the sale of confiscated Loyalist lands. Unlike some Founders, Jefferson was content with his Monticello estate and the land he owned in the vicinity of Virginia's Shenandoah Valley. Jefferson thought of Monticello as an intellectual gathering place for James Madison, James Monroe, and other friends.\n\"Notes on the State of Virginia\".\nIn 1780, Jefferson received a letter of inquiry from French diplomat Fran\u00e7ois Barb\u00e9-Marbois into the geography, history, and government of Virginia, as part of a study of the United States. Jefferson organized his responses in a book, \"Notes on the State of Virginia\" (1785). The book explores what constitutes a good society, using Virginia as an exemplar. Jefferson included extensive data about the state's natural resources and economy and wrote at length about slavery and miscegenation; he articulated his belief that blacks and whites could not live together as free people in one society because of justified resentments of the enslaved. He also wrote of his views on the American Indians, equating them to European settlers.\n\"Notes\" was first published in 1785 in French and appeared in English in 1787. Biographer George Tucker considered the work \"surprising in the extent of the information which a single individual had been thus far able to acquire, as to the physical features of the state\"; University of Virginia historian Merrill D. Peterson described it as an accomplishment for which all Americans should be grateful.\nMember of Congress.\nJefferson was appointed a Virginia delegate to the Congress of the Confederation organized following the peace treaty with Great Britain in 1783. He was a member of the committee setting foreign exchange rates and recommended an American currency based on the decimal system that was adopted. He advised the formation of the Committee of the States to fill the power vacuum when Congress was in recess. The committee met when Congress adjourned, but disagreements rendered it dysfunctional.\nJefferson sent a letter (revealed in 2025) to Virginia Governor Benjamin Harrison, dated December 31, 1783, in which he relates the wave of enthusiasm of Europeans for taking up arms against their leaders. Jefferson was sharing the affirmation of his own promotion of the right to bear arms that brought about the American Revolution. The letter also conveys Jefferson's anxiety over the final ratification of the Treaty of Paris formally ending the revolutionary war. Signed initially by the parties in September, the still-outstanding consent of two colonies was required in London (then a two-month journey) by the following March. The deadline was ultimately but barely met, with the required signatures made in mid-January.\nIn the Congress's 1783\u20131784 session, Jefferson acted as chairman of committees to establish a viable system of government for the new Republic and to propose a policy for settlement of the western territories. He was the principal author of the Land Ordinance of 1784, whereby Virginia ceded to the national government the vast area that it claimed northwest of the Ohio River. He insisted that this territory should not be used as colonial territory by any of the thirteen states, but that it should be divided into sections that could become states. He plotted borders for nine new states in their initial stages and wrote an ordinance banning slavery in all the nation's territories. Congress made extensive revisions and rejected the ban on slavery. The provisions banning slavery, known as the \"Jefferson Proviso\", were modified and implemented three years later in the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 and became the law for the entire Northwest Territory.\nMinister to France.\nOn May 7, 1784, Jefferson was appointed by the Congress of the Confederation to join Benjamin Franklin and John Adams in Paris as Minister Plenipotentiary for Negotiating Treaties of Amity and Commerce with Great Britain and other countries. With his young daughter Patsy and two servants, he departed in July 1784, arriving in Paris the next month. Jefferson had Patsy educated at Pentemont Abbey. Less than a year later, he was assigned the additional duty of succeeding Franklin as Minister to France. French foreign minister Count de Vergennes commented, \"You replace Monsieur Franklin, I hear.\" Jefferson replied, \"I succeed. No man can replace him.\" During his five years in Paris, Jefferson played a leading role in shaping U.S. foreign policy.\nIn 1786, he met and fell in love with Maria Cosway, a married 27-year-old Italian-English musician. She returned to Great Britain after six weeks, but she and Jefferson maintained a lifelong correspondence. During the summer of 1786, Jefferson arrived in London to meet with John Adams, who was then serving as the nation's first US Ambassador to Britain. Adams had official access to George III and arranged a meeting between Jefferson and the king. Jefferson later described the king's reception of the men as \"ungracious\". According to Adams's grandson, George III turned his back on both in a gesture of public insult. Jefferson returned to France in August.\nJefferson sent for his youngest surviving child, nine-year-old Polly, in June 1787. She was accompanied by a young slave from Monticello, Sally Hemings. Jefferson had taken her older brother, James Hemings, to Paris as part of his domestic staff and had him trained in French cuisine. According to Sally's son, Madison Hemings, 16-year-old Sally and Jefferson began a sexual relationship in Paris, where she became pregnant. The son indicated Hemings agreed to return to the United States only after Jefferson promised to free her children when they came of age.\nWhile in France, Jefferson became a regular companion of the Marquis de Lafayette, a French hero of the American Revolution, and Jefferson used his influence with Lafayette to procure trade agreements with France. As the French Revolution began, Jefferson agreed to allow his Paris residence at H\u00f4tel de Langeac to be used for meetings by Lafayette and other revolutionary leaders. He was in Paris during the storming of the Bastille on July 14, 1789, and he consulted with Lafayette as Lafayette drafted the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. Jefferson often found his mail opened by postmasters, so he invented his own enciphering device, the \"Wheel Cipher\"; he wrote important communications in code for the rest of his career. Unable to attend the 1787 Constitution Convention, Jefferson supported the Constitution but desired the addition of the promised Bill of Rights. Jefferson left Paris for America in September 1789. He remained a firm supporter of the French Revolution while opposing its more violent elements.\nSecretary of State.\nSoon after returning from France, Jefferson accepted President Washington's invitation to serve as Secretary of State. Pressing issues at the time, the national debt and where the new national capital should be placed following its planned relocation from Philadelphia in 1800, placed him at odds with Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, who favored a capital close to major commercial centers in the Northeast, while Washington, Jefferson, and other agrarians wanted it further south. After lengthy deadlock, the Compromise of 1790 was struck, permanently locating the capital on the Potomac River, and the federal government assumed the war debts of all original 13 states.\nJefferson opposed a national debt, preferring that each state retire its own, which contrasted with Hamilton's vision of the federal government consolidating state debts and establishing national credit and a national bank. Jefferson strenuously opposed both policies and attempted to undermine Hamilton's agenda, which nearly led Washington to dismiss him from the cabinet. He later left the cabinet voluntarily.\nJefferson's goals were to decrease American dependence on British commerce and to expand commercial trade with France. He sought to weaken Spanish colonialism of the Trans-Appalachia and British control in the North, believing this would aid in the pacification of Native Americans.\nAlong with political proteg\u00e9 James Madison, then a U.S. Representative, and author Philip Freneau, Jefferson co-founded the \"National Gazette\" in Philadelphia in 1791, which sought to counter the policies of the Federalist Party, which Hamilton was promoting through the \"Gazette of the United States\", an influential Federalist newspaper. The \"National Gazette\" criticized the policies promoted by Hamilton, often in anonymous essays signed by the pen name \"Brutus\" at Jefferson's urging and written by Madison. In Spring 1791, Jefferson was suffering from migraines and tiring of the in-fighting with Hamilton, and he and Madison departed for a vacation in Vermont.\nIn May 1792, Jefferson's concern about emerging political rivalries in the young nation was escalating, and he wrote Washington, imploring him to run for reelection for a second term that year as a unifying influence. He urged the president to rally the citizenry to a party that would defend democracy against the corrupting influence of banks and financial-focused interests, which the Federalists were embracing and espousing. Historians recognize Jefferson's letter to Washington as one of the first delineations of Democratic-Republican Party principles. Jefferson, Madison, and other Democratic-Republican organizers favored states' rights and local control and opposed the federal concentration of power. Hamilton, conversely, sought more power vested in the federal government.\nJefferson supported France against Britain when the two nations fought in 1793, though his arguments in Washington's Cabinet were undercut by French Revolutionary envoy Edmond-Charles Gen\u00eat's open scorn for Washington. In discussions with British Minister George Hammond, Jefferson tried in vain to persuade the British to vacate their posts in the Northwest and to compensate the U.S. for enslaved people freed by the British at the end of the Revolutionary War. Jefferson also sought to return to private life, and resigned from the cabinet in December 1793; he may also have wanted to bolster his political influence from outside the administration.\nAfter the Washington administration negotiated the Jay Treaty with Britain in 1794, Jefferson saw a cause around which he could rally the Democratic-Republican Party. He organized national opposition to the treaty from Monticello. The treaty, designed by Hamilton, aimed to reduce tensions and increase trade. Jefferson warned that it would increase British influence and subvert republicanism, calling it \"the boldest act [Hamilton and Jay] ever ventured on to undermine the government\". The Treaty passed, but it expired in 1805 during Jefferson's presidential administration, and then President Jefferson did not renew it. Jefferson continued his pro-France stance; during the violence of the Reign of Terror, he declined to disavow the revolution. \"To back away from France would be to undermine the cause of republicanism in America\", he wrote.\nElection of 1796 and vice presidency.\nIn the presidential campaign of 1796, Jefferson lost the electoral college vote to Federalist John Adams 71\u201368. He did, however, receive the second-highest number of votes and, under the electoral laws at the time, was elected as vice president. As presiding officer of the United States Senate, Jefferson assumed a more passive role than his predecessor, John Adams. He allowed the Senate to freely conduct debates and confined his participation to procedural issues, which he called an \"honorable and easy\" role. Jefferson previously studied parliamentary law and procedure for 40 years, making him qualified to serve as presiding officer. In 1800, he published his assembled notes on Senate procedure as \"A Manual of Parliamentary Practice\". He cast only three tie-breaking votes in the Senate.\nIn four confidential talks with French consul Joseph L\u00e9tombe in the spring of 1797, Jefferson attacked Adams, predicting that his rival would only serve one term. He also encouraged France to invade England, and advised L\u00e9tombe to stall any American envoys sent to Paris. This toughened the tone that the French government adopted toward the Adams administration. After Adams's initial peace envoys were rebuffed, Jefferson and his supporters lobbied for the release of papers related to the incident, called the XYZ Affair after the letters used to disguise the identities of the French officials involved. But the tactic backfired when it was revealed that French officials had demanded bribes, rallying public support against France. The U.S. began an undeclared naval war with France known as the Quasi-War.\nDuring the Adams presidency, the Federalists rebuilt the military, levied new taxes, and enacted the Alien and Sedition Acts. Jefferson believed these laws were intended to suppress Democratic-Republicans, rather than prosecute enemy aliens, and considered them unconstitutional. To rally opposition, he and James Madison anonymously wrote the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, asserting that the federal government had no right to exercise powers not specifically delegated to it by the states. The resolutions followed the \"interposition\" approach of Madison, that states may shield their citizens from federal laws that they deem unconstitutional. Jefferson advocated nullification, allowing states to entirely invalidate federal laws. He warned that, \"unless arrested at the threshold\", the Alien and Sedition Acts would \"drive these states into revolution and blood\".\nBiographer Ron Chernow contends that \"the theoretical damage of the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions was deep and lasting, and was a recipe for disunion\", and contributed to the outbreak of the American Civil War and later events. Washington was so appalled by the resolutions that he told Patrick Henry that, if \"systematically and pertinaciously pursued\", the resolutions would \"dissolve the union or produce coercion\". Jefferson had always admired Washington's leadership skills but felt that his Federalist party was leading the country in the wrong direction. He decided not to attend Washington's funeral in 1799 because of acute differences with him while serving as secretary of state.\nElection of 1800.\nJefferson ran for president against John Adams again in 1800. Adams' campaign was weakened by unpopular taxes and vicious Federalist infighting over his actions in the Quasi-War. Democratic-Republicans pointed to the Alien and Sedition Acts and accused the Federalists of being secret pro-Britain monarchists. Federalists, in turn, charged that Jefferson was a godless libertine beholden to the French. UCLA history professor Joyce Appleby described the 1800 presidential election as \"one of the most acrimonious in the annals of American history\".\nThe Democratic-Republicans ultimately won more electoral college votes, due in part to the electors that resulted from the addition of three-fifths of the South's slaves to the population calculation under the Three-Fifths Compromise. Jefferson and his vice presidential candidate Aaron Burr unexpectedly received an equal total. Because of the tie, the election was decided by the Federalist-dominated U.S. House of Representatives. Hamilton lobbied Federalist representatives on Jefferson's behalf, believing him a lesser political evil than Burr. On February 17, 1801, after thirty-six ballots, the House elected Jefferson president and Burr vice president.\nThe win led to Democratic-Republican celebrations throughout the country. Some of Jefferson's opponents argued that he owed his victory to the South's inflated number of electors. Others alleged that Jefferson secured James Asheton Bayard's tie-breaking electoral vote by promising to retain various Federalist posts in the government. Jefferson disputed the allegation, and the historical record is inconclusive.\nThe transition proceeded smoothly, marking a watershed in American history. Historian Gordon S. Wood writes that, \"it was one of the first popular elections in modern history that resulted in the peaceful transfer of power from one 'party' to another.\"\nPresidency (1801\u20131809).\nJefferson was sworn in as president by Chief Justice John Marshall at the new Capitol in Washington, D.C., on March 4, 1801. His inauguration was not attended by outgoing President Adams. In contrast to his two predecessors, Jefferson exhibited a dislike of formal etiquette. Plainly dressed, he chose to walk alongside friends to the Capitol from his nearby boardinghouse instead of arriving by carriage. His inaugural address struck a note of reconciliation and commitment to democratic ideology, declaring, \"We have been called by different names brethren of the same principle. We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists.\" Ideologically, he stressed \"equal and exact justice to all men\", minority rights, and freedom of speech, religion, and press. He said that a free and republican government was \"the strongest government on earth\". He nominated moderate Republicans to his cabinet: James Madison as secretary of state, Henry Dearborn as secretary of war, Levi Lincoln as attorney general, and Robert Smith as secretary of the navy.\nWidowed since 1782, Jefferson first relied on his two daughters to serve as his official hostesses. In late May 1801, he asked Dolley Madison, wife of his long-time friend James Madison, to be the permanent White House hostess. She was also in charge of the completion of the White House mansion. Dolley served as White House hostess for the rest of Jefferson's two terms and then for another eight years as First Lady while her husband was president.\nFinancial affairs.\nJefferson's first challenge as president was shrinking the $83\u00a0million national debt. He began dismantling Hamilton's Federalist fiscal system with help from the secretary of the treasury, Albert Gallatin. Gallatin devised a plan to eliminate the national debt in sixteen years by extensive annual appropriations and reduction in taxes. The administration eliminated the whiskey excise and other taxes after closing \"unnecessary offices\" and cutting \"useless establishments and expenses\".\nJefferson believed that the First Bank of the United States represented a \"most deadly hostility\" to republican government. He wanted to dismantle the bank before its charter expired in 1811, but was dissuaded by Gallatin. Gallatin argued that the national bank was a useful financial institution and set out to expand its operations. Jefferson looked to other corners to address the growing national debt. He shrank the Navy, for example, deeming it unnecessary in peacetime, and incorporated a fleet of inexpensive gunboats intended only for local defense to avoid provocation against foreign powers. After two terms, he had lowered the national debt from $83\u00a0million to $57\u00a0million.\nDomestic affairs.\nJefferson pardoned several of those imprisoned under the Alien and Sedition Acts. Congressional Republicans repealed the Judiciary Act of 1801, which removed nearly all of Adams's \"midnight judges\". A subsequent appointment battle led to the Supreme Court's landmark decision in \"Marbury v. Madison\", asserting judicial review over executive branch actions. Jefferson appointed three Supreme Court justices: William Johnson (1804), Henry Brockholst Livingston (1807), and Thomas Todd (1807).\nJefferson strongly felt the need for a national military university, producing an officer engineering corps for a national defense based on the advancement of the sciences, rather than having to rely on foreign sources. He signed the Military Peace Establishment Act on March 16, 1802, founding the United States Military Academy at West Point. The act documented a new set of laws and limits for the military. Jefferson was also hoping to bring reform to the Executive branch, replacing Federalists and active opponents throughout the officer corps to promote Republican values.\nJefferson took great interest in the Library of Congress, which had been established in 1800. He often recommended books to acquire. In 1802, Congress authorized Jefferson to name the first Librarian of Congress, and formed a committee to establish library regulations. Congress also granted both the president and vice president the right to use the library.\nForeign affairs (1801\u20131805).\nFirst Barbary War.\nAmerican merchant ships had been protected from Barbary Coast pirates by the Royal Navy when the states were British colonies. After independence, however, pirates often captured U.S. merchant ships, pillaged cargoes, and enslaved or held crew members for ransom. Jefferson had opposed paying tribute to the Barbary States since 1785. In 1801, he authorized a U.S. Navy fleet under Commodore Richard Dale to make a show of force in the Mediterranean, the first American naval squadron to cross the Atlantic. Following the fleet's first engagement, he successfully asked Congress for a declaration of war. The \"First Barbary War\" was the first foreign war fought by the U.S.\nPasha of Tripoli Yusuf Karamanli captured the , so Jefferson authorized William Eaton, the U.S. Consul to Tunis, to lead a force to restore the pasha's older brother to the throne. The American navy forced Tunis and Algiers into breaking their alliance with Tripoli. Jefferson ordered five separate naval bombardments of Tripoli, leading the pasha to sign a treaty that restored peace in the Mediterranean. This victory proved only temporary, but according to Wood, \"many Americans celebrated it as a vindication of their policy of spreading free trade around the world and as a great victory for liberty over tyranny.\"\nLouisiana Purchase.\nSpain ceded ownership of the Louisiana territory in 1800 to France. Jefferson was concerned that Napoleon's interests in the vast territory would threaten the security of the continent and Mississippi River shipping. He wrote that the cession \"works most sorely on the U.S. It completely reverses all the political relations of the U.S.\" In 1802, he instructed James Monroe and Robert R. Livingston to negotiate the purchase of New Orleans and adjacent coastal areas. In early 1803, Jefferson offered Napoleon nearly $10\u00a0million for of tropical territory.\nNapoleon realized that French military control was impractical over such a vast remote territory, and he was in dire need of funds for his wars on the home front. In early April 1803, he unexpectedly made negotiators a counter-offer to sell of French territory for $15\u00a0million (~$ in 2024), doubling the size of the United States. U.S. negotiators accepted the offer and signed the treaty on April 30, 1803. Word of the unexpected purchase did not reach Jefferson until July 3, 1803. He unknowingly acquired the most fertile tract of land of its size on Earth, making the new country self-sufficient in food and other resources. The sale also significantly curtailed European presence in North America, removing obstacles to U.S. westward expansion.\nMost thought that this was an exceptional opportunity, despite Republican reservations about the Constitutional authority of the federal government to acquire land. Jefferson initially thought that a Constitutional amendment was necessary to purchase and govern the new territory; but he later changed his mind, fearing that this would give cause to oppose the purchase, and urged a speedy debate and ratification. On October 20, 1803, the Senate ratified the purchase treaty by a vote of 24\u20137. Jefferson personally was humble about acquiring the Louisiana Territory, but he resented complainers who called the vast domain a \"howling wilderness\".\nAfter the purchase, Jefferson preserved the region's Spanish legal code and instituted a gradual approach to integrating settlers into American democracy. He believed that a period of the federal rule would be necessary while Louisianans adjusted to their new nation. Historians have differed in their assessments regarding the constitutional implications of the sale, but they typically hail the Louisiana acquisition as a major accomplishment. Frederick Jackson Turner called the purchase the most formative event in American history.\nExpeditions.\nJefferson anticipated further westward settlements due to the Louisiana Purchase and arranged for the exploration and mapping of the uncharted territory. He sought to establish a U.S. claim ahead of competing European interests and to find the rumored Northwest Passage. Jefferson and others were influenced by exploration accounts of Le Page du Pratz in Louisiana (1763) and James Cook in the Pacific (1784), and they persuaded Congress in 1804 to fund an expedition to explore and the newly acquired territory to the Pacific Ocean.\nJefferson appointed secretary Meriwether Lewis and acquaintance William Clark to lead the Corps of Discovery (1803\u20131806). In the months leading up to the expedition, Jefferson tutored Lewis in the sciences of mapping, botany, natural history, mineralogy, and astronomy and navigation, giving him unlimited access to his library at Monticello, which included the largest collection of books in the world on the subject of the geography and natural history of the North American continent, along with an impressive collection of maps. The expedition lasted from May 1804 to September 1806 and obtained a wealth of scientific and geographic knowledge, including knowledge of many Indian tribes.\nJefferson organized three other western expeditions: the William Dunbar and George Hunter Expedition on the Ouachita River (1804\u20131805), the Thomas Freeman and Peter Custis Expedition (1806) on the Red River, and the Zebulon Pike Expedition (1806\u20131807) into the Rocky Mountains and the Southwest. All three produced valuable information about the American frontier. This interest also motivated Jefferson to meet the Prussian explorer Alexander von Humboldt several times in June 1804, inquiring into Humboldt's knowledge of New Spain's natural resources, economic prospects, and demographic development.\nNative American affairs.\nJefferson refuted the contemporary notion that Indians were inferior and maintained that they were equal in body and mind to people of European descent, although he believed them to be inferior in terms of culture and technology. As governor of Virginia during the Revolutionary War, Jefferson recommended moving the Cherokee and Shawnee tribes, who had allied with the British, to west of the Mississippi River. But when he took office as president, he quickly took measures to avert another major conflict, as American and Indian societies were in collision and the British were inciting Indian tribes from Canada. In Georgia, he stipulated that the state would release its legal claims for lands to its west in exchange for military support in expelling the Cherokee from Georgia. This facilitated his policy of western expansion, to \"advance compactly as we multiply\".\nIn keeping with his Enlightenment thinking, President Jefferson adopted an assimilation policy toward American Indians known as his \"civilization program\" which included securing peaceful U.S.\u2013Indian treaty alliances and encouraging agriculture. Jefferson advocated that Indian tribes should make federal purchases by credit holding their lands as collateral. Various tribes accepted Jefferson's policies, including the Shawnees led by Black Hoof, the Muscogee, and the Cherokee. However, some Shawnees, led by Tecumseh, broke off from Black Hoof, and opposed Jefferson's assimilation policies.\nHistorian Bernard Sheehan argues that Jefferson believed that assimilation was best for American Indians, and next-best was removal to the west; he felt that the worst outcome of the conflict would be their attacking the whites. Jefferson told U.S. Secretary of War Henry Dearborn, who then oversaw Indian affairs, \"If we are constrained to lift the hatchet against any tribe, we will never lay it down until that tribe is exterminated or driven beyond the Mississippi.\" Miller agrees that Jefferson believed that Indians should assimilate to American customs and agriculture. Historians such as Peter S. Onuf and Merrill D. Peterson argue that Jefferson's actual Indian policies did little to promote assimilation and were a pretext to seize lands.\nRe-election in 1804 and second term.\nJefferson was nominated for reelection by the Democratic-Republican Party, with George Clinton replacing Burr as his running mate. The Federalist Party ran Charles Cotesworth Pinckney of South Carolina, John Adams's vice presidential candidate in the 1800 election. The Jefferson-Clinton ticket won overwhelmingly in the electoral college vote, by 162 to 14, promoting their achievement of a strong economy, lower taxes, and the Louisiana Purchase.\nIn March 1806, a split developed in the Democratic-Republican Party, led by fellow Virginian and former Republican ally John Randolph, who viciously accused President Jefferson on the floor of the House of moving too far in the Federalist direction, permanently setting Randolph apart politically from Jefferson. Jefferson and Madison backed resolutions to limit or ban British imports in retaliation for British seizures of American shipping. Also, in 1808, Jefferson was the first president to propose a broad federal plan to build roads and canals across several states, asking for $20\u00a0million, further alarming Randolph and believers of limited government.\nJefferson's popularity suffered further in his second term as a result of his response to wars in Europe. Relations with Britain deteriorated, due partly to the antipathy between Jefferson and British diplomat Anthony Merry. After Napoleon's decisive victory at the Battle of Austerlitz in 1805, Napoleon became more aggressive in his negotiations with Jefferson and the U.S. over trading rights, which the U.S. proved unsuccessful in countering. Jefferson then led the enactment of the Embargo Act of 1807, directed at both France and Britain, which triggered economic chaos in the U.S. and was strongly criticized, leading Jefferson to abandon the policy a year later.\nDuring the American Revolution, colonial states abolished the international slave trade, but South Carolina reopened it. In his annual message of December 1806, Jefferson denounced the international slave trade as \"violations of human rights\" and called on the new Congress to immediately criminalize it. The following year, in 1807, Congress passed the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves, which Jefferson signed. The act established severe punishment against the international slave trade, although it did not address the issue domestically.\nIn Haiti, Jefferson's neutrality allowed arms to flow to the slave independence movement during the Haitian Revolution, and Jefferson blocked attempts to assist Napoleon, who was defeated militarily in Haiti in 1803. But Jefferson's administration refused official recognition of Haiti during his second term, in deference to southern complaints about racial violence against slave holders. Recognition was not extended to Haiti until 1862.\nControversies.\nBurr conspiracy and trial.\nFollowing the 1801 electoral deadlock, Jefferson's relationship with his vice president, Aaron Burr, rapidly eroded. Jefferson suspected Burr of seeking the presidency for himself, while Burr was angered by Jefferson's refusal to appoint some of his supporters to federal office. Burr was dropped from the Democratic-Republican ticket in 1804 in favor of charismatic George Clinton.\nThe same year, Burr was soundly defeated in his bid to be elected New York governor. During the campaign, Alexander Hamilton made publicly callous remarks regarding Burr's moral character. Burr challenged Hamilton to a duel, held on July 11, 1804. In the duel, Burr mortally wounded Hamilton, who died the following day. Burr was subsequently indicted for Hamilton's murder, causing him to flee to Georgia, even though he remained president of the U.S. Senate during Supreme Court Justice Samuel Chase's impeachment trial. Both indictments quietly died and Burr was not prosecuted.\nIn August 1804, Burr contacted British Minister Anthony Merry offering to cede U.S. western territory in return for money and British ships. After leaving office in April 1805, Burr traveled west and conspired with Louisiana Territory governor James Wilkinson, beginning a large-scale recruitment for a military expedition. Burr discussed seizing control of Mexico or Spanish Florida, or forming a secessionist state in New Orleans or the Western U.S.; historians remain unclear as to his true goal. In the fall of 1806, Burr launched a military flotilla carrying about 60 men down the Ohio River. Wilkinson renounced the plot and reported Burr's expedition to Jefferson, who ordered Burr's arrest. On February 13, 1807, Burr was captured in Louisiana and sent to Virginia to be tried for treason.\nBurr's 1807 conspiracy trial became a national issue. Jefferson attempted to preemptively influence the verdict by telling Congress that Burr's guilt was \"beyond question\", but the case came before his longtime political foe, and distant cousin, John Marshall, who dismissed the treason charge. Burr's legal team subpoenaed Jefferson, but Jefferson refused to testify, making the first argument for executive privilege. Instead, Jefferson provided relevant legal documents. After a three-month trial, the jury found Burr not guilty, while Jefferson denounced his acquittal. Jefferson subsequently removed Wilkinson as territorial governor but retained him in the U.S. military. Historian James N. Banner criticized Jefferson for continuing to trust Wilkinson, a \"faithless plotter\".\nWilkinson's misconduct.\nCommanding General James Wilkinson was a holdover of the Washington and Adams administrations. In 1804, Wilkinson received 12,000 pesos from the Spanish for information on American boundary plans. Wilkinson also received advances on his salary and payments on claims submitted to Secretary of War Henry Dearborn. This damaging information apparently was unknown to Jefferson. In 1805, Jefferson trusted Wilkinson and appointed him Louisiana Territory governor, admiring Wilkinson's work ethic.\nIn January 1806, Jefferson received information from Kentucky U.S. Attorney Joseph Davies that Wilkinson was on the Spanish payroll. Jefferson took no action against Wilkinson, since there was not then significant evidence against him. An investigation by the U.S. House of Representatives in December 1807 exonerated Wilkinson. In 1808, a military court looked into the allegations against Wilkinson but also found a lack of evidence. Jefferson retained Wilkinson in the U.S. Army. Evidence found in Spanish archives in the 20th century proved Wilkinson was on the Spanish payroll.\nForeign affairs (1805\u20131809).\nAttempted annexation of Florida.\nIn the aftermath of the Louisiana Purchase, Jefferson attempted to annex West Florida from Spain. In his annual message to Congress, on December 3, 1805, Jefferson railed against Spain over Florida border depredations. A few days later Jefferson secretly requested a two-million-dollar expenditure to purchase Florida. Floor leader John Randolph opposed annexation, was upset over Jefferson's secrecy on the matter, and believed the money would end up going to Napoleon. The Two Million Dollar bill passed only after Jefferson successfully maneuvered to replace Randolph with Barnabas Bidwell as floor leader. This aroused suspicion of Jefferson and charges of undue executive influence over Congress. Jefferson signed the bill into law in February 1806. Six weeks later the law was made public. The two million dollars was to be given to France as payment, in turn, to put pressure on Spain to permit the annexation of Florida by the United States. France, however, refused the offer and Florida remained under Spanish control. The failed venture damaged Jefferson's reputation among his supporters.\n\"Chesapeake\"\u2013\"Leopard\" affair.\nStarting in 1806, the Royal Navy began stopping American merchantmen to search for deserters from the British navy; approximately 6,000 sailors were impressed into the Royal Navy this way, leading to deep anger and resentment among the U.S. public. In 1806, Jefferson issued a call for a boycott of British goods; on April 18, Congress passed the Non-Importation Acts, but they were never enforced. Later that year, Jefferson asked James Monroe and William Pinkney to negotiate an end to foreign interference with American merchant shipping, though relations with Britain showed no signs of improving. The Monroe\u2013Pinkney Treaty was finalized but lacked any provisions regarding the issue of impressment, and Jefferson refused to submit it to the Senate for ratification.\nThe British warship encountered the off the Virginia coast in June 1807; \"Leopard\" fired at \"Chesapeake\" after the latter refused to allow for a search for deserters before removing four deserters from the ship. Jefferson issued a proclamation banning British warships from U.S. waters. He presumed unilateral authority to call on the states to prepare 100,000 militia and ordered the purchase of arms, ammunition, and supplies, writing, \"The laws of necessity, of self-preservation, of saving our country when in danger, are of higher obligation [than strict observance of written laws]\". The was dispatched to demand an explanation from the British government, and Jefferson called for a special session of Congress in October to enact an embargo or alternatively to consider war.\nEmbargo (1807\u20131809).\nIn December 1807, news arrived that Napoleon had extended the Berlin Decree, globally banning British imports. The Royal Navy, meanwhile continued to impress sailors from American merchant ships. However, Congress had no appetite to prepare the U.S. for war; Jefferson asked for and received the Embargo Act, an alternative that allowed the U.S. more time to build up defensive works, militias, and naval forces. Meacham argued that the Embargo Act was a projection of power that surpassed the Alien and Sedition Acts, and R. B. Bernstein said that Jefferson \"was pursuing policies resembling those he had cited in 1776 as grounds for independence and revolution\".\nIn November 1807, Jefferson, for several days, met with his cabinet to discuss the deteriorating foreign situation. Secretary of State James Madison supported the embargo, while Treasury Secretary Gallatin opposed it, due to its indefinite time frame and the risk to the policy of American neutrality. The U.S. economy suffered, criticism grew, and opponents began evading the embargo. Instead of retreating, Jefferson sent federal agents to secretly track down smugglers and violators. Three acts were passed in Congress during 1807 and 1808, called the \"Supplementary\", the \"Additional\", and the \"Enforcement\" acts. The government could not prevent American vessels from trading with the European belligerents once they had left American ports, although the embargo triggered a devastating decline in exports.\nIn December 1807, Jefferson announced his intention not to seek a third term. He turned his attention increasingly to Monticello during the last year of his presidency, giving Madison and Gallatin almost total control of affairs. Shortly before leaving office in March 1809, Jefferson signed the repeal of the Embargo. In its place, the Non-Intercourse Act was passed, but it proved no more effective. The day before Madison was inaugurated as his successor, Jefferson said that he felt like \"a prisoner, released from his chains\".\nPost-presidency (1809\u20131826).\nAfter his presidency, Jefferson remained influential and continued to correspond with many of the country's leaders (including his two prot\u00e9g\u00e9es, Madison and Monroe, who succeeded him as president); the Monroe Doctrine strongly resembles solicited advice that Jefferson gave to Monroe in 1823.\nUniversity of Virginia.\nJefferson envisioned a university free of church influences where students could specialize in new areas not offered at other colleges. He believed that education engendered a stable society, which should provide publicly funded schools accessible based solely on ability. He initially proposed his university in a letter to Joseph Priestley in 1800 and, in 1819, founded the University of Virginia. He organized the state legislative campaign for its charter and, with the assistance of Edmund Bacon, purchased the location. He was the principal designer of the buildings, planned the university's curriculum, and served as the first rector upon its opening in 1825.\nJefferson was a strong disciple of Greek and Roman architectural styles, which he believed to be most representative of American democracy. Each academic unit, called a pavilion, was designed with a two-story temple front, while the library \"Rotunda\" was modeled on the Roman Pantheon. Jefferson referred to the university's grounds as the \"Academical Village\", and he reflected his educational ideas in its layout. The ten pavilions included classrooms and faculty residences; they formed a quadrangle and were connected by colonnades, behind which stood the student rooms. Gardens and vegetable plots were placed behind the pavilions and were surrounded by serpentine walls, affirming the importance of the agrarian lifestyle. The university had a library rather than a church at its center, emphasizing its secular nature\u2014controversial at the time.\nWhen Jefferson died in 1826, James Madison replaced him as rector. Jefferson bequeathed most of his reconstructed library of almost 2,000 volumes to the university. Only one other ex-president has founded a university; Millard Fillmore founded the University at Buffalo in 1846.\nReconciliation with Adams.\nJefferson and John Adams became good friends in the first decades of their political careers, serving together in the Continental Congress in the 1770s and in Europe in the 1780s. The Federalist/Republican split of the 1790s divided them, however, and Adams felt betrayed by Jefferson's sponsorship of partisan attacks, such as those of James Callender. Jefferson was angered by Adams' appointment of \"midnight judges\". The two men did not communicate directly for more than a decade after Jefferson succeeded Adams as president. A brief correspondence took place between Abigail Adams and Jefferson after Jefferson's daughter Polly died in 1804, in an attempt at reconciliation unknown to Adams. However, an exchange of letters resumed open hostilities between Adams and Jefferson.\nAs early as 1809, Benjamin Rush began to prod the two through correspondence to re-establish contact. In 1812, Adams wrote a short New Year's greeting to Jefferson, prompted earlier by Rush, to which Jefferson warmly responded. This initial correspondence began what historian David McCullough calls \"one of the most extraordinary correspondences in American history\". Over the next 14 years, Jefferson and Adams exchanged 158 letters discussing their political differences, justifying their respective roles in events, and debating the revolution's import to the world.\nWhen Adams died on July 4, 1826, the 50th anniversary of the Declaration of Independence, his last words were an acknowledgment of his longtime friend and rival. \"Thomas Jefferson survives\", Adams said, unaware that Jefferson had died a few hours earlier.\nAutobiography.\nIn 1821, at the age of 77, Jefferson began writing his \"Autobiography of Thomas Jefferson: 1743\u20131790\", in which he said he sought to \"state some recollections of dates and facts concerning myself\". He focused on the struggles and achievements he experienced until July 29, 1790, where the narrative stopped short. He excluded his youth, emphasizing the revolutionary era. He related that his ancestors came from Wales to America in the early 17th century and settled in the western frontier of the Virginia colony, which influenced his zeal for individual and state rights. Jefferson described his father as uneducated, but with a \"strong mind and sound judgement\". He also addressed his enrollment in the College of William &amp; Mary and his election to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia in 1775.\nHe expressed opposition to the idea of a privileged aristocracy made up of large landowning families partial to the King, and instead promoted \"the aristocracy of virtue and talent, which nature has wisely provided for the direction of the interests of society, &amp; scattered with equal hand through all its conditions, was deemed essential to a well-ordered republic\". The work is primarily concerned with the Declaration and reforming the government of Virginia. He used notes, letters, and documents to tell many of the stories. He suggested that this history was so rich that his personal affairs were better overlooked, but he incorporated a self-analysis using the Declaration and other patriotism.\nGreek War of Independence.\nThomas Jefferson was a philhellene, lover of Greek culture, who sympathized with the Greek War of Independence. He has been described as the most influential of the Founding Fathers who supported the Greek cause, viewing it as similar to the American Revolution. By 1823, Jefferson was exchanging ideas with Greek scholar Adamantios Korais. Jefferson advised Korais on building the political system of Greece by using classical liberalism and examples from the American governmental system, ultimately prescribing a government akin to that of a U.S. state. He also suggested the application of a classical education system for the newly founded First Hellenic Republic. Jefferson's philosophical instructions were welcomed by the Greek people. Korais became one of the designers of the Greek constitution and urged his associates to study Jefferson's works and other literature from the American Revolution.\nLafayette's visit.\nIn the summer of 1824, the Marquis de Lafayette accepted an invitation from President James Monroe to visit the country. Jefferson and Lafayette had not seen each other since 1789. After visits to New York, New England, and Washington, Lafayette arrived at Monticello on November 4.\nJefferson's grandson Randolph was present and recorded the reunion: \"As they approached each other, their uncertain gait quickened itself into a shuffling run, and exclaiming, 'Ah Jefferson!' 'Ah Lafayette!', they burst into tears as they fell into each other's arms.\" Jefferson and Lafayette then retired to the house to reminisce. The next morning Jefferson, Lafayette, and James Madison attended a tour and banquet at the University of Virginia. Jefferson had someone else read a speech he had prepared for Lafayette, as his voice was weak and could not carry. This was his last public presentation. After an 11-day visit, Lafayette bid Jefferson goodbye and departed Monticello.\nFinal days, death, and burial.\nJefferson's approximately $100,000 of debt weighed heavily on his mind in his final months, as it became increasingly clear that he would have little to leave to his heirs. In February 1826, he successfully applied to the General Assembly to hold a public lottery as a fundraiser. His health began to deteriorate in July 1825, due to a combination of rheumatism from arm and wrist injuries, and intestinal and urinary disorders. By June 1826, he was confined to bed. On July 3, overcome by fever, Jefferson declined an invitation to attend an anniversary celebration of the Declaration in Washington.\nDuring his last hours, he was accompanied by family members and friends. Jefferson died on July 4, 1826, at 12:50\u00a0p.m. at age 83, on the 50th anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence. In the moments prior to his death, Jefferson instructed his treating physician, \"No, doctor, nothing more\", refusing laudanum. But his final significant words were, \"Is it the Fourth?\" or \"This is the Fourth\". When John Adams died later that same day, his last words were \"Thomas Jefferson survives\", though Adams was unaware that Jefferson had died several hours before. The sitting president was Adams's son, John Quincy Adams, and he called the coincidence of their deaths on the nation's anniversary \"visible and palpable remarks of Divine Favor\".\nShortly after Jefferson died, attendants found a gold locket on a chain around his neck, containing a small faded blue ribbon around a lock of his wife Martha's hair.\nJefferson was interred at Monticello, under an epitaph that he wrote:\nHERE WAS BURIED THOMAS JEFFERSON, AUTHOR OF THE DECLARATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, OF THE STATUTE OF VIRGINIA FOR RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, AND FATHER OF THE UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA.\nIn his advanced years, Jefferson became increasingly concerned that people would understand the principles in the Declaration of Independence, and the people responsible for writing it, and he continually defended himself as its author. He considered the document one of his greatest life achievements, in addition to authoring the Statute of Virginia for Religious Freedom and founding the University of Virginia. Absent from his epitaph were his political roles, including his presidency.\nJefferson died deeply in debt, and was unable to pass on his estate freely to his heirs. He gave instructions in his will for disposal of his assets, including the freeing of Sally Hemings's children; but his estate, possessions, and slaves were sold at public auctions starting in 1827. In 1831, Monticello was sold by Martha Jefferson Randolph and the other heirs.\nPolitical, social, and religious views.\nJefferson subscribed to the political ideals expounded by John Locke, Francis Bacon, and Isaac Newton, whom he considered the three greatest men who ever lived. He was also influenced by the writings of Gibbon, Hume, Robertson, Bolingbroke, Montesquieu, and Voltaire. Jefferson thought that the independent yeoman and agrarian life were ideals of republican virtues. He distrusted cities and financiers, favored decentralized government power, and believed that the tyranny that had plagued the common man in Europe was due to corrupt political establishments and monarchies. He supported efforts to disestablish the Church of England, wrote the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, and he pressed for a wall of separation between church and state. The Republicans under Jefferson were strongly influenced by the 18th-century British Whig Party, which believed in limited government. His Democratic-Republican Party became dominant in early American politics, and his views became known as Jeffersonian democracy.\nPhilosophy, society, and government.\nJefferson wrote letters and speeches prolifically; these show him to be well-read in the philosophical literature of his day and of antiquity. Nevertheless, some scholars do not take Jefferson seriously as a philosopher mainly because he did not produce a formal work on philosophy. However, he has been described as one of the most outstanding philosophical figures of his time because his work provided the theoretical background to, and the substance of, the social and political events of the revolutionary years and the development of the American Constitution in the 1770s and 1780s. Jefferson continued to attend to more theoretical questions of natural philosophy and subsequently left behind a rich philosophical legacy in the form of presidential messages, letters, and public papers.\nJefferson described himself as an Epicurean and agreed with Epictetus' works. Jefferson knew Epicurean philosophy from original sources, but also mentioned Pierre Gassendi's \"Syntagma philosophicum\" as influencing his ideas on Epicureanism.\nAccording to Jefferson's philosophy, citizens have \"certain inalienable rights\" and \"rightful liberty is unobstructed action according to our will, within limits drawn around us by the equal rights of others\". A staunch advocate of the jury system, he proclaimed in 1801, \"I consider [trial by jury] as the only anchor yet imagined by man, by which a government can be held to the principles of its constitution.\" Jeffersonian government not only prohibited individuals in society from infringing on the liberty of others, but also restrained itself from diminishing individual liberty as a protection against tyranny of the majority. Initially, Jefferson favored restricted voting to those who could actually have the free exercise of their reason by escaping any corrupting dependence on others. He advocated enfranchising a majority of Virginians, seeking to expand suffrage to include \"yeoman farmers\" who owned their own land while excluding tenant farmers, city day laborers, vagrants, most American Indians, and women.\nHe was convinced that individual liberties were the fruit of political equality, which was threatened by the arbitrary government. Excesses of democracy in his view were caused by institutional corruption rather than human nature. He was less suspicious of a working democracy than many contemporaries. As president, Jefferson feared that the federal system enacted by Washington and Adams had encouraged corrupting patronage and dependence. He tried to restore a balance between the state and federal governments more nearly reflecting the Articles of Confederation, seeking to reinforce state prerogatives where his party was in the majority.\nAccording to Stanford Scholar Jack Rakove, \"[w]hen Jefferson wrote 'all men are created equal' in the preamble to the Declaration, he was not talking about individual equality. What he really meant was that the American colonists, as a people, had the same rights of self-government as other peoples, and hence could declare independence, create new governments and assume their 'separate and equal station' among other nations.\" Jefferson's famous mantra later became a statement \"of individual equality that everyone and every member of a deprived group could claim for himself or herself\". Historian Henry Wiencek has noted Jefferson included slaves when he penned \"all men are created equal\" in the Declaration. As early as 1774, Jefferson had supported ending domestic slavery, and making slaves citizens. Later, writing in \"Notes\" (1781), Jefferson supported gradual emancipation of slaves, to be sent away from the U.S. to an unspecified place. The former slaves would be replaced by white immigrant workers. In 1792, Jefferson calculated that he was making a 4 percent profit every year on the birth of black children. After this he wrote that slavery presented an investment strategy for the future. Historian Brion Davis writes that Jefferson's emancipation efforts virtually ceased.\nJefferson was steeped in the Whig tradition of the oppressed majority set against a repeatedly unresponsive court party in the Parliament. He justified small outbreaks of rebellion as necessary to get monarchial regimes to amend oppressive measures compromising popular liberties. In a republican regime ruled by the majority, he acknowledged \"it will often be exercised when wrong\". But \"the remedy is to set them right as to facts, pardon and pacify them\". As Jefferson saw his party triumph in two terms of his presidency and launch into a third term under James Madison, his view of the U.S. as a continental republic and an \"empire of liberty\" grew more upbeat. On departing the presidency, he described America as \"trusted with the destines of this solitary republic of the world, the only monument of human rights, and the sole depository of the sacred fire of freedom and self-government\".\nJefferson was a supporter of American expansionism, writing in 1801 that \"it is impossible not to look forward to distant times when our rapid multiplication will expand itself beyond those limits, and cover the whole northern, if not the southern continent\".\nDemocracy.\nJefferson considered democracy to be the expression of society and promoted national self-determination, cultural uniformity, and education of all males of the commonwealth. He supported public education and a free press as essential components of a democratic nation.\nAfter resigning as secretary of state in 1793, Jefferson focused on the electoral bases of the Republicans and Federalists. The \"Republican\" classification for which he advocated included \"the entire body of landholders\" everywhere and \"the body of laborers\" without land. Republicans united behind Jefferson as vice president, with the election of 1796 expanding democracy nationwide at grassroots levels. Jefferson promoted Republican candidates for local offices.\nBeginning with Jefferson's electioneering for the \"revolution of 1800\", his political efforts were based on egalitarian appeals. In his later years, he referred to the 1800 election \"as real a revolution in the principles of our government as that of '76 was in its form\", one \"not effected indeed by the sword\u00a0... but by the\u00a0... suffrage of the people\". Voter participation grew during Jefferson's presidency, increasing to \"unimaginable levels\" compared to the Federalist Era, with turnout of about 67,000 in 1800 rising to about 143,000 in 1804.\nAt the onset of the American Revolution, Jefferson accepted William Blackstone's argument that property ownership would sufficiently empower voters' independent judgement, but he sought to further expand suffrage by land distribution to the poor. In the heat of the Revolutionary Era and afterward, several states expanded voter eligibility from landed gentry to all propertied male, tax-paying citizens with Jefferson's support. In retirement, he gradually became critical of his home state for violating \"the principle of equal political rights\"\u2014the social right of universal male suffrage. He sought a \"general suffrage\" of all taxpayers and militia-men, and equal representation by population in the General Assembly to correct preferential treatment of the slave-holding regions.\nReligion.\nChristianity.\nBaptized in his youth, Jefferson became a governing member of his local Episcopal Church in Charlottesville, which he later attended with his daughters. Jefferson, however, spurned Biblical views of Christianity. Influenced by Deist authors during his college years, Jefferson abandoned orthodox Christianity after his review of New Testament teachings. Jefferson has sometimes been portrayed as a follower of the liberal religious strand of Deism that values reason over revelation. Nonetheless, in 1803, Jefferson asserted, \"I am Christian, in the only sense in which [Jesus] wished any one to be\".\nJefferson later defined being a Christian as one who followed the simple teachings of Jesus. Influenced by Joseph Priestley, Jefferson selected New Testament passages of Jesus' teachings into a private work he called \"The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth\", known today as the \"Jefferson Bible\", which was never published during his lifetime. Jefferson believed that Jesus' message had been obscured and corrupted by Paul the Apostle, the Gospel writers and Protestant reformers. Peterson states that Jefferson was a theist \"whose God was the Creator of the universe\u00a0... all the evidences of nature testified to His perfection; and man could rely on the harmony and beneficence of His work\". In a letter to John Adams, Jefferson wrote that what he believed was genuinely Christ's, found in the Gospels, was \"as easily distinguishable as diamonds in a dunghill\". By omitting miracles and the resurrection, Jefferson made the figure of Jesus more compatible with a worldview based on reason.\nJefferson was firmly anticlerical, writing in \"every age, the priest has been hostile to liberty\u00a0... they have perverted the purest religion ever preached to man into mystery and jargon.\" The full letter to Horatio Spatford can be read at the National Archives. Jefferson once supported banning clergy from public office but later relented. In 1777, he drafted the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. Ratified in 1786, it made compelling attendance or contributions to any state-sanctioned religious establishment illegal and declared that men \"shall be free to profess\u00a0... their opinions in matters of religion\". The Statute is one of only three accomplishments he chose for his epitaph. Early in 1802, Jefferson wrote to the Danbury Connecticut Baptist Association that \"religion is a matter which lies solely between Man and his God\". He interpreted the First Amendment as having built \"a wall of separation between Church and State\". The phrase 'Separation of Church and State' has been cited several times by the Supreme Court in its interpretation of the Establishment Clause.\nJefferson donated to the American Bible Society, saying the Four Evangelists delivered a \"pure and sublime system of morality\" to humanity. He thought Americans would rationally create \"Apiarian\" religion, extracting the best traditions of every denomination. He contributed generously to several local denominations near Monticello. Acknowledging organized religion would always be factored into political life, he encouraged reason over supernatural revelation to make inquiries into religion. He believed in a creator god, an afterlife, and the sum of religion as loving God and neighbors. But he also controversially rejected fundamental Christian beliefs, denying the conventional Christian Trinity, Jesus's divinity as the Son of God and miracles, the Resurrection of Christ, atonement from sin, and original sin. Jefferson believed that original sin was a gross injustice.\nJefferson's unorthodox religious beliefs became an important issue in the 1800 presidential election. Federalists attacked him as an atheist. As president, Jefferson countered the accusations by praising religion in his inaugural address and attending services at the Capitol.\nIslam.\nIn October 1765, while Jefferson was still a law student he bought a copy of the Quran from the year 1734. He had the Quran shipped from England to Williamsburg, Virginia.\nBanks.\nJefferson distrusted government banks and opposed public borrowing, which he thought created long-term debt, bred monopolies, and invited dangerous speculation as opposed to productive labor. In one letter to Madison, he argued each generation should curtail all debt within 19 years, and not impose a long-term debt on subsequent generations.\nIn 1791, President Washington asked Jefferson, then secretary of state, and Hamilton, the secretary of the treasury, if the Congress had the authority to create a national bank. While Hamilton believed so, Jefferson and Madison thought a national bank would ignore the needs of individuals and farmers, and would violate the Tenth Amendment by assuming powers not granted to the federal government by the states. Hamilton successfully argued that the implied powers given to the federal government in the Constitution supported the creation of a national bank, among other federal actions.\nJefferson used agrarian resistance to banks and speculators as the first defining principle of an opposition party, recruiting candidates for Congress on the issue as early as 1792. As president, Jefferson was persuaded by Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin to leave the bank intact but sought to restrain its influence.\nSlavery.\nScholars give radically differing interpretations on Jefferson's views and relationship with slavery. Opinions range from \"emancipationists\" who view him as an early proto-abolitionist, who subsequently made pragmatic compromises with the slave power to preserve the union; to \"revisionists\", who argue that he in fact entrenched the institution in American society; with people also having more nuanced opinions, who either argue that Jefferson held inconsistent views on the institution throughout his lifetime or that both interpretations are too overly simplistic.\nJefferson lived in a planter economy largely dependent upon slavery, and as a wealthy landholder, used slave labor for his household, plantation, and workshops. He first recorded his slaveholding in 1774, when he counted 41 enslaved people. Over his lifetime he enslaved about 600 people; he inherited about 175 people while most of the remainder were people born on his plantations. Jefferson purchased some slaves in order to reunite their families. He sold approximately 110 people for economic reasons, primarily slaves from his outlying farms. In 1784, when the number of people he enslaved likely was approximately 200, he began to divest himself of many slaves, and by 1794 he had divested himself of 161 individuals.\nApproximately 100 slaves lived at Monticello at any given time. In 1817, the plantation recorded its largest slave population of 140 individuals.\nJefferson once said, \"My first wish is that the labourers may be well treated\". Jefferson did not work his slaves on Sundays and Christmas and he allowed them more personal time during the winter months. Some scholars doubt Jefferson's benevolence, noting cases of excessive slave whippings in his absence. His nail factory was staffed only by enslaved children. Many of the enslaved boys became tradesmen. Burwell Colbert, who started his working life as a child in Monticello's Nailery, was later promoted to the supervisory position of butler.\nJefferson felt slavery was harmful to both slave and master but had reservations about releasing slaves from captivity, and advocated for gradual emancipation. In 1779, he proposed gradual voluntary training and resettlement to the Virginia legislature, and three years later drafted legislation allowing slaveholders to free their own slaves. In his draft of the Declaration of Independence, he included a section, stricken by other Southern delegates, criticizing King George III for supposedly forcing slavery onto the colonies. In 1784, Jefferson proposed the abolition of slavery in all western U.S. territories, limiting slave importation to 15 years. Congress, however, failed to pass his proposal by one vote. In 1787, Congress passed the Northwest Ordinance, a partial victory for Jefferson that terminated slavery in the Northwest Territory. Jefferson freed his slave Robert Hemings in 1794 and he freed his cook slave James Hemings in 1796. Jefferson freed his runaway slave Harriet Hemings in 1822. Upon his death in 1826, Jefferson freed five male Hemings slaves in his will.\nDuring his presidency, Jefferson allowed the diffusion of slavery into the Louisiana Territory hoping to prevent slave uprisings in Virginia and to prevent South Carolina secession. In 1804, in a compromise, Jefferson and Congress banned domestic slave trafficking for one year into the Louisiana Territory. In 1806 he officially called for anti-slavery legislation terminating the import or export of slaves. Congress passed the law in 1807.\nIn 1819, Jefferson strongly opposed a Missouri statehood application amendment, which banned domestic slave importation and freed slaves at the age of 25 on grounds that it would destroy the union. In \"Notes on the State of Virginia\", he created controversy by calling slavery a moral evil for which the nation would ultimately have to account to God. Jefferson wrote of his \"suspicion\" that Black people were mentally and physically inferior to Whites, but argued that they nonetheless had innate human rights. He therefore supported colonization plans that would transport freed slaves to another country, such as Liberia or Sierra Leone, though he recognized the impracticability of such proposals. According to Eric Foner, \"In 1824 Jefferson proposed that the federal government purchase and deport 'the increase of each year' (that is, children), so that the slave population would age and eventually disappear.\"\nDuring his presidency, Jefferson was for the most part publicly silent on the issue of slavery and emancipation, as the Congressional debate over slavery and its extension caused a dangerous north\u2013south rift among the states, with talk of a northern confederacy in New England. The violent attacks on white slave owners during the Haitian Revolution due to injustices under slavery supported Jefferson's fears of a race war, increasing his reservations about promoting emancipation. After numerous attempts and failures to bring about emancipation, Jefferson wrote privately in an 1805 letter to William A. Burwell, \"I have long since given up the expectation of any early provision for the extinguishment of slavery among us.\" That same year he also related this idea to George Logan, writing, \"I have most carefully avoided every public act or manifestation on that subject.\"\nJefferson\u2013Hemings controversy.\nClaims that Jefferson fathered children with his slave Sally Hemings after his wife's death have been debated since 1802. In that year James T. Callender, after being denied a position as postmaster, alleged Jefferson had taken Hemings as a concubine and fathered several children with her. In 1998, a panel of researchers conducted a Y-DNA study of living descendants of Jefferson's uncle, Field, and of a descendant of Hemings's son, Eston Hemings. The results showed a match with the male Jefferson line. Subsequently, the Thomas Jefferson Foundation (TJF) formed a nine-member research team of historians to assess the matter. The TJF report concluded that \"the DNA study\u00a0... indicates a high probability that Thomas Jefferson fathered Eston Hemings\". The TJF also concluded that Jefferson likely fathered all of Hemings's children listed at Monticello.\nIn July 2017, the TJF announced that archeological excavations at Monticello had revealed what they believe to have been Sally Hemings's quarters, adjacent to Jefferson's bedroom. Since the results of the DNA tests were made public, the consensus among most historians has been that Jefferson had a sexual relationship with Sally Hemings and that he was the father of her son Eston Hemings.\nA minority of scholars maintain the evidence is insufficient to prove Jefferson's paternity conclusively. Based on DNA and other evidence, they note the possibility that additional Jefferson males, including his brother Randolph Jefferson and any one of Randolph's four sons, or his cousin, could have fathered Sally Hemings's children. In 2002, historian Merrill Peterson said: \"in the absence of direct documentary evidence either proving or refuting the allegation, nothing conclusive can be said about Jefferson's relations with Sally Hemings.\" Concerning the 1998 DNA study, Peterson said that \"the results of the DNA testing of Jefferson and Hemings descendants provided support for the idea that Jefferson was the father of at least one of Sally Hemings's children\".\nAfter Jefferson's death in 1826, although not formally manumitted, Sally Hemings was allowed by Jefferson's daughter Martha to live in Charlottesville as a free woman with her two sons until her death in 1835. The Monticello Association refused to allow Sally Hemings' descendants the right of burial at Monticello.\nInterests and activities.\nJefferson was a farmer, obsessed with new crops, soil conditions, garden designs, and scientific agricultural techniques. His main cash crop was tobacco, but its price was usually low and it was rarely profitable. He tried to achieve self-sufficiency with wheat, vegetables, flax, corn, hogs, sheep, poultry, and cattle to supply his family, slaves, and employees, but he lived perpetually beyond his means and was always in debt. Jefferson also planted two vineyards at Monticello and hoped to grow \"Vitis vinifera,\" the European wine grape species, to make wine, but the crop failed. His efforts were nonetheless an important contribution to the development of American viticulture.\nJefferson mastered architecture through self-study. His primary authority was Andrea Palladio's 1570 \"The Four Books of Architecture\", which outlines the principles of classical design. Jefferson helped popularize the Neo-Palladian style in the United States, utilizing designs for the Virginia State Capitol, the University of Virginia, Monticello, and others. It has been speculated that he was inspired by the Ch\u00e2teau de Rastignac in southwest France. Jefferson viewed the plans during his service as ambassador to France, and may have convinced the architect of the White House to modify the South Portico to resemble the ch\u00e2teau.\nIn archaeology in 1784, Jefferson, using the trench method, started excavating several Native American burial mounds in Virginia. His excavations were prompted by the \"Moundbuilders\" question and his careful methods allowed him to witness the stratigraphic layout, the various human remains and other artifacts inside the mound. The evidence present at the site granted him enough insight to admit that he saw no reason why the ancestors of the present-day Native Americans could not have raised those mounds.\nHe was interested in birds and wine, and was a noted gourmet. As a naturalist, he was fascinated by the Natural Bridge geological formation, and in 1774 successfully acquired the Bridge by a grant from George III.\nAs an advocate of Enlightenment ideals, Jefferson studied many aspects of the natural sciences and frequently corresponded, and even hosted on multiple occasions, with Prussian explorer, Alexander von Humboldt. These two figures regularly shared ideas and knowledge with one another with letters spanning multiple years.\nAmerican Philosophical Society.\nJefferson was a member of the American Philosophical Society for 35 years, beginning in 1780. Through the society he advanced the sciences and Enlightenment ideals, emphasizing that knowledge of science reinforced and extended freedom. His \"Notes on the State of Virginia\" was written in part as a contribution to the society. He became the society's third president on March 3, 1797, a few months after he was elected Vice President of the United States. In accepting, Jefferson stated: \"I feel no qualification for this distinguished post but a sincere zeal for all the objects of our institution and an ardent desire to see knowledge so disseminated through the mass of mankind that it may at length reach even the extremes of society, beggars and kings.\"\nOn March 10, 1797, Jefferson gave a lecture, later published as a paper in 1799, which reported on the skeletal remains of an extinct large sloth, which he named \"Megalonyx\", unearthed by saltpeter workers from a cave in what is now Monroe County, West Virginia. Jefferson is considered to be a pioneer of scientific paleontology research in North America.\nJefferson served as APS president for the next eighteen years, including through both terms of his presidency. He introduced Meriwether Lewis to the society, where various scientists tutored him in preparation for the Lewis and Clark Expedition. He resigned on January 20, 1815, but remained active through correspondence.\nLinguistics.\nJefferson had a lifelong interest in linguistics, and could speak, read, and write in a number of languages, including French, Greek, Italian, and German. In his early years, he excelled in classical languages. Jefferson later came to regard Greek as the \"perfect language\" as expressed in its laws and philosophy. While attending the College of William &amp; Mary, he taught himself Italian. Here Jefferson first became familiar with the Anglo-Saxon language, studying it in a linguistic and philosophical capacity. He owned 17 volumes of Anglo-Saxon texts and grammar and later wrote an essay on the Anglo-Saxon language. Jefferson claimed to have taught himself Spanish during his nineteen-day journey to France, using only a grammar guide and a copy of \"Don Quixote\".\nLinguistics played a significant role in how Jefferson modeled and expressed political and philosophical ideas. He believed that the study of ancient languages was essential in understanding the roots of modern language. Jefferson criticized language purists and supported the introduction of neologisms to English, foreseeing the emergence of \"an American dialect\". He described the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise, a body designated to regulate the French language, as an \"endeavor to arrest the progress of their language\".\nHe collected and understood a number of American Indian vocabularies and instructed Lewis and Clark to record and collect various Indian languages during their Expedition. When Jefferson moved from Washington after his presidency, he took 50 Native American vocabulary lists back to Monticello along with the rest of his possessions. Somewhere along the journey, a thief stole the heavy chest, thinking it was full of valuables, but its contents were dumped into the James River when the thief discovered it was only filled with papers. Thirty years of collecting were lost, with only a few fragments rescued from the muddy banks of the river.\nJefferson was not an outstanding orator and preferred to communicate through writing or remain silent if possible. Instead of delivering his State of the Union addresses himself, Jefferson wrote the annual messages and sent a representative to read them aloud in Congress, which started a tradition that continued until 1913, when President Woodrow Wilson chose to deliver his State of the Union address to Congress verbally and in person.\nInventions.\nJefferson invented many small practical devices and improved contemporary inventions, including a revolving book-stand and a \"Great Clock\" powered by the gravitational pull on cannonballs. He improved the pedometer, the polygraph (a device for duplicating writing), and the moldboard plow, an idea he never patented and gave to posterity. Jefferson can also be credited as the creator of the swivel chair, the first of which he created and used to write much of the Declaration of Independence. He first opposed patents but later supported them. From 1790 to 1793, as Secretary of State, he was the \"ex officio\" head of the three-person patent review board. He drafted reforms of US patent law which led to him being relieved of this duty in 1793, and also drastically changed the patent system.\nAs Minister to France, Jefferson was impressed by the military standardization program known as the \"Syst\u00e8me Gribeauval\", and initiated a program as president to develop interchangeable parts for firearms. For his inventiveness and ingenuity, Jefferson was awarded an honorary Doctor of Law degree from Harvard University in 1787.\nLegacy.\nHistorical reputation.\nJefferson is seen as an icon of individual liberty, democracy, and republicanism, hailed as the author of the Declaration of Independence, an architect of the American Revolution, and a renaissance man who promoted science and scholarship. The participatory democracy and expanded suffrage he championed defined his era and became a standard for later generations. Jon Meacham opined that Jefferson was the most influential figure of the democratic republic in its first half-century, succeeded by presidential adherents James Madison, James Monroe, Andrew Jackson, and Martin Van Buren. A Siena Research Institute poll of presidential scholars, which began in 1982, has consistently ranked Jefferson as one of the five best U.S. presidents, and a 2015 Brookings Institution poll of American Political Science Association members ranked him as the fifth-greatest president.\nMemorials and honors.\nJefferson has been memorialized with buildings, sculptures, postage, and currency. In the 1920s, Jefferson, together with George Washington, Theodore Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln, was chosen by sculptor Gutzon Borglum and approved by President Calvin Coolidge to be depicted in a stone national memorial at Mount Rushmore in the Black Hills in South Dakota.\nThe Jefferson Memorial was dedicated in Washington, D.C., in 1943, on the 200th anniversary of Jefferson's birth. The interior of the memorial includes a statue of Jefferson by Rudulph Evans and engravings of passages from Jefferson's writings. Most prominent among these passages are the words inscribed around the Jefferson Memorial: \"I have sworn upon the altar of God eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man\", a quote from Jefferson's September 23, 1800, letter to Benjamin Rush.\nSeveral species have been named after Jefferson, both during and after his life. Most notable is from a fossil taxon of ground sloths, \u2020\"Megalonyx\". Jefferson himself had defined the genus in 1799 without naming a species. The species of the type fossil would be classified \u2020\"M. jeffersonii\" (Jefferson's ground sloth) in honor of Jefferson by Anselme Ga\u00ebtan Desmarest in 1822. The flower genus \"Jeffersonia\" (Barton, 1793) and Virginia's state fossil \u2020\"Chesapecten jeffersonius\" (Say, 1824) were also named after Jefferson during his lifetime. After his death, \u2020\"Carabus jeffersoni\" (Scudder, 1900); \u2020\"Mammuthus jeffersonii\" (Osborn, 1922); \"Brachypanorpa jeffersoni\" (Byers, 1976); \u2020\"Boreogomphodon jeffersoni\" (Sues &amp; Olsen, 1990); and \"Coiba jeffersoni\" (Kula, 2009) would be named in his honor.\nIn October 2021, in response to lobbying, the New York City Public Design Commission voted unanimously to remove the plaster model of the statue of Jefferson that currently stands in the United States Capitol rotunda from the chamber of the New York City Council, where it had been for more than a century, due to him fathering children with people he enslaved. The statue was taken down the next month.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\nScholarly studies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThomas Jefferson Foundation sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb site sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "29923", "revid": "13783", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29923", "title": "Telepathy", "text": "Psychic ability\nTelepathy (from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'distant' and \" \"/\" ()\"\u00a0'feeling, perception, passion, affliction, experience') is the purported vicarious transmission of information from one person's mind to another's without using any known human sensory channels or physical interaction. The term was first coined in 1882 by the classical scholar Frederic W. H. Myers, a founder of the Society for Psychical Research (SPR), and has remained more popular than the earlier expression \"thought-transference\".\nTelepathy experiments have historically been criticized for a lack of proper controls and repeatability. There is no good evidence that telepathy exists, and the topic is generally considered by the scientific community to be pseudoscience. Telepathy is a common theme in science fiction.\nOrigins of the concept.\nAccording to historians such as Roger Luckhurst and Janet Oppenheim the origin of the concept of telepathy in Western civilization can be traced to the late 19th century and the formation of the Society for Psychical Research. As the physical sciences made significant advances, scientific concepts were applied to mental phenomena (e.g., animal magnetism), with the hope that this would help to understand paranormal phenomena. The modern concept of telepathy emerged in this context.\nPsychical researcher Eric Dingwall criticized SPR founding members Frederic W. H. Myers and William F. Barrett for trying to \"prove\" telepathy rather than objectively analyze whether or not it existed.\nThought reading.\nIn the late 19th century, the magician and mentalist Washington Irving Bishop would perform \"thought reading\" demonstrations. Bishop claimed no supernatural powers and ascribed his powers to muscular sensitivity (reading thoughts from unconscious bodily cues). Bishop was investigated by a group of scientists including the editor of the \"British Medical Journal\" and the psychologist Francis Galton. Bishop performed several feats successfully, such as correctly identifying a selected spot on a table and locating a hidden object. During the experiment, Bishop required physical contact with a subject who knew the correct answer. He would hold the hand or wrist of the helper. The scientists concluded that Bishop was not a genuine telepath but was instead using a highly trained skill to detect ideomotor movements.\nAnother famous thought reader was the magician Stuart Cumberland. He was famous for performing blindfolded feats such as identifying a hidden object in a room that a person had picked out or asking someone to imagine a murder scene and then attempt to read the subject's thoughts and identify the victim and reenact the crime. Cumberland claimed to possess no genuine psychic ability and his thought-reading performances could only be demonstrated by holding the hand of his subject to read their muscular movements. He came into dispute with psychical researchers associated with the Society for Psychical Research who were searching for genuine cases of telepathy. Cumberland argued that both telepathy and communication with the dead were impossible and that the minds of people cannot be read through telepathy, but only by muscle reading.\nCase studies.\nIn the late 19th century the Creery Sisters (Mary, Alice, Maud, Kathleen, and Emily) were tested by the Society for Psychical Research and believed to have genuine psychic ability. However, during a later experiment they were caught utilizing signal codes and they confessed to fraud. George Albert Smith and Douglas Blackburn were claimed to be genuine psychics by the Society for Psychical Research but Blackburn confessed to fraud:\nFor nearly thirty years the telepathic experiments conducted by Mr. G. A. Smith and myself have been accepted and cited as the basic evidence of the truth of thought transference...\n...the whole of those alleged experiments were bogus, and originated in the honest desire of two youths to show how easily men of scientific mind and training could be deceived when seeking for evidence in support of a theory they were wishful to establish.\nBetween 1916 and 1924, Gilbert Murray conducted 236 experiments into telepathy and reported 36% as successful. However, it was suggested that the results could be explained by hyperaesthesia as he could hear what was being said by the sender. Psychologist Leonard T. Troland had carried out experiments in telepathy at Harvard University which were reported in 1917. The subjects produced below chance expectations.\nArthur Conan Doyle and W. T. Stead were duped into believing Julius and Agnes Zancig had genuine psychic powers. Both Doyle and Stead wrote that the Zancigs performed telepathy. In 1924, Julius and Agnes Zancig confessed that their mind reading act was a trick and published the secret code and all the details of the trick method they had used under the title of \"Our Secrets!!\" in a London newspaper.\nIn 1924, Robert H. Gault of Northwestern University with Gardner Murphy conducted the first American radio test for telepathy. The results were entirely negative. One of their experiments involved the attempted thought transmission of a chosen number between one and one-thousand. Out of 2,010 replies, none was correct. This is below the theoretical chance figure of two correct replies in such a situation.\nIn February 1927, with the co-operation of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), V. J. Woolley, who was at the time the Research Officer for the SPR, arranged a telepathy experiment in which radio listeners were asked to take part. The experiment involved 'agents' thinking about five selected objects in an office at Tavistock Square, whilst listeners on the radio were asked to identify the objects from the BBC studio at Savoy Hill. 24,659 answers were received. The results revealed no evidence of telepathy.\nA famous experiment in telepathy was recorded by the American author Upton Sinclair in his book \"Mental Radio\" which documents Sinclair's test of psychic abilities of Mary Craig Sinclair, his second wife. She attempted to duplicate 290 pictures which were drawn by her husband. Sinclair claimed Mary successfully duplicated 65 of them, with 155 \"partial successes\" and 70 failures. However, these experiments were not conducted in a controlled scientific laboratory environment. Science writer Martin Gardner suggested that the possibility of sensory leakage during the experiment had not been ruled out:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Turner-Ownbey long distance telepathy experiment was discovered to contain flaws. May Frances Turner positioned herself in the Duke Parapsychology Laboratory whilst Sara Ownbey claimed to receive transmissions 250 miles away. For the experiment Turner would think of a symbol and write it down whilst Ownbey would write her guesses. The scores were highly successful and both records were supposed to be sent to J. B. Rhine; however, Ownbey sent them to Turner. Critics pointed out this invalidated the results as she could have simply written her own record to agree with the other. When the experiment was repeated and the records were sent to Rhine the scores dropped to average.\nAnother example is the experiment carried out by the author Harold Sherman with the explorer Hubert Wilkins who carried out their own experiment in telepathy for five and a half months starting in October 1937. This took place when Sherman was in New York and Wilkins was in the Arctic. The experiment consisted of Sherman and Wilkins at the end of each day to relax and visualise a mental image or \"thought impression\" of the events or thoughts they had experienced in the day and then to record those images and thoughts on paper in a diary. The results at the end when comparing Sherman's and Wilkins' diaries were claimed to be more than 60 percent.\nThe full results of the experiments were published in 1942 in a book by Sherman and Wilkins titled \"Thoughts Through Space\". In the book, both Sherman and Wilkins had written they believed they had demonstrated that it was possible to send and receive thought impressions from the mind of one person to another. The magician John Booth wrote that the experiment was not an example of telepathy as a high percentage of misses had occurred. Booth wrote it was more likely that the \"hits\" were the result of \"coincidence, law of averages, subconscious expectancy, logical inference or a plain lucky guess\". A review of their book in the \"American Journal of Orthopsychiatry\" cast doubt on their experiment, noting \"the study was published five years after it was conducted, arouses suspicion on the validity of the conclusions.\nIn 1948, on the BBC radio Maurice Fogel made the claim that he could demonstrate telepathy. This intrigued the journalist Arthur Helliwell who wanted to discover his methods. He found that Fogel's mind reading acts were all based on trickery as he relied on information about members of his audience before the show started. Helliwell exposed Fogel's methods in a newspaper article. Although Fogel managed to fool some people into believing he could perform genuine telepathy, the majority of his audience knew he was a showman.\nIn a series of experiments Samuel Soal and his assistant K. M. Goldney examined 160 subjects over 128,000 trials and obtained no evidence for the existence of telepathy. Soal tested Basil Shackleton and Gloria Stewart between 1941 and 1943 in over five hundred sittings and over twenty thousand guesses. Shackleton scored 2890 compared with a chance expectation of 2308 and Gloria scored 9410 compared with a chance level of 7420. It was later discovered the results had been tampered with. Gretl Albert who was present during many of the experiments said she had witnessed Soal altering the records during the sessions. Betty Marwick discovered Soal had not used the method of random selection of numbers as he had claimed. Marwick showed that there had been manipulation of the score sheets and all experiments reported by Soal had thereby become discredited.\nIn 1979 the physicists John G. Taylor and Eduardo Balanovski wrote the only scientifically feasible explanation for telepathy could be electromagnetism (EM) involving EM fields. In a series of experiments the EM levels were many orders of magnitude lower than calculated and no paranormal effects were observed. Both Taylor and Balanovski wrote their results were a strong argument against the validity of telepathy.\nResearch in anomalistic psychology has discovered that in some cases telepathy can be explained by a covariation bias. In an experiment (Schienle \"et al\". 1996) 22 believers and 20 skeptics were asked to judge the covariation between transmitted symbols and the corresponding feedback given by a receiver. According to the results the believers overestimated the number of successful transmissions whilst the skeptics made accurate hit judgments. The results from another telepathy experiment involving 48 undergraduate college students (Rudski, 2002) were explained by hindsight and confirmation biases. \nIn 1995, Rupert Sheldrake published his book on alleged telepathic phenomena \"Seven Experiments That Could Change the World\", claiming among other things that dogs have the telepathic ability to know when their owners are coming home. In 1998, Richard Wiseman, Matthew Smith and Julie Milton published a paper putting forward other explanations for the behavior Sheldrake observed in animals while saying the results from their own experiments did not support Sheldrake's thesis.\nIn parapsychology.\nWithin parapsychology, telepathy, often along with precognition and clairvoyance, is described as an aspect of extrasensory perception (ESP) or \"anomalous cognition\" that parapsychologists believe is transferred through a hypothetical psychic mechanism they call \"psi\". Parapsychologists have reported experiments they use to test for telepathic abilities. Among the most well known are the use of Zener cards and the Ganzfeld experiment.\nTypes.\nSeveral forms of telepathy have been suggested:\nZener cards.\nZener cards are marked with five distinctive symbols. When using them, one individual is designated the \"sender\" and another the \"receiver\". The sender selects a random card and visualizes the symbol on it, while the receiver attempts to determine that symbol telepathically. Statistically, the receiver has a 20% chance of randomly guessing the correct symbol, so to demonstrate telepathy, they must repeatedly score a success rate that is significantly higher than 20%. If not conducted properly, this method is vulnerable to sensory leakage and card counting.\nJ. B. Rhine's experiments with Zener cards were discredited due to the discovery that sensory leakage or cheating could account for all his results such as the subject being able to read the symbols from the back of the cards and being able to see and hear the experimenter to note subtle clues. Once Rhine took precautions in response to criticisms of his methods, he was unable to find any high-scoring subjects. Due to the methodological problems, parapsychologists no longer utilize card-guessing studies.\nDream telepathy.\nParapsychological studies into dream telepathy were carried out at the Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn, New York led by Stanley Krippner and Montague Ullman. They concluded the results from some of their experiments supported dream telepathy. However, the results have not been independently replicated. The psychologist James Alcock has written the dream telepathy experiments at Maimonides have failed to provide evidence for telepathy and \"lack of replication is rampant.\"\nThe picture target experiments that were conducted by Krippner and Ullman were criticized by C. E. M. Hansel. According to Hansel there were weaknesses in the design of the experiments in the way in which the agent became aware of their target picture. Only the agent should have known the target and no other person until the judging of targets had been completed, however, an experimenter was with the agent when the target envelope was opened. Hansel also wrote there had been poor controls in the experiment as the main experimenter could communicate with the subject.\nAn attempt to replicate the experiments that used picture targets was carried out by Edward Belvedere and David Foulkes. The finding was that neither the subject nor the judges matched the targets with dreams above chance level. Results from other experiments by Belvedere and Foulkes were also negative.\nGanzfeld experiment.\nWhen using the Ganzfeld experiment to test for telepathy, one individual is designated as the receiver and is placed inside a controlled environment where they are deprived of sensory input, and another person is designated as the sender and is placed in a separate location. The receiver is then required to receive information from the sender. The nature of the information may vary between experiments.\nThe Ganzfeld experiment studies that were examined by Ray Hyman and Charles Honorton had methodological problems that were well documented. Honorton reported only 36% of the studies used duplicate target sets of pictures to avoid handling cues. Hyman discovered flaws in all of the 42 Ganzfeld experiments and to access each experiment, he devised a set of 12 categories of flaws. Six of these concerned statistical defects, the other six covered procedural flaws such as inadequate documentation, randomization and security as well as possibilities of sensory leakage. Over half of the studies failed to safeguard against sensory leakage and all of the studies contained at least one of the 12 flaws. Because of the flaws, Honorton agreed with Hyman the 42 Ganzfeld studies could not support the claim for the existence of psi.\nPossibilities of sensory leakage in the Ganzfeld experiments included the receivers hearing what was going on in the sender's room next door as the rooms were not soundproof and the sender's fingerprints to be visible on the target object for the receiver to see.\nHyman also reviewed the autoganzfeld experiments and discovered a pattern in the data that implied a visual cue may have taken place:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHyman wrote the autoganzfeld experiments were flawed because they did not preclude the possibility of sensory leakage. In 2010, Lance Storm, Patrizio Tressoldi, and Lorenzo Di Risio analyzed 29 ganzfeld studies from 1997 to 2008. Of the 1,498 trials, 483 produced hits, corresponding to a hit rate of 32.2%. This hit rate is statistically significant with p &lt; .001. Participants selected for personality traits and personal characteristics thought to be psi-conducive were found to perform significantly better than unselected participants in the ganzfeld condition. Hyman (2010) published a rebuttal to Storm \"et al\". According to Hyman \"reliance on meta-analysis as the sole basis for justifying the claim that an anomaly exists and that the evidence for it is consistent and replicable is fallacious. It distorts what scientists mean by confirmatory evidence.\" Hyman wrote the ganzfeld studies have not been independently replicated and have failed to produce evidence for telepathy. Storm \"et al\". published a response to Hyman claiming the ganzfeld experimental design has proved to be consistent and reliable but parapsychology is a struggling discipline that has not received much attention so further research on the subject is necessary. Rouder \"et al\". 2013 wrote that critical evaluation of Storm \"et al\".'s meta-analysis reveals no evidence for telepathy, no plausible mechanism and omitted replication failures. A 2016 paper examined questionable research practices in the ganzfeld experiments.\nTwin telepathy.\nTwin telepathy is a belief that has been described as a myth in psychological literature. Psychologists Stephen Hupp and Jeremy Jewell have noted that all experiments on the subject have failed to provide any scientific evidence for telepathy between twins. According to Hupp and Jewell there are various behavioral and genetic factors that contribute to the twin telepathy myth \"identical twins typically spend a lot of time together and are usually exposed to very similar environments. Thus, it's not at all surprising that they act in similar ways and are adept at anticipating and forecasting each other's reactions to events.\"\nA 1993 study by Susan Blackmore investigated the claims of twin telepathy. In an experiment with six sets of twins one subject would act as the sender and the other the receiver. The sender was given selected objects, photographs or numbers and would attempt to psychically send the information to the receiver. The results from the experiment were negative, no evidence of telepathy was observed.\nThe skeptical investigator Benjamin Radford has noted that \"Despite decades of research trying to prove telepathy, there is no credible scientific evidence that psychic powers exist, either in the general population or among twins specifically. The idea that two people who shared their mother's womb\u2014or even who share the same DNA\u2014have a mysterious mental connection is an intriguing one not borne out in science.\"\nAutism Telepathy.\nThere are multiple anecdotes in \"The Telepathy Tapes\" podcast of people on the autistic spectrum transferring information telepathically.\nScientific reception.\nA variety of tests have been performed to demonstrate telepathy, but there is no scientific evidence that the power exists. A panel commissioned by the United States National Research Council to study paranormal claims concluded that \"despite a 130-year record of scientific research on such matters, our committee could find no scientific justification for the existence of phenomena such as extrasensory perception, mental telepathy or 'mind over matter' exercises... Evaluation of a large body of the best available evidence simply does not support the contention that these phenomena exist.\" The scientific community considers parapsychology a pseudoscience. There is no known mechanism for telepathy. Philosopher and physicist Mario Bunge has written that telepathy would contradict laws of science and the claim that \"signals can be transmitted across space without fading with distance is inconsistent with physics\".\nPhysicist John Taylor has written that the experiments that have been claimed by parapsychologists to support evidence for the existence of telepathy are based on the use of shaky statistical analysis and poor design, and attempts to duplicate such experiments by the scientific community have failed. Taylor also wrote the arguments used by parapsychologists for the feasibility of such phenomena are based on distortions of theoretical physics as well as \"complete ignorance\" of relevant areas of physics.\nPsychologist Stuart Sutherland wrote that cases of telepathy can be explained by people underestimating the probability of coincidences. According to Sutherland, \"most stories about this phenomenon concern people who are close to one another\u2014husband and wife or brother and sister. Since such people have much in common, it is highly probable that they will sometimes think the same thought at the same time.\" Graham Reed, a specialist in anomalistic psychology, noted that experiments into telepathy often involve the subject relaxing and reporting the 'messages' to consist of colored geometric shapes. Reed wrote that these are a common type of hypnagogic image and not evidence for telepathic communication.\nOutside of parapsychology, telepathy is generally explained as the result of fraud, self-delusion and/or self-deception and not as a paranormal power. Psychological research has also revealed other explanations such as confirmation bias, expectancy bias, sensory leakage, subjective validation, and wishful thinking. Virtually all of the instances of more popular psychic phenomena, such as mediumship, can be attributed to non-paranormal techniques such as cold reading. Magicians such as Ian Rowland and Derren Brown have demonstrated techniques and results similar to those of popular psychics, albeit without claiming paranormal skills. They have identified, described, and developed psychological techniques of cold reading and hot reading.\nPsychiatry.\nThe notion of telepathy is not dissimilar to three clinical concepts: delusions of thought insertion/removal and thought broadcasting. This similarity might explain how an individual might come to the conclusion that he or she were experiencing telepathy. Thought insertion/removal is a symptom of psychosis, particularly of schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder or substance-induced psychosis. Psychiatric patients who experience this symptom falsely believe that some of their thoughts are not their own and that others (e.g., other people, aliens, demons or fallen angels, or conspiring intelligence agencies, or artificial intelligences) are putting thoughts into their minds (thought insertion). Some patients feel as if thoughts are being taken out of their minds or deleted (thought removal). Schizophrenic patients suffering from the form of alleged telepathy known as thought broadcasting believe that their private thoughts are being broadcast to other people against their informed consent. Along with other symptoms of psychosis, delusions of thought insertion may be reduced by antipsychotic medication. Psychiatrists and clinical psychologists believe and empirical findings support the idea that people with schizotypy and schizotypal personality disorder are particularly likely to believe in telepathy.\nUse in fiction.\nTelepathy is a common theme in science fiction.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29924", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29924", "title": "Book of Mormon (a)", "text": ""}
{"id": "29925", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29925", "title": "Transuranic", "text": ""}
{"id": "29927", "revid": "32575524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29927", "title": "Texas A&amp;M University", "text": "Public research university in College Station, Texas, US\nTexas A&amp;M University (Texas A&amp;M, A&amp;M, TA&amp;M, or TAMU) is a public, land-grant, research university in College Station, Texas, United States. It was founded in 1876 and became the flagship institution of the Texas A&amp;M University System in 1948. Since 2021, Texas A&amp;M has enrolled the largest student body in the United States. It is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\" and since 2001 has been a member of the Association of American Universities.\nThe university was the first public higher education institution in Texas; it opened for classes on October 4, 1876, as the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas (A.M.C.) under the provisions of the 1862 Morrill Land-Grant Act. In the following decades, the college grew in size and scope, expanding to its largest enrollment during WWII before its first significant stagnation in enrollment post-war. Enrollment grew again in the 1960s under the leadership of President James Earl Rudder, during whose tenure the college desegregated, became coeducational, and ended the requirement for participation in the Corps of Cadets. In 1963, to reflect the institution's expanded roles and academic offerings, the Texas Legislature renamed the college Texas A&amp;M University; the letters \"A&amp;M\" were retained as a tribute to the university's former designation.\nThe university's main campus spans over and includes the George H. W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum. The university offers degrees in more than 130 courses of study through 18 colleges and houses 21 research institutes. As a senior military college, Texas A&amp;M is one of six American universities classed as such and has a full-time, volunteer Cadet Corps whose members study alongside civilian undergraduate students. About one-fifth of the student body lives on campus. Texas A&amp;M has more than 1,000 officially recognized student organizations. The university's students, alumni, and sports teams are known as Aggies. Its athletes compete in eighteen varsity sports as a member of the Southeastern Conference.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nIn 1862, the U.S. Congress passed the Morrill Act, which auctioned land grants of public lands to establish endowments for colleges at which the \"leading object shall be, without excluding other scientific and classical studies and including military tactics, to teach such branches of learning as are related to agriculture and mechanical arts\u00a0... to promote the liberal and practical education of the industrial classes in the several pursuits and professions in life\". In 1871, the Texas Legislature used these funds to establish the state's first public institution of higher education, the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas, (Texas A.M.C.). Brazos County donated near Bryan, Texas, for the college's campus. From its beginning until the late 1920s, students were officially nicknamed \"Farmers\" but the moniker \"Aggies\"\u2014a common nickname for students at schools focused heavily on agriculture\u2014gained favor and became the official student-body nickname in 1949.\nThe first day of classes was set for October 2, 1876, but only six students enrolled on the first day. Classes were delayed and officially began on October 4 with six faculty members and forty students at the military school. During the first semester, enrollment increased to 48 students and by the end of the 1877 spring semester, 106 students had enrolled. Admission was limited to white males, who were required to participate in the Corps of Cadets and receive military training. Originally, the college taught no classes in agriculture or engineering, instead concentrating on classical studies, languages, literature, and applied mathematics. After initial resistance from faculty, the college began to focus on degrees in scientific agriculture, and civil and mechanical engineering. In 1881, enrollment grew to 258 but declined to 108 in 1883, the same year the University of Texas opened in Austin. Although originally envisioned and annotated in the Texas Constitution as a branch of the soon-to-begin University of Texas, Texas A.M.C. had a separate Board of Directors from the University of Texas and was never incorporated into the University of Texas System.\nIn the late 1880s, many Texas residents saw no need for two colleges in Texas and advocated for the elimination of Texas A.M.C. In 1891, the college was saved from closure by its new president Lawrence Sullivan Ross, former Governor of Texas and former Confederate Brigadier General, by demonstrating the college could function and excel in its established form under proper leadership. Ross made many improvements to the campus, installing running water and permanent dormitories. Enrollment doubled under his tenure to 467 cadets as parents sent their sons to Texas A.M.C. to emulate the traits of Ross. Many college traditions began under Ross's presidency, including the creation of the first Aggie Ring, the senior class ring. Ross served until his death in 1898; to honor his contributions to the college, a statue of him was erected in 1918 in front of modern-day Academic Plaza.\nInitially, women were permitted to attend classes only as \"special students\" but were not permitted to seek degrees. In 1893, Ethel Hudson, a daughter of one of the faculty, became the first woman to take classes; in 1899, her sisters Sophie and Mary\u00a0Hudson did the same. Though not explicitly envisioned as such, over time it became a \"de facto\" all-male institution and led to a decades-long debate about the role of women at the college. In 1911, under pressure from the Texas Legislature, the college allowed women to attend classes during the summer semester. A.M.C. expanded its academic offerings with the establishment of the School of Veterinary Medicine in 1915.\nWorld Wars era.\nMany Texas A&amp;M alumni served during World War I and by 1918, 49% of all Aggies were in military service, a higher proportion than that of any other American college or university. In early September 1918, the entire senior class enlisted, and there were plans to send the younger students at staggered dates throughout the next year. Many of the seniors were fighting in France when the war ended two months later. More than 1,200 alumni served as commissioned officers. After the war, Texas A&amp;M grew rapidly and became nationally recognized for its programs in agriculture, engineering, and military science. The first graduate school was organized in 1924 and the school awarded its first PhD in 1940. In 1925, Mary Evelyn Crawford Locke became the first female student to receive a diploma from Texas A&amp;M but she was not allowed to participate in the graduation ceremony. The following month, the Board of Directors officially prohibited all women from enrolling.\nMany Texas A&amp;M alumni served in the military during World War II; the college's educational and technical training resulted in 20,229 trained combat troops for U.S. military efforts. Of those, 14,123 alumni served as officers, more than any other school, and more than the combined total of the United States Naval Academy and the United States Military Academy. At the start of World War II, Texas A&amp;M was selected as one of six engineering colleges to participate in the Electronics Training Program, which would train Navy personnel to maintain new radar systems. During the war, 29 Texas A&amp;M graduates reached the rank of general.\nAfter the end of World War II, enrollment rapidly grew as many former soldiers used the G.I. Bill to fund their education; however, enrollment stagnated in the following decade.\nUniversity era.\nIn 1948, the state legislature established the Texas A&amp;M College Station campus as the flagship of a new system of universities, the Texas A&amp;M University System. Its goal was to serve as the lead institution to foster the evolution of a statewide educational, research and service system.\nOn July 1, 1959, Major General James Earl Rudder, class of 1932, became the 16th president of the college. In 1963, with the backing of State Senator William T. \"Bill\" Moore, the 58th Legislature of Texas approved Rudder's proposal for a substantial expansion of the college. Over the coming years, Texas A&amp;M augmented and upgraded its physical plant and facilities, and diversified and expanded its student body by admitting women and minorities. Membership in the Corps of Cadets also became voluntary from the start of the fall semester of 1963. Initially, the decision to admit women made the student body very unhappy. The change was initially resisted and some minor efforts to reverse it persisted for several decades. The positive impact of these changes was rapid. By 1972, on-campus housing was dedicated for women and in 1976, the student body elected its first Black student-body president. In the same series of actions, the Texas legislature officially renamed the school \"Texas A&amp;M University\", specifying the symbolic nature of the letters \"A\" and \"M\", which reflect the institution's past, and no longer denote \"Agricultural and Mechanical\".\nBy the time of his death in 1970, Rudder had overseen the growth of the college from 7,500 to 14,000 students from all 50 U.S. states and from 75 other nations. In the 35 years following his death, Texas A&amp;M more than tripled its enrollment from 14,000\u00a0students to more than 45,000. Texas A&amp;M became one of the first four universities given the designation sea-grant for its achievements in oceanography and marine resources development in 1971. In 1989, the university earned the title space-grant from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to recognize its commitment to space research and participation in the Texas Space Grant Consortium. In 1997, the university opened the Bush School of Government and Public Service and the George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum\u2014one of fifteen American presidential libraries operated by the National Archives and Records Administration. Former U.S. President George H.W. Bush remained actively involved with the university, frequently visiting the campus and participating in special events until his death in 2018. He was buried on campus.\n21st century.\nWith strong support from Rice University and the University of Texas, the Association of American Universities inducted Texas A&amp;M in May 2001. On July 12, 2013, Texas A&amp;M Health Science Center was formally merged into the university. On August 12, 2013, the university acquired the Texas Wesleyan University School of Law and renamed it the Texas A&amp;M University School of Law.\nIn 2017, the retention of the statue of Lawrence Sullivan \"Sul\" Ross was in question after other institutions removed statues of former Confederate officers. The Texas A&amp;M University System Chancellor, John Sharp, and President, Michael Young, announced the statue would remain on campus because it is not based upon his service in the Confederate Army. Amid the nationwide Black Lives Matter riots, attempts in 2020 by a group of students and activists to secure its removal were rebuffed by the university's administration, other students and alumni, and counter-protestors. The university also confirmed that the removal of the statue would require approval from the Texas Legislature.\nIn 2022, university president M. Katherine Banks implemented university-wide administrative restructuring that involved several changes to academic unit names and branding. The College of Science, the College of Geosciences, and the College of Liberal Arts, were merged to form the Texas A&amp;M University College of Arts &amp; Sciences. Several academic units underwent a change in name including the Texas A&amp;M University Irma Lerma Rangel School of Pharmacy. The following year, Banks abruptly resigned in July after her role in the failed attempt to hire Kathleen McElroy via unauthorized means and subsequent cover-up. McElroy's potential hiring was heavily criticized by conservative groups and alumni due to her work about race and gender in newsrooms. After Banks resigned, Mark A. Welsh III, the dean of the Bush School of Government and Public Service, was appointed interim president and became the university's president later that year.\nOn September 19, 2025, then-president of the university, Mark A. Welsh III, resigned under backlash from the state and federal governments surrounding the teaching of a children's book (\"Jude Saves the World\") involving LGBTQ themes and the subsequent firing of Dr. Melissa McCoul, the instructor of the summer course in children's literature within the English Department at the College of Arts and Sciences.\nCampuses.\nCollege Station campus.\nTexas A&amp;M's College Station campus spans and Research Park covers an additional . The university is part of the Bryan-College Station metropolitan area of Brazos County, which is located in the Brazos Valley (Southeast Central Texas) region, an area often referred to as \"Aggieland\". Brazos Valley is centrally located within of three of the ten largest cities in the U.S. and 75% of the population of Texas and Louisiana\u2014approximately 13\u00a0million people. The area's major roadway is State Highway 6, and several smaller state highways and Farm to Market Roads connect the area to larger highways such as Interstate 45.\nThe College Station campus is bisected by a railroad track operated by Union Pacific. The area east of the tracks, known as main campus, includes buildings for the colleges of engineering, architecture, geosciences, science, education, and liberal arts. Dormitories, the main dining centers, and many campus support facilities are also on the main campus. Notable buildings on the main campus include Kyle Field, Sterling C. Evans Library, the Academic Building, Harrington Hall, the Memorial Student Center, the Administration Building, Rudder Tower, Albritton Bell Tower, and the Bonfire Memorial. To the west of the railroad tracks lies West Campus, which includes most of the sports facilities, the business school, agricultural programs, life sciences, the veterinary college, the political science and economics school, George Bush School of Government &amp; Public Service, George Bush Presidential Library, and two schools within the Texas A&amp;M Health Science Center.\nBranch campuses.\nBesides the College Station main campus, the university formally includes three branch campuses:\nTexas A&amp;M Health maintains several other Health Science Centers and campuses away from the Bryan-College Station campus. The School of Engineering Medicine (EnMed), at the Houston Methodist Hospital, and the Texas A&amp;M Institute of Biosciences and Technology, are both located in the Texas Medical Center in Houston. The School of Dentistry is located in Dallas, and the institution has a presence in Corpus Christi, Kingsville, Lufkin, McAllen, Round Rock, and Temple. Texas A&amp;M School of Law, formerly Texas Wesleyan University School of Law, is located in Fort Worth. Texas A&amp;M maintains the RELLIS Campus, formerly the Texas A&amp;M University-Riverside Campus and Bryan Air Force Base, which was transferred from the university to become a separate entity within the Texas A&amp;M University System in September 2015.\nAcademics.\nAdministration and organization.\nTexas A&amp;M is part of the Texas A&amp;M University System, which consists of eleven universities, eight state agencies, and the RELLIS Campus. The system is governed by a ten-member Board of Regents, nine of whom are appointed by the Governor of Texas to six-year terms, and one non-voting Student Regent who is appointed to a one-year term. The Chancellor of the Texas A&amp;M University System is responsible for day-to-day operations and is answerable to the Board of Regents.\nThe university is led by the university president, who has executive responsibility, and is selected by and reports to the chancellor. The provost is responsible for all educational and service activities of the university, and reports to the president. The cabinet, as the institution's administrative arm, and the deans of the respective colleges, also report to the president. The university and colleges are accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools and associated professional organizations offering degrees in 130 courses of study, over 260 professional and graduate degrees via its 17 colleges, and further opportunities in 21 research centers and institutes.\nStudent body.\nAs of the fall semester in 2021, Texas A&amp;M was the largest American university with an enrollment of 72,982 students who were pursuing degrees in 17 academic colleges. The student body originates from all 50 U.S. states and over 120 other countries. Texas residents account for 86.27% of the student population and 7.42% are of international origin. The demographics of the student body are 52.9% male and 47.1% female. Members of ethnic minority groups make up 42.2% of the student population. According to \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\", Texas A&amp;M has a student-to-teacher ratio of 19:1 and an average-freshman-retention rate of 92%. According to the institution, in 2019, it had a four-year-graduation rate of 59% and a six-year-graduation of 81.7%. College of Engineering had the largest enrollment of 29.6%. The College of Liberal Arts and the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences followed, enrolling 12% and 11% of the student body, respectively. The School of Education and Human Development and Mays Business School each enrolled 9%. The remaining schools enrolled less than 6% each. In addition, slightly more than 3% of the student body had not declared a major.\nAs of 2019, the university enrolled the seventh-highest total of National Merit scholars in the United States and the third-highest among all public universities. As of 2021, about 72% of the student body receives about $810\u00a0million in financial aid annually. The admission rate of students who applied as undergraduates in 2020 was 63%. The school is rated as \"more selective\" by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\".\nRankings.\nIn a comparison of educational quality, faculty quality, and research output, the Center for World-Class Universities placed Texas A&amp;M 57th nationally and 151st internationally in its 2021 Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) rankings. In its 2021\u20132022 rankings, \"The Times Higher Education Supplement\" listed Texas A&amp;M 61st among North America's universities and 193rd among world universities. The 2021\u20132022 QS World University Rankings placed the university 168th in the world. In its 2022 edition, the Center for World University Rankings placed Texas A&amp;M as the 74th-best university globally and 41st nationally. In the 2022 edition of the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranking of universities, Texas A&amp;M was placed 68th nationally and 130th globally.\nIn 2021, \"The Washington Monthly\" assessed Texas A&amp;M 21st nationally based on their criteria that weigh research, community service, and social mobility. In 2021, \"Forbes\" rated Texas A&amp;M as the 17th-best public university in the country and 50th overall. After conducting a survey of leading employment recruiters, \"The Wall Street Journal\" ranked Texas A&amp;M second nationally as \"most likely to help students land a job in key careers and professions\" and the 83rd-best college overall. As of 2017, according to \"Best Value Schools\", Texas A&amp;M graded first in the nation as the best college for military veterans, based on a return on investment. As of 2015, Texas A&amp;M was rated the second-best university for veterans in \"USA Today\" and ninth for \"business schools for veterans\" by the \"Military Times\".\nEndowment.\nThe Texas A&amp;M University System has an endowment valued at more than $19.2\u00a0billion; the second highest among U.S. public universities and seventh overall. Apart from revenue received from tuition and research grants, as part of the university system, Texas A&amp;M is partially funded from two endowments. The smaller endowment and investment assets, totaling $3.4\u00a0billion as of 2024, are run by the private Texas A&amp;M Foundation. A larger sum is distributed from the Texas Permanent University Fund (PUF), in which the system holds a one-third stake. As of 2021[ [update]], the PUF ending net-asset value was approximately $30\u00a0billion.\nResearch.\nThe National Science Foundation ranked Texas A&amp;M 16th among American universities for research and development expenditures in 2021 with $1.14 billion. Concentrated in two primary areas, Research Valley and Research Park, the institution has over , which includes of dedicated research space. The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education classifies Texas A&amp;M among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\" as of 2021. Its research entities include the Hagler Institute for Advanced Study, the Texas Institute for Genomic Medicine, the Texas Transportation Institute, the Cyclotron Institute, the Institute of Biosciences and Technology, and the Institute for Plant Genomics and Biotechnology. Texas A&amp;M University is a member of the SEC Academic Consortium.\nTexas A&amp;M works with state and university agencies on local and international research projects to develop innovations in science and technology that can have commercial applications. In 2006, the Texas A&amp;M University System was the first to explicitly state in its policy that technology commercialization could be used for tenure. Passage of this policy was intended to give faculty more academic freedom and strengthen the university's industry partnerships. The efforts of system-wide faculty and research departments have yielded millions of dollars for Texas A&amp;M in royalty-bearing license agreements through more than 900 patents and 1,500 patent applications relating to a portfolio of over 2,600 inventions. On average, Texas A&amp;M files over 50 patents and closes 25 license agreements per year.\nTexas A&amp;M has led the world in several fields of cloning research. Scientists at the university's College of Veterinary Medicine created the first cloned pet, a cat named \"cc\", on December 22, 2001. Texas A&amp;M was also the first academic institution to clone six species; cattle, a Boer goat, pigs, a cat, a deer, and a horse. In 2016, the animal-rights group People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) targeted the university and alleged abusive experiments on dogs. According to Texas A&amp;M, the dogs in question were given several experimental treatments to improve or cure a genetic condition that also affects humans. During this period, the dogs were under the care of board-certified veterinarians and other highly trained staff with oversight from multiple agencies including the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Muscular Dystrophy Association.\nThe university is also engaged in significant scientific exploration projects. In 2004, as part of its responsibilities under the space grant program, it joined a consortium of universities and countries to build the Giant Magellan Telescope in Chile. Construction began in November 2015; on its completion\u2014which is scheduled for 2025\u2014it will be the largest optical telescope ever constructed with seven mirrors, each with a diameter of , the equivalent of a mirror across and ten times more powerful than the Hubble Space Telescope. As part of a collaboration with the U.S. Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration, Texas A&amp;M completed the first conversion of a nuclear research reactor from using highly enriched uranium fuel (70%) to using low-enriched uranium (20%). The eighteen-month project ended on October 13, 2006, after the first-ever refueling of the reactor, thus fulfilling a portion of the United States' Global Nuclear Threat Reduction Initiative. In 2013, geography researchers named the largest volcano on Earth, Tamu Massif, after the university in honor of their research contributions.\nWorldwide.\nOf the university's numerous agreements and joint facilities of international cooperation, Texas A&amp;M owns a multipurpose center in Mexico City, Soltis Research and Education Center near San Isidro, Costa Rica, and the Santa Chiara Study Abroad Center in Castiglion Fiorentino, Italy. During the 2018 academic year, over 5,600 Texas A&amp;M students\u2014primarily undergraduates\u2014studied in 110 countries. Marine research occurs on the university's branch campus, Texas A&amp;M University at Galveston. It also has collaborations with international facilities such as Hacienda Santa Clara in San Miguel de Allende, Guanajuato, Mexico.\nThe university is one of two American universities in partnership with CONACyT, Mexico's equivalent of the National Science Foundation, to support research in areas including biotechnology, telecommunications, energy, and urban development. The university also hosts Las Americas Digital Research Network, an online architecture network for 26 universities in 12 nations, primarily in Central and South America.\nFounded in 1995 by then-emir Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani and his wife, who is the mother of the current emir Sheikha Moza bint Nasser, Texas A&amp;M University at Qatar was set up through an agreement between Texas A&amp;M and the Qatar Foundation for Education, Science, and Community Development and continues its part of Qatar's efforts to expand higher education with the assistance of elite institutions from the United States. All degrees at the Qatar campus are granted by the university's TAMU College of Engineering. TAMUQ was opened in 2003, and the current contract extends through 2023. The campus offers undergraduate degrees in chemical, electrical, mechanical and petroleum engineering, and a graduate degree in chemical engineering. TAMUQ has received awards for its research. Texas A&amp;M receives $76.2\u00a0million per year from the Qatar Foundation for the campus. In the agreement with the Qatar Foundation, TAMU agreed 70% of its undergraduates at its Qatar campus would be Qatari citizens. The curriculum is designed to emulate the academic rigors of the facility at College Station but critics question whether this is possible due to Qatar's strict stance on some of the freedoms granted to U.S. students. TAMU has also been criticized over its Qatari campus due to Qatar's alleged ties to Islamic terrorism and the country's human rights record. In 2016, Texas A&amp;M Aggie Conservatives, a campus activism group, criticized the campus and called for its immediate closure on the grounds it violated a commitment to educating Texans and diminished the credibility of engineering degrees of students at College Station. On 7 January 2024, Mark A. Welsh III, President of TAMU, addressed inaccuracies and misconceptions circulating on various websites and social media platforms regarding the University and its branch campus in Qatar and shared accurate information. Nevertheless, the university announced on 9 February 2024 that it would be closing its Qatar campus by 2028.\nIn 2013, Texas A&amp;M signed an agreement to open a $200\u00a0million campus in Nazareth, Israel, as a \"peace campus\" for Arabs and Israelis. The agreement led to protests from students at the Qatari campus, who called it \"an insult to [their] people\". The planned campus in Nazareth was never opened; instead, Texas A&amp;M opened a $6\u00a0million marine biology center in Haifa, Israel, in 2016.\nStudent life.\nResidential life.\nAs of 2020,[ [update]] approximately 20% of the Texas A&amp;M student body lived on campus, primarily in one of two distinct housing sections located on opposite ends of the campus. Both the Northside and Southside areas contain student residence halls. Some halls are single-sex. Several halls include a \"substance-free\" floor whose residents pledge to refrain from bringing alcoholic beverages, recreational drugs, or tobacco products into the hall.\nNorthside consists of seventeen student residence halls, including two dedicated to honors students. Approximately half of the residence halls on campus are reserved for members of the Corps of Cadets. The university also has four major apartment complexes for both staff and students, which are located both on and adjacent to the campus.\nFacilities for the Corps of Cadets are located in the Quadrangle, known as \"The Quad\", an area consisting of dormitories, Duncan Dining Hall, and the Corps training fields. The Corps Arches, a series of twelve arches that allude to the spirit of the 12th Man, mark the entrance to the Quadrangle. All cadets, except those who are married or who have had previous military service, must live in the Quad with assigned roommates from the same unit and graduating class. The Aggie mascot Reveille, a Rough Collie, lives with her handlers in the Corps in the Quad.\nCorps of Cadets.\nTexas A&amp;M is one of six United States senior military colleges. As of 2019, the university's Corps of Cadets (or the Corps), with more than 2,500 members, is the largest uniformed student body outside the service academies. Many members participate in Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) programs and earn commissions in the United States Armed Forces upon graduation. Members of the Corps have served in every armed conflict fought by the United States since 1876, and over 285 alumni have served as generals or flag officers as of 2021. Until 1965, Corps membership was mandatory. The Corps began accepting female members in the fall semester of 1974.\nThe Corps of Cadets is composed of four major units, the Air Force Wing, the Army Brigade, the Navy/Marine Regiment, and the Fightin' Texas Aggie Band, whose members may be affiliated with any military branch. Parson's Mounted Cavalry is the only mounted ROTC unit in the United States. The Ross Volunteer Company, one of the oldest student-run organizations in the state, is the official honor guard for the Governor of Texas. The Fish Drill Team, a precision, close-order rifle drill team composed entirely of Corps freshmen, represents Texas A&amp;M in local and national competitions. The team has won the national championship almost every year since their creation in 1946, and has appeared in several Hollywood films, including \"A Few Good Men\" and \"Courage Under Fire\", in which they had prominent roles.\nThe Fightin' Texas Aggie Band, the nation's largest precision military marching band, provides music for university functions and presents halftime performances at football games. Some band drills are so complicated they require band members to step between each other's feet to complete the maneuvers. Membership of the Corps of Cadets is a requirement for joining the Aggie Band, whose members live by the same standards, schedules, and regimens as the rest of the Corps.\nActivities.\nTexas A&amp;M has over 1,000 student organizations, including academic, service, religious, social, and common interest organizations, and hosts 58 nationally or internationally recognized Greek Letter Organizations (GLOs). About 10% of the undergraduate population is affiliated with a GLO fraternity or sorority.\nOne of the oldest student organizations is the Singing Cadets, an all-male choral group not affiliated with the Corps of Cadets with about 70 members that was founded in 1893. Texas A&amp;M Hillel, the oldest Hillel organization in the United States, was founded in 1920 at the original college. Since 1955, the MSC Student Conference on National Affairs has held conferences, lectures, and other programs to discuss national and international issues with speakers. The Department of Recreational Sports provides athletic activities to the university community; sports facilities include the Student Recreation Center, a natatorium; the Penberthy Rec Sports Complex; and the Omar Smith Instructional Tennis Center. The Student Government Association (SGA), one of A&amp;M's largest organizations, has over 1,300 student members in three branches, fifteen committees, and four commissions. The Graduate Student Council, which was founded in 1995, serves as the student government for Texas A&amp;M University's graduate and professional students. The Student Engineers' Council (SEC), which was founded in 1939, serves to represent engineering students, increase awareness regarding engineering, and foster professional development for engineering students.\nStudent organizations have had a nationwide impact. Texas A&amp;M students founded the largest one-day, student-run service project in America known as The Big Event. The annual service project allows students to serve the community by assisting local residents. Such events are now also held at other universities. The organization CARPOOL, a student-run safe ride program, has provided over 250,000 free rides (as of 2016[ [update]]) to students who are unable to transport themselves home. Its organizers help other universities establish similar programs. In 2009, GLBT Aggies, formerly Gay Student Services (GSS), successfully sued the university for official recognition and the Fifth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled the U.S. Constitution requires public universities to allow such student organizations under the First Amendment's \"freedom to assemble\" clause.\nMedia.\nThe university newspaper \"The Battalion\" has been in production since 1893. The \"Aggieland\", formerly known as \"The Olio\" and \"The Longhorn\", is one of America's largest college yearbooks in number of pages and copies sold.\nAs of 2007, the university houses three public broadcasting stations: KAMU-TV, a PBS member station since 1970; KAMU-FM, a National Public Radio affiliate since 1977, and the student-run station KANM, which bills itself \"the college station of College Station\". W5AC, a student-run amateur radio club, broadcast the first live, play-by-play broadcast of a college football game at Kyle Field in November 1921.\nTraditions.\nTexas A&amp;M culture is a product of the university's founding as a rural military and agricultural school. Although the school and surrounding community have grown and military training is no longer mandated, the university's history has instilled in students, according to Paul Burka, \"the idealized elements of a small-town life: community, tradition, loyalty, optimism, and unabashed sentimentality\". \"Texas Monthly\" posits that Texas A&amp;M students' respect for school traditions and values is the university's greatest strength. These traditions enable and encourage students and alumni to cultivate the Aggie Spirit, a strong sense of loyalty and respect for the university. They dictate many aspects of student life, including greeting others using the official school greeting of \"Howdy!\", personal conduct at university sporting events, and students' word choices in conversation.\nA visible designation tradition among senior undergraduates, graduate students nearing the end of their programs, and former students is wearing an Aggie Ring, whose design has been relatively unchanged since its introduction in 1894. Although not sanctioned by the university, many students \"dunk\" their newly acquired Aggie Rings into a pitcher of beer and drink the entire pitcher in seconds.\nTexas A&amp;M students have created two major traditions to honor deceased former students. The Aggie Muster is a ceremony of remembrance held annually on April 21, the anniversary of the Battle of San Jacinto, to honor current and former students who died the previous year. Alumni also typically socialize and remember their time at the university. Over 300 Musters are held around the world, the largest taking place at Reed Arena on the university's main campus. All Muster ceremonies feature the Roll Call for the Absent, in which names of deceased alumni are called. A family member or friend answers \"here\" and lights a candle to symbolize that although their loved one is not physically present, his or her spirit will shine forever. This is traditionally followed by a three-volley salute. The event received nationwide attention during World War II, when 25 Texas A&amp;M alumni held a brief Aggie Muster during the Battle of Corregidor.\nStudents who die while enrolled at Texas A&amp;M are honored at Silver Taps, a ceremony that is held, when necessary, on the first Tuesday of the month. This tradition began as a memorial for former Texas A&amp;M president Lawrence Sullivan Ross. On the day of the ceremony, flags fly at half-staff and notices are posted throughout campus. At 10:15\u00a0pm, lights around campus are extinguished and hymns are chimed from Albritton Tower while students and faculty gather in the Academic Plaza. Following a three-volley salute by the Ross Volunteer Firing Squad, six buglers play \"Silver Taps\", a choral version of the bugle call \"Taps\", from the dome of the university's Academic Building. The song is played three times: once toward the north, once toward the south, and once toward the west. The song is not played to the east, symbolizing that the sun will never again rise on the deceased student.\nSports.\nAt university sporting events, Texas A&amp;M students collectively are called the 12th Man; in the context of football games, this symbolizes students supporting the eleven players on the field and being willing to enter the game if necessary. To symbolize their zeal and motivation, it is traditional for students to stand throughout the sports game. The tradition of standing for games began on January 2, 1922, at the Dixie Classic, in which Texas A&amp;M played Centre College. Texas A&amp;M had so many injuries Coach Dana X. Bible feared he would not have enough men to finish the game. He called into the stands for E. King Gill, a reserve who had left football after the regular season to play basketball, to prepare to play in the game. Texas A&amp;M won 22\u201314 but E. King Gill was the only player left available on the sidelines for the team. In recent decades, the 12th Man is represented on the field by a walk-on player who wears a number-twelve jersey and participates in kick-offs.\nThe 12th Man uses a variety of school yells, rather than cheers, to support Aggie teams. Each year, the student body elects five students to serve as Yell Leaders. At midnight before each home football game at Kyle Field, or at a designated location at away games, fans gather to practice yells for the next day's game at an event called Midnight Yell Practice. Led by the Yell Leaders and the Fightin' Texas Aggie Band, the 12th Man practice yells, sing the , joke about their opponents, and practice celebrating. \"Sports Illustrated\" named Midnight Yell as one of the \"100 Things You Gotta Do Before You Graduate\". At home football games, the 12th Man consists of more than 36,000 Texas A&amp;M students and forms the largest student section in college football. When singing the war hymn, A&amp;M students cause the stands to sway; visiting press are warned prior to the game.\nAlmost every year since 1909, Texas A&amp;M students have built a large bonfire to celebrate their rivalry with the University of Texas at Austin. Aggie Bonfire was traditionally lit around Thanksgiving in conjunction with the festivities surrounding the annual college football game between the universities. Although it began as a trash pile, Aggie Bonfire evolved into a massive, six-tiered structure, achieving a then-world-record height for a bonfire of . On November 18, 1999, the Aggie Bonfire collapsed during construction. Eleven enrolled students and one former student died and twenty-seven others were injured. The accident was later attributed to improper design and poor construction practices. The victims' family members filed six lawsuits against Texas A&amp;M officials, Aggie Bonfire officials, and the university. Half of the defendants settled their portion of the case in 2005, and a federal appeals court dismissed the remaining lawsuits against the university in 2007. Following the collapse, the university suspended the official sanction of the bonfire, but the tradition continues off-campus.\nAthletics.\nTexas A&amp;M University has been a member of the Southeastern Conference (SEC) of the NCAA for all sports since 2012. It was previously a charter member of the Southwest Conference until its dissolution in 1996 and competed in the Big 12 Conference until June 30, 2012. The university has twenty sports teams, which are known as the Aggies, whose team colors are maroon and white. As of 2024[ [update]], Aggies had won 178 conference titles and 21 national championships.\nTexas A&amp;M's archrival is the University of Texas at Austin Longhorns. The rivalry was renewed in 2024 when the Longhorns joined the SEC, ending the hiatus that began in 2011. In 2004, sporting events between the Aggies and the Longhorns became known as the Lone Star Showdown; the most-watched event in the rivalry was the annual football game held on Thanksgiving. Texas A&amp;M's other current rivalries include the University of Arkansas Razorbacks and more intensely, the Louisiana State University Tigers, with the latter rivalry becoming particularly strong since Texas A&amp;M's 74-72 victory in 2018. Historic rivals who were played during the Big 12 and Southwest Conference days, now dormant, include Texas Tech University and Baylor University.\nThe Texas A&amp;M Athletic Hall of Fame was established in 1964 to \"acknowledge athletes whose accomplishments on the field have brought credit to Texas A&amp;M\". As of 2018, it has 297 inductees. The Hall of Fame also hosts the Hall of Honor and Lettermen's Lifetime Achievement Award. The Texas A&amp;M Athletic Hall of Honor was established in 1977 to \"recognizes individuals who have gone above and beyond in contributions and support of the athletic programs at Texas A&amp;M\". The Lettermen's Lifetime Achievement Award was established in 2011 to recognize \"lettermen, who after graduation, have gone on to gain prominence through his or her efforts in industry, commerce, technology, athletics, the professions, or other worthy endeavors\".\nFootball.\nThe Aggies football team, which was founded in 1894, has won eighteen Southwest Conference championships, three Big 12 South Division championships, and one Big 12 championship. The university also claims three national championships. As of 2021, the team has played in forty-two bowl games, of which they have won twenty, and former players include forty-one first Team All-Americans, five Academic All-Americans, and Heisman Trophy winners John David Crow (1957) and Johnny Manziel (2012). Since 1904, home football games have been played at Kyle Field, a stadium with a current capacity of 102,733. As of 2024, the football team is led by Mike Elko in his second season as head coach.\nBasketball.\nThe Aggies men's basketball team, which was founded in 1912, has won eleven Southwest Conference championships and two Southwest Conference Tournament championships. The team has played in the National Invitation Tournament six times and in the NCAA Tournament eleven times, of which three resulted in the team progressing to the regional semifinals round, dubbed Sweet Sixteen\u2014the highest round to which the Aggies have advanced\u2014most recently in the 2015\u201316 season. As of 2025, the men's basketball team is led by Bucky McMillan in his first season as head coach.\nThe women's basketball team has won one Southwest Conference Tournament championship, one regular season Big 12 Conference championship, two Big 12 Tournament championships, and two SEC Tournament championships\u2014most recently in 2021. As of 2022[ [update]], the Aggies women's team has advanced to sixteen NCAA Tournament appearances, including fourteen consecutive seasons, and won the National Championship in 2011. They have also twice competed in the Women's National Invitation Tournament, which they won in 1995. The women's team was coached by Gary Blair from 2003 to his retirement in 2022. Blair's replacement Joni Taylor began coaching the team in March 2022.\nBoth the men's and women's basketball teams play in the 12,889-seat Reed Arena, which opened in 1998.\nOther sports.\nThe Aggies women's soccer team was formed in 1993; as of 2021, it has taken part in every NCAA Tournament since 1995. The women's volleyball team is a frequent qualifier for the annual NCAA tournament, and has played in thirteen consecutive NCAA Tournaments from 1993 to 2005. Texas A&amp;M also fields men's and women's teams in swimming and diving, golf, tennis, cross country, track and field, softball, baseball, rugby union and equestrianism.\nNotable alumni and faculty.\nAlumni.\nWith over 508,000 alumni, Texas A&amp;M University has one of the largest alumni groups in America. Many alumni have attained local, national, and international prominence. Jorge Quiroga and Martin Torrijos have served as heads of state of Bolivia and Panama, respectively. Rick Perry served as the United States Secretary of Energy and Governor of Texas and ran as a 2012 US presidential candidate. Congressman Louie Gohmert is also a Texas A&amp;M graduate. William A. Pailes, Michael E. Fossum, and Steven Swanson became NASA astronauts. Mechanical engineer Holly Ridings became the first female chief flight director at NASA. Phyllis Frye is a residing judge in Houston, Texas, and is the first transgender judge in the United States. In 1903, twin sisters Mary Lockett Hutson Nelson and Sophie Palmer Hutson Rollins were the first women to complete the original college's civil engineering program but they did not receive their degrees until 99 years later because the college's charter at the time made no provision for female students.\nSeveral notable alumni have excelled in sports. These include Heisman Trophy winners John David Crow and Johnny Manziel; Heisman runner-up, legislator, and actor John Kimbrough; and Randy Barnes, indoor/outdoor shot put world-record holder. In popular culture, Robert Earl Keen and Lyle Lovett, who played on the porch of their Northgate home on the university's campus, have become country singers. Alumni in business include Lowry Mays, chairman and CEO of Clear Channel Communications; George P. Mitchell, chairman and CEO of Mitchell Energy and Development Corporation; Khalid A. Al-Falih, President and CEO of Saudi Aramco; and Eduardo Castro-Wright, CEO of Wal-Mart Stores USA.\nMany alumni have become leaders in the armed forces. General Bernard Adolph Schriever, the architect of the Air Force's ballistic missile and military space program, became the namesake of Schriever Air Force Base, Colorado. General Michael Moseley is a former Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force. Seven alumni received the Medal of Honor in World War II: Horace S. Carswell, Jr., Thomas W. Fowler, William Harrell, Lloyd H. Hughes, George D. Keathley, Turney W. Leonard, and Eli L. Whiteley Clarence E. Sasser received the Medal of Honor for his actions in the Vietnam War prior to enrolling at the university.\nNotable faculty.\nNotable Texas A&amp;M faculty include eight Nobel Prize laureates; among them are Derek Barton, Sheldon Glashow, Robert H. Grubbs, Dudley R. Herschbach, Jack Kilby, David Lee, and Vernon L. Smith. In addition, Norman Borlaug, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, is one of only five people to have won both the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the Congressional Gold Medal. U.S. Senator Phil Gramm taught economics at the university, C++ computer language creator Bjarne Stroustrup taught computer science, and Pulitzer Prize recipient Charles Gordone also taught at Texas A&amp;M. Aviation pioneer Fred Weick did much of his post-war research at Texas A&amp;M. Robert Gates served as president of the university between leaving his post as Director of Central Intelligence and his appointment as the 22nd United States Secretary of Defense. John E. Sloan, US Army major general, was assigned to Texas A&amp;M as professor of military science and tactics.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29929", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29929", "title": "The Iliad", "text": ""}
{"id": "29931", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29931", "title": "Teaching methods", "text": ""}
{"id": "29932", "revid": "46696839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29932", "title": "On the Origin of Species", "text": "1859 book on evolution by Charles Darwin\nOn the Origin of Species (or, more completely, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life) is a work of scientific literature by Charles Darwin that is considered to be the foundation of evolutionary biology. It was published on 24 November 1859. Darwin's book introduced the scientific theory that populations evolve over the course of generations through a process of natural selection, although Lamarckism was also included as a mechanism of lesser importance. The book presented a body of evidence that the diversity of life arose by common descent through a branching pattern of evolution. Darwin included evidence that he had collected on the \"Beagle\" expedition in the 1830s and his subsequent findings from research, correspondence, and experimentation.\nVarious evolutionary ideas had already been proposed to explain new findings in biology. There was growing support for such ideas among dissident anatomists and the general public, but during the first half of the 19th century the English scientific establishment was closely tied to the Church of England, while science was part of natural theology. Ideas about the transmutation of species were controversial as they conflicted with the beliefs that species were unchanging parts of a designed hierarchy and that humans were unique, unrelated to other animals. The political and theological implications were intensely debated, but transmutation was not accepted by the scientific mainstream.\nThe book was written for non-specialist readers and attracted widespread interest upon its publication. Darwin was already highly regarded as a scientist, so his findings were taken seriously and the evidence he presented generated scientific, philosophical, and religious discussion. The debate over the book contributed to the campaign by T.\u00a0H. Huxley and his fellow members of the X Club to secularise science by promoting scientific naturalism. Within two decades, there was widespread scientific agreement that evolution, with a branching pattern of common descent, had occurred, but scientists were slow to give natural selection the significance that Darwin thought appropriate. During \"the eclipse of Darwinism\" from the 1880s to the 1930s, various other mechanisms of evolution were given more credit. With the development of the modern evolutionary synthesis in the 1930s and 1940s, Darwin's concept of evolutionary adaptation through natural selection became central to modern evolutionary theory, and it has now become the unifying concept of the life sciences.\nSummary of Darwin's theory.\nDarwin's theory of evolution is based on key facts and the inferences drawn from them, which biologist Ernst Mayr summarised as follows:\n* Every species is fertile enough that if all offspring survived to reproduce, the population would grow (fact).\n* Despite periodic fluctuations, populations remain roughly the same size (fact).\n* Resources such as food are limited and are relatively stable over time (fact).\n* A struggle for survival ensues (inference).\n* Individuals in a population vary significantly from one another (fact).\n* Much of this variation is heritable (fact).\n* Individuals less suited to the environment are less likely to survive and less likely to reproduce; individuals more suited to the environment are more likely to survive and more likely to reproduce and leave their heritable traits to future generations, which produces the process of natural selection (fact).\n* This slowly effected process results in populations changing to adapt to their environments, and ultimately, these variations accumulate over time to form new species (inference).\nBackground.\nDevelopments before Darwin's theory.\nIn later editions of the book, Darwin traced evolutionary ideas as far back as Aristotle; the text he cites is a summary by Aristotle of the ideas of the earlier Greek philosopher Empedocles. Early Christian Church Fathers and Medieval European scholars interpreted the Genesis creation narrative allegorically rather than as a literal historical account; organisms were described by their mythological and heraldic significance as well as by their physical form. Nature was widely believed to be unstable and capricious, with monstrous births from union between species, and spontaneous generation of life.\nThe Protestant Reformation inspired a literal interpretation of the Bible, with concepts of creation that conflicted with the findings of an emerging science seeking explanations congruent with the mechanical philosophy of Ren\u00e9 Descartes and the empiricism of the Baconian method. After the turmoil of the English Civil War, the Royal Society wanted to show that science did not threaten religious and political stability. John Ray developed an influential natural theology of rational order; in his taxonomy, species were static and fixed, their adaptation and complexity designed by God, and varieties showed minor differences caused by local conditions. In God's benevolent design, carnivores caused mercifully swift death, but the suffering caused by parasitism was a puzzling problem. The biological classification introduced by Carl Linnaeus in 1735 also viewed species as fixed according to the divine plan, but did recognize the hierarchical nature of different taxa. In 1766, Georges Buffon suggested that some similar species, such as horses and asses, or lions, tigers, and leopards, might be varieties descended from a common ancestor. The Ussher chronology of the 1650s had calculated creation at 4004\u00a0BC, but by the 1780s geologists assumed a much older world. Wernerians thought strata were deposits from shrinking seas, but James Hutton proposed a self-maintaining infinite cycle, anticipating uniformitarianism.\nCharles Darwin's grandfather Erasmus Darwin outlined a hypothesis of transmutation of species in the 1790s, and French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck published a more developed theory in 1809. Both envisaged that spontaneous generation produced simple forms of life that progressively developed greater complexity, adapting to the environment by inheriting changes in adults caused by use or disuse. This process was later called Lamarckism. Lamarck thought there was an inherent progressive tendency driving organisms continuously towards greater complexity, in parallel but separate lineages with no perceptible extinction. Geoffroy contended that embryonic development recapitulated transformations of organisms in past eras when the environment acted on embryos, and that animal structures were determined by a constant plan as demonstrated by homologies. Georges Cuvier strongly disputed such ideas, holding that unrelated, fixed species showed similarities that reflected a design for functional needs. His pal\u00e6ontological work in the 1790s had established the reality of extinction, which he explained by local catastrophes, followed by repopulation of the affected areas by other species.\nIn Britain, William Paley's \"Natural Theology\" saw adaptation as evidence of beneficial \"design\" by the Creator acting through natural laws. All naturalists in the two English universities (Oxford and Cambridge) were Church of England clergymen, and science became a search for these laws. Geologists adapted catastrophism to show repeated worldwide annihilation and creation of new fixed species adapted to a changed environment, initially identifying the most recent catastrophe as the biblical flood. Some anatomists such as Robert Grant were influenced by Lamarck and Geoffroy, but most naturalists regarded their ideas of transmutation as a threat to divinely appointed social order.\nInception of Darwin's theory.\nDarwin went to Edinburgh University in 1825 to study medicine. In his second year he neglected his medical studies for natural history and spent four months helping Robert Grant's research into marine invertebrates. Grant revealed his enthusiasm for the transmutation of species, but Darwin rejected it. Starting in 1827, at Cambridge University, Darwin learnt science as natural theology from botanist John Stevens Henslow, and read Paley, John Herschel and Alexander von Humboldt. Filled with zeal for science, he studied catastrophist geology with Adam Sedgwick.\nIn December 1831, he joined the \"Beagle\" expedition as a gentleman naturalist and geologist. He read Charles Lyell's \"Principles of Geology\" and from the first stop ashore, at St. Jago, found Lyell's uniformitarianism a key to the geological history of landscapes. Darwin discovered fossils resembling huge armadillos, and noted the geographical distribution of modern species in hope of finding their \"centre of creation\". The three Fuegian missionaries the expedition returned to Tierra del Fuego were friendly and civilised, yet to Darwin their relatives on the island seemed \"miserable, degraded savages\", and he no longer saw an unbridgeable gap between humans and animals. As the \"Beagle\" neared England in 1836, he noted that species might not be fixed.\nRichard Owen showed that fossils of extinct species Darwin found in South America were allied to living species on the same continent. In March 1837, ornithologist John Gould announced that Darwin's rhea was a separate species from the previously described rhea (though their territories overlapped), that mockingbirds collected on the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands represented three separate species each unique to a particular island, and that several distinct birds from those islands were all classified as finches. Darwin began speculating, in a series of notebooks, on the possibility that \"one species does change into another\" to explain these findings, and around July sketched a genealogical branching of a single evolutionary tree, discarding Lamarck's independent lineages progressing to higher forms. Unconventionally, Darwin asked questions of fancy pigeon and animal breeders as well as established scientists. At the zoo he had his first sight of an ape, and was profoundly impressed by how human the orangutan seemed.\nIn late September 1838, he started reading Thomas Malthus's \"An Essay on the Principle of Population\" with its statistical argument that human populations, if unrestrained, breed beyond their means and struggle to survive. Darwin related this to the struggle for existence among wildlife and botanist de Candolle's \"warring of the species\" in plants; he immediately envisioned \"a force like a hundred thousand wedges\" pushing well-adapted variations into \"gaps in the economy of nature\", so that the survivors would pass on their form and abilities, and unfavourable variations would be destroyed. By December 1838, he had noted a similarity between the act of breeders selecting traits and a Malthusian Nature selecting among variants thrown up by \"chance\" so that \"every part of newly acquired structure is fully practical and perfected\".\nDarwin now had the basic framework of his theory of natural selection, but he was fully occupied with his career as a geologist and held back from compiling it until his book on \"The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs\" was completed. As he recalled in his autobiography, he had \"at last got a theory by which to work\", but it was only in June 1842 that he allowed himself \"the satisfaction of writing a very brief abstract of my theory in pencil\".\nFurther development.\nDarwin continued to research and extensively revise his theory while focusing on his main work of publishing the scientific results of the \"Beagle\" voyage. He tentatively wrote of his ideas to Lyell in January 1842; then in June he roughed out a 35-page \"Pencil Sketch\" of his theory. Darwin began correspondence about his theorising with the botanist Joseph Dalton Hooker in January 1844, and by July had rounded out his \"sketch\" into a 230-page \"Essay\", to be expanded with his research results and published if he died prematurely.\nIn November 1844, the anonymously published popular science book \"Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation\", written by Scottish journalist Robert Chambers, widened public interest in the concept of transmutation of species. \"Vestiges\" used evidence from the fossil record and embryology to support the claim that living things had progressed from the simple to the more complex over time. But it proposed a linear progression rather than the branching common descent theory behind Darwin's work in progress, and it ignored adaptation. Darwin read it soon after publication, and scorned its amateurish geology and zoology, but he carefully reviewed his own arguments after leading scientists, including Adam Sedgwick, attacked its morality and scientific errors. \"Vestiges\" had significant influence on public opinion, and the intense debate helped to pave the way for the acceptance of the more scientifically sophisticated \"Origin\" by moving evolutionary speculation into the mainstream. While few naturalists were willing to consider transmutation, Herbert Spencer became an active proponent of Lamarckism and progressive development in the 1850s.\nHooker was persuaded to take away a copy of the \"Essay\" in January 1847, and eventually sent a page of notes giving Darwin much-needed feedback. Reminded of his lack of expertise in taxonomy, Darwin began an eight-year study of barnacles, becoming the leading expert on their classification. Using his theory, he discovered homologies showing that slightly changed body parts served different functions to meet new conditions, and he found an intermediate stage in the evolution of distinct sexes.\nDarwin's barnacle studies convinced him that variation arose constantly and not just in response to changed circumstances. In 1854, he completed the last part of his \"Beagle\"-related writing and began working full-time on evolution. He now realised that the branching pattern of evolutionary divergence was explained by natural selection working constantly to improve adaptation. His thinking changed from the view that species formed in isolated populations only, as on islands, to an emphasis on speciation without isolation; that is, he saw increasing specialisation within large stable populations as continuously exploiting new ecological niches. He conducted empirical research focusing on difficulties with his theory. He studied the developmental and anatomical differences between different breeds of many domestic animals, became actively involved in fancy pigeon breeding, and experimented (with the help of his young son Francis) on ways that plant seeds and animals might disperse across oceans to colonise distant islands. By 1856, his theory was much more sophisticated, with a mass of supporting evidence.\nPublication.\nTime taken to publish.\nIn his autobiography, Darwin said he had \"gained much by my delay in publishing from about 1839, when the theory was clearly conceived, to 1859; and I lost nothing by it\". On the first page of his 1859 book he noted that, having begun work on the topic in 1837, he had drawn up \"some short notes\" after five years, had enlarged these into a sketch in 1844, and \"from that period to the present day I have steadily pursued the same object.\"\nVarious biographers have proposed that Darwin avoided or delayed making his ideas public for personal reasons. Reasons suggested have included fear of religious persecution or social disgrace if his views were revealed, and concern about upsetting his clergymen naturalist friends or his pious wife Emma. Charles Darwin's illness caused repeated delays. His paper on Glen Roy had proved embarrassingly wrong, and he may have wanted to be sure he was correct. David Quammen has suggested all these factors may have contributed, and notes Darwin's large output of books and busy family life during that time.\nA more recent study by science historian John van Wyhe has determined that the idea that Darwin delayed publication only dates back to the 1940s, and Darwin's contemporaries thought the time he took was reasonable. Darwin always finished one book before starting another. While he was researching, he told many people about his interest in transmutation without causing outrage. He firmly intended to publish, but it was not until September 1854 that he could work on it full-time. His 1846 estimate that writing his \"big book\" would take five years proved optimistic.\nEvents leading to publication: \"big book\" manuscript.\nAn 1855 paper on the \"introduction\" of species, written by Alfred Russel Wallace, claimed that patterns in the geographical distribution of living and fossil species could be explained if every new species always came into existence near an already existing, closely related species. Charles Lyell recognised the implications of Wallace's paper and its possible connection to Darwin's work, although Darwin did not, and in a letter written on 1\u20132 May 1856 Lyell urged Darwin to publish his theory to establish priority. Darwin was torn between the desire to set out a full and convincing account and the pressure to quickly produce a short paper. He met Lyell, and in correspondence with Joseph Dalton Hooker affirmed that he did not want to expose his ideas to review by an editor as would have been required to publish in an academic journal. He began a \"sketch\" account on 14 May 1856, and by July had decided to produce a full technical treatise on species as his \"big book\" on \"Natural Selection\". His theory including the principle of divergence was complete by 5 September 1857 when he sent Asa Gray a brief but detailed abstract of his ideas.\nJoint publication of papers by Wallace and Darwin.\nDarwin was hard at work on the manuscript for his \"big book\" on \"Natural Selection\", when on 18 June 1858 he received a parcel from Wallace, who stayed on the Maluku Islands (Ternate and Gilolo). It enclosed twenty pages describing an evolutionary mechanism, a response to Darwin's recent encouragement, with a request to send it on to Lyell if Darwin thought it worthwhile. The mechanism was similar to Darwin's own theory. Darwin wrote to Lyell that \"your words have come true with a vengeance, ... forestalled\" and he would \"of course, at once write and offer to send [it] to any journal\" that Wallace chose, adding that \"all my originality, whatever it may amount to, will be smashed\". Lyell and Hooker agreed that a joint publication putting together Wallace's pages with extracts from Darwin's 1844 Essay and his 1857 letter to Gray should be presented at the Linnean Society, and on 1 July 1858, the papers entitled \"On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties; and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection\", by Wallace and Darwin respectively, were read out but drew little reaction. While Darwin considered Wallace's idea to be identical to his concept of natural selection, historians have pointed out differences. Darwin described natural selection as being analogous to the artificial selection practised by animal breeders, and emphasised competition between individuals; Wallace drew no comparison to selective breeding, and focused on ecological pressures that kept different varieties adapted to local conditions. Some historians have suggested that Wallace was actually discussing group selection rather than selection acting on individual variation.\nAbstract of Species book.\nSoon after the meeting, Darwin decided to write \"an abstract of my whole work\" in the form of one or more papers to be published by the Linnean Society, but was concerned about \"how it can be made scientific for a Journal, without giving facts, which would be impossible.\" He asked Hooker how many pages would be available, but \"If the Referees were to reject it as not strictly scientific I would, perhaps publish it as pamphlet.\" He began his \"abstract of Species book\" on 20 July 1858, while on holiday at Sandown, and wrote parts of it from memory, while sending the manuscripts to his friends for checking.\nBy early October, he began to \"expect my abstract will run into a small volume, which will have to be published separately.\" Over the same period, he continued to collect information and write large fully detailed sections of the manuscript for his \"big book\" on Species, \"Natural Selection\".\nMurray as publisher; choice of title.\nBy mid-March 1859 Darwin's abstract had reached the stage where he was thinking of early publication; Lyell suggested the publisher John Murray, and met with him to find if he would be willing to publish. On 28 March Darwin wrote to Lyell asking about progress, and offering to give Murray assurances \"that my Book is not more \"un\"-orthodox, than the subject makes inevitable.\" He enclosed a draft title sheet proposing \"An abstract of an Essay on the Origin of Species and Varieties Through natural selection\", with the year shown as \"1859\".\nMurray's response was favourable, and a very pleased Darwin told Lyell on 30 March that he would \"send shortly a large bundle of M.S. but unfortunately I cannot for a week, as the three first chapters are in three copyists' hands\". He bowed to Murray's objection to \"abstract\" in the title, though he felt it excused the lack of references, but wanted to keep \"natural selection\" which was \"constantly used in all works on Breeding\", and hoped \"to retain it with Explanation, somewhat as thus\",\u2014 \"Through Natural Selection or the preservation of favoured races\".\nOn 31 March Darwin wrote to Murray in confirmation, and listed headings of the 12 chapters in progress: he had drafted all except \"XII. Recapitulation &amp; Conclusion\". Murray responded immediately with an agreement to publish the book on the same terms as he published Lyell, without even seeing the manuscript: he offered Darwin two-thirds of the profits. Darwin promptly accepted with pleasure, insisting that Murray would be free to withdraw the offer if, having read the chapter manuscripts, he felt the book would not sell well (eventually Murray paid \u00a3180 to Darwin for the first edition and by Darwin's death in 1882 the book was in its sixth edition, earning Darwin nearly \u00a33000).\nOn 5 April, Darwin sent Murray the first three chapters, and a proposal for the book's title. An early draft title page suggests \"On the Mutability of Species\". Murray cautiously asked Whitwell Elwin to review the chapters. At Lyell's suggestion, Elwin recommended that, rather than \"put forth the theory without the evidence\", the book should focus on observations upon pigeons, briefly stating how these illustrated Darwin's general principles and preparing the way for the larger work expected shortly: \"Every body is interested in pigeons.\" Darwin responded that this was impractical: he had only the last chapter still to write. In September the main title still included \"An essay on the origin of species and varieties\", but Darwin now proposed dropping \"varieties\".\nWith Murray's persuasion, the title was eventually agreed as \"On the Origin of Species\", with the title page adding \"by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life\". In this extended title (and elsewhere in the book) Darwin used the biological term \"races\" interchangeably with \"varieties\", meaning varieties within a species. He used the term broadly, and as well as discussions of \"the several races, for instance, of the cabbage\" and \"the hereditary varieties or races of our domestic animals and plants\", there are three instances in the book where the phrase \"races of man\" is used, referring to races of humans.\nPublication and subsequent editions.\n\"On the Origin of Species\" was first published on Thursday 24 November 1859, priced at fifteen shillings with a first printing of 1250 copies. The book had been offered to booksellers at Murray's autumn sale on Tuesday 22 November, and all available copies had been taken up immediately. In total, 1,250 copies were printed but after deducting presentation and review copies, and five for Stationers' Hall copyright, around 1,170 copies were available for sale. Significantly, 500 were taken by Mudie's Library, ensuring that the book promptly reached a large number of subscribers to the library. The second edition of 3,000 copies was quickly brought out on 7 January 1860, and incorporated numerous corrections as well as a response to religious objections by the addition of a new epigraph on page ii, a quotation from Charles Kingsley, and the phrase \"by the Creator\" added to the closing sentence. During Darwin's lifetime the book went through six editions, with cumulative changes and revisions to deal with counter-arguments raised. The third edition came out in 1861, with a number of sentences rewritten or added and an introductory appendix, \"An Historical Sketch of the Recent Progress of Opinion on the Origin of Species\". In response to objections that the origin of life was unexplained, Darwin pointed to acceptance of Newton's law even though the cause of gravity was unknown, and Leibnitz had accused Newton of introducing \"occult qualities &amp; miracles\". The fourth edition in 1866 had further revisions. The fifth edition, published on 10 February 1869, incorporated more changes and for the first time included the phrase \"survival of the fittest\", which had been coined by the philosopher Herbert Spencer in his \"Principles of Biology\" (1864).\nIn January 1871, George Jackson Mivart's \"On the Genesis of Species\" listed detailed arguments against natural selection, and claimed it included false metaphysics. Darwin made extensive revisions to the sixth edition of the \"Origin\" (this was the first edition in which he used the word \"evolution\" which had commonly been associated with embryological development, though all editions concluded with the word \"evolved\"), and added a new chapter VII, \"Miscellaneous objections\", to address Mivart's arguments.\nThe sixth edition was published by Murray on 19 February 1872 as \"The Origin of Species\", with \"On\" dropped from the title. Darwin had told Murray of working men in Lancashire clubbing together to buy the fifth edition at 15 shillings and wanted it made more widely available; the price was halved to 7s 6d by printing in a smaller font. It includes a glossary compiled by W.S. Dallas. Book sales increased from 60 to 250 per month.\nPublication outside Great Britain.\nIn the United States, botanist Asa Gray, an American colleague of Darwin, negotiated with a Boston publisher for publication of an authorised American version, but learnt that two New York publishing firms were already planning to exploit the absence of international copyright to print \"Origin\". Darwin was delighted by the popularity of the book, and asked Gray to keep any profits. Gray managed to negotiate a 5% royalty with Appleton's of New York, who got their edition out in mid-January 1860, and the other two withdrew. In a May letter, Darwin mentioned a print run of 2,500 copies, but it is not clear if this referred to the first printing only, as there were four that year.\nThe book was widely translated in Darwin's lifetime, but problems arose with translating concepts and metaphors, and some translations were biased by the translator's own agenda. Darwin distributed presentation copies in France and Germany, hoping that suitable applicants would come forward, as translators were expected to make their own arrangements with a local publisher. He welcomed the distinguished elderly naturalist and geologist Heinrich Georg Bronn, but the German translation published in 1860 imposed Bronn's own ideas, adding controversial themes that Darwin had deliberately omitted. Bronn translated \"favoured races\" as \"perfected races\", and added essays on issues including the origin of life, as well as a final chapter on religious implications partly inspired by Bronn's adherence to \"Naturphilosophie\". In 1862, Bronn produced a second edition based on the third English edition and Darwin's suggested additions, but then died of a heart attack. Darwin corresponded closely with Julius Victor Carus, who published an improved translation in 1867. Darwin's attempts to find a translator in France fell through, and the translation by Cl\u00e9mence Royer published in 1862 added an introduction praising Darwin's ideas as an alternative to religious revelation and promoting ideas anticipating social Darwinism and eugenics, as well as numerous explanatory notes giving her own answers to doubts that Darwin expressed. Darwin corresponded with Royer about a second edition published in 1866 and a third in 1870, but he had difficulty getting her to remove her notes and was troubled by these editions. He remained unsatisfied until a translation by Edmond Barbier was published in 1876. A Dutch translation by Tiberius Cornelis Winkler was published in 1860. By 1864, additional translations had appeared in Italian and Russian. In Darwin's lifetime, \"Origin\" was published in Swedish in 1871, Danish in 1872, Polish in 1873, Hungarian in 1873\u20131874, Spanish in 1877 and Serbian in 1878. As of 1977, \"Origin\" had appeared in an additional 18 languages, including Chinese by Ma Ch\u00fcn-wu who added non-Darwinian ideas; he published the preliminaries and chapters 1\u20135 in 1902\u20131904, and his complete translation in 1920.\nContent.\nTitle pages and introduction.\nPage ii contains quotations by William Whewell and Francis Bacon on the theology of natural laws, harmonising science and religion in accordance with Isaac Newton's belief in a rational God who established a law-abiding cosmos. In the second edition, Darwin added an epigraph from Joseph Butler affirming that God could work through scientific laws as much as through miracles, in a nod to the religious concerns of his oldest friends. The \"Introduction\" establishes Darwin's credentials as a naturalist and author, then refers to John Herschel's letter suggesting that the origin of species \"would be found to be a natural in contradistinction to a miraculous process\":\nWHEN on board HMS \"Beagle\", as naturalist, I was much struck with certain facts in the distribution of the inhabitants of South America, and in the geological relations of the present to the past inhabitants of that continent. These facts seemed to me to throw some light on the origin of species\u2014that mystery of mysteries, as it has been called by one of our greatest philosophers.\nDarwin refers specifically to the distribution of the species rheas, and to that of the Gal\u00e1pagos tortoises and mockingbirds. He mentions his years of work on his theory, and the arrival of Wallace at the same conclusion, which led him to \"publish this Abstract\" of his incomplete work. He outlines his ideas, and sets out the essence of his theory:\nAs many more individuals of each species are born than can possibly survive; and as, consequently, there is a frequently recurring struggle for existence, it follows that any being, if it vary however slightly in any manner profitable to itself, under the complex and sometimes varying conditions of life, will have a better chance of surviving, and thus be naturally selected. From the strong principle of inheritance, any selected variety will tend to propagate its new and modified form.\nStarting with the third edition, Darwin prefaced the introduction with a sketch of the historical development of evolutionary ideas. In that sketch he acknowledged that Patrick Matthew had, unknown to Wallace or himself, anticipated the concept of natural selection in an appendix to a book published in 1831; in the fourth edition he mentioned that William Charles Wells had done so as early as 1813.\nVariation under domestication and under nature.\nChapter I covers animal husbandry and plant breeding, going back to ancient Egypt. Darwin discusses contemporary opinions on the origins of different breeds under cultivation to argue that many have been produced from common ancestors by selective breeding. As an illustration of artificial selection, he describes fancy pigeon breeding, noting that \"[t]he diversity of the breeds is something astonishing\", yet all were descended from one species, the rock dove. Darwin saw two distinct kinds of variation: (1) rare abrupt changes he called \"sports\" or \"monstrosities\" (example: Ancon sheep with short legs), and (2) ubiquitous small differences (example: slightly shorter or longer bill of pigeons). Both types of hereditary changes can be used by breeders. However, for Darwin the small changes were most important in evolution. In this chapter Darwin expresses his erroneous belief that environmental change is necessary to generate variation. The opening two sentences of On The Origin demonstrate this point and also show that Darwin did not see the role of natural selection in stabilizing selection:\n\"When we look to the individuals of the same variety or sub-variety of our older cultivated plants and animals, one of the first points which strikes us, is, that they generally differ much more from each other, than do the individuals of any one species or variety in a state of nature. When we reflect on the vast diversity of the plants and animals which have been cultivated, and which have varied during all ages under the most different climates and treatment, I think we are driven to conclude that this greater variability is simply due to our domestic productions having been raised under conditions of life not so uniform as, and somewhat different from, those to which the parent-species have been exposed under nature.\"\nIt can be seen here that Darwin attributes the greater variation amongst individuals of domestic varieties compared to their progenitor populations in nature as being due to their \"conditions of life\" (environment) being \"not so uniform as\", and \"somewhat different from\" those of the parent species\". He later erroneously elaborates that changed \"conditions of life\" act on the reproductive organs to generate greater variability in the progeny. Even after 1860 when Darwin read the correct reason for greater variation in domestic varieties in Patrick Matthew's book, \"On Naval Timber and Arboriculture\" published in 1831, future editions of On the Origin of Species contained these first two sentences unchanged and continued to omit the correct explanation of stabilizing selection.\nIn Chapter II, Darwin specifies that the distinction between species and varieties is arbitrary, with experts disagreeing and changing their decisions when new forms were found. He concludes that \"a well-marked variety may be justly called an incipient species\" and that \"species are only strongly marked and permanent varieties\". He argues for the ubiquity of variation in nature. Historians have noted that naturalists had long been aware that the individuals of a species differed from one another, but had generally considered such variations to be limited and unimportant deviations from the archetype of each species, that archetype being a fixed ideal in the mind of God. Darwin and Wallace made variation among individuals of the same species central to understanding the natural world.\nStruggle for existence, natural selection, and divergence.\nIn Chapter III, Darwin asks how varieties \"which I have called incipient species\" become distinct species, and in answer introduces the key concept he calls \"natural selection\"; in the fifth edition he adds, \"But the expression often used by Mr. Herbert Spencer, of the Survival of the Fittest, is more accurate, and is sometimes equally convenient.\"\nOwing to this struggle for life, any variation, however slight and from whatever cause proceeding, if it be in any degree profitable to an individual of any species, in its infinitely complex relations to other organic beings and to external nature, will tend to the preservation of that individual, and will generally be inherited by its offspring ... I have called this principle, by which each slight variation, if useful, is preserved, by the term of Natural Selection, in order to mark its relation to man's power of selection.\nHe notes that both A. P. de Candolle and Charles Lyell had stated that all organisms are exposed to severe competition. Darwin emphasizes that he used the phrase \"struggle for existence\" in \"a large and metaphorical sense, including dependence of one being on another\"; he gives examples ranging from plants struggling against drought to plants competing for birds to eat their fruit and disseminate their seeds. He describes the struggle resulting from population growth: \"It is the doctrine of Malthus applied with manifold force to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms.\" He discusses checks to such increase including complex ecological interdependencies, and notes that competition is most severe between closely related forms \"which fill nearly the same place in the economy of nature\".\nChapter IV details natural selection under the \"infinitely complex and close-fitting\u00a0... mutual relations of all organic beings to each other and to their physical conditions of life\". Darwin takes as an example a country where a change in conditions led to extinction of some species, immigration of others and, where suitable variations occurred, descendants of some species became adapted to new conditions. He remarks that the artificial selection practised by animal breeders frequently produced sharp divergence in character between breeds, and suggests that natural selection might do the same, saying:\nBut how, it may be asked, can any analogous principle apply in nature? I believe it can and does apply most efficiently, from the simple circumstance that the more diversified the descendants from any one species become in structure, constitution, and habits, by so much will they be better enabled to seize on many and widely diversified places in the polity of nature, and so be enabled to increase in numbers.\nHistorians have remarked that here Darwin anticipated the modern concept of an ecological niche. He did not suggest that every favourable variation must be selected, nor that the favoured animals were better or higher, but merely more adapted to their surroundings.\nDarwin proposes sexual selection, driven by competition between males for mates, to explain sexually dimorphic features such as lion manes, deer antlers, peacock tails, bird songs, and the bright plumage of some male birds. He analysed sexual selection more fully in \"The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex\" (1871). Natural selection was expected to work very slowly in forming new species, but given the effectiveness of artificial selection, he could \"see no limit to the amount of change, to the beauty and infinite complexity of the coadaptations between all organic beings, one with another and with their physical conditions of life, which may be effected in the long course of time by nature's power of selection\". Using a tree diagram and calculations, he indicates the \"divergence of character\" from original species into new species and genera. He describes branches falling off as extinction occurred, while new branches formed in \"the great Tree of life\u00a0... with its ever branching and beautiful ramifications\".\nVariation and heredity.\nIn Darwin's time there was no agreed-upon model of heredity; in Chapter I Darwin admitted, \"The laws governing inheritance are quite unknown.\" He accepted a version of the inheritance of acquired characteristics (which after Darwin's death came to be called Lamarckism), and Chapter V discusses what he called the effects of use and disuse; he wrote that he thought \"there can be little doubt that use in our domestic animals strengthens and enlarges certain parts, and disuse diminishes them; and that such modifications are inherited\", and that this also applied in nature. Darwin stated that some changes that were commonly attributed to use and disuse, such as the loss of functional wings in some island-dwelling insects, might be produced by natural selection. In later editions of \"Origin\", Darwin expanded the role attributed to the inheritance of acquired characteristics. Darwin also admitted ignorance of the source of inheritable variations, but speculated they might be produced by environmental factors. However, one thing was clear: whatever the exact nature and causes of new variations, Darwin knew from observation and experiment that breeders were able to select such variations and produce huge differences in many generations of selection. The \"observation\" that selection works in domestic animals is not destroyed by lack of \"understanding\" of the underlying hereditary mechanism.\nBreeding of animals and plants showed related varieties varying in similar ways, or tending to revert to an ancestral form, and similar patterns of variation in distinct species were explained by Darwin as demonstrating common descent. He recounted how Lord Morton's mare apparently demonstrated telegony, offspring inheriting characteristics of a previous mate of the female parent, and accepted this process as increasing the variation available for natural selection.\nMore detail was given in Darwin's 1868 book on \"The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication\", which tried to explain heredity through his hypothesis of pangenesis. Although Darwin had privately questioned blending inheritance, he struggled with the theoretical difficulty that novel individual variations would tend to blend into a population. However, inherited variation could be seen, and Darwin's concept of selection working on a population with a range of small variations was workable. It was not until the modern evolutionary synthesis in the 1930s and 1940s that a model of heredity became completely integrated with a model of variation. This modern evolutionary synthesis had been dubbed Neo Darwinian Evolution because it encompasses Charles Darwin's theories of evolution with Gregor Mendel's theories of genetic inheritance.\nDifficulties for the theory.\nChapter VI begins by saying the next three chapters will address possible objections to the theory, the first being that often no intermediate forms between closely related species are found, though the theory implies such forms must have existed. As Darwin noted, \"Firstly, why, if species have descended from other species by insensibly fine gradations, do we not everywhere see innumerable transitional forms? Why is not all nature in confusion, instead of the species being, as we see them, well defined?\" Darwin attributed this to the competition between different forms, combined with the small number of individuals of intermediate forms, often leading to extinction of such forms.\nAnother difficulty, related to the first one, is the absence or rarity of transitional varieties in time. Darwin commented that by the theory of natural selection \"innumerable transitional forms must have existed,\" and wondered \"why do we not find them embedded in countless numbers in the crust of the earth?\" (For further discussion of these difficulties, see and Bernstein et al. and Michod.)\nThe chapter then deals with whether natural selection could produce complex specialised structures, and the behaviours to use them, when it would be difficult to imagine how intermediate forms could be functional. Darwin said:\nSecondly, is it possible that an animal having, for instance, the structure and habits of a bat, could have been formed by the modification of some animal with wholly different habits? Can we believe that natural selection could produce, on the one hand, organs of trifling importance, such as the tail of a giraffe, which serves as a fly-flapper, and, on the other hand, organs of such wonderful structure, as the eye, of which we hardly as yet fully understand the inimitable perfection?\nHis answer was that in many cases animals exist with intermediate structures that are functional. He presented flying squirrels, and flying lemurs as examples of how bats might have evolved from non-flying ancestors. He discussed various simple eyes found in invertebrates, starting with nothing more than an optic nerve coated with pigment, as examples of how the vertebrate eye could have evolved. Darwin concludes: \"If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed, which could not possibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight modifications, my theory would absolutely break down. But I can find out no such case.\"\nIn a section on \"organs of little apparent importance\", Darwin discusses the difficulty of explaining various seemingly trivial traits with no evident adaptive function, and outlines some possibilities such as correlation with useful features. He accepts that we \"are profoundly ignorant of the causes producing slight and unimportant variations\" which distinguish domesticated breeds of animals, and human races. He suggests that sexual selection might explain these variations:\nI might have adduced for this same purpose the differences between the races of man, which are so strongly marked; I may add that some little light can apparently be thrown on the origin of these differences, chiefly through sexual selection of a particular kind, but without here entering on copious details my reasoning would appear frivolous.\nChapter VII (of the first edition) addresses the evolution of instincts. His examples included two he had investigated experimentally: slave-making ants and the construction of hexagonal cells by honey bees. Darwin noted that some species of slave-making ants were more dependent on slaves than others, and he observed that many ant species will collect and store the pupae of other species as food. He thought it reasonable that species with an extreme dependency on slave workers had evolved in incremental steps. He suggested that bees that make hexagonal cells evolved in steps from bees that made round cells, under pressure from natural selection to economise wax. Darwin concluded:\nFinally, it may not be a logical deduction, but to my imagination it is far more satisfactory to look at such instincts as the young cuckoo ejecting its foster-brothers, \u2014ants making slaves, \u2014the larv\u00e6 of ichneumonid\u00e6 feeding within the live bodies of caterpillars, \u2014not as specially endowed or created instincts, but as small consequences of one general law, leading to the advancement of all organic beings, namely, multiply, vary, let the strongest live and the weakest die.\nChapter VIII addresses the idea that species had special characteristics that prevented hybrids from being fertile in order to preserve separately created species. Darwin said that, far from being constant, the difficulty in producing hybrids of related species, and the viability and fertility of the hybrids, varied greatly, especially among plants. Sometimes what were widely considered to be separate species produced fertile hybrid offspring freely, and in other cases what were considered to be mere varieties of the same species could only be crossed with difficulty. Darwin concluded: \"Finally, then, the facts briefly given in this chapter do not seem to me opposed to, but even rather to support the view, that there is no fundamental distinction between species and varieties.\"\nIn the sixth edition Darwin inserted a new chapter VII (renumbering the subsequent chapters) to respond to criticisms of earlier editions, including the objection that many features of organisms were not adaptive and could not have been produced by natural selection. He said some such features could have been by-products of adaptive changes to other features, and that often features seemed non-adaptive because their function was unknown, as shown by his book on \"Fertilisation of Orchids\" that explained how their elaborate structures facilitated pollination by insects. Much of the chapter responds to George Jackson Mivart's criticisms, including his claim that features such as baleen filters in whales, flatfish with both eyes on one side and the camouflage of stick insects could not have evolved through natural selection because intermediate stages would not have been adaptive. Darwin proposed scenarios for the incremental evolution of each feature.\nGeological record.\nChapter IX deals with the fact that the geological record appears to show forms of life suddenly arising, without the innumerable transitional fossils expected from gradual changes. Darwin borrowed Charles Lyell's argument in \"Principles of Geology\" that the record is extremely imperfect as fossilisation is a very rare occurrence, spread over vast periods of time; since few areas had been geologically explored, there could only be fragmentary knowledge of geological formations, and fossil collections were very poor. Evolved local varieties which migrated into a wider area would seem to be the sudden appearance of a new species. Darwin did not expect to be able to reconstruct evolutionary history, but continuing discoveries gave him well-founded hope that new finds would occasionally reveal transitional forms. To show that there had been enough time for natural selection to work slowly, he cited the example of The Weald as discussed in \"Principles of Geology\" together with other observations from Hugh Miller, James Smith of Jordanhill and Andrew Ramsay. Combining this with an estimate of recent rates of sedimentation and erosion, Darwin calculated that erosion of The Weald had taken around 300 million years. The initial appearance of entire groups of well-developed organisms in the oldest fossil-bearing layers, now known as the Cambrian explosion, posed a problem. Darwin had no doubt that earlier seas had swarmed with living creatures, but stated that he had no satisfactory explanation for the lack of fossils. Fossil evidence of pre-Cambrian life has since been found, extending the history of life back for billions of years.\nChapter X examines whether patterns in the fossil record are better explained by common descent and branching evolution through natural selection, than by the individual creation of fixed species. Darwin expected species to change slowly, but not at the same rate \u2013 some organisms such as \"Lingula\" were unchanged since the earliest fossils. The pace of natural selection would depend on variability and change in the environment. This distanced his theory from Lamarckian laws of inevitable progress. It has been argued that this anticipated the punctuated equilibrium hypothesis, but other scholars have preferred to emphasise Darwin's commitment to gradualism. He cited Richard Owen's findings that the earliest members of a class were a few simple and generalised species with characteristics intermediate between modern forms, and were followed by increasingly diverse and specialised forms, matching the branching of common descent from an ancestor. Patterns of extinction matched his theory, with related groups of species having a continued existence until extinction, then not reappearing. Recently extinct species were more similar to living species than those from earlier eras, and as he had seen in South America, and William Clift had shown in Australia, fossils from recent geological periods resembled species still living in the same area.\nGeographic distribution.\nChapter XI deals with evidence from biogeography, starting with the observation that differences in flora and fauna from separate regions cannot be explained by environmental differences alone; South America, Africa, and Australia all have regions with similar climates at similar latitudes, but those regions have very different plants and animals. The species found in one area of a continent are more closely allied with species found in other regions of that same continent than to species found on other continents. Darwin noted that barriers to migration played an important role in the differences between the species of different regions. The coastal sea life of the Atlantic and Pacific sides of Central America had almost no species in common even though the Isthmus of Panama was only a few miles wide. His explanation was a combination of migration and descent with modification. He went on to say: \"On this principle of inheritance with modification, we can understand how it is that sections of genera, whole genera, and even families are confined to the same areas, as is so commonly and notoriously the case.\" Darwin explained how a volcanic island formed a few hundred miles from a continent might be colonised by a few species from that continent. These species would become modified over time, but would still be related to species found on the continent, and Darwin observed that this was a common pattern. Darwin discussed ways that species could be dispersed across oceans to colonise islands, many of which he had investigated experimentally.\nChapter XII continues the discussion of biogeography. After a brief discussion of freshwater species, it returns to oceanic islands and their peculiarities; for example on some islands roles played by mammals on continents were played by other animals such as flightless birds or reptiles. The summary of both chapters says:\n...\u00a0I think all the grand leading facts of geographical distribution are explicable on the theory of migration (generally of the more dominant forms of life), together with subsequent modification and the multiplication of new forms. We can thus understand the high importance of barriers, whether of land or water, which separate our several zoological and botanical provinces. We can thus understand the localisation of sub-genera, genera, and families; and how it is that under different latitudes, for instance in South America, the inhabitants of the plains and mountains, of the forests, marshes, and deserts, are in so mysterious a manner linked together by affinity, and are likewise linked to the extinct beings which formerly inhabited the same continent\u00a0... On these same principles, we can understand, as I have endeavoured to show, why oceanic islands should have few inhabitants, but of these a great number should be endemic or peculiar;\u00a0...\nClassification, morphology, embryology, rudimentary organs.\nChapter XIII starts by observing that classification depends on species being grouped together in a \"Taxonomy\", a multilevel system of groups and sub-groups based on varying degrees of resemblance. After discussing classification issues, Darwin concludes:\nAll the foregoing rules and aids and difficulties in classification are explained, if I do not greatly deceive myself, on the view that the natural system is founded on descent with modification; that the characters which naturalists consider as showing true affinity between any two or more species, are those which have been inherited from a common parent, and, in so far, all true classification is genealogical; that community of descent is the hidden bond which naturalists have been unconsciously seeking,\u00a0...\nDarwin discusses morphology, including the importance of homologous structures. He says, \"What can be more curious than that the hand of a man, formed for grasping, that of a mole for digging, the leg of the horse, the paddle of the porpoise, and the wing of the bat, should all be constructed on the same pattern, and should include the same bones, in the same relative positions?\" This made no sense under doctrines of independent creation of species, as even Richard Owen had admitted, but the \"explanation is manifest on the theory of the natural selection of successive slight modifications\" showing common descent. He notes that animals of the same class often have extremely similar embryos. Darwin discusses rudimentary organs, such as the wings of flightless birds and the rudiments of pelvis and leg bones found in some snakes. He remarks that some rudimentary organs, such as teeth in baleen whales, are found only in embryonic stages. These factors also supported his theory of descent with modification.\nConcluding remarks.\nThe final chapter, \"Recapitulation and Conclusion\", reviews points from earlier chapters, and Darwin concludes by hoping that his theory might produce revolutionary changes in many fields of natural history. He suggests that psychology will be put on a new foundation and implies the relevance of his theory to the first appearance of humanity with the sentence that \"Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history.\" Darwin ends with a passage that became well known and much quoted:\nIt is interesting to contemplate an entangled bank, clothed with many plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth, and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different from each other, and dependent on each other in so complex a manner, have all been produced by laws acting around us ... Thus, from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most exalted object which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the production of the higher animals, directly follows. There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having been originally breathed into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being, evolved.\nDarwin added the phrase \"by the Creator\" from the 1860 second edition onwards, so that the ultimate sentence begins \"There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms or into one\".\nStructure, style, and themes.\nNature and structure of Darwin's argument.\nDarwin's aims were twofold: to show that species had not been separately created, and to show that natural selection had been the chief agent of change. He knew that his readers were already familiar with the concept of transmutation of species from \"Vestiges\", and his introduction ridicules that work as failing to provide a viable mechanism. Therefore, the first four chapters lay out his case that selection in nature, caused by the struggle for existence, is analogous to the selection of variations under domestication, and that the accumulation of adaptive variations provides a scientifically testable mechanism for evolutionary speciation.\nLater chapters provide evidence that evolution has occurred, supporting the idea of branching, adaptive evolution without directly proving that selection is the mechanism. Darwin presents supporting facts drawn from many disciplines, showing that his theory could explain a myriad of observations from many fields of natural history that were inexplicable under the alternative concept that species had been individually created. The structure of Darwin's argument showed the influence of John Herschel, whose philosophy of science maintained that a mechanism could be called a \"vera causa\" (true cause) if three things could be demonstrated: its existence in nature, its ability to produce the effects of interest, and its ability to explain a wide range of observations. This reflected the influence of William Whewell's idea of a consilience of inductions, as explained in his work \"Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences\", where if you could argue that a proposed mechanism successfully explained various phenomena you could then use those arguments as evidence for that mechanism.\nLiterary style.\nThe \"Examiner\" review of 3 December 1859 commented, \"Much of Mr. Darwin's volume is what ordinary readers would call 'tough reading;' that is, writing which to comprehend requires concentrated attention and some preparation for the task. All, however, is by no means of this description, and many parts of the book abound in information, easy to comprehend and both instructive and entertaining.\"\nWhile the book was readable enough to sell, its dryness ensured that it was seen as aimed at specialist scientists and could not be dismissed as mere journalism or imaginative fiction. Though Richard Owen did complain in the Quarterly Review that the style was too easy for a serious work of science. Unlike the still-popular \"Vestiges\", it avoided the narrative style of the historical novel and cosmological speculation, though the closing sentence clearly hinted at cosmic progression. Darwin had long been immersed in the literary forms and practices of specialist science, and made effective use of his skills in structuring arguments. David Quammen has described the book as written in everyday language for a wide audience, but noted that Darwin's literary style was uneven: in some places he used convoluted sentences that are difficult to read, while in other places his writing was beautiful. Quammen advised that later editions were weakened by Darwin making concessions and adding details to address his critics, and recommended the first edition. James T. Costa said that because the book was an abstract produced in haste in response to Wallace's essay, it was more approachable than the big book on natural selection Darwin had been working on, which would have been encumbered by scholarly footnotes and much more technical detail. He added that some parts of \"Origin\" are dense, but other parts are almost lyrical, and the case studies and observations are presented in a narrative style unusual in serious scientific books, which broadened its audience.\nHuman evolution.\nFrom his early transmutation notebooks in the late 1830s onwards, Darwin considered human evolution as part of the natural processes he was investigating, and rejected divine intervention. In 1856, his \"big book on species\" titled \"Natural Selection\" was to include a \"note on Man\", but when Wallace enquired in December 1857, Darwin replied; \"You ask whether I shall discuss 'man';\u2014I think I shall avoid whole subject, as so surrounded with prejudices, though I fully admit that it is the highest &amp; most interesting problem for the naturalist.\"\nOn 28 March 1859, with his manuscript for the book well under way, Darwin wrote to Lyell offering the suggested publisher John Murray assurances \"That I do not discuss origin of man\".\nIn the final chapter of \"On the Origin of Species\", \"Recapitulation and Conclusion\", Darwin briefly highlights the human implications of his theory:\n\"In the distant future I see open fields for far more important researches. Psychology will be based on a new foundation, that of the necessary acquirement of each mental power and capacity by gradation. Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history.\"\nDiscussing this in January 1860, Darwin assured Lyell that \"by the sentence [Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history] I show that I believe man is in same predicament with other animals. Many modern writers have seen this sentence as Darwin's only reference to humans in the book; Janet Browne describes it as his only discussion there of human origins, while noting that the book makes other references to humanity.\nSome other statements in the book are quietly effective at pointing out the implication that humans are simply another species, evolving through the same processes and principles affecting other organisms. For example, in Chapter III: \"Struggle for Existence\" Darwin includes \"slow-breeding man\" among other examples of Malthusian population growth. In his discussions on morphology, Darwin compares and comments on bone structures that are homologous between humans and other mammals.\nDarwin's early notebooks discussed how non-adaptive characteristics could be selected when animals or humans chose mates, with races of humans differing over ideas of beauty. In his 1856 notes responding to Robert Knox's \"The Races of Man: A Fragment\", he called this effect sexual selection. He added notes on sexual selection to his \"big book on species\", and in mid-1857 he added a section heading \"Theory applied to Races of Man\", but did not add text on this topic.\nIn \"On the Origin of Species\", Chapter VI: \"Difficulties on Theory\", Darwin mentions this in the context of \"slight and unimportant variations\":\nI might have adduced for this same purpose the differences between the races of man, which are so strongly marked; I may add that some little light can apparently be thrown on the origin of these differences, chiefly through sexual selection of a particular kind, but without here entering on copious details my reasoning would appear frivolous.\"\nWhen Darwin published \"The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex\" twelve years later, he said that he had not gone into detail on human evolution in the \"Origin\" as he thought that would \"only add to the prejudices against my views\". He had not completely avoided the topic:\nIt seemed to me sufficient to indicate, in the first edition of my \"Origin of Species,\" that by this work \"light would be thrown on the origin of man and his history;\" and this implies that man must be included with other organic beings in any general conclusion respecting his manner of appearance on this earth.\nHe also said that he had \"merely alluded\" in that book to sexual selection differentiating human races.\nReception.\nThe book aroused international interest and a widespread debate, with no sharp line between scientific issues and ideological, social and religious implications. Much of the initial reaction was hostile, in a large part because very few reviewers actually understood his theory, but Darwin had to be taken seriously as a prominent and respected name in science. Bishop Samuel Wilberforce wrote a review in \"Quarterly Review\" in 1860 where he disagreed with Darwin's 'argument'. There was much less controversy than had greeted the 1844 publication \"Vestiges of Creation\", which had been rejected by scientists, but had influenced a wide public readership into believing that nature and human society were governed by natural laws. The \"Origin of Species\" as a book of wide general interest became associated with ideas of social reform. Its proponents made full use of a surge in the publication of review journals, and it was given more popular attention than almost any other scientific work, though it failed to match the continuing sales of \"Vestiges\". Darwin's book legitimised scientific discussion of evolutionary mechanisms, and the newly coined term 'Darwinism' was used to cover the whole range of evolutionism, not just his own ideas. By the mid-1870s, evolutionism was triumphant.\nWhile Darwin had been somewhat coy about human origins, not identifying any explicit conclusion on the matter in his book, he had dropped enough hints about human's animal ancestry for the inference to be made, and the first review claimed it made a creed of the \"men from monkeys\" idea from \"Vestiges\". Human evolution became central to the debate and was strongly argued by Huxley who featured it in his popular \"working-men's lectures\". Darwin did not publish his own views on this until 1871.\nThe naturalism of natural selection conflicted with presumptions of purpose in nature and while this could be reconciled by theistic evolution, other mechanisms implying more progress or purpose were more acceptable. Herbert Spencer had already incorporated Lamarckism into his popular philosophy of progressive free market human society. He popularised the terms 'evolution' and 'survival of the fittest', and many thought Spencer was central to evolutionary thinking.\nImpact on the scientific community.\nScientific readers were already aware of arguments that species changed through processes that were subject to laws of nature, but the transmutational ideas of Lamarck and the vague \"law of development\" of \"Vestiges\" had not found scientific favour. Darwin presented natural selection as a scientifically testable mechanism while accepting that other mechanisms such as inheritance of acquired characters were possible. His strategy established that evolution through natural laws was worthy of scientific study, and by 1875, most scientists accepted that evolution occurred but few thought natural selection was significant. Darwin's scientific method was also disputed, with his proponents favouring the empiricism of John Stuart Mill's \"A System of Logic\", while opponents held to the idealist school of William Whewell's \"Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences\", in which investigation could begin with the intuitive idea that species were fixed objects created by design. Early support for Darwin's ideas came from the findings of field naturalists studying biogeography and ecology, including Joseph Dalton Hooker in 1860, and Asa Gray in 1862. Henry Walter Bates presented research in 1861 that explained insect mimicry using natural selection. Alfred Russel Wallace discussed evidence from his Malay Archipelago research, including an 1864 paper with an evolutionary explanation for the Wallace line.\nEvolution had less obvious applications to anatomy and morphology, and at first had little impact on the research of the anatomist Thomas Henry Huxley. Despite this, Huxley strongly supported Darwin on evolution; though he called for experiments to show whether natural selection could form new species, and questioned if Darwin's gradualism was sufficient without sudden leaps to cause speciation. Huxley wanted science to be secular, without religious interference, and his article in the April 1860 \"Westminster Review\" promoted scientific naturalism over natural theology, praising Darwin for \"extending the domination of Science over regions of thought into which she has, as yet, hardly penetrated\" and coining the term \"Darwinism\" as part of his efforts to secularise and professionalise science. Huxley gained influence, and initiated the X Club, which used the journal \"Nature\" to promote evolution and naturalism, shaping much of late-Victorian science. Later, the German morphologist Ernst Haeckel would convince Huxley that comparative anatomy and palaeontology could be used to reconstruct evolutionary genealogies.\nThe leading naturalist in Britain was the anatomist Richard Owen, an idealist who had shifted to the view in the 1850s that the history of life was the gradual unfolding of a divine plan. Owen's review of the \"Origin\" in the April 1860 \"Edinburgh Review\" bitterly attacked Huxley, Hooker and Darwin, but also signalled acceptance of a kind of evolution as a teleological plan in a continuous \"ordained becoming\", with new species appearing by natural birth. Others that rejected natural selection, but supported \"creation by birth\", included the Duke of Argyll who explained beauty in plumage by design. Since 1858, Huxley had emphasised anatomical similarities between apes and humans, contesting Owen's view that humans were a separate sub-class. Their disagreement over human origins came to the fore at the British Association for the Advancement of Science meeting featuring the legendary 1860 Oxford evolution debate. In two years of acrimonious public dispute that Charles Kingsley satirised as the \"Great Hippocampus Question\" and parodied in \"The Water-Babies\" as the \"great hippopotamus test\", Huxley showed that Owen was incorrect in asserting that ape brains lacked a structure present in human brains. Others, including Charles Lyell and Alfred Russel Wallace, thought that humans shared a common ancestor with apes, but higher mental faculties could not have evolved through a purely material process. Darwin published his own explanation in the \"Descent of Man\" (1871).\nImpact outside Great Britain.\nThe German physiologist Emil du Bois-Reymond converted to Darwinism after reading an English copy of \"On the Origin of Species\" in the spring of 1860. Du Bois-Reymond was a committed supporter, securing Darwin an honorary degree from the University of Breslau, teaching his theory to students at the University of Berlin, and defending his name to paying audiences across Germany and The Netherlands. Du Bois-Reymond's exposition resembled Darwin's: he endorsed natural selection, rejected the inheritance of acquired characters, remained silent on the origin of variation, and identified \"the altruism of bees, the regeneration of tissue, the effects of exercise, and the inheritance of disadvantageous traits\" as puzzles presented by the theory.\nEvolutionary ideas, although not natural selection, were accepted by other German biologists accustomed to ideas of homology in morphology from Goethe's \"Metamorphosis of Plants\" and from their long tradition of comparative anatomy. Bronn's alterations in his German translation added to the misgivings of conservatives but encouraged political radicals. Ernst Haeckel was particularly ardent, aiming to synthesise Darwin's ideas with those of Lamarck and Goethe while still reflecting the spirit of \"Naturphilosophie\". His ambitious programme to reconstruct the evolutionary history of life was joined by Huxley and supported by discoveries in palaeontology. Haeckel used embryology extensively in his recapitulation theory, which embodied a progressive, almost linear model of evolution. Darwin was cautious about such histories, and had already noted that von Baer's laws of embryology supported his idea of complex branching.\nAsa Gray promoted and defended \"Origin\" against those American naturalists with an idealist approach, notably Louis Agassiz, who viewed every species as a distinct fixed unit in the mind of the Creator, classifying as species what others considered merely varieties. Edward Drinker Cope and Alpheus Hyatt reconciled this view with evolutionism in a form of neo-Lamarckism involving recapitulation theory.\nFrench-speaking naturalists in several countries showed appreciation of the much-modified French translation by Cl\u00e9mence Royer, but Darwin's ideas had little impact in France, where any scientists supporting evolutionary ideas opted for a form of Lamarckism. The intelligentsia in Russia had accepted the general phenomenon of evolution for several years before Darwin had published his theory, and scientists were quick to take it into account, although the Malthusian aspects were felt to be relatively unimportant. The political economy of struggle was criticised as a British stereotype by Karl Marx and by Leo Tolstoy, who had the character Levin in his novel \"Anna Karenina\" voice sharp criticism of the morality of Darwin's views.\nChallenges to natural selection.\nThere were serious scientific objections to the process of natural selection as the key mechanism of evolution, including Carl N\u00e4geli's insistence that a trivial characteristic with no adaptive advantage could not be developed by selection. Darwin conceded that these could be linked to adaptive characteristics. His estimate that the age of the Earth allowed gradual evolution was disputed by William Thomson (later awarded the title Lord Kelvin), who calculated that the Sun, and therefore life on Earth, was only about 100 million years old. Darwin accepted blending inheritance, but Fleeming Jenkin calculated that as it mixed traits, natural selection could not accumulate useful traits. Darwin tried to meet these objections in the fifth edition. Mivart supported directed evolution, and compiled scientific and religious objections to natural selection. In response, Darwin made considerable changes to the sixth edition. The problems of the age of the Earth and heredity were only resolved in the 20th century.\nBy the mid-1870s, most scientists accepted evolution, but relegated natural selection to a minor role as they believed evolution was purposeful and progressive. The range of evolutionary theories during \"the eclipse of Darwinism\" included forms of \"saltationism\" in which new species were thought to arise through \"jumps\" rather than gradual adaptation, forms of orthogenesis claiming that species had an inherent tendency to change in a particular direction, and forms of neo-Lamarckism in which inheritance of acquired characteristics led to progress. The minority view of August Weismann, that natural selection was the only mechanism, was called neo-Darwinism. It was thought that the rediscovery of Mendelian inheritance invalidated Darwin's views.\nImpact on economic and political debates.\nWhile some, like Spencer, used analogy from natural selection as an argument against government intervention in the economy to benefit the poor, others, including Alfred Russel Wallace, argued that action was needed to correct social and economic inequities to level the playing field before natural selection could improve humanity further. Some political commentaries, including Walter Bagehot's \"Physics and Politics\" (1872), attempted to extend the idea of natural selection to competition between nations and between human races. Such ideas were incorporated into what was already an ongoing effort by some working in anthropology to provide scientific evidence for the superiority of Caucasians over non-white races and justify European imperialism. Historians write that most such political and economic commentators had only a superficial understanding of Darwin's scientific theory, and were as strongly influenced by other concepts about social progress and evolution, such as the Lamarckian ideas of Spencer and Haeckel, as they were by Darwin's work. Darwin objected to his ideas being used to justify military aggression and unethical business practices as he believed morality was part of fitness in humans, and he opposed polygenism, the idea that human races were fundamentally distinct and did not share a recent common ancestry.\nReligious attitudes.\nThe book produced a wide range of religious responses at a time of changing ideas and increasing secularisation. The issues raised were complex and there was a large middle ground. Developments in geology meant that there was little opposition based on a literal reading of Genesis, but defence of the argument from design and natural theology was central to debates over the book in the English-speaking world.\nNatural theology was not a unified doctrine, and while some such as Louis Agassiz were strongly opposed to the ideas in the book, others sought a reconciliation in which evolution was seen as purposeful. In the Church of England, some liberal clergymen interpreted natural selection as an instrument of God's design, with the cleric Charles Kingsley seeing it as \"just as noble a conception of Deity\". In the second edition of January 1860, Darwin quoted Kingsley as \"a celebrated cleric\", and added the phrase \"by the Creator\" to the closing sentence, which from then on read \"life, with its several powers, having been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms or into one\". While some commentators have taken this as a concession to religion that Darwin later regretted, Darwin's view at the time was of God creating life through the laws of nature, and even in the first edition there are several references to \"creation\".\nBaden Powell praised \"Mr Darwin's masterly volume [supporting] the grand principle of the self-evolving powers of nature\". In America, Asa Gray argued that evolution is the secondary effect, or \"modus operandi\", of the first cause, design, and published a pamphlet defending the book in terms of theistic evolution, \"Natural Selection is not inconsistent with Natural Theology\". Theistic evolution became a popular compromise, and St. George Jackson Mivart was among those accepting evolution but attacking Darwin's naturalistic mechanism. Eventually it was realised that supernatural intervention could not be a scientific explanation, and naturalistic mechanisms such as neo-Lamarckism were favoured over natural selection as being more compatible with purpose.\nEven though the book did not explicitly spell out Darwin's beliefs about human origins, it had dropped a number of hints about human's animal ancestry and quickly became central to the debate, as mental and moral qualities were seen as spiritual aspects of the immaterial soul, and it was believed that animals did not have spiritual qualities. This conflict could be reconciled by supposing there was some supernatural intervention on the path leading to humans, or viewing evolution as a purposeful and progressive ascent to mankind's position at the head of nature. While many conservative theologians accepted evolution, Charles Hodge argued in his 1874 critique \"What is Darwinism?\" that \"Darwinism\", defined narrowly as including rejection of design, was atheism though he accepted that Asa Gray did not reject design. Asa Gray responded that this charge misrepresented Darwin's text. By the early 20th century, four noted authors of \"The Fundamentals\" were explicitly open to the possibility that God created through evolution, but fundamentalism inspired the American creation\u2013evolution controversy that began in the 1920s. Some conservative Roman Catholic writers and influential Jesuits opposed evolution in the late 19th and early 20th century, but other Catholic writers, starting with Mivart, pointed out that early Church Fathers had not interpreted Genesis literally in this area. The English cardinal John Henry Newman stated in a letter that \u201c\u2026 Darwin's theory need not then to be atheistical, be it true or not; it may simply be suggesting a larger idea of Divine Prescience and Skill.\u201d The Vatican stated its official position in a 1950 papal encyclical, which held that evolution was not inconsistent with Catholic teaching.\nModern influence.\nVarious alternative evolutionary mechanisms favoured during \"the eclipse of Darwinism\" became untenable as more was learned about inheritance and mutation. The full significance of natural selection was at last accepted in the 1930s and 1940s as part of the modern evolutionary synthesis. During that synthesis biologists and statisticians, including R. A. Fisher, Sewall Wright and J. B. S. Haldane, merged Darwinian selection with a statistical understanding of Mendelian genetics.\nModern evolutionary theory continues to develop. Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection, with its tree-like model of branching common descent, has become the unifying theory of the life sciences. The theory explains the diversity of living organisms and their adaptation to the environment. It makes sense of the geological record, biogeography, parallels in embryonic development, biological homologies, vestigiality, cladistics, phylogenetics and other fields, with unrivalled explanatory power; it has also become essential to applied sciences such as medicine and agriculture. Despite the scientific consensus, a religion-based political controversy has developed over how evolution is taught in schools, especially in the United States.\nInterest in Darwin's writings continues, and scholars have generated an extensive literature, the Darwin Industry, about his life and work. The text of \"Origin\" itself has been subject to much analysis including a variorum, detailing the changes made in every edition, first published in 1959, and a concordance, an exhaustive external index published in 1981. Worldwide commemorations of the 150th anniversary of the publication of \"On the Origin of Species\" and the bicentenary of Darwin's birth were scheduled for 2009. They celebrated the ideas which \"over the last 150 years have revolutionised our understanding of nature and our place within it\".\nIn a survey conducted by a group of academic booksellers, publishers and librarians in advance of Academic Book Week in the United Kingdom, \"On the Origin of Species\" was voted the most influential academic book ever written. It was hailed as \"the supreme demonstration of why academic books matter\" and \"a book which has changed the way we think about everything\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n For further reviews, see "}
{"id": "29935", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29935", "title": "Thriller Film", "text": ""}
{"id": "29937", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29937", "title": "Texas Declaration of Independence", "text": "1836 proclamation of Texan independence from Mexico\nThe Texas Declaration of Independence was the formal declaration of independence of the Republic of Texas from Mexico in the Texas Revolution. It was adopted at the Convention of 1836 at Washington-on-the-Brazos on March 2, 1836, and was formally signed the next day after mistakes were noted in the text.\nBackground.\nIn October 1835, native Tejanos and new settlers in Mexican Texas launched the Texas Revolution.\nHowever, amongst the people of Texas, many struggled with understanding what the ultimate goal of the Revolution was. Some believed that the goal should be total independence from Mexico, while others sought the reimplementation of the Mexican Constitution of 1824 which had included freedoms, such as the treatment of slaves as property, that were not in the 1835 constitution of Mexico, Siete Leyes. To settle the issue, a convention was called for in March of 1836.\nThis convention differed from the previous Texas councils of 1832, 1833, and the 1835 Consultation. Many of the delegates to the 1836 convention were young citizens of the United States, who had only recently arrived in Texas, in violation of Mexico's immigration ban of April 1830. Moreover, many of them had fought in battles during the Texas Revolution against Mexico in 1835. Of the 60 men to sign, the only two known native Texans to sign are Jose Francisco Ruiz and Jose Antonio Navarro. Most of the delegates were members of the https:// and were adamant that Texas must declare its independence from Mexico. Forty-one of these delegates arrived in Washington-on-the-Brazos on February 28.\nDevelopment.\nThe convention was convened on March 1 with Richard Ellis as president. The delegates selected a committee of five to draft a declaration of independence; this committee was led by George Childress along with Edward Conrad, James Gaines, Bailey Hardeman, and Collin McKinney. The committee submitted its draft within a mere 24 hours, and this led historians to speculate that Childress had written much of it before he arrived at the Convention. The document closely mirrors the United States Declaration of Independence in both structure and tone.\nThe declaration was approved on March 2 with no debate. Based primarily on the writings of John Locke and Thomas Jefferson, the declaration proclaimed that the Mexican government \"ceased to protect the lives, liberty, and property of the people, from whom its legitimate powers are derived\" and alleged that it committed \"arbitrary acts of oppression and tyranny.\" Throughout the declaration are numerous references to the United States laws, rights, and customs. Omitted from the declaration was the fact that the author and many of the signatories were citizens of the United States, occupying Texas illegally, and therefore had no legal rights in the governance of Mexico. The declaration clarifies that the men were accustomed to the laws and privileges of the United States, and were unfamiliar with the language, religion, and traditions of the nation that they were rebelling against.\nThe declaration officially established the Republic of Texas, although it was not officially recognized at that time by any government other than itself. The Mexican Republic still claimed the land and considered the delegates to be invaders, and the United States didn't recognize it since that would be an act of war against Mexico. The declaration's adoption was followed by the Battle of the Alamo and ultimately the decisive Texian victory at the Battle of San Jacinto in April 1836. \nAmong others, the declaration mentions the following reasons for the separation:\nModeled after the United States Declaration of Independence, the Texas Declaration also contains many memorable expressions of American political principles:\nIn the claim that Mexico had invited settlers, the declaration did not mention that many settlers, including the author and majority of signatories, were factually uninvited, illegal immigrants who failed to comply with settlement laws. From Mexico's viewpoint, lawful elections of 1835 seated many conservative politicians who intended to strengthen Mexico's republic form of government and defend their nation from what they described as an invasion of illegal immigrants. Mexican legislators had lawfully amended the 1824 constitution by passing the Seven Laws.\nSignatories.\nSixty men signed the Texas Declaration of Independence. Three of them were born in Mexico, those being Jos\u00e9 Antonio Navarro, Jos\u00e9 Francisco Ruiz, and Lorenzo de Zavala. Fifty-seven of the sixty moved to Texas from the United States,and ten of them had lived in Texas for more than six years, while one-quarter of them had been in the province for less than a year. This is significant, because it indicates that the majority of signatories had moved to Texas after the Law of April 6, 1830. This law, banning immigration, had taken effect and this meant that the majority were legally citizens of the United States, occupying Texas illegally. Fifty-nine of these men were delegates to the Convention, and one was the Convention Secretary, Herbert S. Kimble, who was not a delegate.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29941", "revid": "4928500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29941", "title": "Trick-taking", "text": ""}
{"id": "29942", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29942", "title": "The Graduate", "text": "1967 film by Mike Nichols\nThe Graduate is a 1967 American independent romantic comedy-drama film directed by Mike Nichols and written by Buck Henry and Calder Willingham, based on the 1963 novella by Charles Webb. It stars Dustin Hoffman as Benjamin Braddock, a recent college graduate who is seduced by an older married woman, Mrs. Robinson (Anne Bancroft), but falls for her daughter, Elaine (Katharine Ross). The soundtrack was recorded by Simon &amp; Garfunkel, and featured the hit single \"Mrs. Robinson\".\n\"The Graduate\" was released December 21, 1967. It grossed $104.9million in the United States and Canada, making it the highest-grossing film of 1967 in North America. Adjusted for inflation (as of 2021), its gross is $857 million, making it the 22nd-highest-grossing film in the United States and Canada. It received seven nominations at the 40th Academy Awards, and won for Best Director.\nIn 1996, \"The Graduate\" was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The following year, the American Film Institute ranked it the 7th-greatest American film and the 17th-greatest in 2007. It is widely regarded as one of the greatest and most influential films ever made.\nPlot.\nAfter earning his bachelor's degree, Benjamin Braddock returns to his parents' home in Pasadena, California. During his graduation party, Mrs. Robinson, the wife of his father's law partner, asks him to drive her home. Once there, she tries to seduce him. He resists her advances, but later invites Mrs. Robinson to the Taft Hotel, where he registers under the surname Gladstone. Benjamin spends the summer idly floating in his parents' swimming pool and meeting Mrs. Robinson at the hotel. During one of their trysts, Mrs. Robinson reveals that she and her husband married after she accidentally became pregnant with their daughter, Elaine. When Benjamin jokingly suggests that he date Elaine, Mrs. Robinson angrily forbids it.\nBenjamin's parents and Mr. Robinson pester Benjamin to ask Elaine out. He reluctantly takes her out, but attempts to sabotage the date by ignoring her, driving recklessly and taking her to a strip club. She flees in tears, but Benjamin chases after her, apologizes and kisses her. They eat at a drive-in restaurant, where they bond over their shared uncertainty about their plans. After they visit the Taft Hotel for a late-night drink and the staff greet Benjamin as Mr. Gladstone, Elaine deduces that Benjamin is having an affair. Benjamin admits to having an affair with a married woman whom he does not name. He tells Elaine the affair is over and asks to see her again.\nTo prevent Benjamin from dating Elaine, Mrs. Robinson threatens to tell her about their affair. To thwart this, Benjamin tells Elaine that the married woman is her mother. Elaine throws Benjamin out of the house and returns to school at Berkeley. Benjamin follows her there, hoping to regain her affections. Elaine initially rejects him and briefly dates a medical student, Carl. When she learns her mother lied about Benjamin raping her, she reconciles with him. Benjamin pushes for marriage, but Elaine is uncertain despite her feelings for him. Mr. Robinson arrives at Berkeley and angrily confronts Benjamin. He informs him that he and Mrs. Robinson are getting divorced and threatens to have him jailed if he keeps seeing Elaine. Mr. Robinson forces Elaine to leave college to marry Carl.\nBenjamin drives to Pasadena and enters the Robinson home searching for Elaine. He finds Mrs. Robinson, who tells him that he cannot prevent Elaine's marriage to Carl. Benjamin flees the house and drives back to Berkeley. There he discovers the wedding is in Santa Barbara that day. He speeds over 300 miles to Santa Barbara, but his car runs out of gas a short distance from the church.\nBenjamin runs to the church, arriving just as the ceremony is ending. His desperate appearance in the glass church gallery stirs Elaine into defying her mother and fleeing the sanctuary. Benjamin fights off Mr. Robinson and repels the wedding guests by swinging a large cross, which he uses to bar the church doors, trapping everyone inside. Benjamin and Elaine escape aboard a bus and sit among the startled passengers, with Elaine still in her wedding gown. As the bus drives on, their ecstatic smiles slowly change into ambivalent expressions.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Anne Bancroft as Mrs. Robinson\nRichard Dreyfuss makes an uncredited appearance and speaks two lines in his second film role as one of the tenants in Mr. McCleery's boarding house. Ben Murphy also has an uncredited appearance, as the shaving fraternity brother who comes out with a double entendre. Mike Farrell appears uncredited as a hotel bellhop. Kevin Tighe makes a brief uncredited appearance as one of the showering fraternity brothers. Noam Pitlik appears uncredited as the service station attendant.\nProduction.\nGetting the film made was difficult for Nichols, who, while noted for being a successful Broadway director, was still an unknown in Hollywood. Producer Lawrence Turman, who wanted only Nichols to direct it, was continually turned down for financing. Turman also said that every studio turned down the project, saying \"they read the book and hated it, and no one thought it was funny\". He then contacted producer Joseph E. Levine, who said he would finance the film because he had associated with Nichols on the play \"The Knack\", and because he heard Elizabeth Taylor specifically wanted Nichols to direct her and Richard Burton in \"Virginia Woolf\".\nWith financing assured, Nichols suggested Buck Henry for screenwriter, although Henry's experience had also been mostly in improvised comedy, and he had no writing background. Nichols said to Henry, \"I think you could do it; I think you should do it.\" Nichols was paid $150,000, and was to receive one-sixth of the profits.\nCasting.\nNichols' first choice for Mrs. Robinson was French actress Jeanne Moreau. The motivation for this was the clich\u00e9 that in French culture, \"older\" women tended to \"train\" the younger men in sexual matters. Casting for the project was challenging. Doris Day turned down an offer because the nudity required by the role offended her. Shelley Winters, Ingrid Bergman, Eva Marie Saint, Ava Gardner, Patricia Neal, Susan Hayward, Deborah Kerr, Rita Hayworth, Lana Turner and Geraldine Page were also considered for the role of Mrs. Robinson.\nDustin Hoffman was cast as Liebkind in the Mel Brooks film \"The Producers\" (1967), but before filming began Hoffman begged Brooks to let him go to audition for \"The Graduate\". When Dustin Hoffman auditioned for the role of Benjamin, he was just short of his 30th birthday at the time of filming. He was asked to perform a love scene with Ross, having previously never done one, and believed that, as he said later, \"a girl like [Ross] would never go for a guy like me in a million years\". Ross agreed, believing that Hoffman \"looked about 3 feet tall ... so unkempt. This is going to be a disaster.\" Producer Joseph E. Levine later admitted that he at first believed Hoffman \"was one of the messenger boys\". Despite \u2013 or perhaps because of \u2013 Hoffman's awkwardness, Nichols chose him for the film.\n\"As far as I'm concerned, Mike Nichols did a very courageous thing casting me in a part that I was not right for, meaning I was Jewish,\" said Hoffman. \"In fact, many of the reviews were very negative. It was kind of veiled anti-Semitism... I was called 'big-nosed' in the reviews; 'a nasal voice'.\" Hoffman was paid $20,000 for his role in the film, and netted $4,000 after taxes and paying for temporary accommodations. After spending that money, Hoffman filed for New York State unemployment benefits, receiving $55 per week while living in a two-room apartment in the West Village of Manhattan.\nBefore Hoffman was cast, Robert Redford and Charles Grodin were among the top choices. Redford tested for the part of Benjamin (with Candice Bergen as Elaine), but Nichols thought Redford did not possess the underdog quality Benjamin needed. Grodin turned down the part at first because of the low $500/week salary offered by producer Lawrence Turman. Grodin was offered more money, but declined again because he did not believe he could prepare for a screen test for the film overnight. \"If they had given me three days to prepare, I think I would have gotten the role,\" he said.\nHarrison Ford also auditioned for the role of Benjamin Braddock but was turned down.\nBurt Ward was informally offered Hoffman's role, but was already committed to the role of Robin in the \"Batman\" television series.\nJack Nicholson, Steve McQueen, Anthony Perkins, Warren Beatty, George Peppard, George Hamilton, Keir Dullea, Brandon deWilde and Michael Parks were also considered for the role of Benjamin Braddock.\nRonald Reagan was considered for the part of Benjamin's father Mr. Braddock, which eventually went to William Daniels. Nichols cast Gene Hackman as Mr. Robinson, but he was later fired after a few days of rehearsals; he was replaced by Murray Hamilton. Many years later, Hackman said that being fired from the film still hurt him.\nDespite playing mother and daughter, Anne Bancroft and Katharine Ross were only eight years apart in age. Bancroft and Hoffman differed less than six.\nFilming.\nThe quality of the cinematography was influenced by Nichols, who chose Oscar winner Robert Surtees to do the photography. Surtees, who had photographed major films since the 1920s, including \"Ben-Hur\", said later, \"It took everything I had learned over 30 years to be able to do the job. I knew that Mike Nichols was a young director who went in for a lot of camera. We did more things in this picture than I ever did in one film.\"\nMany of the exterior university campus shots of Berkeley were actually filmed on the brick campus of USC in Los Angeles.\nThe church used for the wedding scene is actually the United Methodist Church in La Verne. In an audio commentary released with the 40th anniversary DVD, Hoffman revealed he was uneasy about the scene in which he pounds on the church window, as the minister of the church had been watching the filming disapprovingly. The wedding scene was highly influenced by the ending of the 1924 comedy film \"Girl Shy\" starring Harold Lloyd, who also served as an advisor for the scene in \"The Graduate\".\nMusic.\nThe film boosted the profile of folk-rock duo Simon &amp; Garfunkel. Originally, Nichols and O'Steen used their existing songs like \"The Sound of Silence\" merely as a pacing device for the editing, until Nichols decided that substituting original music would not be effective, and decided to include them on the soundtrack, an unusual move at that time.\nAccording to a \"Variety\" article by Peter Bart in the May 15, 2005, issue, Lawrence Turman, his producer, then made a deal for Simon to write three new songs for the movie. By the time they had nearly finished editing the film, Simon had written only one new song. Nichols begged him for more, but Simon, who was touring constantly, told him he did not have the time. He did play a few notes of a new song he had been working on: \"It's not for the movie... It's a song about times past \u2014 about Mrs. Roosevelt and Joe DiMaggio and stuff.\" Nichols advised Simon, \"It's now about Mrs. Robinson, not Mrs. Roosevelt.\"\nRelease.\n\"The Graduate\" had a dual world premiere in New York City December 20, 1967, at the Coronet Theatre, and at the Lincoln Art Theatre on 57th Street. Its general release began on December 21, 1967.\nHome media.\n\"The Graduate\" was released on DVD by MGM Home Entertainment in 1999 and 2007. A Blu-ray release was first issued by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment in 2009 and later by StudioCanal in 2010. A 4K digital restoration of the film was released by The Criterion Collection in 2016. It will be released on Ultra HD Blu-ray by StudioCanal in September 2025.\nReception and legacy.\nCritical response.\n\"The Graduate\" was met with generally positive reviews from critics upon its release. A.D. Murphy of \"Variety\" and Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" praised the film, with Murphy describing it as a \"delightful satirical comedy drama\", and Ebert claiming it was the \"funniest American comedy of the year\".\nHowever, \"Life\" critic Richard Schickel felt the film \"starts out to satirize the alienated spirit of modern youth, does so with uncommon brilliance for its first half, but ends up selling out to the very spirit its creators intended to make fun of... It's a shame \u2013 they were halfway to something wonderful when they skidded on a patch of greasy kid stuff.\"\nPauline Kael wondered, \"How could you convince them [younger viewers] that a movie that sells innocence is a very commercial piece of work when they're so clearly in the market to buy innocence?\" Kael goes on to say that the fundamental problem with the film is in its attempt to \"only succeed.\" Kael posited that the succcess of the film was \"sociological;\" that it was based on youth being emotionally manipulable.\nCritics continue to praise the film, if not always with the same ardor. For the film's thirtieth anniversary reissue, Ebert retracted some of his previous praise for it, noting that he felt its time had passed, and that he now had more sympathy for Mrs. Robinson than for Benjamin (whom he considered \"an insufferable creep\"), viewing one's sympathy for Mrs. Robinson and disdainful attitude toward Ben as a function of aging and wisdom.\nHe, along with Gene Siskel, gave the film a positive, if unenthusiastic review on the television program \"Siskel &amp; Ebert\". Furthermore, the film's rating in the American Film Institute list of the greatest American films fell from seventh in 1997 to 17th in the 2007 update. Lang Thompson, however, argued that \"it really hasn't dated much\".\nReview aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an approval rating of 86% based on 87 reviews, with an average rating of 8.90/10. The site's consensus reads: \"The music, the performances, the precision in capturing the post-college malaise \u2013 \"The Graduate\"'s coming-of-age story is indeed one for the ages.\" On the similar website, Metacritic, the film holds a score of 83 out of 100, based on 19 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nIn popular culture.\nNumerous films, TV shows, music videos, and commercials have referenced \"The Graduate\". The climactic sequence in which Benjamin crashes the wedding and leaves with Elaine is frequently parodied and referenced. TV show episodes that reference the scene include the \"Family Guy\" episode \"When You Wish Upon a Weinstein\", \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Lady Bouvier's Lover\", the \"Archer\" episode \"Skin Game\", the \"New Girl\" episode \"Elaine's Big Day\", and \"The Office\" episode \"Two Weeks\".\nThe scene was elaborately parodied in the movie \"Wayne's World 2\", and was referenced in the music video for \"Love Action (I Believe in Love)\" by The Human League and \"If You Go\" by Jon Secada, as well as the song \"Crashed the Wedding\" by Busted. The scene was also referenced in the 1998 finale of the Papa and Nicole advertising campaign in the United Kingdom for the MK1 Renault Clio, featuring Reeves and Mortimer and tying in with the release of the MK2 Renault Clio. The 1999 film \"The Other Sister\" contained a reference.\nThe leg-framing scene where Mrs. Robinson seduces Benjamin has been parodied in the \"Roseanne\" episode \"David and Goliath\", which includes a fantasy scene in which Jackie assumes the Bancroft role and attempts to seduce David. This scene is also parodied in \"The Simpsons\" episode, \"Lisa's Substitute\", when Mrs. Krabappel tries to seduce Mr. Bergstrom, who was voiced by Dustin Hoffman.\nThe car Benjamin drives in the movie is an Alfa Romeo Spider. Based on its iconic role, Alfa Romeo sold a version of the Spider in the United States from 1985 to 1990 under the name \"Spider Graduate\".&lt;ref name=\"conceptcarz.com/vehicle\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn the 1992 film \"The Player\", Robert Altman's satire of Hollywood, Buck Henry pitches a sequel to \"The Graduate\" to producer Griffin Mill (played by Tim Robbins) during the film's opening sequence. A parody of Hollywood high concept films, Henry describes the plot as Ben and Elaine living in a haunted house in Northern California, with an invalid Mrs. Robinson living in the attic.\nGeorge Michael's 1992 song, \"Too Funky,\" features a clip of the Anne Bancroft lines, \"I am not trying to seduce you... Would you like me to seduce you? Is that what you're trying to tell me?\", as an intro of the song, and is repeated during the final crescendo.\nIn conjunction with the film's 25th anniversary home video release, alternative rock band The Lemonheads recorded a punk-style cover of Simon &amp; Garfunkel's \"Mrs. Robinson\". The music video includes scenes from the film. This cover was then used in Martin Scorsese's 2013 film \"The Wolf of Wall Street\".\nThe film \"Kingpin\" parodied the leg-framed shot, showing Woody Harrelson framed by his landlady's leg, and features an excerpt of \"The Sound of Silence\" after Harrelson's character has sex with the landlady to make up for back rent.\nHoffman recreated the church wedding scene for a 2004 Audi commercial, in which he stops his daughter (played by Lake Bell) from getting married, and tells her \"you're just like your mother\" as they drive off, implying he is portraying an older Benjamin who has a daughter with Elaine.\nThe plot of the 2005 romantic comedy film \"Rumor Has It\", directed by Rob Reiner and starring Jennifer Aniston, Kevin Costner, Shirley MacLaine and Mark Ruffalo, revolves around a story in which a woman learns that her mother and grandmother may be the inspiration for \"The Graduate\", and the 1963 novel of the same name it was based on.\n\"(500) Days of Summer\" features a scene in which the protagonist, Tom, watches \"The Graduate\" with his then girlfriend Summer. He is said to misinterpret the ending, a fact that serves to characterize his naivety concerning relationships.\nAccolades.\nIn 1996, \"The Graduate\" was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\", and placed #22 on the list of highest-grossing films in the United States and Canada, adjusted for inflation.\nThe film is listed in \"1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die\".\nThe film appears on the following American Film Institute lists:\nStage adaptation.\nTerry Johnson's adaptation of the original novel and the film ran on both London's West End and Broadway, and has toured the United States. There is a Brazilian version adapted by Miguel Falabella. Several actresses have starred as Mrs. Robinson, including Kathleen Turner, Lorraine Bracco, Jerry Hall, Amanda Donohoe, Morgan Fairchild, Anne Archer, Vera Fischer, Patricia Richardson and Linda Gray.\nThe stage production adds several scenes not in the novel nor the film, as well as using material from both film and novel.\nThe soundtrack uses songs by Simon &amp; Garfunkel also not used in the film, such as \"Bridge Over Troubled Water\", as well as music from other popular musicians from the era, such as The Byrds and The Beach Boys. The West End production opened at the Gielgud Theatre on April 5, 2000, after previews from March 24, with Kathleen Turner starring as Mrs. Robinson. Jerry Hall replaced Turner from July 31, 2000, followed by Amanda Donohoe from February 2001, Anne Archer from June 2001, and Linda Gray from October 2001. The production closed in January 2002. The 2003 U.K. touring production starred Glynis Barber as Mrs. Robinson.\nThe Broadway production opened at the Plymouth Theatre April 4, 2002, and closed March 2, 2003, after 380 performances. Directed by Terry Johnson, the play featured the cast of Jason Biggs as Benjamin Braddock, Alicia Silverstone as Elaine Robinson, and Kathleen Turner as Mrs. Robinson. The play received no award nominations. Linda Gray briefly filled in for Turner in September 2002. Lorraine Bracco replaced Turner from November 19, 2002.\nPossible sequel.\nCharles Webb wrote a sequel to his original novel, titled \"Home School\", but initially refused to publish it in its entirety because of a contract he signed in the 1960s. When he sold the film rights to \"The Graduate\", he surrendered the rights to any sequels. If he were to publish \"Home School\", the French media company that owns the rights to \"The Graduate\", Canal+, would be able to adapt it for the screen without his permission. Extracts of \"Home School\" were printed in \"The Times\" on May 2, 2006. Webb told the newspaper there was a possibility he would find a publisher for the full text, provided he could retrieve the film rights using French copyright law. On May 30, 2006, \"The Times\" reported Webb had signed a publishing deal for \"Home School\" with Random House, which he hoped would enable him to instruct French lawyers to attempt to retrieve his rights. The novel was published in Britain in 2007.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29943", "revid": "16540403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29943", "title": "The Breakfast Club", "text": "1985 film by John Hughes\nThe Breakfast Club is a 1985 American coming-of-age comedy-drama film written, produced, and directed by John Hughes. It stars Emilio Estevez, Paul Gleason, Anthony Michael Hall, Judd Nelson, Molly Ringwald, and Ally Sheedy. The film tells the story of five teenagers from different high school cliques who serve a Saturday detention overseen by their authoritarian Vice Principal.\nHughes had written the script in 1982, and began casting for the film after the release of \"Sixteen Candles\" (1984). Filming took place from March to May 1984, and the entire film was shot at Maine North High School in Des Plaines, Illinois. Although the film is technically not an independent film, due to Universal Pictures' involvement as a producer, \"The Breakfast Club\" has been popularly recognized as one; the low budget, Universal not being the primary production company, and the overall feel of the film are factors to its recognition.\nThe film premiered in Los Angeles on February 7, 1985, and was theatrically released by Universal Pictures on February 15, 1985. It grossed $51.5 million against a $1 million budget, and earned acclaim from critics, who consider it to be one of Hughes's most memorable and recognized works. The media subsequently referred to the film's five main actors as members of a group called the \"Brat Pack\". In 2015, the film was digitally remastered and was re-screened in 430 theaters in celebration of its 30th anniversary.\nIn 2016, \"The Breakfast Club\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The film has been considered as one of the best films of the 1980s, and one of the best teen films of all time.\nPlot.\nOn Saturday, March 24, 1984, five students at Shermer High School in Shermer, Illinois, report for an all-day detention: socially awkward Brian Johnson, jock Andrew Clark, shy loner Allison Reynolds, popular girl Claire Standish, and rebellious delinquent John Bender. They gather in the school library and meet with their Vice Principal Richard Vernon, who warns them not to talk or move from their seats and assigns each of them the task of writing a thousand-word essay describing \"who you think you are.\"\nBender ignores the rules and spends his time antagonizing the others and defying Vernon, who gives him eight additional weekends of detention. The students sneak off to retrieve Bender's marijuana stash from his locker. When they see Vernon returning to the library, Bender deliberately gets caught to allow the others to sneak back in. \nLocked in a storage closet as punishment, Bender is further berated by Vernon, who tells him that he wants Bender to prove how tough he is. Bender is offered a chance to punch Vernon but silently refuses. He soon escapes into the ceiling panels and falls into the library, where the others hide him from Vernon.\nThe students pass the time arguing, listening to music, and smoking marijuana, gradually opening up about their home lives and their reasons for being in detention: \nDespite their differences, the students realize they all face similar problems: Andrew and Allison bond over their complex relationships with their parents; Brian and Claire each feel anxiety over being a virgin. While the group suspects that their new friendships will end once detention is over, they do admit they will look at their peers differently from now on.\nMeanwhile, Vernon complains to the janitor, Carl, that students have become less disciplined and more arrogant compared to the ones he had when he was a teacher, but Carl suggests that Vernon is the one who has changed and cares too much about what the students think of him.\nThe group convinces Brian to complete Vernon's essay on everyone's behalf. Claire gives Allison a makeover, which sparks romantic interest from Andrew, and Bender crawls back to the closet, where Claire challenges her \"pristine\" reputation by kissing him. As the students part ways, Allison and Andrew kiss, and she rips the state championship patch off his letterman jacket to keep; Claire gives Bender one of her diamond earrings, and they share their own kiss.\nVernon reads Brian's essay, which asserts that the vice principal has made petty assumptions about all of them and declares that \"each one of us is a brain (Brian), an athlete (Andrew), a basket case (Allison), a princess (Claire), and a criminal (Bender).\" \"Does that answer your question? Sincerely yours, the Breakfast Club.\" Bender walks home across the school's football field and raises his fist in the air triumphantly as he leaves.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nThe title was originally \"The Lunch Bunch\", but a friend of John's from another school had a detention class called \"The Breakfast Club\", so he decided to go with that. Hughes wrote the script around the time when he was writing \"Sixteen Candles\", but he wrote the \"Sixteen Candles\" script in mere days and it impressed the studio executives and they chose it to be his directorial debut.\nCasting.\nMolly Ringwald and Anthony Michael Hall both starred in Hughes's 1984 film \"Sixteen Candles\". Towards the end of filming, Hughes asked them to be in \"The Breakfast Club\". Hall became the first to be cast, agreeing to the role of Brian Johnson; his real-life mother and sister played his character's mother and sister in the film. Ringwald was originally approached to play the character of Allison Reynolds, but she was \"really upset\" because she wanted to play Claire Standish (then named \"Cathy\" in the first draft of the script), which saw the auditions of Robin Wright, Jodie Foster, Diane Lane and Laura Dern. She eventually convinced Hughes and the studio to give her the part. The role of Allison ultimately went to Ally Sheedy.\nEmilio Estevez was originally cast in the role of John Bender, but when Hughes was unable to find someone to play Andrew Clark, Estevez was recast. Nicolas Cage was considered for the role of John Bender, which was the last role to be cast. Alan Ruck also auditioned for the role, but the choice was narrowed down to John Cusack and Judd Nelson. Hughes originally cast Cusack, but decided to replace him with Nelson before shooting began, because Cusack did not look intimidating enough for the role. At one point, Hughes was disappointed in Nelson because he stayed in character and harassed Ringwald off-camera; the other actors had to convince Hughes to not fire him. Rick Moranis was originally cast as the janitor but was released by Ned Tanen, the film\u2019s producer, who felt that Moranis' portrayal as an over-the-top Russian caricature did not suit the serious nature of the film. Moranis was replaced by John Kapelos.\nFilming.\nIn 1999, Hughes said that his request to direct the film met with resistance and skepticism because he lacked filmmaking experience. He ultimately convinced the film's investors that due to the modest $1 million budget and its single-location shoot, he could greatly minimize their risk. Hughes originally thought that \"The Breakfast Club\" would be his directorial debut. He opted for an insular, largely one-room set and wrote about high school students, who would be played by younger actors.\nPrincipal photography began on March 28, 1984, and ended in May. Filming took place at Maine North High School in Des Plaines, Illinois, which had been closed in May 1981. The same school was used for interior scenes of Hughes's 1986 film \"Ferris Bueller's Day Off\", which also featured exterior shots from nearby Glenbrook North High School. The appearance of the library at Maine North High, considered too small for use in the film, prompted the crew to build a virtually identical but larger set in the school's gymnasium. The actors rehearsed for three weeks and then shot the film in sequence. Nelson tried other opinions for the ending scene until eventually landing the fist pump. The dance sequence was originally scripted with Claire dancing alone, but Ringwald felt embarrassed about performing solo and Hughes agreed to have the others join her. On the \"Ferris Bueller's Day Off\" DVD commentary (featured on the 2004 DVD version), Hughes revealed that he shot the two films concurrently to save time and money, and some outtakes of both films feature elements of the film crews working on the other film. The first print was 150 minutes in length.\nDuring a cast reunion in honor of the film's 25th anniversary, Ally Sheedy revealed that a director's cut existed; but Hughes's widow, who was also present, did not disclose any details concerning its whereabouts. In 2015, the first draft of the film's script was discovered in a Maine South High School cabinet as district employees were moving offices to a new building.\nPoster.\nThe film's poster, featuring the five characters huddled together, was photographed by Annie Leibovitz toward the end of shooting. The shot of five actors gazing at the camera influenced the way teen films were marketed from that point on. The poster refers to the five \"types\" of the story, using slightly different terms than those used in the film (and in a different sequence), stating \"They were five total strangers with nothing in common, meeting for the first time. A brain, a beauty, a jock, a rebel and a recluse\". \"The Breakfast Club\" poster \"family shot\", notably including Bender's raised fist, was satirized in the poster for the comedy-horror film \"The Texas Chainsaw Massacre 2\". It also inspired the title page of chapter 29 of the manga series \"Akane-banashi\".\nThemes.\nThe main theme of the film is the constant struggle of the American teenager to be understood, both by adults and by themselves. It explores the pressure put on teenagers to fit into their own realms of high school social constructs, as well as the lofty expectations of their parents, teachers, and other authority figures. On the surface, the students have little in common with each other, but they eventually bond over a common disdain for the aforementioned peer pressure and parental expectations. Stereotyping is another theme. Once the obvious stereotypes are broken down, the characters \"empathize with each other's struggles, dismiss some of the inaccuracies of their first impressions, and discover that they are more similar than different\". The main adult character, Mr. Vernon, is portrayed with arguably no redeeming qualities; throughout the film, he consistently talks down to students, accesses private student information (then attempts to cover his tracks when confronted by a fellow employee) and forcefully flaunts his authority at each opportunity. He continually and aggressively challenges Bender, who is the only one of the group who chooses to stand up to him.\nRelease.\nThe film premiered in Los Angeles on February 7, 1985. Universal Pictures released the film in cinemas on February 15, 1985, in the United States.\nHome media.\n\"The Breakfast Club\" was first released on VHS and LaserDisc. In 2003, the film was released on DVD as part of the \"High School Reunion Collection\". In 2008, a \"Flashback Edition\" DVD was released with several special features, including an audio commentary with Anthony Michael Hall and Judd Nelson. A 25th Anniversary Edition Blu-ray was released in 2010, and the same disc was re-released with a DVD and digital copy in 2012 as part of Universal's 100th Anniversary series.\nOn March 10, 2015, the 30th Anniversary Edition was released. This release was digitally remastered and restored from the original 35mm film negatives for better picture quality on DVD, Digital HD and Blu-ray. The Criterion Collection released a special edition two-disc DVD set and a Blu-ray disc on January 2, 2018. The transfer was the same as the previous release but included new features such as fifty minutes of new, deleted and extended scenes, an Electronic Press Kit, new and archival interviews, a 1985 excerpt of the \"Today\" program, a new video essay and an episode of \"This American Life\". Criterion released the film on Ultra HD Blu-ray on November 4, 2025, based on a new 4K scan of the film.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nRoger Ebert awarded three stars out of four and called the performances \"wonderful\", adding that the film was \"more or less predictable\" but \"doesn't need earthshaking revelations; it's about kids who grow willing to talk to one another, and it has a surprisingly good ear for the way they speak.\" Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, and wrote: \"This confessional formula has worked in films as different as \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\", \"The Big Chill\", and \"My Dinner with Andre\" and it works here too. It works especially well in \"The Breakfast Club\" because we keep waiting for the film to break out of its claustrophobic set and give us a typical teenage movie sex-or-violence scene. That doesn't happen, much to our delight.\" Kathleen Carroll from the \"New York Daily News\" stated, \"Hughes has a wonderful knack for communicating the feelings of teenagers, as well as an obvious rapport with his exceptional cast\u2013who deserve top grades.\"\nOther reviews were less positive. Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"There are some good young actors in \"The Breakfast Club\", though a couple of them have been given unplayable roles\", namely Ally Sheedy and Judd Nelson, adding, \"The five young stars would have mixed well even without the fraudulent encounter-group candor towards which \"The Breakfast Club\" forces them. Mr. Hughes, having thought up the characters and simply flung them together, should have left well enough alone.\" James Harwood of \"Variety\" panned the film as a movie that \"will probably pass as deeply profound among today's teenage audience, meaning the youngsters in the film spend most of their time talking to each other instead of dancing, dropping their drawers and throwing food. This, on the other hand, should not suggest they have anything intelligent to say.\"\nAmong retrospective reviews, James Berardinelli wrote in 1998: \"Few will argue that \"The Breakfast Club\" is a great film, but it has a candor that is unexpected and refreshing in a sea of too-often generic teen-themed films. The material is a little talky (albeit not in a way that will cause anyone to confuse it with something by \u00c9ric Rohmer), but it's hard not to be drawn into the world of these characters.\"\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 86% based on 111 reviews, with an average rating of 7.60/10. The website's critics consensus reads, \"If \"The Breakfast Club\"'s gestures towards authenticity are occasionally undercut by trendy flourishes, its blistering emotional honesty and talented troupe of young actors catapult it to the top of the teen comedy class.\" Metacritic gave the film a weighted average score of 66 out of 100 based on 25 reviews from mainstream critics, considered to be \"generally favorable reviews\".\nWriting in 2015, P. J. O'Rourke called \"The Breakfast Club\" and \"Ferris Bueller's Day Off\" \"Hughes's masterwork[s]\". He described the former film as an example of Hughes's politics, in that the students do not organize a protest, but \"present themselves, like good conservatives do, as individuals and place the highest value, like this conservative does, on goofing off. Otherwise known as individual liberty.\"\nBox office.\nIn February 1985, the film debuted at No. 3 at the box office (behind \"Beverly Hills Cop\" and \"Witness\"). Grossing $45,875,171 domestically and $51,525,171 worldwide, the film was a box office success, given its $1 million budget.\nAccolades.\nAnthony Michael Hall, Judd Nelson, Molly Ringwald, Paul Gleason and Ally Sheedy all won a Silver Bucket of Excellence Award at the 2005 MTV Movie Awards.\nLegacy.\n\"The Breakfast Club\" has been called the quintessential 1980s film. In 2008, \"Empire\" magazine ranked it at number 369 on their \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\" list. It later ranked at number 38 on their 2014 list. Similarly, \"The New York Times\" placed the film on its \"Best 1000 Movies Ever\" list and \"Entertainment Weekly\" ranked the film number 1 on its list of the 50 Best High School Movies. In the 2001 parody film \"Not Another Teen Movie\", Gleason reprised his role as Assistant Principal Vernon in a short scene that parodies \"The Breakfast Club\". To emphasize its eminent position within the canon of American coming-of-age films and its continued influence to this day, scholar Bj\u00f6rn Sonnenberg-Schrank called \"The Breakfast Club\" \"the \"Citizen Kane\" of the teen film genre\". Sebastian Stan described the superhero film \"Thunderbolts*\" (2025) as \"\"The Breakfast Club\" of Marvel\".\nIn 2005, the film received the Silver Bucket of Excellence Award in honor of its 20th anniversary at the \"MTV Movie Awards\". For the event, MTV attempted to reunite the original cast. Sheedy, Ringwald, and Hall appeared together on stage, with Kapelos in the audience; Gleason gave the award to his former castmates. Estevez could not attend because of other commitments, and Nelson appeared earlier in the show but left before the on-stage reunion, prompting Hall to joke that the two were \"in Africa with Dave Chappelle\". Yellowcard performed Simple Minds' anthem for the film, \"Don't You (Forget About Me)\", at the awards. At the 82nd Academy Awards (March 7, 2010), Sheedy, Hall, Ringwald, and Nelson all appeared in a tribute to John Hughes\u2014who had died the prior year\u2014along with other actors who had worked with him, including Jon Cryer from \"Pretty in Pink\", Matthew Broderick from \"Ferris Bueller's Day Off\", and Macaulay Culkin from \"Home Alone\". In 2012, the Nickelodeon television series \"Victorious\" had their own spoof on the film, in the episode titled \"The Breakfast Bunch\".\nIn 2018, \"The New Yorker\" published an article written by Ringwald in which she critiqued Hughes's films \"in the age of #MeToo\", beginning with a discussion of how she explained to her ten-year-old daughter what happened in the scene when her character seems to be sexually assaulted under a desk. The essay provoked some to claim that Ringwald was criticizing the director who made her into a film star, but she was defended by Jenny Han for a \"tender, fair-minded piece\".\nIn April 2025, all five principal stars reunited in Chicago during a panel discussion, marking the first time the cast had been together in forty years.\nSoundtrack.\nThe film's soundtrack, The Breakfast Club (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack), was produced by British pop musician Keith Forsey and released on February 19, 1985, by A&amp;M Records. The album peaked at No. 17 on the US \"Billboard\" 200 album chart. The song \"Don't You (Forget About Me)\", performed by Scottish rock band Simple Minds, was released as a single on February 23, 1985, in the United States and reached No. 1 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. It was released on April 8, 1985, in the United Kingdom.\nOverview.\nThe album contains ten songs that are played partially throughout the movie, performed by bands and singers of the rock and new wave genre, including three instrumental songs by record producer Keith Forsey. Simple Minds's international hit \"Don't You (Forget About Me)\" is played in the opening and closing credits. A music video was made for this song and for Wang Chung's \"Fire in the Twilight\" (reached No 110 on the US \"Billboard Hot 100\"). Not included on the soundtrack is the \"Colonel Bogey March\" that the students are whistling when Principal Vernon walks into the room.\nCritical reception.\nIn a June 25, 1985 review for \"The Village Voice\", music critic Robert Christgau gave the album a \"D\u2212\" and said that it has \"utterly negligible\" songs, and he commended Simple Minds for trying to distance themselves from their song, \"Don't You (Forget About Me)\", best known for being played during the film's opening and closing credits. In a retrospective review for AllMusic, Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the soundtrack three out of five stars and wrote that, apart from Simple Minds' \"undisputed masterpiece\", the album is largely \"disposable\" and marred by \"'80s artifacts\" and \"forgettable instrumentals\".\nCancelled sequel.\nHughes had considered a sequel to the film, focusing on the teens reuniting years later while serving detention in university, now as the polar opposite of how they were in the first film. The film was never made prior to Hughes' death.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29944", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29944", "title": "Tasmania", "text": "State of Australia\nTasmania (; palawa kani: \"Lutruwita\") is an island state of Australia. It is located to the south of the Australian mainland, and is separated from it by the Bass Strait. The state encompasses the main island of Tasmania, the 26th-largest island in the world, and the surrounding 1000 islands. It is Australia's smallest and least populous state, with 573,479 residents as of June\u00a02023[ [update]]. The state capital and largest city is Hobart, with around 40% of the population living in the Greater Hobart area. Tasmania is the most decentralised state in Australia, with the lowest proportion of its residents living within its capital city.\nTasmania's main island was first inhabited by Aboriginal peoples, who today generally identify as Palawa or Pakana. \nIt is believed that Aboriginal Tasmanians became isolated from mainland Aboriginal groups around 11,700 years ago, when rising sea levels formed Bass Strait. \nIn 1803, Tasmania was permanently settled by Europeans as a penal settlement of the British Empire, partly to pre-empt French territorial claims during the Napoleonic Wars. At the time of British arrival, the Aboriginal population is estimated to have been between 3,000 and 7,000. Within three decades, however, this number declined drastically due to violent conflict, known as the Black War, and the spread of infectious diseases. The Black War peaked between 1825 and 1831, resulting in the declaration of martial law for more than three years and causing the deaths of nearly 1,100 Aboriginal people and settlers.\nUnder British rule, the island was initially part of the Colony of New South Wales; however, it became a separate colony under the name Van Diemen's Land (named after Anthony van Diemen) in 1825. Approximately 80,000 convicts were sent to Van Diemen's Land before this practice, known as transportation, ceased in 1853. In 1855, the present Constitution of Tasmania was enacted, and the following year the colony formally changed its name to Tasmania. In 1901, it became a founding constituent state of Australia (one of six) through the process of the federation of Australia.\nToday, Tasmania has the second smallest economy of the Australian states and territories; economic activity involves principally tourism, agriculture, aquaculture, education, and healthcare. Tasmania is a significant agricultural exporter, as well as a significant destination for eco-tourism. About 42% of its land area, including national parks and World Heritage Sites (21%), is protected in some form of reserve. The first environmental political party in the world was founded in Tasmania.\nToponymy.\nTasmania is named after Dutch explorer Abel Tasman, who made the first reported European sighting of the island on 24 November 1642. Tasman named the island Anthony van Diemen's Land after his sponsor Anthony van Diemen, the Governor of the Dutch East Indies. The name was later shortened to Van Diemen's Land by the British. It was officially renamed \"Tasmania\" in honour of its first European discoverer on 1 January 1856.\nTasmania was sometimes referred to as \"Dervon\", as mentioned in the Jerilderie Letter written by the notorious Australian bushranger Ned Kelly in 1879. The colloquial expression or nickname for the state is \"Tassie\". Tasmania is also sometimes referenced by its short-form name \"Tas\", mainly when written (eg, in business names, websites, addresses). TAS is also the Australia Post abbreviation for the state.\nNames from Indigenous languages.\nIn the constructed palawa kani language, the main island of Tasmania is called \"Lutruwita\", a name originally derived from the Bruny Island Tasmanian language. George Augustus Robinson recorded it as \"Loe.trou.witter\", but also as \"Trow.wer.nar\", probably from one or more of the eastern or Northeastern Tasmanian languages. However, he also recorded this name for Cape Barren Island. In the 20th century, some writers used it as an Aboriginal name for Tasmania\u2014spelled \"Trowenna\" or \"Trowunna\". It is now believed that that name is more properly applied to Cape Barren Island, which has had an official dual name of \"Truwana\" since 2014.\nA number of palawa kani names, based on historical records of aboriginal names, have been accepted by the Tasmanian government. A dozen of these (below) are 'dual-use' (bilingual) names, and another two are unbounded areas with only palawa names.\nThere are also a number of archaeological sites with Palawa names. Some of these names have been contentious, with names being proposed without consultation with the aboriginal community, or without having a connection to the place in question.\nAs well as a diverse First Nations geography, where remnants are preserved in rough form by European documentation, Tasmania is known as a place for unorthodox place-names. These names often come about from lost definitions, where descriptive names have lost their old meanings and have taken on new modern interpretations (e.g. 'Bobs Knobs'). Other names have retained their original meaning, and are often quaint or endearing descriptions (e.g. 'Paradise').\nHistory.\nPhysical history.\nThe island was adjoined to the mainland of Australia until the end of the last glacial period about 11,700 years ago. Much of the island is composed of Jurassic dolerite intrusions (the upwelling of magma) through other rock types, sometimes forming large columnar joints. Tasmania has the world's largest areas of dolerite, with many distinctive mountains and cliffs formed from this rock type. The central plateau and the southeast portions of the island are mostly dolerites. Mount Wellington above Hobart is a good example, showing distinct columns known as the Organ Pipes.\nIn the southern midlands as far south as Hobart, the dolerite is underlaid by sandstone and similar sedimentary stones. In the southwest, Precambrian quartzites were formed from very ancient sea sediments and form strikingly sharp ridges and ranges, such as Federation Peak or Frenchmans Cap.\nIn the northeast and east, continental granites can be seen, such as at Freycinet, similar to coastal granites on mainland Australia. In the northwest and west, mineral-rich volcanic rock can be seen at Mount Read near Rosebery, or at Mount Lyell near Queenstown. Also present in the south and northwest is limestone with caves.\nThe quartzite and dolerite areas in the higher mountains show evidence of glaciation, and much of Australia's glaciated landscape is found on the Central Plateau and the Southwest. Cradle Mountain, another dolerite peak, for example, was a nunatak. The combination of these different rock types contributes to scenery which is distinct from any other region of the world. In the far southwest corner of the state, the geology is almost wholly quartzite, which gives the mountains the false impression of having snow-capped peaks year round.\nAboriginal people.\nEvidence indicates the presence of Aboriginal people in Tasmania about 42,000\u00a0years ago. Rising sea levels cut Tasmania off from mainland Australia about 10,000\u00a0years ago and by the time of European contact, the Aboriginal people in Tasmania had nine major nations or ethnic groups. At the time of the British occupation and colonisation in 1803, the indigenous population was estimated at between 3,000 and 10,000.\nHistorian Lyndall Ryan's analysis of population studies led her to conclude that there were about 7,000 spread throughout the island's nine nations; Nicholas Clements, citing research by N.J.B. Plomley and Rhys Jones, settled on a figure of 3,000 to 4,000. They engaged in fire-stick farming, hunted game including kangaroo and wallabies, caught seals, mutton-birds, shellfish and fish and lived as nine separate \"nations\" on the island, which they knew as \"Trouwunna\".\nEuropean arrival and governance.\nThe first reported sighting of Tasmania by a European was on 24 November 1642 by Dutch explorer Abel Tasman, who landed at today's Blackman Bay. More than a century later, in 1772, a French expedition led by Marc-Joseph Marion du Fresne landed at (nearby but different) Blackmans Bay, and the following year Tobias Furneaux became the first Englishman to land in Tasmania when he arrived at Adventure Bay, which he named after his ship HMS \"Adventure\". Captain James Cook also landed at Adventure Bay in 1777. Matthew Flinders and George Bass sailed through Bass Strait in 1798\u20131799, determining for the first time that Tasmania was an island.\nSealers and whalers based themselves on Tasmania's islands from 1798, and in August 1803 New South Wales Governor Philip King sent Lieutenant John Bowen to establish a small military outpost on the eastern shore of the Derwent River in order to forestall any claims to the island by French explorers who had been exploring the southern Australian coastline. Bowen, who led a party of 49, including 21 male and three female convicts, named the camp Risdon.\nSeveral months later, a second settlement was established by Captain David Collins, with 308 convicts, to the south in Sullivans Cove on the western side of the Derwent, where fresh water was more plentiful. The latter settlement became known as Hobart Town or Hobarton, later shortened to Hobart, after the British Colonial Secretary of the time, Lord Hobart. The settlement at Risdon was later abandoned. Left on their own without further supplies, the Sullivans Cove settlement suffered severe food shortages and by 1806 its inhabitants were starving, with many resorting to scraping seaweed off rocks and scavenging washed-up whale blubber from the shore to survive.\nA smaller colony was established at Port Dalrymple on the Tamar River in the island's north in October 1804 and several other convict-based settlements were established, including the particularly harsh penal colonies at Port Arthur in the southeast and Macquarie Harbour on the West Coast. Tasmania was eventually sent 75,000 convicts\u2014four out of every ten people transported to Australia. By 1819, the Aboriginal and British population reached parity with about 5000 of each, although among the colonists men outnumbered women four-to-one. Free settlers began arriving in large numbers from 1820, lured by the promise of land grants and free convict labour. Settlement in the island's northwest corner was monopolised by the Van Diemen's Land Company, which sent its first surveyors to the district in 1826. By 1830, one-third of Australia's non-Indigenous population lived in Van Diemen's Land and the island accounted for about half of all land under cultivation and exports.\nBlack War.\nTensions between Tasmania's Aboriginal and white inhabitants rose, partly driven by increasing competition for kangaroo and other game. Explorer and naval officer John Oxley in 1810 noted the \"many atrocious cruelties\" inflicted on Aboriginal people by convict bushrangers in the north, which in turn led to black attacks on solitary white hunters. Hostilities increased further with the arrival of 600 colonists from Norfolk Island between 1807 and 1813. They established farms along the River Derwent and east and west of Launceston, occupying ten percent of Van Diemen's Land. By 1824 the colonial population had swelled to 12,600, while the island's sheep population had reached 200,000. The rapid colonisation transformed traditional kangaroo hunting grounds into farms with grazing livestock as well as fences, hedges and stone walls, while police and military patrols were increased to control the convict farm labourers.\nViolence began to spiral rapidly from the mid-1820s in what became described as the \"Black War\". Aboriginal inhabitants were driven to desperation by hunger \u2013 that included a desire for agricultural produce, as well as feeling anger at the prevalence of abductions of women and girls. New settlers motivated by fear carried out self-defence operations as well as attacks as a means of suppressing the native threat \u2013 or even in some cases, exacting revenge. Van Diemen's Land had an enormous gender imbalance, with male colonists outnumbering females six to one in 1822\u2014and 16 to one among the convict population. Historian Nicholas Clements has suggested the \"voracious appetite\" for native women was the most important trigger for the explosion of violence from the late 1820s.\nFrom 1825 to 1828, the number of native attacks more than doubled each year, raising panic among settlers. Over the summer of 1826\u20131827 clans from the Big River, Oyster Bay and North Midlands nations speared stock-keepers on farms and made it clear that they wanted the settlers and their sheep and cattle to move from their kangaroo hunting grounds. Settlers responded vigorously, resulting in many mass-killings. In November 1826, Governor Sir George Arthur issued a government notice declaring that colonists were free to kill Aboriginal people when they attacked settlers or their property, and in the following eight months more than 200 Aboriginal people were killed in the Settled Districts in reprisal for the deaths of 15 colonists. After another eight months, the death toll had risen to 43 colonists and probably 350 Aboriginal people. In April 1828, Arthur issued a Proclamation of Demarcation forbidding Aboriginal people to enter the settled districts without a passport issued by the government. Arthur declared martial law in the colony in November that year, and this remained in force for over three years, the longest period of martial law in Australian history.\nIn November 1830, Arthur organised the so-called \"Black Line\", ordering every able-bodied male colonist to assemble at one of seven designated places in the Settled Districts to join a massive drive to sweep Aboriginal people out of the region and on to the Tasman Peninsula. The campaign failed and was abandoned seven weeks later, but by then Tasmania's Aboriginal population had fallen to about 300.\nRemoval of Aboriginal people.\nAfter hostilities between settlers and Aboriginal peoples ceased in 1832, almost all of the remnants of the Indigenous population were persuaded by government agent George Augustus Robinson to move to Flinders Island. Many quickly succumbed to infectious diseases to which they had no immunity, reducing the population further. Of those removed from Tasmania, the last to die was Truganini, in 1876.\nThe near-destruction of Tasmania's Aboriginal population has been described as an act of genocide by historians including Robert Hughes, James Boyce, Lyndall Ryan and Tom Lawson. However, other historians including Henry Reynolds, Richard Broome and Nicholas Clements do not agree with the genocide thesis, arguing that the colonial authorities did not intend to destroy the Aboriginal population in whole or in part. Boyce has claimed that the April 1828 \"Proclamation Separating the Aborigines from the White Inhabitants\" sanctioned force against Aboriginal people \"for no other reason than that they were Aboriginal\". However, as Reynolds, Broome and Clements point out, there was open warfare at the time. Boyce described the decision to remove all Tasmanian Aboriginal people after 1832\u2014by which time they had given up their fight against white colonists\u2014as an extreme policy position. He concluded: \"The colonial government from 1832 to 1838 ethnically cleansed the western half of Van Diemen's Land.\" Nevertheless, Clements and Flood note that there was another wave of violence in north-west Tasmania in 1841, involving attacks on settlers' huts by a band of Aboriginal Tasmanians who had not been removed from the island.\nProclamation as a colony.\nVan Diemen's Land\u2014which thus far had existed as a territory within the colony of New South Wales\u2014was proclaimed a separate colony, with its own judicial establishment and Legislative Council, on 3 December 1825. Transportation to the island ceased in 1853 and the colony was renamed Tasmania in 1856, partly to differentiate the burgeoning society of free settlers from the island's convict past.\nThe Legislative Council of Van Diemen's Land drafted a new constitution which gained Royal Assent in 1855. The Privy Council also approved the colony changing its name from \"Van Diemen's Land\" to \"Tasmania\", and in 1856 the newly elected bicameral parliament sat for the first time, establishing Tasmania as a self-governing colony of the British Empire.\nThe colony suffered from economic fluctuations, but for the most part was prosperous, experiencing steady growth. With few external threats and strong trade links with the Empire, Tasmania enjoyed many fruitful periods in the late 19th century, becoming a world-centre of shipbuilding. It raised a local defence force that eventually played a significant role in the Second Boer War in South Africa, and Tasmanian soldiers in that conflict won the first two Victoria Crosses awarded to Australians.\nFederation.\nIn 1901, the Colony of Tasmania united with the five other Australian colonies to form the Commonwealth of Australia. Tasmanians voted in favour of federation with the largest majority of all the Australian colonies.\n20th and 21st century.\nTasmania was an early adopter of electric street lighting. Australia's first electric street lights were switched on in Waratah in 1886. Launceston became the first completely electrified city on the island in 1885, followed closely by the township of Zeehan in 1900.\nThe state economy was riding mining prosperity until World War I. In 1901, the state population was 172,475. The 1910 foundation of what would become Hydro Tasmania began to shape urban patterns, as well as future major damming programs. Hydro's influence culminated in the 1970s when the state government announced plans to flood environmentally significant Lake Pedder. As a result of the eventual flooding of Lake Pedder, the world's first green party was established; the United Tasmania Group. National and international attention surrounded the campaign against the Franklin Dam in the early 1980s.\nTasmanian Enid Lyons became the first female member of the House of Representatives at the 1943 federal election and first female to serve in the federal cabinet. In May 1948, Margaret McIntyre achieved another milestone as the first female elected to the Parliament of Tasmania. Less than six months after her election, McIntyre died in the crash of the \"Lutana\" near Quirindi on 2 September 1948.\nAfter the end of World War II, the state saw major urbanisation, and the growth of towns like Ulverstone. It gained a reputation as \"Sanitorium of the South\" and a health-focused tourist boom began to grow. The\" Princess of Tasmania\" began her maiden voyage in 1959, the first car ferry to Tasmania. As part of the boom, Tasmania allowed the opening of the first casino in Australia in 1968. Queen Elizabeth II visited the state in 1954, and the 50s and 60s were charactered by the opening of major public services, including the Tasmanian Housing Department and Metro Tasmania public bus services. A jail was opened at Risdon in 1960, and the State Library of Tasmania the same year. The University of Tasmania also moved to its present location in 1963.\nThe state was badly affected by the 1967 Tasmanian fires, killing 64 people and destroying over 652,000 acres in five hours. In 1975 the Tasman Bridge collapsed when the bridge was struck by the bulk ore carrier \"Lake Illawarra\". It was the only bridge in Hobart, and made crossing the Derwent River by road at the city impossible. The nearest bridge was approximately to the north, at Bridgewater.\nThroughout the 1980s, strong environmental concerns saw the building of the Australian Antarctic Division headquarters, and the proclamation of the Tasmanian Wilderness World Heritage Area. The Franklin Dam was blocked by the federal government in 1983, and CSIRO opened its marine studies centre in Hobart. Pope John Paul II would hold mass at Elwick Racecourse in 1986.\nThe 1990s were characterised by the fight for LGBT rights in Tasmania, culminating in the intervention of the United Nations Human Rights Committee in 1997 and the decriminalization of homosexuality that year. Christine Milne became the first female leader of a Tasmanian political party in 1993, and major council amalgamations reduce the number of councils from 46 to 29.\nFollowing the Port Arthur massacre on 28 April 1996, which resulted in the loss of 35 lives and injured 23 others, the Australian Government conducted a review of its firearms policies and enacted new nationwide gun ownership laws under the National Firearms Agreement.\nIn 2000, Queen Elizabeth II once again visited the state. Gunns rose to prominence as a major forestry company during this decade, only to collapse in 2013. In 2004, Premier Jim Bacon died in office from lung cancer. In January 2011 philanthropist David Walsh opened the Museum of Old and New Art (MONA) in Hobart to international acclaim. Within 12 months, MONA became Tasmania's top tourism attraction.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic in Tasmania resulted in at least 230 cases and 13 deaths as of September\u00a02021[ [update]]. In 2020, after the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic (SARS-CoV-2) and its spread to Australia, the Tasmanian government issued a public health emergency on 17 March, the following month receiving the state's most significant outbreak from the North-West which required assistance from the Federal government. In late 2021, Tasmania was leading the nationwide vaccination response.\nGeography.\nTasmania, the largest island of Australia, has a landmass of and is located directly in the pathway of the notorious \"Roaring Forties\" wind that encircles the globe. To its north, it is separated from mainland Australia by Bass Strait. Tasmania is the only Australian state that is not located on the Australian mainland. About south of Tasmania island lies the George V Coast of Antarctica. Depending on which borders of the oceans are used, the island can be said to be either surrounded by the Southern Ocean, or to have the Pacific on its east and the Indian to its west. Still other definitions of the ocean boundaries would have Tasmania with the Great Australian Bight to the west, and the Tasman Sea to the east. The southernmost point on mainland Tasmania is approximately at South East Cape, and the northernmost point on mainland Tasmania is approximately in Woolnorth / Temdudheker near Cape Grim / Kennaook. Tasmania lies at similar latitudes to Te Waipounamu / South Island of New Zealand and parts of Patagonia in South America. Areas at equivalent latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere include Hokkaido in Japan, Northeast China (Manchuria), Central Italy, and United States cities such as New York and Chicago. \nThe most mountainous region is the Central Highlands area, which covers most of the central western parts of the state. The Midlands located in the central east, is fairly flat, and is predominantly used for agriculture, although farming activity is scattered throughout the state. Tasmania's tallest mountain is Mount Ossa at . Much of Tasmania is still densely forested, with the Southwest National Park and neighbouring areas holding some of the last temperate rain forests in the Southern Hemisphere. The Tarkine, containing Savage River National Park located in the island's far north west, is the largest temperate rainforest area in Australia covering about . With its rugged topography, Tasmania has a great number of rivers. Several of Tasmania's largest rivers have been dammed at some point to provide hydroelectricity. Many rivers begin in the Central Highlands and flow out to the coast. Tasmania's major population centres are mainly situated around estuaries (some of which are named rivers).\nTasmania is in the shape of a downward-facing triangle, likened to a shield, heart, or face. It consists of the main island as well as at least a thousand neighbouring islands within the state's jurisdiction. The largest of these are Flinders Island in the Furneaux Group of Bass Strait, King Island in the west of Bass Strait, Cape Barren Island south of Flinders Island, Bruny Island separated from Tasmania by the D'Entrecasteaux Channel, Macquarie Island 1,500\u00a0km from Tasmania, and Maria Island off the east coast. \nTasmania features a number of separated and continuous mountain ranges. The majority of the state is defined by a significant dolerite exposure, though the western half of the state is older and more rugged, featuring buttongrass plains, temperate rainforests, and quartzite ranges, notably Federation Peak and Frenchmans Cap. The presence of these mountain ranges is a primary factor in the rain shadow effect, where the western half receives the majority of rainfall, which also influences the types of vegetation that can grow. The Central Highlands feature a large plateau which forms a number of ranges and escarpments on its north side, tapering off along the south, and radiating into the highest mountain ranges in the west. At the north-west of this, another plateau radiates into a system of hills where takayna / Tarkine is located.\nThe Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia (IBRA) divides Tasmania into 9 bioregions: \nBen Lomond, Furneaux, King, Central Highlands, Northern Midlands, Northern Slopes, Southern Ranges, South East, and West.\nTasmania's environment consistes of many different biomes or communities across its different regions. It is the most forested state in Australia, and preserves the country's largest areas of temperate rainforest. A distinctive type of moorland found across the west, and particularly south-west of Tasmania, are buttongrass plains, which are speculated to have been expanded by Tasmanian Aboriginal burning practices. Tasmania also features a diverse alpine garden environment, such as cushion plant. Highland areas receive consistent snowfall above ~1,000 metres every year, and due to cold air from Antarctica, this level often reaches 800 m, and more occasionally 600 or 400 metres. Every five or so years, snow can form at sea level. This environment gives rise to the cypress forests of the Central Plateau and mountainous highlands. In particular, the Walls of Jerusalem with large areas of rare pencil pine, and its closest relative King Billy pine. On the West Coast Range and partially on Mount Field, Australia's only winter-deciduous plant, deciduous beech is found, which forms a carpet or krummholz, or very rarely a 4-metre tree.\nTasmania features a high concentration of waterfalls. These can be found in small creeks, alpine streams, rapid rivers, or off precipitous plunges. Some of the tallest waterfalls are found on mountain massifs, sometimes at a 200-metre cascade. The most famous and most visited waterfall in Tasmania is Russell Falls in Mount Field due to its proximity to Hobart and stepped falls at a total height of 58 metres. \nTasmania also has a large number of beaches, the longest of which is Ocean Beach on the West Coast at about 40 kilometres. Wineglass Bay in Freycinet on the east coast is a well-known landmark of the state.\nThe Tasmanian temperate rainforests cover a few different types. These are also considered distinct from the more common wet sclerophyll forests, though these eucalypt forests often form with rainforest understorey and ferns (such as tree-ferns) are not usually absent. Rainforest found in deep gullies are usually difficult to traverse due to dense understorey growth, such as from horizontal (\"Anodopetalum biglandulosum\"). Higher-elevation forests (~500 to 800 m) have smaller ground vegetation and are thus easier to walk in. The most common rainforests usually have a 50-metre canopy and are varied by environmental factors. Emergent growth usually comes from eucalyptus, which can tower another 50 metres higher (usually less), providing the most common choice of nesting for giant wedge-tailed eagles.\nThe human environment ranges from urban or industrial development to farming or grazing land. The most cultivated area is the Midlands, where it has suitable soil but is also the driest part of the state.\nTasmania's was possibly detected by Captain Abel Tasman when he charted Tasmania's coast in 1642. On 5 December, Tasman was following the east coast northward to see how far it went. When the land veered to the north-west at Eddystone Point, he tried to keep in with it but his ships were suddenly hit by the Roaring Forties howling through Bass Strait. Tasman was on a mission to find the Southern Continent, not more islands, so he abruptly turned away to the east and continued his continent-hunting.\nThe next European to enter the strait was Captain James Cook on HMS \"Endeavour\" in April 1770. However, after sailing for two hours westward into the strait against the wind, he turned back east and noted in his journal that he was \"doubtful whether they [i.e. Van Diemen's Land and New Holland] are one land or no\".\nThe strait was named after George Bass, after he and Matthew Flinders passed through it while circumnavigating Van Diemen's Land in the \"Norfolk\" in 1798\u201399. At Flinders' recommendation, the Governor of New South Wales, John Hunter, in 1800 named the stretch of water between the mainland and Van Diemen's Land \"Bass's Straits\". Later it became known as Bass Strait.\nThe existence of the strait had been suggested in 1797 by the master of Sydney Cove when he reached Sydney after deliberately grounding his foundering ship and being stranded on Preservation Island (at the eastern end of the strait). He reported that the strong south westerly swell and the tides and currents suggested that the island was in a channel linking the Pacific and southern Indian Ocean. Governor Hunter thus wrote to Joseph Banks in August 1797 that it seemed certain a strait existed.\nClimate.\nTasmania has a relatively cool temperate climate compared to the rest of Australia, spared from the hot summers of the mainland and experiencing four distinct seasons. Summer is from December to February when the average maximum sea temperature is and inland areas around Launceston reach . Other inland areas are much cooler, with Liawenee, located on the Central Plateau, one of the coldest places in Australia, ranging between in February. Autumn is from March to May, with mostly settled weather, as summer patterns gradually take on the shape of winter patterns. The winter months are from June to August and are generally the wettest and coldest months in the state, with most high lying areas receiving considerable snowfall. Winter maximums are on average along coastal areas and on the central plateau, as a result of a series of cold fronts from the Southern Ocean. Inland areas receive regular freezes throughout the winter months. Spring is from September to November, and is an unsettled season of transition, where winter weather patterns begin to take the shape of summer patterns, although snowfall is still common up until October. Spring is generally the windiest time of the year with afternoon sea breezes starting to take effect on the coast.\nBiodiversity.\nGeographically and biological isolated, Tasmania is known for its unique endemic flora and fauna.\nFlora.\nTasmania has extremely diverse vegetation, from the heavily grazed grassland of the dry Midlands to the tall evergreen eucalypt forest, alpine heathlands and large areas of cool temperate rainforests and moorlands in the rest of the state. Many species are unique to Tasmania, and some are related to species in South America and New Zealand through ancestors which grew on the supercontinent of Gondwana, 50\u00a0million years ago. \"Nothofagus gunnii\", commonly known as Australian beech, is Australia's only temperate native deciduous tree and is found exclusively in Tasmania.\nDistinctive species of plant in Tasmania include:\nBush tucker.\nTasmania also has a number of native edibles, known as bush tucker in Australia. These plants were foraged by the Tasmanian Aboriginals and also used for other purposes, such as construction. Unusual trees such as cider gum (\"Eucalyptus gunnii\") had their manna used to make a syrup or an alcohol (cider). Other trees such as wattles (acacias) like blackwood (\"Acacia melanoxylon\") and mimosa (\"Acacia dealbata\") could have their seeds eaten or crushed into a powder. There are also many berries such as snowberry (\"Gaultheria hispida\"), fruits such as heartberry (\"Aristotelia peduncularis\"), and vegetables such as river mint (\"Mentha australis\"), though no crops like maize that are used for large production.\nFauna.\nTasmania has a large percentage of endemism whilst featuring many types of animals found on mainland Australia. Many of these species, such as the platypus, are larger than their mainland relatives.\nThe island of Tasmania was home to the thylacine, a marsupial which resembled a fossa or some say a wild dog. Known colloquially as the Tasmanian tiger for the distinctive striping across its back, it became extinct in mainland Australia much earlier because of competition by the dingo, introduced in prehistoric times. Owing to persecution by farmers, government-funded bounty hunters and, in the final years, collectors for overseas museums, it appears to have been exterminated in Tasmania. The Tasmanian devil became the largest carnivorous marsupial in the world following the extinction of the thylacine in 1936 and is now found in the wild only in Tasmania. Tasmania was one of the last regions of Australia to be introduced to domesticated dogs. Dogs were brought from Britain in 1803 for hunting kangaroos and emus. This introduction completely transformed Aboriginal society, as it helped them to successfully compete with European hunters and was more important than the introduction of guns for the Aboriginal people.\nTasmania is a hotspot for giant habitat trees and the large animal species that occupy them, notably the endangered Tasmanian wedge-tailed eagle (\"Aquila audax fleayi\"), the Tasmanian masked owl (\"Tyto novaehollandiae castanops\"), the Tasmanian giant freshwater crayfish (\"Astacopsis gouldi\"), the yellow wattlebird (\"Anthochaera paradoxa\"), the green rosella (\"Platycercus caledonicus\") and others. Tasmania is also home to the world's only three migratory parrots, the critically endangered Orange-bellied parrot (\"Neophema chrysogaster\"), the Blue-winged parrot (\"Neophema chrysostoma\"), and the fastest parrot in the world, the swift parrot (\"Lathamus discolor\").\nTasmania has 12 endemic species of bird in total.\nMycology.\nTasmania is a hotspot for fungal diversity. The importance of fungi in Tasmania's ecology is often overlooked; nonetheless, they play a vital role in the natural vegetation cycle. Tasmania's southwestern wilderness hosts a rich diversity of alpine lichens, with at least 162 documented species. The region's alpine lichen flora is particularly notable for its high level of endemism, with approximately 16% of species found nowhere else in the world. The area's cool maritime climate, Precambrian geology, and extensive peat formations create unique habitats for these organisms. The lichen communities differ significantly from those found on Tasmania's eastern dolerite mountains, with the southwestern species showing stronger affinities to New Zealand and sub-Antarctic flora rather than to mainland Australia. Major lichen habitats in the alpine southwest include heathlands, alpine lawns, feldmark (windswept rocky plateaus), and large rock outcrops, each supporting distinct assemblages of species. Some particularly diverse genera in the region include \"Bunodophoron\", \"Cladia\", \"Cladonia\", \"Menegazzia\", \"Micarea\", \"Pertusaria\", \"Pseudocyphellaria\", \"Psoroma\", \"Siphula\", and \"Stereocaulon\".\nConservation.\nLike the rest of Australia, Tasmania suffers from an endangered species problem. In particular, many important Tasmanian subspecies and world-significant species of animal are classified as at risk in some way. A famous example is the Tasmanian devil, which is endangered due to devil facial tumour disease. Some species have already gone extinct, primarily due to human interference, such as in the case of the thylacine or the Tasmanian emu. In Tasmania, there are about 90 endangered, vulnerable, or threatened vertebrate species classified by the state or Commonwealth governments. Because of a reliance on roads and private vehicle transport, and a high concentration of animal populations divided by this development, Tasmania has the worst (per kilometre) roadkill rate in the world, with 32 animals killed per hour and at least 300,000 per year.\nProtected areas of Tasmania cover 21% of the island's land area in the form of national parks. The Tasmanian Wilderness World Heritage Area (TWWHA) was inscribed by UNESCO in 1982, where it is globally significant because \"most UNESCO World Heritage sites meet only one or two of the ten criteria for that status. The Tasmanian Wilderness World Heritage Area (TWWHA) meets 7 out of 10 criteria. Only one other place on earth\u2014China\u2019s Mount Taishan\u2014meets that many criteria\". \nControversy surrounds the decision in 2014 by the Abbott federal Liberal government to request the area's delisting and opening for resource exploration (before it was rejected by the UN Committee at Doha), and the current mining and deforestation in the state's Tarkine region, the largest single temperate rainforest in Australia.\nDemography.\nThe population of Tasmania is the most homogeneous of any Australian state, being mostly of British (primarily English) descent.\nUntil 2012, Tasmania was the only state in Australia with an above-replacement total fertility rate; Tasmanian women had an average of 2.24 children each. By 2012 the birth rate had slipped to 2.1 children per woman, bringing the state to the replacement threshold, but it continues to have the second-highest birth rate of any state or territory (behind the Northern Territory).\nMajor population centres include Hobart, Launceston, Devonport, Burnie, and Ulverstone. Kingston is often defined as a separate city but is generally regarded as part of the Greater Hobart Area.\nAncestry and immigration.\nAt the 2016 census, the most commonly nominated ancestries were: \n19.3% of the population was born overseas at the 2016 census. The five largest groups of overseas-born were from England (3.7%), New Zealand (1%), Mainland China (0.6%), Scotland (0.4%) and the Netherlands (0.4%).\n4.6% of the population, or 23,572 people, identified as Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders) in 2016.\nLanguage.\nAt the 2021 census, 86.1% of inhabitants spoke only English at home, with the next most common languages being Mandarin (1.5%), Nepali (1.3%), Punjabi (0.5%) and Spanish (0.3%).\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2021, 50.0% of people in Tasmania reported having no religious affiliation, a substantial increase from 38.2% in 2016 and just 5.1% in 1971. Meanwhile, Christianity remained the largest religious affiliation in the state, with 38.4% identifying as Christian, though this proportion has steadily declined over time\u2014from 88.7% in 1971 to 49.7% in 2016.\nNon-Christian religions accounted for 4.5% of the population in 2021, with Hinduism (1.7%), Buddhism (1.0%), and Islam (0.9%) being the most prevalent among them.\nGovernment.\nThe form of the government of Tasmania is prescribed in its constitution, which dates from 1934. Since 1901, Tasmania has been a state of the Commonwealth of Australia, and the Australian Constitution regulates its relationship with the Commonwealth and prescribes which powers each level of government is allowed.\nTasmania is represented in the Senate by 12 senators, on an equal basis with all other states. In the House of Representatives, Tasmania is entitled to five seats, which is the minimum allocation for a state guaranteed by the Constitution\u2014the number of House of Representatives seats for each state is otherwise decided on the basis of their relative populations, and Tasmania has never qualified for five seats on that basis alone. Tasmania's House of Assembly use a system of multi-seat proportional representation known as Hare-Clark.\nParliamentary elections.\nAt the 2002 state election, the Labor Party won 14 of the 25 House seats. The people decreased their vote for the Liberal Party; representation in the Parliament fell to seven seats. The Greens won four seats, with over 18% of the popular vote, the highest proportion of any Green party in any parliament in the world at that time.\nTasmania in parliamentary elections has consecutively elected minority governments since 2024. The premiership of Jeremy Rockliff has retained government with the support of the crossbench.\nPolitics.\nTasmania has a number of undeveloped regions. Proposals for local economic development have been faced with requirements for environmental sensitivity, or opposition. In particular, proposals for hydroelectric power generation were debated in the late 20th century. In the 1970s, opposition to the construction of the Lake Pedder reservoir impoundment led to the formation of the world's first Green party, the United Tasmania Group.\nIn the early 1980s the state debated the proposed Franklin River Dam. The anti-dam sentiment was shared by many Australians outside Tasmania and proved a factor in the election of the Hawke Labor government in 1983, which halted construction of the dam. Since the 1980s the environmental focus has shifted to old growth logging and mining in the Tarkine region, which have both proved divisive. The Tasmania Together process recommended an end to clear felling in high conservation old growth forests by January 2003, but was unsuccessful.\nIn 1996, the House of Assembly consisted of 35 seats with 7 seats per each of the five electorates. By the 1998 election, the number of seats had been reduced down to 25, or 5 per each electorate. This resulted in the reduction of the Greens' number of seats from 4 to 1, and increased the proportion of seats held by both the Labor and Liberal parties. This was despite growth in population (five-fold since responsible government) and an increase in the voting percentage required for a majority government. There was also no public consultation, and inquiries at the time had recommended the opposite. The House of Assembly Select Committee in 2020 recommended in its report that the number should be increased again from 25 to 35, arguing that such a small representation would undermine democracy and limit the capabilities of the government. In 2010, the major party leadership had even endorsed reinstating the 35 seat number, but Liberal and Labor support was withdrawn the following year, with only the Greens keeping their commitment. \nLocal government.\nTasmania has 29 local government areas. Local councils are responsible for functions delegated by the Tasmanian parliament, such as urban planning, road infrastructure and waste management. Council revenue comes mostly from property taxes and government grants.\nAs with the House of Assembly, Tasmania's local government elections use a system of multi-seat proportional representation known as Hare\u2013Clark. Local government elections take place every four years and are conducted by the Tasmanian Electoral Commission by full postal ballot. The next local government elections will be held during October 2026.\nEconomy.\nTraditionally, Tasmania's main industries have been mining (including copper, zinc, tin, and iron), agriculture, forestry, and tourism. Tasmania is on Australia's electrical grid and in the 1940s and 1950s, a hydro-industrialisation initiative was embodied in the state by Hydro Tasmania. These all have had varying fortunes over the last century and more, involved in ebbs and flows of population moving in and away dependent upon the specific requirements of the dominant industries of the time. The state also has a large number of food exporting sectors, including but not limited to seafood (such as salmon, abalone and crayfish).\nIn the 1960s and 1970s there was a decline in traditional crops such as apples and pears, with other crops and industries eventually rising in their place. During the 15 years until 2010, new agricultural products such as wine, saffron, pyrethrum and cherries have been fostered by the Tasmanian Institute of Agricultural Research.\nFavourable economic conditions throughout Australia, cheaper air fares, and two new \"Spirit of Tasmania\" ferries have all contributed to what is now a rising tourism industry.\nAbout 1.7% of the Tasmanian population are employed by local government. Other major employers include Nyrstar, Norske Skog, Grange Resources, Rio Tinto, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Hobart, and Federal Group. Small business is a large part of the community life, including Incat, Moorilla Estate and Tassal. In the late 1990s, a number of national companies based their call centres in the state after obtaining cheap access to broad-band fibre optic connections.\n34% of Tasmanians are reliant on welfare payments as their primary source of income. This number is in part due to the large number of older residents and retirees in Tasmania receiving Age Pensions. Due to its natural environment and clean air, Tasmania is a common retirement selection for Australians.\nScience and technology.\nThe modern scientific sector in Tasmania benefits from around $500 million in annual investment.\nTasmania has a long history of scientific and technological innovation. The first scientific-style observations were conducted by the First Nation Tasmanians, primarily through the watching and mythologising of the night sky. Their story explaining the phases of the moon and sun \"is one of the rare accounts that explicitly acknowledges that the light of the Moon is a reflection of the Sun's light\".\nThe French D'Entrecasteaux Expedition of 1792\u201393 had anchored twice during its search of the missing La P\u00e9rouse in the Baie de la Recherche (Recherche Bay) in far-south Tasmania. During their stay, the crew took botanical, astronomical, and geomagnetic observations which were the first of their kind performed on Australian soil. As well as this, they engaged in amicable relations with the locals and environment, gifting the area a \"French garden\", in which \"the relatively extensive, well-documented (both pictorially and written) encounters [...] between [them] provided a very early opportunity for meetings and mutual observation\".\nThe longest-running branch of the Royal Society outside of the United Kingdom is the Royal Society of Tasmania which was summoned in 1843. The Tasmanian Society of Natural History had been formed previously in 1838 before its merger with the Royal Society in 1849. It had been served by early botanists working in Tasmania such as Ronald Gunn and his correspondences.\nAlthough Tamworth in New South Wales is often credited as being the first place in Australia with electric street lighting in 1888, Waratah in North West Tasmania was actually the first place to do so in Australia in 1886, although at a smaller scale.\nCulture.\nLiterature.\nNotable titles by Tasmanian authors include \"The Museum of Modern Love\" by Heather Rose, \"The Narrow Road to the Deep North\" by Richard Flanagan, \"The Alphabet of Light and Dark\" by Danielle Wood, \"The Roving Party\" by Rohan Wilson and \"The Year of Living Dangerously\" by Christopher Koch, \"The Rain Queen\" by Katherine Scholes, \"Bridget Crack\" by Rachel Leary, and \"The Blue Day Book\" by Bradley Trevor Greive. A small part of Helen Garner's \"Monkey Grip\" is set in Hobart as the main characters take a sojourn there. Children's books include \"They Found a Cave\" by Nan Chauncy, \"The Museum of Thieves\" by Lian Tanner, \"Finding Serendipity\", \"A Week Without Tuesday\" and \"Blueberry Pancakes Forever\" by Angelica Banks, \"Tiger Tale\" by Marion and Steve Isham. Tasmania is home to the eminent literary magazine that was formed in 1979, Island magazine, and the biennial Tasmanian Writers and Readers Festival, now renamed the Hobart Writers Festival.\nTasmanian Gothic is a literary genre which expresses the island state's \"peculiar 'otherness' in relation to the mainland, as a remote, mysterious and self-enclosed place.\" Marcus Clarke's novel \"For the Term of his Natural Life\", written in the 1870s and set in convict era Tasmania, is a seminal example. This distinctive Gothic is not just restricted to literature, but can be represented through all the arts, such as in painting, music, or architecture.\nVisual arts.\nThe biennial \"Tasmanian Living Artists' Week\" is a ten-day statewide festival for Tasmania's visual artists. The fourth festival in 2007 involved more than 1000 artists. Tasmania is home to two winners of the prestigious Archibald Prize\u2014Jack Carington Smith in 1963 for a portrait of James McAuley, and Geoffrey Dyer in 2003 for his portrait of Richard Flanagan. Photographers Olegas Truchanas and Peter Dombrovskis are known for works that became iconic in the Lake Pedder and Franklin Dam conservation movements. English-born painter John Glover (1767\u20131849) is known for his paintings of Tasmanian landscapes, and is the namesake for the annual Glover Prize, which is awarded to the best landscape painting of Tasmania. The Museum of Old and New Art (MONA) opened in January 2011 at the Moorilla Estate in Berriedale, and is the largest privately owned museum complex in Australia.\nMusic and performing arts.\nTasmania has a varied musical scene, ranging from the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra whose home is the Federation Concert Hall, to a substantial number of small bands, orchestras, string quintets, saxophone ensembles and individual artists who perform at a variety of venues around the state. Tasmania is also home to a vibrant community of composers including Constantine Koukias, Maria Grenfell and Don Kay. Tasmania is also home to one of Australia's leading new music institutions, IHOS Music Theatre and Opera and gospel choirs, the Southern Gospel Choir. Prominent Australian metal bands Psycroptic and Striborg hail from Tasmania. Noir-rock band The Paradise Motel and 1980s power-pop band The Innocents are also citizens.\nThe Tasmanian Aboriginals were known to have sung oral traditions, as Fanny Cochrane Smith (the last fluent speaker of any Tasmanian language) had done so in recordings from 1899 to 1903. Tasmania has been home to some early and prominent Australian composers. In piano, Kitty Parker from Longford was described by world-famous Australian composer Percy Grainger as his most gifted student. Peter Sculthorpe was originally from Launceston and became well known in Australia for his works which were influenced by his Tasmanian origins, and he is, by coincidence, distantly related to Fanny Cochrane Smith. In 1996, Sculthorpe composed the piece \"Port Arthur: In Memoriam\" for chamber orchestra, which was first performed by the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra. Charles Sandys Packer was an early Tasmanian example of the tradition of Australian classical music, transported for the crime of embezzlement in 1839, and at a similar time Francis Hartwell Henslowe had spent time as a public servant in Tasmania. Amy Sherwin, known as the \"Tasmanian Nightingale\" was a successful soprano, and Eileen Joyce, who came from remote Zeehan, became a world-renowned pianist at the time of her peak.\nCinema.\nFilms set in Tasmania include \"Young Einstein\", \"The Tale of Ruby Rose\", \"The Hunter\", \"The Last Confession of Alexander Pearce\", \"Arctic Blast\", \"Manganinnie\" (with music composed by Peter Sculthorpe), \"Van Diemen's Land\", \"Lion\", and \"The Nightingale\". Common within Australian cinema, the Tasmanian landscape is a focal point in most of their feature film productions. \"The Last Confession of Alexander Pearce\" and \"Van Diemen's Land\" are both set during an episode of Tasmania's convict history. Tasmanian film production goes as far back as the silent era, with the epic \"For The Term of His Natural Life\" in 1927 being the most expensive feature film made on Australian shores. \"The Kettering Incident\", filmed in and around Kettering, Tasmania, won the 2016 AACTA Award for Best Telefeature or Miniseries. The documentary series \"Walking with Dinosaurs\" was partly filmed in Tasmania due to its terrain.\nThe Tasmanian Film Corporation, which financed \"Manganinnie\", was the successor to the Tasmanian Government Department of Film Production but disappeared after privatisation. Its role is now filled by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, Screen Tasmania, and private ventures such as Blue Rocket Productions.\nHigher education.\nTasmania is served by the University of Tasmania, a research university established in 1846.\nMedia.\nTasmania has five broadcast television stations which produce local content including ABC Tasmania, Seven Tasmania \u2013 an affiliate of the Seven Network, WIN Television Tasmania \u2013 an affiliate of the Nine Network, 10 Tasmania \u2013 an affiliate of Network 10 (joint owned by WIN and Southern Cross), and SBS.\nSport.\nSport is an important pastime in Tasmania, and the state has produced several famous sportsmen and women and also hosted several major sporting events. The Tasmanian Tigers cricket team represents the state successfully (for example the Sheffield Shield in 2007, 2011 and 2013) and plays its home games at the Bellerive Oval in Hobart, which is also the home ground for the Hobart Hurricanes in the Big Bash League. In addition, Bellerive Oval regularly hosts international cricket matches. Famous Tasmanian cricketers include David Boon, former Australian captains Ricky Ponting and Tim Paine.\nAustralian rules football in Tasmania is the most watched form of football and a Tasmanian team was awarded a license to enter the Australian Football League (AFL) in 2028 to be based out of a new Macquarie Point Stadium. AFL matches have been played since 2001 at Aurora Stadium in Launceston and Bellerive Oval in Hobart. Local leagues include the North West Football League and Tasmanian State League.\nSoccer in Tasmania is the most participated football code and there is an active Tasmanian A-League bid. The existing statewide league is the NPL Tasmania.\nRugby Union is also played in Tasmania and is governed by the Tasmanian Rugby Union. Ten clubs take part in the statewide Tasmanian Rugby Competition.\nTasmania hosts the professional Moorilla International tennis tournament as part of the lead up to the Australian Open and is played at the Hobart International Tennis Centre, Hobart.\nThe Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race is an annual event starting in Sydney, NSW, on Boxing Day and finishing in Hobart, Tasmania. It is widely considered to be one of the most difficult yacht races in the world.\nIn basketball, Tasmania has previously been represented in the National Basketball League (NBL) by Launceston Casino City (1980\u20131982), the Devonport Warriors (1983\u20131984), and the Hobart Devils (1983\u20131996). Since the 2021\u201322 NBL season, Tasmania has been represented by the Tasmania JackJumpers, a state-wide franchise which plays its home games in both Hobart and Launceston. The JackJumpers secured their maiden NBL championship in the 2023\u201324 season, marking Tasmania's first NBL title since Launceston Casino City in 1981.\nCuisine.\nTasmanian Aboriginal people had a diverse diet, including native currants, pigface, and native plums, and a wide range of birds and kangaroos. Seafood has always been a significant part of the Tasmanian diet, including its wide range of shellfish, which are still commercially farmed such as crayfish, orange roughy, salmon and oysters. Seal meat also formed a significant part of the Aboriginal diet.\nTasmania's non-Aboriginal cuisine has a unique history from that of mainland Australia. It has developed through many subsequent waves of immigration. Tasmanian traditional foods include scallop pies \u2013 a pie filled with scallops in curry \u2013 and curry powder, which was popularised by Keen's Curry in the 19th century. Tasmania also produces and consumes wasabi, saffron, truffles and leatherwood honey.\nTasmania now has a wide range of restaurants, in part due to the arrival of immigrants and changing cultural patterns. Scattered across Tasmania are many vineyards, and Tasmanian beer brands such as Boags and Cascade are known and sold in mainland Australia. King Island off the northwestern coast of Tasmania has a reputation for boutique cheeses and dairy products.\nThe \"Central Cookery Book\" was written in 1930 by A. C. Irvine and is still popular in Australia and even internationally. Tasmanian cuisine is often unique and has won many awards. One example is the Hartshorn Distillery, which has won prizes in the World Vodka Awards for three years in a row since 2017.\nEvents.\nTo foster tourism, the state government encourages or supports several annual events in and around the island. The best known of these is the Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race, starting on Boxing Day in Sydney and usually arriving at Constitution Dock in Hobart around three to four days later, during the Taste of Tasmania, an annual food and wine festival. Other events include the Targa Tasmania rally which attracts rally drivers from around the world and is staged all over the state, over five days. Rural or regional events include Agfest, a three-day agricultural show held at Carrick (just west of Launceston) in early May and NASA supported TastroFest \u2013 Tasmania's Astronomy Festival, held early August in Ulverstone (Northwest Tasmania). The Royal Hobart Show and Royal Launceston Show are both held in October annually.\nMusic events held in Tasmania include the Falls Festival at Marion Bay (a Victorian event now held in both Victoria and Tasmania on New Year's Eve); the Festival of Voices, a national celebration of song held each year in Hobart attracting international and national teachers and choirs in the heart of Winter; and MS Fest, a charity music event held in Launceston to raise money for those with multiple sclerosis. The Cygnet Folk Festival is one of Australia's most iconic folk music festivals and is held in Cygnet in the Huon Valley every year in January. The Tasmanian Lute Festival is an early music event held in different locations in Tasmania every two years. Recent additions to the state arts events calendar include the 10 Days on the Island arts festival, MONA FOMA, run by David Walsh and curated by Brian Ritchie and Dark Mofo also run by David Walsh and curated by Leigh Carmichael.\nThe Unconformity is a three-day festival held every two years in Queenstown on the West Coast. Each February in Evandale a penny-farthing championships are held.\nPerception within Australia.\nTasmania is perceived within Australia and internationally as an island with pristine wildlife, water and air. It is known for its ecotourism for these reasons, and is considered an idyllic location for Australians considering a \"tree-\" or \"sea-change\", or are seeking retirement because of Tasmania's temperate environment and friendly locals. In other parts of the world, Tasmania is considered as the opposite side of the planet to most places, and supposedly home to mythically exotic animals, such as the Tasmanian Devil as popularised by Warner Brothers.\nStereotypes.\nTasmania has a reputation within Australia that is often at odds with the reality of the state or may have only been true during colonial times and has only persevered on the Australian mainland as a myth. Because of these stereotypes, Tasmania is often referred to as the primary target (i.e., \"butt\") of mainland Australian jokes. In more recent times, references to insults against Tasmania are more sarcastic and jovial, but angst against the island still exists. The most commonly cited sarcastic comment is on the supposedly 'two-headed' Tasmanians, which originated due to some colonists developing goitres from the low amount of iodine in the island's soil. But as Tasmania receives higher volumes of inter-state tourists, the perceptions are in the process of changing.\nThe most prominent example of negative stereotype is of inbreeding due to the relatively small size of Tasmania compared to the rest of Australia (though Tasmania is nearly as large as the Republic of Ireland in area, and more populous than Iceland). This is untrue and if it had once been the case, it would have existed in the rest of colonial Australia as well, though Tasmania's penal establishments were some of the harshest in the entire colony and home to infamous bushrangers. This is a part of the also-receding global stereotype that all Australians are or were derived from criminals, even as most convicts were transported for petty crimes. During this period of European settlement, Tasmania was the second centre of power (and a significant port of the British Empire) on the continent after New South Wales, before being surpassed in the latter half of the 19th century by Victoria and regions sustained by mining booms following the cessation of transportation in 1853.\nA mentality developed in certain corners of Australia, and led to a general dislike of Tasmania amongst these people, even if the opinion-holder had never properly visited. It can rise to such an extent as to argue for the secession of Tasmania from the rest of Australia, in an effort to 'recover' Australia's reputation from Tasmania.\nTransport.\nAir.\nTasmania's main air carriers are Jetstar and Virgin Australia; Qantas and QantasLink. These airlines fly direct routes to Brisbane, Melbourne and Sydney. Major airports include Hobart Airport and Launceston Airport; the smaller airports, Burnie (Wynyard) and King Island, serviced by Rex Airlines; and Devonport, serviced by QantasLink; have services to Melbourne. Intra-Tasmanian air services are offered by Par Avion. Until 2001 Ansett Australia operated majorly out of Tasmania to 12 destinations nationwide. Tourism-related air travel is also represented in Tasmania, such as in the Par Avion route between Cambridge Aerodrome near Hobart to Melaleuca in Southwest National Park.\nAntarctica base.\nTasmania \u2013 Hobart in particular \u2013 serves as Australia's chief sea link to Antarctica, with the Australian Antarctic Division located in Kingston. Hobart is also the home port of the French ship \"l'Astrolabe\", which makes regular supply runs to the French Southern Territories near and in Antarctica.\nRoad.\nWithin the state, the primary form of transport is by road. Since the 1980s, many of the state's highways have undergone regular upgrades. These include the Hobart Southern Outlet, Launceston Southern Outlet, Bass Highway reconstruction, and the Huon Highway. Public transport is provided by Metro Tasmania bus services, regular taxis and Hobart only UBER ride-share services within urban areas, with Kinetic Tasmania, Tassielink Transit, Manions Coaches, Area Connect and Calows Coaches providing bus service between population centres.\nRail.\nRail transport in Tasmania consists of narrow-gauge lines to major population centres and to mining and forestry operations on the west coast and in the northwest. Services are operated by TasRail. Regular passenger train services in the state ceased in 1978; the only scheduled trains are freight, but there are tourist and heritage trains on several closed alignments, for example the West Coast Wilderness Railway between Queenstown and Strahan. There is an ongoing proposal to reinstate commuter trains to Hobart. This idea however lacks political motivation due to ongoing scrutiny about the Macquarie Point Stadium. The centre of TasRail's freight network is the state of the art Brighton Transport Hub in Hobart's northern suburbs. Other major rail hubs are located at Burnie and East Tamar Junction. Rail maintenance and loading facilities are located here. The busiest rail service in the state is TasRail's cement trains running between Devonport and Railton. Mainline heritage rail services ceased in 2004 after Pacific National revoked their permission to run.\nShipping.\nThere is a substantial amount of commercial and recreational shipping within Hobart's harbour, and the port hosts approximately 120 cruise ships during the warmer half of the year, and there are occasional visits from military vessels.\nBurnie and Devonport on the northwest coast host ports and several other coastal towns host either small fishing ports or substantial marinas. The domestic sea route between Tasmania and the mainland is serviced by Bass Strait passenger/vehicle ferries operated by the Tasmanian government-owned \"Spirit of Tasmania\". The state is also home to Incat, a manufacturer of very high-speed aluminium catamarans that regularly broke records when they were first launched.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29945", "revid": "42601261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29945", "title": "Names of God in Judaism", "text": "Judaism has different names given to God, which are considered sacred: (), (\"Adonai\" transl.\u2009my Lord[s]), (\"El\" transl.\u2009God), ( transl.\u2009Gods/Godhead), (\"Shaddai\" transl.\u2009Almighty), and ( transl.\u2009[Lord of] Hosts); some also include I Am that I Am. Early authorities considered other Hebrew names mere epithets or descriptions of God, and wrote that they and names in other languages may be written and erased freely. Some moderns advise special care even in these cases, and many Orthodox Jews have adopted the chumras of writing \"G-d\" instead of \"God\" in English or saying \u1e6c\u0113t-Vav (, lit.\u00a0'9-6') instead of Y\u014dd-H\u0113 (, '10-5', but also 'Jah') for the number fifteen or \u1e6c\u0113t-Zayin (, '9-7') instead of Y\u014dd-Vav (, '10-6') for the Hebrew number sixteen.\nSeven names of God.\nThe names of God that, once written, cannot be erased because of their holiness are the Tetragrammaton (YHWH), Adonai, El, Elohim, Shaddai, Tzevaot; some also include I Am that I Am, from which \"YHWH\" is believed to be derived. In addition, the name \"Jah\"\u2014because it forms part of the Tetragrammaton\u2014is similarly protected. The tanna Jose ben Halafta considered \"Tzevaot\" a common name in the second century and Rabbi Ishmael considered \"Elohim\" to be one. All other names, such as \"Merciful\", \"Gracious\" and \"Faithful\", merely represent attributes that are also common to human beings.\nTetragrammaton.\nAlso abbreviated \"Jah\", the most common name of God in the Hebrew Bible is the Tetragrammaton, . The Hebrew script is an abjad, and thus vowels are often omitted in writing. The Tetragrammaton is sometimes rendered with vowels, though it is not known which vowels were used originally. Direct transliteration is avoided in Jewish custom.\nModern Rabbinical Jewish culture forbids pronunciation of this name. In prayers it is replaced by saying the word (, 'My Lords', Pluralis majestatis taken as singular), and in discussion by 'The Name'. Nothing in the Torah explicitly prohibits speaking the name and the Book of Ruth shows that it continued to be pronounced as late as the 5th century\u00a0BCE. Mark Sameth argues that only a pseudo name was pronounced, the four letters \u05d9\u05d4\u05d5\u05d4 (YHVH, YHWH) being a cryptogram which the priests of ancient Israel read in reverse as , 'he\u2013she', signifying a dual-gendered deity, as earlier theorized by Guillaume Postel (16th century) and Michelangelo Lanci (19th century). It had ceased to be spoken aloud by at least the 3rd\u00a0century\u00a0BCE, during Second Temple Judaism. The Talmud relates, perhaps anecdotally, that this began with the death of Simeon the Just. Vowel points began to be added to the Hebrew text only in the early medieval period. The Masoretic Text adds to the Tetragrammaton the vowel points of Adonai or Elohim (depending on the context), indicating that these are the words to be pronounced in place of the Tetragrammaton (see Qere and Ketiv), as shown also by the pronunciation changes when combined with a preposition or a conjunction. This is in contrast to Karaite Jews, who traditionally viewed pronouncing the Tetragrammaton as a mitzvah because the name appears some 6800 times throughout the Tanakh; however, most modern Karaites, under pressure and seeking acceptance from mainstream Rabbinical Jews, now also use the term \"Adonai\" instead. The Beta Israel pronounce the Tetragrammaton as \"Yahu\", but also use the Ge\u02bdez term .\nThe Tetragrammaton appears in Genesis and occurs 6,828 times in total in the Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia edition of the Masoretic Text. It is thought to be an archaic third-person singular of the imperfective aspect of the verb \"to\u00a0be\" (i.e., \"[He] is/was/will be\"). This agrees with the passage in Exodus where God names himself as \"I Will Be What I Will Be\" using the first-person singular imperfective aspect, open to interpretation as present tense (\"I am what I am\"), future (\"I shall be what I shall be\"), or imperfect (\"I used to be what I used to be\").\nRabbinic Judaism teaches that the name is forbidden to all except the High Priest of Israel, who should only speak it in the Holy of Holies of the Temple in Jerusalem on Yom Kippur. He then pronounces the name \"just as it is written.\" As each blessing was made, the people in the courtyard were to prostrate themselves completely as they heard it spoken aloud. As the Temple has not been rebuilt since its destruction in 70\u00a0CE, most modern Jews never pronounce YHWH but instead read (, , 'My Lords', Pluralis majestatis taken as singular) during prayer and while reading the Torah and as HaShem 'The Name' at other times. Most English translations of the Bible write \"the LORD\" for YHWH, and \"the LORD God\" or \"the Lord GOD\" for Adonai YHWH instead of transcribing the name. The Septuagint may have originally used the Hebrew letters themselves amid its Greek text, but there is no scholarly consensus on this point.\nAdonai.\n (, , lit.\u00a0transl.\u2009My Lords, pluralis majestatis taken as singular) is the possessive form of ('Lord'), along with the first-person singular pronoun enclitic. As with , Adonai's grammatical form is usually explained as a form akin to the \"royal we\". In the Hebrew Bible, the word is nearly always used to refer to God (approximately 450 occurrences). As the pronunciation of the Tetragrammaton came to be avoided in the Hellenistic period, Jews may have begun to drop the Tetragrammaton when presented alongside Adonai and subsequently to expand it to cover for the Tetragrammaton in the forms of spoken prayer and written scripture. Owing to the expansion of chumra, the idea of 'building a fence around the Torah', the word itself has come to be too holy to say for Orthodox Jews outside of prayer, leading to its replacement by ('The Name').\nThe singular forms and ('my lord') are used in the Hebrew Bible as royal titles, as in the First Book of Samuel, and for distinguished persons. The Phoenicians used it as a title of Tammuz (the origin of the Greek god's name Adonis). It is also used very occasionally in Hebrew texts to refer to God (e.g. Psalm 136:3). Deuteronomy 10:17 has the Tetragrammaton alongside the superlative constructions \"God of gods\" (, literally, \"the gods of gods\") and \"Lord of lords\" (, \"the lords of lords\": ; JPS 2006: \"For your God \u05d9\u05d4\u05d5\u05d4 is God supreme and Lord supreme\").\nThe final syllable of Adonai uses the vowel rather than , which would be expected from the Hebrew for 'my lord(s)'. Professor Yoel Elitzur explains this as a normal transformation when a Hebrew word becomes a name, citing other examples such as Nathan, Yitzhak, and Yigal. As became the most common reverent substitute for the Tetragrammaton, it too became considered un-erasable due to its holiness. As such, most prayer books avoid spelling out the word , and instead write two () in its place.\nThe forms , , and \nrepresent Ashkenazi Hebrew variant pronunciations of the word .\nEl.\nEl appears in Ugaritic, Phoenician and other late Bronze and Iron Age Levant texts both as generic \"god\" and as the head of the divine pantheon. In the Hebrew Bible, El (, ) appears very occasionally alone (e.g. Genesis 33:20, , 'Mighty God of Israel', and Genesis 46:3, , 'El the God of thy father'), but usually with some epithet or attribute attached (e.g. , 'Most High El', , El Shaddai, 'Everlasting El', , 'Living El', 'El my Shepherd', and 'El of Strength'). In these cases, it can be understood as the generic \"god\". In theophoric names such as Gabriel (\"Strength of God\"), Michael (\"Who is like God?\"), Raphael (\"God healed\"), Ariel (\"My lion is God\"), Daniel (\"My judgment is God\"), Ezekiel (\"God shall strengthen\"), Israel (\"one who has struggled with God\"), Immanuel (\"God is with us\"), and Ishmael (\"God hears/ will hear / listens/ will listen\") it is usually interpreted and translated as \"God\". \nEl also appears in the form ().\nElohim.\nA common name of God in the Hebrew Bible is Elohim (, ), the plural of (). When Elohim refers to God in the Hebrew Bible, singular verbs are used. The word is identical to meaning gods and is cognate to the found in Ugaritic, where it is used for the pantheon of Canaanite gods, the children of El and conventionally vocalized as \"Elohim\" although the original Ugaritic vowels are unknown. When the Hebrew Bible uses not in reference to God, it is plural (for example, Exodus 20:2). There are a few other such uses in Hebrew, for example \"Behemoth\". In Modern Hebrew, the singular word ('owner') looks plural, but likewise takes a singular verb.\nA number of scholars have traced the etymology to the Semitic root , 'to be first, powerful', despite some difficulties with this view. is thus the plural construct 'powers'. Hebrew grammar allows for this form to mean \"He is the Power (singular) over powers (plural)\", just as the word means 'owner' (see above). \"He is lord (singular) even over any of those things that he owns that are lordly (plural)\".\nTheologians who dispute this claim cite the hypothesis that plurals of majesty came about in more modern times. Richard Toporoski, a classics scholar, asserts that plurals of majesty first appeared in the reign of Diocletian (CE\u00a0284\u2013305). Indeed, Gesenius states in his book \"Hebrew Grammar\" the following:\nThe Jewish grammarians call such plurals ... or ; later grammarians call them , , or .\nThis last name may have been suggested by the \"we\" used by kings when speaking of themselves (compare 1 Maccabees 10:19 and 11:31); and the plural used by God in Genesis 1:26 and 11:7; Isaiah 6:8 has been incorrectly explained in this way. It is, however, either \"communicative\" (including the attendant angels: so at all events in Isaiah 6:8 and Genesis 3:22), or according to others, an indication of \"the fullness of power and might\" implied. It is best explained as a plural of \"self-deliberation\". The use of the plural as a form of respectful address is quite foreign to Hebrew.\nMark S. Smith has cited the use of plural as possible evidence to suggest an evolution in the formation of early Jewish conceptions of monotheism, wherein references to \"the gods\" (plural) in earlier accounts of verbal tradition became either interpreted as multiple aspects of a single monotheistic God at the time of writing, or subsumed under a form of monolatry, wherein the god(s) of a certain city would be accepted after the fact as a reference to the God of Israel and the plural deliberately dropped.\nThe plural form ending in can also be understood as denoting abstraction, as in the Hebrew words (, 'life') or (, 'virginity'). If understood this way, means 'divinity' or 'deity'. The word is similarly syntactically singular when used as a name but syntactically plural otherwise. In many of the passages in which occurs in the Bible, it refers to non-Israelite deities, or in some instances to powerful men or judges, and even angels (Exodus 21:6, Psalms 8:5) as a simple plural in those instances.\nShaddai.\n (, , ) is one of the names of God in Judaism, with its etymology coming from the influence of the Ugaritic religion on modern Judaism. is conventionally translated as \"God Almighty\". While the translation of as 'god' in Ugaritic/Canaanite languages is straightforward, the literal meaning of is the subject of debate.\nTzevaot.\nTzevaot, Tzevaoth, Tsebaoth or Sabaoth (, , , lit.\u00a0\"Armies\"), usually translated \"Hosts\", appears in reference to armies or armed hosts of men but is not used as a divine epithet in the Torah, Joshua, or Judges. Starting in the Books of Samuel, the term \"Lord of Hosts\" appears hundreds of times throughout the Prophetic books, in Psalms, and in Chronicles.\nThe Hebrew word was also absorbed in Ancient Greek (, ) and Latin (, with no declension). Tertullian and other Fathers of the Church used it with the meaning of \"Army of angels of God\".\nEhyeh.\n () is the first of three responses given to Moses when he asks for God's name in the Book of Exodus. The King James Version of the Bible translates the Hebrew as \"I Am that I Am\" and uses it as a way to describe God.\nThe word is the first-person singular imperfect form of , 'to be'. Biblical Hebrew does not distinguish between grammatical tenses. It has instead an aspectual system in which the imperfect denotes any actions that are not yet completed, Accordingly, can be rendered in English not only as \"I am that I am\" but also as \"I will be what I will be\" or \"I will be who I will be\", or \"I shall prove to be whatsoever I shall prove to be\" or even \"I will be because I will be\". Other renderings include: Leeser, \"I Will Be that I Will Be\"; Rotherham, \"I Will Become whatsoever I please\", Greek, (), \"I am Being/the Existing One\" in the Septuagint, and Philo, and Revelation; Latin, , \"I am Who I am.\"\nThe word is a relative pronoun whose meaning depends on the immediate context, so that \"that\", \"who\", \"which\", or \"where\" are all possible translations of that word.\nOther names and titles.\nBaal.\n meant 'owner' and, by extension, 'lord', 'master', and 'husband' in Hebrew and the other Northwest Semitic languages. In some early contexts and theophoric names, it and (; \"My Lord\") were treated as synonyms of Adon and Adonai. After the time of Solomon and particularly after Jezebel's attempt to promote the worship of the Lord of Tyre Melqart, however, the name became particularly associated with the Canaanite storm god Ba\u02bfal Haddu and was gradually avoided as a title for Yahweh. Several names that included it were rewritten as (\"shame\"). The prophet Hosea in particular reproached the Israelites for continuing to use the term:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nElah.\n (, pl. or ; ) is the Aramaic word for God and the absolute singular form of , . The origin of the word is from Proto-Semitic and is thus cognate to the Hebrew, Arabic, Akkadian, and other Semitic languages' words for god. is found in the Tanakh in the books of Ezra, Jeremiah (Jeremiah 10:11, the only verse in the entire book written in Aramaic), and Daniel. is used to describe both pagan gods and the Abrahamic God.\nEl Roi.\nIn the Book of Genesis, Hagar uses this name for the God who spoke to her through his angel. In Hebrew, her phrase , literally, 'God of Seeing Me', is translated in the King James Version as \"Thou God seest me.\"\nElyon.\nThe name () occurs in combination with , , and alone. It appears chiefly in poetic and later Biblical passages. The modern Hebrew adjective means 'supreme' (as in \"Supreme Court\": ) or 'Most High'. has been traditionally translated into English as 'God Most High'. The Phoenicians used what appears to be a similar name for God, one that the Greeks wrote as .\nEternal One.\n\"The Eternal One\" or \"The Eternal\" is increasingly used, particularly in Reform and Reconstructionist communities seeking to use gender-neutral language. In the Torah, (\"the Everlasting God\") is used at Genesis 21:33 to refer to God.\nHaShem.\nIt is common Jewish practice to restrict the use of the names of God to a liturgical context. In casual conversation some Jews, even when not speaking Hebrew, will call God HaShem (), which is Hebrew for 'the Name' (compare Leviticus 24:11 and Deuteronomy 28:58). When written, it is often abbreviated to . Likewise, when quoting from the Tanakh or prayers, some pious Jews will replace with . For example, when making audio recordings of prayer services, will generally be substituted for .\nA popular expression containing this phrase is , meaning \"Thank God\" (literally, 'Blessed be the Name').\nSamaritans use the Aramaic equivalent (, 'the name') in much the same situations as Jews use .\nShalom.\nTalmudic authors, ruling on the basis of Gideon's name for an altar (, according to Judges 6:24), write that \"the name of God is 'Peace'\" (, Shabbat 10b); consequently, a Talmudic opinion (, 10b) asserts that one would greet another with the word in order for the word not to be forgotten in the exile. But one is not permitted to greet another with the word in unholy places such as a bathroom, because of the holiness of the name.\nShekhinah.\n () is the presence or manifestation of God which has descended to \"dwell\" among humanity. The term never appears in the Hebrew Bible; later rabbis used the word when speaking of God dwelling either in the Tabernacle or amongst the people of Israel. The root of the word means \"dwelling\". Of the principal names of God, it is the only one that is of the feminine gender in Hebrew grammar. Some believe that this was the name of a female counterpart of God, but this is unlikely as the name is always mentioned in conjunction with an article (e.g.: \"the Shekhina descended and dwelt among them\" or \"He removed Himself and His Shekhina from their midst\"). This kind of usage does not occur in Semitic languages in conjunction with proper names. The term, however, may not be a name, as it may merely describe the presence of God, and not God Himself.\nWriting divine names.\nIn Jewish tradition the sacredness of the divine name or titles must be recognized by the professional (scribe) who writes Torah scrolls, or and . Before transcribing any of the divine titles or name, they prepare mentally to sanctify them. Once they begin a name, they do not stop until it is finished, and they must not be interrupted while writing it, even to greet a king. If an error is made in writing it may not be erased, but a line must be drawn round it to show that it is canceled, and the whole page must be put in a (burial place for scripture) and a new page begun.\nKabbalistic use.\nOne of the most important names is that of the ( 'Endless'), which first came into use after 1300\u00a0CE. \nAnother name is derived from the names . By spelling these four names out with the names of the Hebrew letters ( and ) this new forty-five letter long name is produced. Spelling the letters in (YHWH) by itself gives . Each letter in Hebrew is given a value, according to gematria, and the value of is also 45.\nThe 72-fold name is derived from three verses in Exodus 14:19\u201321. Each of the verses contains 72 letters. When the verses are read boustrophedonically 72 names, three letters each, are produced (the of the source verses is disregarded in respect to pronunciation). Some regard this name as the Shem HaMephorash.\nErasing the name of God.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Deuteronomy 12:3\u20134\nFrom this it is understood by the rabbis that one should not erase or blot out the name of God. The general halachic opinion is that this only applies to the sacred Hebrew names of God, not to other euphemistic references; there is a dispute as to whether the word \"God\" in English or other languages may be erased or whether Jewish law and/or Jewish custom forbids doing so, directly or as a precautionary \"fence\" about the law.\nThe words \"God\" and \"Lord\" are written by some Jews as \"G-d\" and \"L-rd\" as a way of avoiding writing any name of God out in full. The hyphenated version of the English name (\"G-d\") can be destroyed, so by writing that form, religious Jews prevent documents in their possession with the unhyphenated form from being destroyed later. Alternatively, a euphemistic reference such as (literally, 'the Name') may be substituted, or an abbreviation thereof, such as in ( 'with the help of the Name').\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29946", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29946", "title": "The Koran", "text": ""}
{"id": "29947", "revid": "50934638", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29947", "title": "Trick-taking game", "text": "Type of card game\nA trick-taking game is a card- or tile-based game in which play of a \"hand\" centers on a series of finite rounds or units of play, called \"tricks\" (or, in some settings, \"books\"), which are each evaluated to determine a winner or \"taker\" of that trick. The object of such games then may be closely tied to the number of tricks taken, as in plain-trick games such as contract bridge, whist, and spades, or to the value of the cards contained in taken tricks, as in point-trick games such as pinochle, the tarot family, briscola, and most evasion games like hearts. \nTrick-and-draw games are trick-taking games in which the players can fill up their hands after each trick. In most variants, players are free to play any card into a trick in the first phase of the game, but must \"follow suit\" as soon as the stock is depleted. Trick-avoidance games like reversis or polignac are those in which the aim is to avoid taking some or all tricks.\nThe domino game Texas 42 is an example of a trick-taking game that is not a card game.\nHistory.\nThe earliest card games were trick-taking games, as evidenced by the rank-and-suit structure, originating from China and spreading westwards during the early part of the second millennium. Michael Dummett noted that these games share various features. They were played without trumps, following suit was not required but only the highest card of the suit led wins, rotation was counter-clockwise, they were plain-trick games, and the pip cards of one or more suits were in reverse order so that the lower cards beat the higher ones. \nTwo revolutions in European trick-taking games led to the development of ever more sophisticated card games: the invention of trumps, and the requirement of following suit to constrain their power, in the 15th century; and bidding in the 17th century.\nAccording to card game researcher David Parlett, the oldest known European trick-taking game, Karn\u00f6ffel, was mentioned in 1426 in the Bavarian town N\u00f6rdlingen \u2013 roughly half a century after the introduction of playing cards to Europe, which were first mentioned in Spain in 1371. The oldest known game in which certain cards have additional privileges is Karn\u00f6ffel, where specific ranks of one suit were named \"Karn\u00f6ffel, Devil, Pope\" etc. and subject to an elaborate system of variable powers. However, these were not trumps in the sense of a suit whose cards uniformly beat all other suit cards. \nAround 1440 in Italy, special cards called \"trionfi\" were introduced with such a function. These special cards are now known as \"tarots\", and a deck augmented by tarots as a tarot deck. The trionfi/tarots formed essentially a fifth suit without the ordinary ranks but consisting of trumps in a fixed hierarchy. One can get a similar effect by declaring all cards of a fixed or randomly determined suit to be trumps. This method, originating with triomphe, is still followed by a number of modern trick-taking games that do not involve an auction. \nTrumps were retroactively added to some games, such as trappola. It is much rarer for trumps to be removed. The invention of trumps became so popular that very few European trick-taking games exist without them. This did not stop the two-handed piquet from becoming the most popular card game in Europe during the 16th century. Parlett suggests the invention of trumps let players in games involving more than two a greater chance of heading a trick.\nThe invention of bidding for a trump suit is credited to ombre, the most popular card game of the 17th century. Rather than having a randomly selected trump suit, players can now hold an auction for it. The most popular game of the 18th-century was tarot which experienced a great revival. During this time, many tarot games were borrowed bidding over the stock (taroc l'hombre). In the 20th century, whist, now with bidding and the dummy hand, developed into contract bridge, the last global trick-taking game.\nThe practice of counting tricks, in plain-trick games, may have originated in the counting of cards won in tricks. It was therefore a logical development to accord some cards a higher counting-value, and some cards no value at all, leading to point-trick games. Point-trick games are at least as old as tarot decks and may even predate the invention of trumps. Elfern and F\u00fcnfzehnern are possible candidates, although the earliest references date to the 18th century. Nearly all point-trick games are played with tarot decks or stripped decks, which in many countries became standard before 1600. Neither point-trick games nor stripped decks have a tradition in England.\nWhile there are a number of games with unusual card-point values, such as trappola and all fours, most point-trick games are in the huge family of ace\u2013ten card games beginning with brusquembille. Pinochle is a representative of this family that is popular in the United States. Other examples include belote and skat.\nIn contrast to Europe, Chinese trick-taking games did not develop trumps or bidding. They diverged into multi-trick games where melds can only be beaten by other melds provided they have the same number of cards. During the Qing dynasty, these multi-trick games evolved into the earliest draw-and-discard games where the players' objective was to form melds and \"go out\" rather than capture the opponents' cards. Khanhoo is an example of a multi-trick game that became a draw-and-discard game. Multi-trick games are also probably the source for climbing games like \"Zheng Shangyou\" and \"dou dizhu\", which first appeared during the Cultural Revolution.\nBasic structure.\nCertain actions in trick-taking games with three or more players always proceed in the same direction. In games originating in North and West Europe, including England, Russia, and the United States and Canada, the rotation is typically clockwise, i.e., play proceeds to the left. In South and East Europe, South America, and Asia it is typically anticlockwise, so that play proceeds to the right. When games move from one region to another, they tend to initially preserve their original sense of rotation. A region with a dominant sense of rotation may adapt a migrated game to its own sensibilities. For two-player games the order of play is moot.\nIn each \"hand\" or \"deal,\" one player is the \"dealer.\" This function moves from deal to deal in the normal direction of play. The dealer usually shuffles the deck (some games use \"soft shuffling,\" where the dealer does not explicitly shuffle the deck), and after giving the player one seat from the dealer opposite the normal direction of play an opportunity to cut, hands out the same prescribed number of cards to each player, usually in an order following the normal direction of play. \nMost games deal cards one at a time in rotation. A few games require dealing multiple cards at one time in a \"packet.\" The cards apportioned to each player are collectively known as that player's \"hand\" and are only known to the player. Some games involve a set of cards that are not dealt to a player's hand. These cards form the \"stock.\" (see below) It is generally good manners to leave one's cards on the table until the deal is complete.\nThe player sitting one seat after the declarer (one with the highest bid and not the dealer) in normal rotation is known as the \"eldest hand,\" also called the \"forehand\" in Skat and other games of German origin. The eldest hand \"leads\" to the first \"trick,\" i.e. places the first card of the trick face up in the middle of all players. The other players each follow with a single card, in the direction of play. When every player has played a card to the trick, the trick is evaluated to determine the winner, who takes the cards, places them face down on a pile, and leads to the next trick. The winner or taker of a trick is usually the player who played the highest-value card of the suit that was led, unless the game uses one or more \"trump\" cards (see below).\nThe player who leads to a trick is usually allowed to play an arbitrary card from their hand. Some games have restrictions on the first card played in the hand, or may disallow leading a card of a particular suit until that suit has been played \"off-suit\" in a prior trick, called \"breaking\" the suit, usually seen in cases of a trump or penalty suit. Other games have special restrictions on the card that must be led to the first trick. Usually this is a specific card, e.g., &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u2663. The holder of that card is the eldest hand instead of the person one seat after the dealer.\nIn many games, the following players must \"follow suit\" if they can, i.e., they must play a card of the same suit if possible. A player who cannot follow suit may \"slough\" a card, i.e., play a card of a different suit. A trick is won by the player who has played the highest-ranked card of the \"suit led,\" i.e., of the suit of the first card in the trick, unless the game uses a trump suit.\nIt can be an advantage to lead to a trick, because the player who leads controls the suit that is led and which others must follow. The leading player playing a suit of which he has many decreases the chance that anyone else would be able to follow suit. Playing a suit of which he has few allows him to rid his hand of that suit, known as \"voiding\" the suit, freeing him from the restriction to follow suit when that suit is led by another player. \nOn the other hand, it can be advantageous to be the final player who plays to the trick, because at that point one has full information about the other cards played to the trick. The last player to a trick can play a card just slightly higher or lower than the current winning card, guaranteeing they will win or lose it by the minimum amount necessary, saving more valuable high or low value cards for situations where they must guarantee that a card played early to a trick will win or lose.\nWhen all cards have been played, the number or contents of the tricks won by each player is tallied and used to update the score. Scoring based on the play of tricks varies widely between games. In most games either the number of tricks a player or partnership has won (\"plain-trick\" games), or the value of certain cards that the player has won by taking tricks (\"point-trick\" games) is important.\nPartnerships.\nIn many games such as hearts and oh hell, all players play individually against each other.\nIn many four-player games such as bridge, euchre and spades, the players sitting opposite to each other form a fixed partnership.\nSome games such as pinochle are commonly played with or without partnerships, depending on the number of players.\nIn some contract/auction games for three or more players, e.g. most tarot variants, the contractor (\"declarer\" or \"taker\") plays alone against all opponents, who form an \"ad hoc\" partnership (the \"defenders\").\nIn some games the partnerships are decided by chance \u2013 the contractor forms a partnership with the winner of the first trick, or with the player who holds a certain card. This practice originated from cinquillo and quadrille. In K\u00f6nigrufen and five-player French tarot the taker can call out a suit of which he does not possess the king, and is partnered with whomever does have it against the other three. Standard Schafkopf is similar: A \"player\" can \"call\" a suit, and the person holding the ace of that suit becomes his partner for the hand. \nAs this is not openly declared, it can be a challenge for the remaining players, to find out who is partnered with whom through cunning playing for several tricks. Aside from that, standard Schafkopf also has several solo options, where the \"player\" plays alone against the rest. In Doppelkopf, the two players holding the black queens are partners for that hand. Special rules are provided for the case where a single player holds both black queens.\nStock.\nIn some games not all cards are distributed to the players, and a \"stock\" remains. This stock can be referred to by different names, depending on the game; \"supply\", \"talon\", \"nest\", \"skat\", \"kitty\", and \"dog\" are common game-specific and/or regional names.\nIn some games the stock remains untouched throughout play of the hand. It is simply a pile of \"extra\" cards that will never be played and whose values are unknown, which will reduce the effectiveness of \"counting cards\", a common strategy of keeping track of the cards that have been played or are yet to be played. In games without bidding, trumps may be decided by exposing a card in the stock as in Triomphe. \nIn other games, the winner of an auction-bidding process, the taker or declarer, may get to exchange cards from his hand with the stock, either by integrating the stock into his hand and then discarding equal cards as in Skat, Rook and French tarot, or in a \"blind\" fashion by discarding and drawing as in Ombre. The stock, either in its original or discarded form, may additionally form part of one or more players' \"scoring piles\" of tricks taken; it may be kept by the declarer, may be won by the player of the first trick, or may go to an opposing player or partnership.\nIn some games, especially two-player games, after each trick every player draws a new card. This continues while the stock lasts. Since this drawing mechanism would normally make it difficult or impossible to detect a revoke (for instance, the player may not be able to follow suit, so they play off-suit and then immediately draw a card of the suit led), in the first phase of trick-play (before the stock is empty) players generally need not follow suit. A widespread game of this type is the Marriage group.\nBidding.\nIn a \"contract\" game the winning and scoring conditions are not fixed but are chosen by one of the players after seeing their hand. In such games, players make \"bids\" depending on the number of tricks or card points they believe they can win during play of the hand. One or more of these bids stands as the \"contract\", and the player who made that bid is rewarded for meeting it or penalized for not meeting it.\nIn \"auction\" games, bidding players are competing against each other for the right to attempt to make the contract. In a few games, the contract is fixed, normally a simple majority, less often based on certain cards captured during play, and players' bids are a wager of game points to be won or lost. In others, the bid is a number of tricks or card points the bidder is confident that they or their partnership will take. Either of these can also include the suit to be used as trumps during the hand. \nCommon bids include slam (winning all the tricks), mis\u00e8re (losing all the tricks), ouvert (the contractor's hand is exposed), playing without using the stock or only part of it, and winning the last trick or other specific tricks. The highest bid becomes the contract and the highest bidder is the \"contractor\", known in some games as the \"declarer\" or \"taker\", who then plays either with or without a partner. The other players become \"opponents\" or \"defenders\", whose main goal is to prevent the contract being met. They may announce a \"contra\" against the contractor which doubles the points for the hand. The contractor can declare a \"recontra\" which will double the points again.\nPopular examples of games with auctions include Contract bridge, Pinochle, tarot games, Skat, Belote and Twenty-Eight. In many auction games the eldest hand leads to the first trick, regardless of who won the auction, but in some, such as Contract Bridge, the first lead is made by the player next in rotation after the contractor, so that the contractor plays last to that trick.\nIn \"precision\" or \"exact-prediction\" games, all players choose their winning condition independently: to win precisely a predicted number of tricks (oh hell) or card points (Differenzler). Each player's bid stands. In partnership games the partners' bids are often combined. Each player or partnership then tries to take exactly the number of tricks or points they bid, and are rewarded or penalized for doing so independently of anyone else's success or failure in meeting their bid. This type of game began to mature in the 20th century. Other games generally falling into the exact-prediction category are Spades and Ninety-Nine.\nTrumps.\n\"Trump cards\" are a set of one or more cards in the deck that, when played, are of higher value than the suit led. If a trick contains any trump cards, it is won by the highest-value trump card played, not the highest-value card of the suit led.\nIn most games with trumps, one of the four suits is identified as the \"trump suit\". In the simplest case, there is a static trump suit such as the Spade suit in the game Spades, or a dedicated trump suit in the Tarot family, in addition to the other four, is featured. More often, a dynamic trump suit is determined by some means, either randomly by selection of a card as in oh hell and the original form of Whist, or decided by the winner or winning bid of an auction as in contract bridge and some forms of Pinochle. \nIn certain games, such as Rowboat and Rage, the trump suit may change during the course of the hand, even from trick to trick. Some psychological variety is added to the game and makes it more difficult to cheat if the trump suit is only chosen after dealing.\nIn some games, in addition to or separately from a trump suit, certain fixed cards are always the highest trumps, e.g. the Jacks in Skat, the Jacks or Jokers in Euchre, and the Rook Bird card in Rook. They are called \"matadors\" after the high trumps in Ombre. \"Matadors\" either have high point values or special abilities as in Spoil Five where they can revoke legally.\nSome games have more than one trump suit, such as the quasi-trick game Stortok, in which there are two trumps, with one superseding the other. Other games have no trumps. Hearts for instance has no provision for a trump suit of any kind. The Hearts suit for which the game is named has a different significance. Though trump is part of contract bridge, teams can make bids that do not specify a trump suit, called notrump. If that is the winning bid, then there is no trump suit for that hand. Making such a contract is regarded as harder to accomplish.\nIn most cases for \"no trump\" deals, any card other than the leading suit played has no value. In some games such as Oh, hell, where the player may need to not get more tricks to win, playing cards other than the leading suit can be useful.\nDeclarations.\nIn some games such as Piquet, Tarocchini, and Belote, before the taking of tricks commences, players can expose certain cards or melds (combinations) that they possess for bonus points. While this phase may seem to award players for pure chance, those who do declare risk letting their opponents develop strategies to counter the cards that they have revealed.\nFollow suit.\nIn many games, \"following suit\" is the action of playing a card of the same suit as that of the leading suit. A player must follow suit if that player has cards of the leading suit in his hands. There is a large variation of strictness in following suit among games.\nIn most modern games with trump suits, the rules for following suit do not distinguish between the trump suit and the \"plain suits\". If a trick begins with a plain suit card and a later player cannot follow suit, the player may choose freely to either \"slough\" (discard a card of another plain suit), or \"ruff\" (\"trump\" the trick by playing a trump card). Subsequent players to the trick must still follow the original suit, and may only discard or trump if they do not hold a card of the suit led. \nCertain games are \"play to beat\" or \"must-trump\". If a player cannot follow suit but can play trump, they must play trump. If they are able, they must beat any trump card already played to the trick. Pinochle and several of the Tarot card games have this rule.\nSome games, notably French tarot and a variation of Rook, use a special card (in French Tarot's case, the Excuse) that can be played at any time. If not, he has the choice of playing a trump to possibly win the trick, or rough (waste) a different suit.\nIf unable to follow suit or trump, any card can be played. Each trick must contain one card per player, and hence a player unable to satisfy any other instruction is at liberty to play any card. Usually a low-ranking card or one from a short suit is sacrificed. The former is used to protect a higher ranking card while the latter is to help void a suit so as to allow trumping a future trick.\nFor example, consider the following Whist hand, in a game where diamonds &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;d are the trump:\nNorth leads the deal with &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;K\u2660. Now, all the other players must follow suit, i.e. play a spade card. East has a spade card, and thus must follow suit by playing &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;7\u2660. South, however, does not have any spade card, and thus is allowed to play any card he wants. If he desires to win the trick, he can override North's &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;K\u2660 by playing a diamond card (diamond being the trump), for example &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;J\u2666. If he does not want to win the trick, he can slough any other suit, such as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u2665. Let us assume that he plays &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;J\u2666, overriding North's card. Now, West still has to follow suit, since he has a spade card, and plays &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u2660. South's trump card, gives him an opportunity to escape following suit, and he wins the trick.\nIf a player who can follow suit does not do so, or in games with additional restrictions on card play, not following these restrictions is known as a revoke, or 'renege'. A revoke typically cannot be discovered at the time when it is committed, but when a player plays off-suit to a trick, competent opponents will make a mental note that the player does not hold the suit led, and will notice later if the player later plays a card of the suit they were thought to be void in. The situation is similar for other types of revoke. \nMost game rules prescribe a severe penalty for a revoke and may also result in the hand being voided, a \"misdeal\". Decks of cards have been marketed for trick-taking games with the traditional French suit symbols, but in four colors. These are often called \"no-revoke\" decks, as the color contrast between each suit makes a potential revoking play easier to spot and harder to do accidentally.\nIn some trick games\u2014typically ones in which players are not penalized for winning tricks, and there is no requirement for trumping or following suit when possible\u2014players may \"slough\", or play a card face down. A card so played is incapable of winning the trick; but sloughing has the advantage that the other players cannot see what card is played. As this form of sloughing has the potential to be used to cheat in most games (i.e. playing a winning card face-down to avoid taking an \"overtrick\" or a trick containing penalty points) and is thus not allowed. \"Sloughing\" in the vernacular more often refers to simply discarding an off-suit card on a trick, particularly one that could be dangerous to that player if kept. \nThis form of sloughing is important in evasion games and in some contract games where \"overtricks\" are penalized. In oh hell, for instance, a player who cannot follow suit may elect to discard a card that would win if played to follow suit later, thus reducing the chance that the player will \"bag\", or take more tricks than needed. This is common in Hearts, where high-value cards are dangerous, especially Spades and Hearts, as they increase the chance of winning a trick with penalty points.\nSome games such as Pinochle use several decks shuffled together. In these games, there may be several equal winning cards in a trick; such games then use other rules to break ties. Common rules include:\nA common additional rule to reduce these occurrences is that a player cannot play a card tying the current high card unless they would renege or fail to overtrump by making any other play.\nScoring.\nWhen all tricks have been played, the winner of the hand and the players' scores can be determined. The determining factor in plain-trick games, the most popular form of trick-taking games in English-speaking countries, is simply how many tricks each player or partnership has taken. In point-trick games, certain card values are worth varying points. The players sum the points from cards in their \"scoring piles\" that were accumulated by taking tricks. \nPoints for cards, and the method of counting points, vary by game. In Rook, for example, the 5-card of each color is worth 5 points, the 10 and 14 (or Ace) is worth 10, and the Rook Bird (or Joker) is worth 20, while all other cards are worth nothing. Many Chinese card games like Finding Friends use a very similar system, in which each 5-card is worth 5 points, and the 10 and King are each worth 10 points. \nPinochle has many popular scoring variants usually based on point values for face cards and Aces, while pip cards score no points. In French tarot, all cards have a value including a half-point, and are traditionally scored in pairs of a high-value and a low-value card which results in a whole-point value for the pair.\nIn the most common \"positive\" or \"race\" games, players seek to win as many tricks or card points as possible. To win a hand, a player typically needs to win a minimal number of tricks or card points; this minimal threshold is usually called the \"contract\", and may be defined by the game's rules (a simple majority of total available points or tricks, or tiered thresholds depending on which player or side has captured certain cards), or the result of an \"auction\" or \"bidding\" process. A player who wins more than the number of tricks or card points necessary for winning the hand may be rewarded with a higher score, or conversely (in exact-prediction games) they may be penalized.\nThere are also \"negative\" or \"evasion\" games, in which the object is to avoid tricks or card points. E.g. in Hearts each card point won in a trick contributes negatively to the score. A special type is \"mis\u00e8re\" games, which are usually variants of positive games which can only be won by not winning a single trick.\nOther criteria also occur. Sometimes the last trick has special significance. In \"marriage games\" such as Pinochle the winner of the last trick receives 10 points in addition to the card points, while in \"final-trick\" games such as c\u1eaft t\u00ea only the winner of the last trick can win a hand. There are also blends between positive and negative games, e.g. the aim may be to win a certain prescribed number of tricks. Many card games, regardless of their normal scoring mechanism, give bonuses to players or partnerships who win all tricks or possible points in a hand, or conversely lose all tricks or points.\nGames usually end after every player has had an equal chance to be the dealer. The number of rotations varies widely among games. Some games have a cumulative score where all points from each hand add up. Others assign only a set number of game points for winning a hand. For example, a player or side that wins one hand may be awarded one game point, two if they achieve a slam. The player or side with the most game points or the first to reach a certain number of card or game points, is considered the winner.\nSpecial variations.\nVariations to basic rules.\nNumerous further variations to the basic rules may occur, and only a few examples can be mentioned here:\nRules in Austrian and German games.\nIn games derived from Austria and Germany, trick-taking is governed by the rules called \"Zw\u00e4nge\". The three main ones are \"Farbzwang\", \"Stichzwang\" and \"Trumpfzwang\". Although they broadly equate to rules in English-speaking countries, there are no single-word equivalents. For many games of this type, applying these rules correctly is crucial to the type of contract being played.\n\"Farbzwang\".\n\"Farbzwang\" (or \"Bedienzwang\") literally means \"suit compulsion\" and is the rule that players must follow the suit of the first card to be led to the trick, provided that they have a card of that suit. If a player does not have a card of the led suit, rules vary depending on whether the other \"Zw\u00e4nge\" apply.\n\"Stichzwang\".\n\"Stichzwang\" means \"trick compulsion\" and is the rule that players must attempt to win the trick if they are able, either by playing a higher card of the led suit or by playing a trump card to a side suit lead.\n\"Farbzwang\" with \"Stichzwang\".\nSome games apply \"Farbzwang\" and \"Stichzwang\" together, which means that a player, when it is his or her turn, must:\n\"Farbzwang\", the requirement to follow suit, almost always takes precedence over \"Stichzwang\". A player is not allowed to take the trick with a trump if able to follow suit. There are rare instances where e.g. All Fours rules apply i.e. a player with a card of the led suit may either follow suit or trump, but only if unable to follow may a player discard.\n\"Trumpfzwang\".\n\"Trumpfzwang\" means \"trump compulsion\" and requires that a player \"must\" play a trump if unable to follow suit. In other words, the player may not simply discard, if unable to follow.\n\"Example\": Acorns are trumps. Peter is forehand and plays the 8 of Bells, middlehand trumps with a 10 of Acorns; Anna is rearhand and has no Bells, but does have a trump card, the 8 of Acorns. She must play this and cannot discard another non-trump card in order to keep the trump for a subsequent trick.\n\"Tarockzwang\".\n\"Tarockzwang\" is used in tarock games such as K\u00f6nigrufen and Tapp-Tarock and means \"Tarock compulsion\" or the requirement to play a Tarock card if one is led to the trick or if a player is unable to follow suit. It is a form of \"Trumpfzwang\".\nExamples.\nTrick-taking games may be divided into point-trick games and plain-trick games. Examples of each are as follows:\nPoint-trick games.\nPoint-trick game are those in which win or loss is determined by the total value of the \"counters\" in the tricks. The counters are cards with a point value, sometimes referred to as \"card points\" to avoid confusion with \"game points\" awarded for winning the game and/or bonuses.\nExamples include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlain-trick games.\nPlain-trick games are those in which the outcome is determined by the number of tricks taken, regardless of their content.\nExamples of plain-trick games include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn games that consist of several successive, different, trick-taking contracts, such as Herzeln or Quodlibet, it is not possible to categorise them as either point- or plain-trick games.\nLast trick games.\nIn a very few games the aim is to win the last trick. These include:\nTrick-avoidance games.\nTrick-avoidance games are those in which the aim is to avoid taking certain tricks or to avoid taking all tricks. Misere or bettel are contracts in which the declarer undertakes to win no tricks. There are also contracts like Piccolo in the game of K\u00f6nigrufen, in which the aim is to take only one trick. Examples include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29949", "revid": "90546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29949", "title": "Table-top game", "text": ""}
{"id": "29950", "revid": "50291152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29950", "title": "Tile-based game", "text": "Type of tabletop game using tiles\nA tile-based game is a game that uses tiles as one of the fundamental elements of play. Traditional tile-based games use small tiles as playing pieces for gambling or entertainment games. Some board games use tiles to create their board, giving multiple possibilities for board layout, or allowing changes in the board geometry during play.\nEach tile has a back (undifferentiated) side and a face side. Domino tiles are usually rectangular, twice as long as they are wide and at least twice as wide as they are thick, though games exist with square tiles, triangular tiles and even hexagonal tiles. Modern games may use unconventional non-tileable shapes such as the curved-shaped \"Bendominoes\", or use many different shapes that together tile a surface such as the polyominoes in \"Blokus\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29952", "revid": "44673720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29952", "title": "Thermodynamics", "text": "Physics of heat, work, and temperature\nThermodynamics is a branch of physics that deals with heat, work, and temperature, and their relation to energy, entropy, and the physical properties of matter and radiation. The behavior of these quantities is governed by the four laws of thermodynamics, which convey a quantitative description using measurable macroscopic physical quantities but may be explained in terms of microscopic constituents by statistical mechanics. Thermodynamics applies to various topics in science and engineering, especially physical chemistry, biochemistry, chemical engineering, and mechanical engineering, as well as other complex fields such as meteorology.\nHistorically, thermodynamics developed out of a desire to increase the efficiency of early steam engines, particularly through the work of French physicist Sadi Carnot (1824) who believed that engine efficiency was the key that could help France win the Napoleonic Wars. Scots-Irish physicist Lord Kelvin was the first to formulate a concise definition of thermodynamics in 1854 which stated, \"Thermo-dynamics is the subject of the relation of heat to forces acting between contiguous parts of bodies, and the relation of heat to electrical agency.\" German physicist and mathematician Rudolf Clausius restated Carnot's principle known as the Carnot cycle and gave the theory of heat a truer and sounder basis. His most important paper, \"On the Moving Force of Heat\", published in 1850, first stated the second law of thermodynamics. In 1865 he introduced the concept of entropy. In 1870 he introduced the virial theorem, which applied to heat.\nThe initial application of thermodynamics to mechanical heat engines was quickly extended to the study of chemical compounds and chemical reactions. Chemical thermodynamics studies the nature of the role of entropy in the process of chemical reactions and has provided the bulk of expansion and knowledge of the field. Other formulations of thermodynamics emerged. Statistical thermodynamics, or statistical mechanics, concerns itself with statistical predictions of the collective motion of particles from their microscopic behavior. In 1909, Constantin Carath\u00e9odory presented a purely mathematical approach in an axiomatic formulation, a description often referred to as \"geometrical thermodynamics\".\nIntroduction.\nA description of any thermodynamic system employs the four laws of thermodynamics that form an axiomatic basis. The first law specifies that energy can be transferred between physical systems as heat, as work, and with the transfer of matter. The second law defines the existence of a quantity called entropy, which describes the direction, thermodynamically, that a system can evolve and quantifies the state of order of a system and which can be used to quantify the useful work that can be extracted from the system.\nIn thermodynamics, interactions between large ensembles of objects are studied and categorized. Central to this are the concepts of the thermodynamic \"system\" and its \"surroundings\". A system is composed of particles, whose average motions define its properties, and those properties are in turn related to one another through equations of state. Properties can be combined to express internal energy and thermodynamic potentials, which are useful for determining conditions for equilibrium and spontaneous processes.\nWith these tools, thermodynamics can be used to describe how systems respond to changes in their environment. This can be applied to a wide variety of topics in science and engineering, such as engines, phase transitions, chemical reactions, transport phenomena, and even black holes. The results of thermodynamics are essential for other fields of physics and for chemistry, chemical engineering, corrosion engineering, aerospace engineering, mechanical engineering, cell biology, biomedical engineering, materials science, and economics, to name a few.\nThis article is focused mainly on classical thermodynamics which primarily studies systems in thermodynamic equilibrium. Non-equilibrium thermodynamics is often treated as an extension of the classical treatment, but statistical mechanics has brought many advances to that field.\nHistory.\nThe history of thermodynamics as a scientific discipline generally begins with Otto von Guericke who, in 1650, built and designed the world's first vacuum pump and demonstrated a vacuum using his Magdeburg hemispheres. Guericke was driven to make a vacuum in order to disprove Aristotle's long-held supposition that 'nature abhors a vacuum'. Shortly after Guericke, the Anglo-Irish physicist and chemist Robert Boyle had learned of Guericke's designs and, in 1656, in coordination with English scientist Robert Hooke, built an air pump. Using this pump, Boyle and Hooke noticed a correlation between pressure, temperature, and volume. In time, Boyle's Law was formulated, which states that pressure and volume are inversely proportional. Then, in 1679, based on these concepts, an associate of Boyle's named Denis Papin built a steam digester, which was a closed vessel with a tightly fitting lid that confined steam until a high pressure was generated.\nLater designs implemented a steam release valve that kept the machine from exploding. By watching the valve rhythmically move up and down, Papin conceived of the idea of a piston and a cylinder engine. He did not, however, follow through with his design. Nevertheless, in 1697, based on Papin's designs, engineer Thomas Savery built the first engine, followed by Thomas Newcomen in 1712. Although these early engines were crude and inefficient, they attracted the attention of the leading scientists of the time.\nThe fundamental concepts of heat capacity and latent heat, which were necessary for the development of thermodynamics, were developed by Professor Joseph Black at the University of Glasgow, where James Watt was employed as an instrument maker. Black and Watt performed experiments together, but it was Watt who conceived the idea of the external condenser which resulted in a large increase in steam engine efficiency. Drawing on all the previous work led Sadi Carnot, the \"father of thermodynamics\", to publish \"Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire\" (1824), a discourse on heat, power, energy and engine efficiency. The book outlined the basic energetic relations between the Carnot engine, the Carnot cycle, and motive power. It marked the start of thermodynamics as a modern science.\nThe first thermodynamic textbook was written in 1859 by William Rankine, originally trained as a physicist and a civil and mechanical engineering professor at the University of Glasgow. The first and second laws of thermodynamics emerged simultaneously in the 1850s, primarily out of the works of William Rankine, Rudolf Clausius, and William Thomson (Lord Kelvin).\nThe foundations of statistical thermodynamics were set out by physicists such as James Clerk Maxwell, Ludwig Boltzmann, Max Planck, Rudolf Clausius and J. Willard Gibbs.\nClausius, who first stated the basic ideas of the second law in his paper \"On the Moving Force of Heat\", published in 1850, and is called \"one of the founding fathers of thermodynamics\", introduced the concept of entropy in 1865.\nDuring the years 1873\u201376 the American mathematical physicist Josiah Willard Gibbs published a series of three papers, the most famous being \"On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances\", in which he showed how thermodynamic processes, including chemical reactions, could be graphically analyzed, by studying the energy, entropy, volume, temperature and pressure of the thermodynamic system in such a manner, one can determine if a process would occur spontaneously. Also Pierre Duhem in the 19th century wrote about chemical thermodynamics. During the early 20th century, chemists such as Gilbert N. Lewis, Merle Randall, and E. A. Guggenheim&lt;ref name=\"Guggenheim 1949/1967\"&gt;Guggenheim, E.A. (1949/1967). \"Thermodynamics. An Advanced Treatment for Chemists and Physicists\", 1st edition 1949, 5th edition 1967, North-Holland, Amsterdam.&lt;/ref&gt; applied the mathematical methods of Gibbs to the analysis of chemical processes.\nEtymology.\n\"Thermodynamics\" has an intricate etymology.\nBy a surface-level analysis, the word consists of two parts that can be traced back to Ancient Greek. Firstly, (\"of heat\"; used in words such as \"thermometer\") can be traced back to the root \u03b8\u03ad\u03c1\u03bc\u03b7 \"therme\", meaning \"heat\". Secondly, the word (\"science of force [or power]\") can be traced back to the root \u03b4\u03cd\u03bd\u03b1\u03bc\u03b9\u03c2 \"dynamis\", meaning \"power\".\nIn 1849, the adjective \"thermo-dynamic\" is used by William Thomson.\nIn 1854, the noun \"thermo-dynamics\" is used by Thomson and William Rankine to represent the science of generalized heat engines.\nPierre Perrot claims that the term \"thermodynamics\" was coined by James Joule in 1858 to designate the science of relations between heat and power, however, Joule never used that term, but used instead the term \"perfect thermo-dynamic engine\" in reference to Thomson's 1849 phraseology.\nBranches of thermodynamics.\nThe study of thermodynamic systems has developed into several related branches, each using a different fundamental model as a theoretical or experimental basis, or applying the principles to varying types of systems.\nClassical thermodynamics.\nClassical thermodynamics is the description of the states of thermodynamic systems at near-equilibrium, that uses macroscopic, measurable properties. It is used to model exchanges of energy, work and heat based on the laws of thermodynamics. The qualifier \"classical\" reflects the fact that it represents the first level of understanding of the subject as it developed in the 19th century and describes the changes of a system in terms of macroscopic empirical (large scale, and measurable) parameters. A microscopic interpretation of these concepts was later provided by the development of \"statistical mechanics\".\nStatistical mechanics.\nStatistical mechanics, also known as statistical thermodynamics, emerged with the development of atomic and molecular theories in the late 19th century and early 20th century, and supplemented classical thermodynamics with an interpretation of the microscopic interactions between individual particles or quantum-mechanical states. This field relates the microscopic properties of individual atoms and molecules to the macroscopic, bulk properties of materials that can be observed on the human scale, thereby explaining classical thermodynamics as a natural result of statistics, classical mechanics, and quantum theory at the microscopic level.\nChemical thermodynamics.\nChemical thermodynamics is the study of the interrelation of energy with chemical reactions or with a physical change of state within the confines of the laws of thermodynamics. The primary objective of chemical thermodynamics is to determine the spontaneity of a given transformation.\nEquilibrium thermodynamics.\nEquilibrium thermodynamics is the study of transfers of matter and energy in systems or bodies that, by agencies in their surroundings, can be driven from one state of thermodynamic equilibrium to another. The term 'thermodynamic equilibrium' indicates a state of balance, in which all macroscopic flows are zero; in the case of the simplest systems or bodies, their intensive properties are homogeneous, and their pressures are perpendicular to their boundaries. In an equilibrium state there are no unbalanced potentials, or driving forces, between macroscopically distinct parts of the system. A central aim in equilibrium thermodynamics is: given a system in a well-defined initial equilibrium state, and given its surroundings, and given its constitutive walls, to calculate what will be the final equilibrium state of the system after a specified thermodynamic operation has changed its walls or surroundings.\nNon-equilibrium thermodynamics.\nNon-equilibrium thermodynamics is a branch of thermodynamics that deals with systems that are not in thermodynamic equilibrium. Most systems found in nature are not in thermodynamic equilibrium because they are not in stationary states, and are continuously and discontinuously subject to flux of matter and energy to and from other systems. The thermodynamic study of non-equilibrium systems requires more general concepts than are dealt with by equilibrium thermodynamics. Many natural systems still today remain beyond the scope of currently known macroscopic thermodynamic methods.\nLaws of thermodynamics.\nThermodynamics is principally based on a set of four laws which are universally valid when applied to systems that fall within the constraints implied by each. In the various theoretical descriptions of thermodynamics these laws may be expressed in seemingly differing forms, but the most prominent formulations are the following.\nZeroth law.\nThe zeroth law of thermodynamics states: \"If two systems are each in thermal equilibrium with a third, they are also in thermal equilibrium with each other.\"\nThis statement implies that thermal equilibrium is an equivalence relation on the set of thermodynamic systems under consideration. Systems are said to be in equilibrium if the small, random exchanges between them (e.g. Brownian motion) do not lead to a net change in energy. This law is tacitly assumed in every measurement of temperature. Thus, if one seeks to decide whether two bodies are at the same temperature, it is not necessary to bring them into contact and measure any changes of their observable properties in time. The law provides an empirical definition of temperature, and justification for the construction of practical thermometers.\nThe zeroth law was not initially recognized as a separate law of thermodynamics, as its basis in thermodynamical equilibrium was implied in the other laws. The first, second, and third laws had been explicitly stated already, and found common acceptance in the physics community before the importance of the zeroth law for the definition of temperature was realized. As it was impractical to renumber the other laws, it was named the \"zeroth law\".\nFirst law.\nThe first law of thermodynamics states: \"In a process without transfer of matter, the change in internal energy,\" formula_1\", of a thermodynamic system is equal to the energy gained as heat,\" formula_2\", less the thermodynamic work,\" formula_3\", done by the system on its surroundings.\"\nformula_4.\nwhere formula_1 denotes the change in the internal energy of a closed system (for which heat or work through the system boundary are possible, but matter transfer is not possible), formula_2 denotes the quantity of energy supplied \"to\" the system as heat, and formula_3 denotes the amount of thermodynamic work done \"by\" the system \"on\" its surroundings. An equivalent statement is that perpetual motion machines of the first kind are impossible; work formula_3 done by a system on its surrounding requires that the system's internal energy formula_9 decrease or be consumed, so that the amount of internal energy lost by that work must be resupplied as heat formula_2 by an external energy source or as work by an external machine acting on the system (so that formula_9 is recovered) to make the system work continuously.\nFor processes that include transfer of matter, a further statement is needed: \"With due account of the respective fiducial reference states of the systems, when two systems, which may be of different chemical compositions, initially separated only by an impermeable wall, and otherwise isolated, are combined into a new system by the thermodynamic operation of removal of the wall, then\"\nformula_12,\n\"where\" \"U\"0 \"denotes the internal energy of the combined system, and\" \"U\"1 \"and\" \"U\"2 \"denote the internal energies of the respective separated systems.\"\nAdapted for thermodynamics, this law is an expression of the principle of conservation of energy, which states that energy can be transformed (changed from one form to another), but cannot be created or destroyed.\nInternal energy is a principal property of the thermodynamic state, while heat and work are modes of energy transfer by which a process may change this state. A change of internal energy of a system may be achieved by any combination of heat added or removed and work performed on or by the system. As a function of state, the internal energy does not depend on the manner, or on the path through intermediate steps, by which the system arrived at its state.\nSecond law.\nA traditional version of the second law of thermodynamics states: \"Heat does not spontaneously flow from a colder body to a hotter body.\"\nThe second law refers to a system of matter and radiation, initially with inhomogeneities in temperature, pressure, chemical potential, and other intensive properties, that are due to internal 'constraints', or impermeable rigid walls, within it, or to externally imposed forces. The law observes that, when the system is isolated from the outside world and from those forces, there is a definite thermodynamic quantity, its entropy, that increases as the constraints are removed, eventually reaching a maximum value at thermodynamic equilibrium, when the inhomogeneities practically vanish. For systems that are initially far from thermodynamic equilibrium, though several have been proposed, there is known no general physical principle that determines the rates of approach to thermodynamic equilibrium, and thermodynamics does not deal with such rates. The many versions of the second law all express the general irreversibility of the transitions involved in systems approaching thermodynamic equilibrium.\nIn macroscopic thermodynamics, the second law is a basic observation applicable to any actual thermodynamic process; in statistical thermodynamics, the second law is postulated to be a consequence of molecular chaos.\nThird law.\nThe third law of thermodynamics states: \"As the temperature of a system approaches absolute zero, all processes cease and the entropy of the system approaches a minimum value.\"\nThis law of thermodynamics is a statistical law of nature regarding entropy and the impossibility of reaching absolute zero of temperature. This law provides an absolute reference point for the determination of entropy. The entropy determined relative to this point is the absolute entropy. Alternative definitions include \"the entropy of all systems and of all states of a system is smallest at absolute zero,\" or equivalently \"it is impossible to reach the absolute zero of temperature by any finite number of processes\".\nAbsolute zero, at which all activity would stop if it were possible to achieve, is \u2212273.15\u00a0\u00b0C (degrees Celsius), or \u2212459.67\u00a0\u00b0F (degrees Fahrenheit), or 0 K (kelvin), or 0\u00b0 R (degrees Rankine).\nSystem models.\nAn important concept in thermodynamics is the thermodynamic system, which is a precisely defined region of the universe under study. Everything in the universe except the system is called the \"surroundings\". A system is separated from the remainder of the universe by a \"boundary\" which may be a physical or notional, but serve to confine the system to a finite volume. Segments of the \"boundary\" are often described as \"walls\"; they have respective defined 'permeabilities'. Transfers of energy as work, or as heat, or of matter, between the system and the surroundings, take place through the walls, according to their respective permeabilities.\nMatter or energy that pass across the boundary so as to effect a change in the internal energy of the system need to be accounted for in the energy balance equation. The volume contained by the walls can be the region surrounding a single atom resonating energy, such as Max Planck defined in 1900; it can be a body of steam or air in a steam engine, such as Sadi Carnot defined in 1824. The system could also be just one nuclide (i.e. a system of quarks) as hypothesized in quantum thermodynamics. When a looser viewpoint is adopted, and the requirement of thermodynamic equilibrium is dropped, the system can be the body of a tropical cyclone, such as Kerry Emanuel theorized in 1986 in the field of atmospheric thermodynamics, or the event horizon of a black hole.\nBoundaries are of four types: fixed, movable, real, and imaginary. For example, in an engine, a fixed boundary means the piston is locked at its position, within which a constant volume process might occur. If the piston is allowed to move that boundary is movable while the cylinder and cylinder head boundaries are fixed. For closed systems, boundaries are real while for open systems boundaries are often imaginary. In the case of a jet engine, a fixed imaginary boundary might be assumed at the intake of the engine, fixed boundaries along the surface of the case and a second fixed imaginary boundary across the exhaust nozzle.\nGenerally, thermodynamics distinguishes three classes of systems, defined in terms of what is allowed to cross their boundaries:\nAs time passes in an isolated system, internal differences of pressures, densities, and temperatures tend to even out. A system in which all equalizing processes have gone to completion is said to be in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium.\nOnce in thermodynamic equilibrium, a system's properties are, by definition, unchanging in time. Systems in equilibrium are much simpler and easier to understand than are systems which are not in equilibrium. Often, when analysing a dynamic thermodynamic process, the simplifying assumption is made that each intermediate state in the process is at equilibrium, producing thermodynamic processes which develop so slowly as to allow each intermediate step to be an equilibrium state and are said to be reversible processes.\nStates and processes.\nWhen a system is at equilibrium under a given set of conditions, it is said to be in a definite thermodynamic state. The state of the system can be described by a number of state quantities that do not depend on the process by which the system arrived at its state. They are called intensive variables or extensive variables according to how they change when the size of the system changes. The properties of the system can be described by an equation of state which specifies the relationship between these variables. State may be thought of as the instantaneous quantitative description of a system with a set number of variables held constant.\nA thermodynamic process may be defined as the energetic evolution of a thermodynamic system proceeding from an initial state to a final state. It can be described by process quantities. Typically, each thermodynamic process is distinguished from other processes in energetic character according to what parameters, such as temperature, pressure, or volume, etc., are held fixed; Furthermore, it is useful to group these processes into pairs, in which each variable held constant is one member of a conjugate pair.\nSeveral commonly studied thermodynamic processes are:\nInstrumentation.\nThere are two types of thermodynamic instruments, the meter and the reservoir. A thermodynamic meter is any device which measures any parameter of a thermodynamic system. In some cases, the thermodynamic parameter is actually defined in terms of an idealized measuring instrument. For example, the zeroth law states that if two bodies are in thermal equilibrium with a third body, they are also in thermal equilibrium with each other. This principle, as noted by James Maxwell in 1872, asserts that it is possible to measure temperature. An idealized thermometer is a sample of an ideal gas at constant pressure. From the ideal gas law \"pV=nRT\", the volume of such a sample can be used as an indicator of temperature; in this manner it defines temperature. Although pressure is defined mechanically, a pressure-measuring device, called a barometer may also be constructed from a sample of an ideal gas held at a constant temperature. A calorimeter is a device which is used to measure and define the internal energy of a system.\nA thermodynamic reservoir is a system which is so large that its state parameters are not appreciably altered when it is brought into contact with the system of interest. When the reservoir is brought into contact with the system, the system is brought into equilibrium with the reservoir. For example, a pressure reservoir is a system at a particular pressure, which imposes that pressure upon the system to which it is mechanically connected. The Earth's atmosphere is often used as a pressure reservoir. The ocean can act as temperature reservoir when used to cool power plants.\nConjugate variables.\nThe central concept of thermodynamics is that of energy, the ability to do work. By the First Law, the total energy of a system and its surroundings is conserved. Energy may be transferred into a system by heating, compression, or addition of matter, and extracted from a system by cooling, expansion, or extraction of matter. In mechanics, for example, energy transfer equals the product of the force applied to a body and the resulting displacement.\nConjugate variables are pairs of thermodynamic concepts, with the first being akin to a \"force\" applied to some thermodynamic system, the second being akin to the resulting \"displacement\", and the product of the two equaling the amount of energy transferred. The common conjugate variables are:\nPotentials.\nThermodynamic potentials are different quantitative measures of the stored energy in a system. Potentials are used to measure the energy changes in systems as they evolve from an initial state to a final state. The potential used depends on the constraints of the system, such as constant temperature or pressure. For example, the Helmholtz and Gibbs energies are the energies available in a system to do useful work when the temperature and volume or the pressure and temperature are fixed, respectively. Thermodynamic potentials cannot be measured in laboratories, but can be computed using molecular thermodynamics.\nThe five most well known potentials are:\nwhere formula_13 is the temperature, formula_14 the entropy, formula_15 the pressure, formula_16 the volume, formula_17 the chemical potential, formula_18 the number of particles in the system, and formula_19 is the count of particles types in the system.\nThermodynamic potentials can be derived from the energy balance equation applied to a thermodynamic system. Other thermodynamic potentials can also be obtained through Legendre transformation.\nAxiomatic thermodynamics.\nAxiomatic thermodynamics is a mathematical discipline that aims to describe thermodynamics in terms of rigorous axioms, for example by finding a mathematically rigorous way to express the familiar laws of thermodynamics.\nThe first attempt at an axiomatic theory of thermodynamics was Constantin Carath\u00e9odory's 1909 work \"Investigations on the Foundations of Thermodynamics\", which made use of Pfaffian systems and the concept of adiabatic accessibility, a notion that was introduced by Carath\u00e9odory himself. In this formulation, thermodynamic concepts such as heat, entropy, and temperature are derived from quantities that are more directly measurable. Theories that came after, differed in the sense that they made assumptions regarding thermodynamic processes with arbitrary initial and final states, as opposed to considering only neighboring states.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nThe following titles are more technical:"}
{"id": "29954", "revid": "51011716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29954", "title": "Topology", "text": "Branch of mathematics\nTopology (from the Greek words , and ) is the branch of mathematics concerned with the properties of a geometric object that are preserved under continuous deformations, such as stretching, twisting, crumpling, and bending; that is, without closing holes, opening holes, tearing, gluing, or passing through itself.\nA topological space is a set endowed with a structure, called a \"topology\", which allows defining continuous deformation of subspaces, and, more generally, all kinds of continuity. Euclidean spaces, and, more generally, metric spaces are examples of topological spaces, as any distance or metric defines a topology. The deformations that are considered in topology are homeomorphisms and homotopies. A property that is invariant under such deformations is a topological property. The following are basic examples of topological properties: the dimension, which allows distinguishing between a line and a surface; compactness, which allows distinguishing between a line and a circle; connectedness, which allows distinguishing a circle from two non-intersecting circles.\nThe ideas underlying topology go back to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, who in the 17th century envisioned the and . Leonhard Euler's Seven Bridges of K\u00f6nigsberg problem and polyhedron formula are arguably the field's first theorems. The term \"topology\" was introduced by Johann Benedict Listing in the 19th century, although, it was not until the first decades of the 20th century that the idea of a topological space was developed.\nMotivation.\nThe motivating insight behind topology is that some geometric problems depend not on the exact shape of the objects involved, but rather on the way they are put together. For example, the square and the circle have many properties in common: they are both one-dimensional objects (from a topological point of view) and both separate the plane into two parts, the part inside and the part outside.\nIn one of the first papers in topology, Leonhard Euler demonstrated that it was impossible to find a route through the town of K\u00f6nigsberg (now Kaliningrad) that would cross each of its seven bridges exactly once. This result did not depend on the lengths of the bridges or on their distance from one another, but only on connectivity properties: which bridges connect to which islands or riverbanks. This Seven Bridges of K\u00f6nigsberg problem led to the branch of mathematics known as graph theory.\nSimilarly, the hairy ball theorem of algebraic topology says that \"one cannot comb the hair flat on a hairy ball without creating a cowlick.\" This fact is immediately convincing to most people, even though they might not recognize the more formal statement of the theorem, that there is no nonvanishing continuous tangent vector field on the sphere. As with the \"Bridges of K\u00f6nigsberg\", the result does not depend on the shape of the sphere; it applies to any kind of smooth blob, as long as it has no holes.\nTo deal with these problems that do not rely on the exact shape of the objects, one must be clear about just what properties these problems do rely on. From this need arises the notion of homeomorphism. The impossibility of crossing each bridge just once applies to any arrangement of bridges homeomorphic to those in K\u00f6nigsberg, and the hairy ball theorem applies to any space homeomorphic to a sphere.\nIntuitively, two spaces are homeomorphic if one can be deformed into the other without cutting or gluing. A famous example, known as the \"Topologist's Breakfast\", is that a topologist cannot distinguish a coffee mug from a doughnut. A pliable torus (shaped like a doughnut) can be reshaped to a coffee mug by creating a dimple and progressively enlarging it while shrinking the central hole into the mug's handle.\nHomeomorphism can be considered the most basic topological equivalence. Another is homotopy equivalence. This is harder to describe without getting technical, but the essential notion is that two objects are homotopy equivalent if they both result from \"squishing\" some larger object.\nHistory.\nTopology, as a well-defined mathematical discipline, originates in the early part of the twentieth century, but some isolated results can be traced back several centuries. Among these are certain questions in geometry investigated by Leonhard Euler. His 1736 paper on the Seven Bridges of K\u00f6nigsberg is regarded as one of the first practical applications of topology. On 14 November 1750, Euler wrote to a friend that he had realized the importance of the \"edges\" of a polyhedron. This led to his polyhedron formula, \"V\" \u2212 \"E\" + \"F\" = 2 (where V, E, and F respectively indicate the number of vertices, edges, and faces of the polyhedron). Some authorities regard this analysis as the first theorem, signaling the birth of topology.\nFurther contributions were made by Augustin-Louis Cauchy, Ludwig Schl\u00e4fli, Johann Benedict Listing, Bernhard Riemann and Enrico Betti. Listing introduced the term \"Topologie\" in \"Vorstudien zur Topologie\", written in his native German, in 1847, having used the word for ten years in correspondence before its first appearance in print. The English form \"topology\" was used in 1883 in Listing's obituary in the journal \"Nature\" to distinguish \"qualitative geometry from the ordinary geometry in which quantitative relations chiefly are treated\".\nTheir work was corrected, consolidated and greatly extended by Henri Poincar\u00e9. In 1895, he published his ground-breaking paper on \"Analysis Situs\", which introduced the concepts now known as homotopy and homology, which are now considered part of algebraic topology.\nThe development of topology in the 20th century was marked by significant advances in both foundational theory and its application to other fields of mathematics. Unifying the work on function spaces of Georg Cantor, Vito Volterra, Cesare Arzel\u00e0, Jacques Hadamard, Giulio Ascoli and others, Maurice Fr\u00e9chet introduced the metric space in 1906. A metric space is now considered a special case of a general topological space, with any given topological space potentially giving rise to many distinct metric spaces. In 1914, Felix Hausdorff coined the term \"topological space\" and defined what is now called a Hausdorff space. Currently, a topological space is a slight generalization of Hausdorff spaces, given in 1922 by Kazimierz Kuratowski.\nModern topology depends strongly on the ideas of set theory, developed by Georg Cantor in the later part of the 19th century. In addition to establishing the basic ideas of set theory, Cantor considered point sets in Euclidean space as part of his study of Fourier series. For further developments, see point-set topology and algebraic topology.\nThe 2022 Abel Prize was awarded to Dennis Sullivan \"for his groundbreaking contributions to topology in its broadest sense, and in particular its algebraic, geometric and dynamical aspects\".\nConcepts.\nTopologies on sets.\nThe term \"topology\" also refers to a specific mathematical idea central to the area of mathematics called topology. Informally, a topology describes how elements of a set relate spatially to each other. The same set can have different topologies. For instance, the real line, the complex plane, and the Cantor set can be thought of as the same set with different topologies.\nFormally, let X be a set and let \u03c4 be a family of subsets of X. Then \u03c4 is called a topology on X if:\nIf \u03c4 is a topology on X, then the pair (\"X\", \"\u03c4\") is called a topological space. The notation \"X\"\"\u03c4\" may be used to denote a set X endowed with the particular topology \u03c4. By definition, every topology is a \u03c0-system.\nThe members of \u03c4 are called \"open sets\" in X. A subset of X is said to be closed if its complement is in \u03c4 (that is, its complement is open). A subset of X may be open, closed, both (a clopen set), or neither. The empty set and X itself are always both closed and open. An open subset of X which contains a point x is called an open neighborhood of x.\nContinuous functions and homeomorphisms.\nA function or map from one topological space to another is called \"continuous\" if the inverse image of any open set is open. If the function maps the real numbers to the real numbers (both spaces with the standard topology), then this definition of continuous is equivalent to the definition of continuous in calculus. If a continuous function is one-to-one and onto, and if the inverse of the function is also continuous, then the function is called a homeomorphism and the domain of the function is said to be homeomorphic to the range. Another way of saying this is that the function has a natural extension to the topology. If two spaces are homeomorphic, they have identical topological properties and are considered topologically the same. The cube and the sphere are homeomorphic, as are the coffee cup and the doughnut. However, the sphere is not homeomorphic to the doughnut.\nManifolds.\nWhile topological spaces can be extremely varied and exotic, many areas of topology focus on the more familiar class of spaces known as manifolds. A \"manifold\" is a topological space that resembles Euclidean space near each point. More precisely, each point of an n-dimensional manifold has a neighborhood that is homeomorphic to the Euclidean space of dimension n. Lines and circles, but not figure eights, are one-dimensional manifolds. Two-dimensional manifolds are also called surfaces. Examples include the plane, the sphere, and the torus, which can all be realized in three dimensions without self-intersection, and the Klein bottle and real projective plane, which cannot.\nTopics.\nGeneral topology.\nGeneral topology is the branch of topology dealing with the basic set-theoretic definitions and constructions used in topology. It is the foundation of most other branches of topology, including differential topology, geometric topology, and algebraic topology. Another name for general topology is point-set topology.\nThe basic object of study is topological spaces, which are sets equipped with a topology, that is, a family of subsets, called \"open sets\", which is closed under finite intersections and (finite or infinite) unions. The fundamental concepts of topology, such as \"continuity\", \"compactness\", and \"connectedness\", can be defined in terms of open sets. Intuitively, continuous functions take nearby points to nearby points. Compact sets are those that can be covered by finitely many sets of arbitrarily small size. Connected sets are sets that cannot be divided into two pieces that are far apart. The words \"nearby\", \"arbitrarily small\", and \"far apart\" can all be made precise by using open sets. Several topologies can be defined on a given set. Changing a topology consists of changing the collection of open sets. This changes which functions are continuous and which subsets are compact or connected.\nMetric spaces are an important class of topological spaces where the distance between any two points is defined by a function called a \"metric\". In a metric space, an open set is a union of open disks, where an open disk of radius r centered at x is the set of all points whose distance to x is less than r. Many common spaces are topological spaces whose topology can be defined by a metric. This is the case of the real line, the complex plane, real and complex normed vector spaces and Euclidean spaces. Having a metric simplifies many proofs.\nAlgebraic topology.\nAlgebraic topology is a branch of mathematics that uses tools from algebra to study topological spaces. The basic goal is to find algebraic invariants that classify topological spaces up to homeomorphism, or more commonly up to homotopy equivalence.\nThe most important of these invariants are homotopy groups, homology, and cohomology.\nAlthough algebraic topology primarily uses algebra to study topological problems, using topology to solve algebraic problems is sometimes also possible. Algebraic topology, for example, allows for a convenient proof that any subgroup of a free group is again a free group.\nDifferential topology.\nDifferential topology is the field dealing with differentiable functions on differentiable manifolds. It is closely related to differential geometry and together they make up the geometric theory of differentiable manifolds.\nMore specifically, differential topology considers the properties and structures that require only a smooth structure on a manifold to be defined. Smooth manifolds are \"softer\" than manifolds with extra geometric structures, which can act as obstructions to certain types of equivalences and deformations that exist in differential topology. For instance, volume and Riemannian curvature are invariants that can distinguish different geometric structures on the same smooth manifold\u00a0\u2013 that is, one can smoothly \"flatten out\" certain manifolds, but it might require distorting the space and affecting the curvature or volume.\nGeometric topology.\nGeometric topology is a branch of topology that primarily focuses on low-dimensional manifolds (that is, spaces of dimensions 2, 3, and 4) and their interaction with geometry, but it also includes some higher-dimensional topology. Some examples of topics in geometric topology are orientability, handle decompositions, local flatness, crumpling and the planar and higher-dimensional Sch\u00f6nflies theorem.\nIn high-dimensional topology, characteristic classes are a basic invariant, and surgery theory is a key theory.\nLow-dimensional topology is strongly geometric, as reflected in the uniformization theorem in 2 dimensions \u2013 every surface admits a constant curvature metric; geometrically, it has one of 3 possible geometries: positive curvature/spherical, zero curvature/flat, and negative curvature/hyperbolic \u2013 and the geometrization conjecture (now theorem) in 3 dimensions \u2013 every 3-manifold can be cut into pieces, each of which has one of eight possible geometries.\n2-dimensional topology can be studied as complex geometry in one variable (Riemann surfaces are complex curves) \u2013 by the uniformization theorem every conformal class of metrics is equivalent to a unique complex one, and 4-dimensional topology can be studied from the point of view of complex geometry in two variables (complex surfaces), though not every 4-manifold admits a complex structure.\nGeneralizations.\nOccasionally, one needs to use the tools of topology but a \"set of points\" is not available. In pointless topology one considers instead the lattice of open sets as the basic notion of the theory, while Grothendieck topologies are structures defined on arbitrary categories that allow the definition of sheaves on those categories and with that the definition of general cohomology theories.\nApplications.\nBiology.\nTopology has been used to study various biological systems including molecules and nanostructure (e.g., membraneous objects). In particular, circuit topology and knot theory have been extensively applied to classify and compare the topology of folded proteins and nucleic acids. Circuit topology classifies folded molecular chains based on the pairwise arrangement of their intra-chain contacts and chain crossings. Knot theory, a branch of topology, is used in biology to study the effects of certain enzymes on DNA. These enzymes cut, twist, and reconnect the DNA, causing knotting with observable effects such as slower electrophoresis.\nComputer science.\nTopological data analysis uses techniques from algebraic topology to determine the large-scale structure of a set (for instance, determining if a cloud of points is spherical or toroidal). The main method used by topological data analysis is to:\nSeveral branches of programming language semantics, such as domain theory, are formalized using topology. In this context, Steve Vickers, building on work by Samson Abramsky and Michael B. Smyth, characterizes topological spaces as Boolean or Heyting algebras over open sets, which are characterized as semidecidable (equivalently, finitely observable) properties.\nPhysics.\nTopology is relevant to physics in areas such as condensed matter physics, quantum field theory, quantum computing and physical cosmology.\nThe topological dependence of mechanical properties in solids is of interest in the disciplines of mechanical engineering and materials science. Electrical and mechanical properties depend on the arrangement and network structures of molecules and elementary units in materials. The compressive strength of crumpled topologies is studied in attempts to understand the high strength to weight of such structures that are mostly empty space. Topology is of further significance in Contact mechanics where the dependence of stiffness and friction on the dimensionality of surface structures is the subject of interest with applications in multi-body physics.\nA topological quantum field theory (or topological field theory or TQFT) is a quantum field theory that computes topological invariants. Although TQFTs were invented by physicists, they are also of mathematical interest, being related to, among other things, knot theory, the theory of four-manifolds in algebraic topology, and the theory of moduli spaces in algebraic geometry. Donaldson, Jones, Witten, and Kontsevich have all won Fields Medals for work related to topological field theory.\nThe topological classification of Calabi\u2013Yau manifolds has important implications in string theory, as different manifolds can sustain different kinds of strings.\nIn topological quantum computers, the qubits are stored in topological properties, that are by definition invariant with respect to homotopies.\nIn cosmology, topology can be used to describe the overall shape of the universe. This area of research is commonly known as spacetime topology.\nIn condensed matter, a relevant application to topological physics comes from the possibility of obtaining a one-way current, which is a current protected from backscattering. It was first discovered in electronics with the famous quantum Hall effect, and then generalized in other areas of physics, for instance in photonics. David Thouless, Duncan Haldane, and Michael Kosterlitz were awarded the 2016 Nobel Prize in Physics for their work on Topological orders.\nRobotics.\nThe possible positions of a robot can be described by a manifold called configuration space. In the area of motion planning, one finds paths between two points in configuration space. These paths represent a motion of the robot's joints and other parts into the desired pose.\nGames and puzzles.\nDisentanglement puzzles are based on topological aspects of the puzzle's shapes and components.\nFiber art.\nIn order to create a continuous join of pieces in a modular construction, it is necessary to create an unbroken path in an order that surrounds each piece and traverses each edge only once. This process is an application of the Eulerian path.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29957", "revid": "39323016", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29957", "title": "Troll", "text": "Supernatural being in Nordic folklore\nA troll is a being in Nordic folklore, including Norse mythology. In Old Norse sources, beings described as trolls dwell in isolated areas of rocks, mountains, or caves, live together in small family units, and are rarely helpful to human beings.\nIn later Scandinavian folklore, trolls became beings in their own right, where they live far from human habitation, are not Christianized, and are considered dangerous to human beings. Depending on the source, their appearance varies greatly; trolls may be ugly and slow-witted, or look and behave exactly like human beings, with no particularly grotesque characteristic about them.\nIn Scandinavian folklore, trolls are sometimes associated with particular landmarks (sometimes said to have been formed by a troll having been exposed to sunlight). Trolls are depicted in a variety of media in modern popular culture.\nEtymology.\nThe Old Norse nouns \"troll\" and \"tr\u01ebll\" (variously meaning \"fiend, demon, werewolf, j\u00f6tunn\") and Middle High German \"troll, trolle\" \"fiend\" (according to philologist Vladimir Orel, the word is likely borrowed from Old Norse), possibly developed from Proto-Germanic neuter noun *\"trullan\", meaning \"to tread, step on\". The origin of the Proto-Germanic word is unknown. Additionally, the Old Norse verb \"trylla\" 'to enchant, to turn into a troll' and the Middle High German verb \"tr\u00fcllen\" \"to flutter\" both developed from the Proto-Germanic verb *\"trulljanan\", a derivative of *\"trullan\".\nNorse mythology.\nIn Norse mythology, \"troll\", like \"thurs\", is a term applied to \"j\u00f6tnar\" and is mentioned throughout the Old Norse corpus. In Old Norse sources, trolls are said to dwell in isolated mountains, rocks, and caves, sometimes live together (usually as father-and-daughter or mother-and-son), and are rarely described as helpful or friendly. The \"Prose Edda\" book \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" describes an encounter between an unnamed troll woman and the 9th-century skald Bragi Boddason. According to the section, Bragi was driving through \"a certain forest\" late one evening when a troll woman aggressively asked him who he was, in the process describing herself:\nBragi responds in turn, describing himself and his abilities as a skillful skald, before the scenario ends.\nThere is much confusion and overlap in the use of Old Norse terms \"j\u00f6tunn\", \"troll\", \"\u00feurs\", and \"risi\", which describe various beings. Lotte Motz theorized that these were originally four distinct classes of beings: lords of nature (\"j\u00f6tunn\"), mythical magicians (\"troll\"), hostile monsters (\"\u00feurs\"), and heroic and courtly beings (\"risi\"), the last class being the youngest addition. On the other hand, \u00c1rmann Jakobson is critical of Motz's interpretation and calls this theory \"unsupported by any convincing evidence\". \u00c1rmann highlights that the term is used to denote various beings, such as a j\u00f6tunn or mountain-dweller, a witch, an abnormally strong or large or ugly person, an evil spirit, a ghost, a \"bl\u00e1ma\u00f0r\", a magical boar, a heathen demi-god, a demon, a brunnmigi, or a berserker.\nScandinavian folklore.\nLater in Scandinavian folklore, trolls become defined as a particular type of being. Numerous tales are recorded about trolls in which they are frequently described as being extremely old, very strong, but slow and dim-witted, and are at times described as man-eaters and as turning to stone upon contact with sunlight. However, trolls are also attested as looking much the same as human beings, without any particularly hideous appearance about them, but living far away from human habitation and generally having \"some form of social organization\"\u2014unlike the \"r\u00e5\" and \"n\u00e4ck\", who are attested as \"solitary beings\". According to John Lindow, what sets them apart is that they are not Christian, and those who encounter them do not know them. Therefore, trolls were in the end dangerous, regardless of how well they might get along with Christian society, and trolls display a habit of \"bergtagning\" ('kidnapping'; literally \"mountain-taking\") and overrunning a farm or estate.\nLindow states that the etymology of the word \"troll\" remains uncertain, though he defines trolls in later Swedish folklore as \"nature beings\" and as \"all-purpose otherworldly being[s], equivalent, for example, to fairies in Anglo-Celtic traditions\". They \"therefore appear in various migratory legends where collective nature-beings are called for\". Lindow notes that trolls are sometimes swapped out for cats and \"little people\" in the folklore record.\nA Scandinavian folk belief that lightning frightens away trolls and j\u00f6tnar appears in numerous Scandinavian folktales, and may be a late reflection of the god Thor's role in fighting such beings. In connection, the lack of trolls and j\u00f6tnar in modern Scandinavia is sometimes explained as a result of the \"accuracy and efficiency of the lightning strokes\". Additionally, the absence of trolls in regions of Scandinavia is described in folklore as being a \"consequence of the constant din of the church-bells\". This ringing caused the trolls to leave for other lands, although not without some resistance; numerous traditions relate how trolls destroyed a church under construction or hurled boulders and stones at completed churches. Large local stones are sometimes described as the product of a troll's toss. Additionally, into the 20th century, the origins of particular Scandinavian landmarks, such as particular stones, are ascribed to trolls who may, for example, have turned to stone upon exposure to sunlight.\nLindow compares the trolls of the Swedish folk tradition to Grendel, the supernatural mead hall invader in the Old English poem \"Beowulf\", and notes that \"just as the poem \"Beowulf\" emphasizes not the harrying of Grendel but the cleansing of the hall of Beowulf, so the modern tales stress the moment when the trolls are driven off.\"\nSmaller trolls are attested as living in burial mounds and in mountains in Scandinavian folk tradition. In Denmark, these creatures are recorded as \"troldfolk\" (\"troll-folk\"), \"bjergtrolde\" (\"mountain-trolls\"), or \"bjergfolk\" (\"mountain-folk\") and in Norway also as \"trollfolk\" (\"troll-folk\") and \"tusser\". Trolls may be described as small, human-like beings or as tall as men depending on the region of origin of the story.\nIn Norwegian tradition, similar tales may be told about the larger trolls and the Huldrefolk (\"hidden-folk\"), yet a distinction is made between the two. The use of the word \"trow\" in Orkney and Shetland, to mean beings which are very like the Huldrefolk in Norway, may suggest a common origin for the terms. The word \"troll\" may have been used by pagan Norse settlers in Orkney and Shetland as a collective term for supernatural beings who should be respected and avoided rather than worshipped. \"Troll\" could later have become specialized as a description of the larger, more menacing J\u00f6tunn-kind whereas \"Huldrefolk\" may have developed as the term for smaller trolls.\nJohn Arnott MacCulloch posited a connection between the Old Norse v\u00e6ttir and trolls, suggesting that both concepts may derive from spirits of the dead.\nTroll, a Norwegian research station in Antarctica, is so named because of the rugged mountains which stand around that place like trolls. It includes a ground station which tracks satellites in polar orbit.\nIn popular culture.\nTrolls have appeared in many works of modern fiction, most often in the fantasy genre, with classic examples being the portrayal of trolls in works such as in Tolkien's Middle-earth or the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" roleplaying game. \nBeginning in the 1950s, Troll dolls were a popular toy based on the folklore creature. Trolls based on the dolls appeared in the Hollywood animated movie \"Trolls\" (2016) and its subsequent sequels \"Trolls World Tour\" (2020), and \"Trolls Band Together\" (2023).\nThere were also different types of trolls in the \"Harry Potter\" franchise.\n\"Troll\" is the name of a 2022 Norwegian movie released by Netflix on December 1, 2022 that details with the awakening of a 105 ft. troll that sports a rocky body and a cat-like tail. A sequel called \"Troll 2\" will be released on December 1, 2025 which will feature two trolls.\nTrolls were heavily featured in the 2010 Norwegian found footage movie Trollhunter, directed by Andr\u00e9 \u00d8vredal.\nRolf Lidberg was a Swedish artist well known for his troll illustrations. \nThe Danish artist Thomas Dambo has created from recycled wood a series of monumental troll sculptures that can be seen in several botanic gardens and similar installations.\nOther.\nIt has been hypothesized that the troll myth might have its origin in real-life interactions between anatomically modern humans and Neanderthals.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29960", "revid": "48574075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29960", "title": "Trade secret", "text": "Business information kept secret to gain or maintain a competitive advantage\nA trade secret is information that a business keeps confidential to maintain a competitive advantage. Well-known examples include the Coca-Cola formula and the recipe for Kentucky Fried Chicken. \nUnlike other forms of intellectual property (\"IP\"), trade secrets do not require formal registration and can remain protected indefinitely, provided the information continues to meet the legal requirements for trade secret status. Instead, non-disclosure agreements (NDAs), among other measures, are commonly used to keep the information secret. \nLike other IP assets, trade secrets may be sold or licensed. Unauthorized acquisition, use, or disclosure of a trade secret by others in a manner contrary to honest commercial practices is considered misappropriation of the trade secret. If trade secret misappropriation happens, the trade secret holder can seek various legal remedies.\nDefinition.\nThe precise definition of a trade secret varies by jurisdiction, as do the types of information eligible for trade secret protection. However, in general, trade secrets are confidential information that is:\nAll three elements are required. If any element ceases to exist, then the trade secret will also cease to exist.\nTrade secret protection covers confidential information, which can include technical and scientific data, business and commercial information, and financial records. Even \"negative\" information, like failed experiments, can be valuable by helping companies avoid repeating costly mistakes.\nIn international law, while \"trade secrets\" and \"confidential information\" are often used interchangeably, trade secrets are technically a subset of confidential information. To qualify as a trade secret, confidential information must meet the specific requirements set by a country's national laws, which are often influenced by Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreement.\nHistory.\nEarly origins.\nCommentators like A. Arthur Schiller have argued that trade secrets were protected under Roman law by a claim known as , meaning an \"action for making a slave worse\" or \"an action for corrupting a servant.\" The Roman law is described as follows:\n[T]he Roman owner of a mark or firm name was legally protected against unfair usage by a competitor through the \"actio servi corrupti\" ... which the Roman jurists used to grant commercial relief under the guise of private law actions. \"If, as the writer believes [writes Schiller], various private cases of action were available in satisfying commercial needs, the state was acting in exactly the same fashion as it does at the present day.\"\nThe suggestion that trade secret law has its roots in Roman law was introduced in 1929 in a \"Columbia Law Review\" article called \"Trade Secrets and the Roman Law: The \"Actio Servi Corrupti\"\", which has been reproduced in Schiller's, \"An American Experience in Roman Law\" 1 (1971).\nHowever, the University of Georgia Law School professor Alan Watson argued in \"Trade Secrets and Roman Law: The Myth Exploded \"that the \"actio servi corrupti\" was not used to protect trade secrets. Rather, he explained:\nSchiller is sadly mistaken as to what was going on. ... The \"actio servi corrupti\" presumably or possibly could be used to protect trade secrets and other similar commercial interests. That was not its purpose and was, at most, an incidental spin-off. But there is not the slightest evidence that the action was ever so used. In this regard the \"actio servi corrupti\" is not unique. Exactly the same can be said of many private law actions including those for theft, damage to property, deposit, and production of property. All of these could, I suppose, be used to protect trade secrets, etc., but there is no evidence they were. It is bizarre to see any degree the Roman \"actio servi corrupti\" as the counterpart of modern law for the protection of trade secrets and other such commercial interests.\nEarly case law.\nModern trade secret law is primarily rooted in Anglo-American common law.(p6) The earliest recorded court case was the 1817 English case \"Newbery v. James,\" which involved a secret formula for gout treatment.(p5) In the United States, this concept was first recognized in the 1837 case \"Vickery v. Welch\", involving the sale of a chocolate factory and the seller\u2019s agreement to keep the secret recipe confidential.\n\"Newbery\" and \"Vickery\" only awarded compensation for losses (damages) and did not issue orders to prevent the misuse of secrets (injunctive relief).(p5) The first English case involving injunctive relief was \"Yovatt v. Winyard\" in 1820, where the court issued an injunction to prevent a former employee from using or disclosing recipes he had secretly copied from his employer's veterinary medicine practice. \nIn the United States, the 1868 Massachusetts Supreme Court decision in \"Peabody v. Norfolk\" is one of the most well-known and well-reasoned early trade secret cases, as it established foundational legal principles that continue to be central to common law. In this case, the court ruled that Peabody\u2019s confidential manufacturing process was a protectable trade secret and issued an injunction preventing former employees from using or disclosing it after they shared it with a competitor.\nUniform lawmaking and legislation.\nIn 1939, the \"Restatement of Torts,\" published by the American Law Institute, offered, among other things, one of the earliest formal definitions of a trade secret. According to Section 757, Comment b, a trade secret may consist of \"any formula, pattern, device, or compilation of information which is used in one's business, and which gives the business an opportunity to obtain an advantage over competitors who do not know or use it.\"(p278) This definition became widely used by courts across the United States.(p278) As the first attempt to outline the accepted principles of trade secret law, the \"Restatement\" served as the primary authority adopted in virtually every reported case.(p282) \nTrade secret law saw further development in 1979 when the Uniform Law Commission (ULC) introduced a model law known as the Uniform Trade Secrets Act (UTSA), which was later amended in 1985. The UTSA defines the types of information eligible for trade secret protection, establishes a private cause of action for misappropriation, and outlines remedies such as injunctions, damages, and, in certain cases, attorneys' fees. It has since been adopted by 48 states, along with the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, with New York and North Carolina as the exceptions. \nThe UTSA influenced the Defend Trade Secrets Act (DTSA) of 2016, which created a federal civil cause of action for trade secret misappropriation, allowing plaintiffs to file cases directly in federal courts if \"the trade secret is related to a product or service used in ... interstate or foreign commerce.\"\nInternational standards.\nTrade secret law is governed by national legal systems. However, international standards for protecting secrets (called \u201cundisclosed information\u201d) were established as part of the TRIPS Agreement in 1995. Article 39 of TRIPS obligates member countries to protect \u201cundisclosed information\u201d from unauthorized use conducted \u201cin a manner contrary to honest commercial practices,\u201d including actions such as breach of contract, breach of confidence, and unfair competition. For the information to qualify, it must not be generally known or easily accessible, must hold value due to its secrecy, and must be safeguarded through \u201creasonable steps\u201d to keep it secret. \nValue.\nTrade secrets are an important, but invisible component of a company's intellectual property (IP). Their contribution to a company's value can be major. Being invisible, that contribution is hard to measure. Still, research shows that changes in trade secrets laws affect business spending on R&amp;D and patents. This research provides indirect evidence of the value of trade secrecy.\nProtection.\nUnlike other forms of intellectual property, trade secrets do not require formal registration and can be protected indefinitely, as long as they remain secret. Maintaining secrecy is both a practical necessity and a legal obligation, as trade secret owners must take \"reasonable\" measures to protect the confidentiality of their trade secrets to qualify for legal protection.(p4) \"Reasonable\" efforts are decided case by case, considering factors like the type and value of the secret, its importance to the business, the company\u2019s size, and its organizational complexity.(p4)\nThe most common reason for trade secret disputes to arise is when former employees of trade secret-bearing companies leave to work for a competitor and are suspected of taking or using valuable confidential information belonging to their former employer. Legal protections include non-disclosure agreements (NDAs), and work-for-hire and non-compete clauses. In other words, in exchange for an opportunity to be employed by the holder of secrets, an employee may agree to not reveal their prospective employer's proprietary information, to surrender or assign to their employer ownership rights to intellectual work and work-products produced during the course (or as a condition) of employment, and to not work for a competitor for a given period of time (sometimes within a given geographic region). \nViolating the agreement generally carries the possibility of heavy financial penalties, thus disincentivizing the revealing of trade secrets. Trade secret information can be protected through legal action including an injunction preventing breaches of confidentiality, monetary damages, and, in some instances, punitive damages and attorneys\u2019 fees too. In extraordinary circumstances, an \"ex parte seizure\" under the Defend Trade Secrets Act (DTSA) also allows for the court to seize property to prevent the propagation or dissemination of the trade secret. \nHowever, proving a breach of an NDA by a former stakeholder who is legally working for a competitor or prevailing in a lawsuit for breaching a non-compete clause can be very difficult. A holder of a trade secret may also require similar agreements from other parties, such as vendors, licensees, and board members.\nAs a company can protect its confidential information through NDA, work-for-hire, and non-compete contracts with its stakeholders (within the constraints of employment law, including only restraint that is reasonable in geographic- and time-scope), these protective contractual measures effectively create a monopoly on secret information that does not expire as would a patent or copyright. The lack of formal protection associated with registered intellectual property rights, however, means that a third party not bound by a signed agreement is not prevented from independently duplicating and using the secret information once it is discovered, such as through reverse engineering.\nTherefore, trade secrets such as secret formulas are often protected by restricting the key information to a few trusted individuals. Famous examples of products protected by trade secrets are Chartreuse liqueur and Coca-Cola.\nBecause protection of trade secrets can, in principle, extend indefinitely, it may provide an advantage over patent protection and other registered intellectual property rights, which last for a limited duration. For example, the Coca-Cola company has no patent for the formula of Coca-Cola and has been effective in protecting it for many more years than the 20 years of protection that a patent would have provided. In fact, Coca-Cola refused to reveal its trade secret under at least two judges' orders.\nTrade secret legal protection can reduce the knowledge spillover, which enhances the knowledge spread and technology improvement. Therefore, while trade secret laws strengthen R&amp;D exclusivity and encourage firms to engage in innovative activities, broadly reducing knowledge spillovers can harm economic growth.\nMisappropriation.\nIn general, trade secret \"misappropriation\" occurs when someone improperly acquires, discloses, or uses a trade secret without the trade secret holder's consent. Common scenarios include former employees taking proprietary data to a new employer in violation of non-disclosure agreements (NDAs), espionage, or unauthorized disclosure.\nTo prove misappropriation, the trade secret holder must generally show (subject to the specific requirements of the applicable jurisdiction) that:\nExceptions and limitations.\nWhile the improper, dishonest, or unlawful acquisition, use, or disclosure of trade secret information by unauthorized third parties is generally prohibited, there are exceptions to this rule. The scope of these exceptions and limitations varies across jurisdictions:\nBy nation.\nCommonwealth nations.\nIn Commonwealth common law jurisdictions, confidentiality and trade secrets are regarded as an equitable right rather than a property right.\nThe Court of Appeal of England and Wales in the case of \"Saltman Engineering Co Ltd v. Campbell Engineering Ltd\" held that the action for breach of confidence is based on a principle of preserving \"good faith\".\nThe test for a cause of action for breach of confidence in the common law world is set out in the case of \"Coco v. A.N. Clark (Engineers) Ltd\":\nThe \"quality of confidence\" highlights that trade secrets are a legal concept. With sufficient effort or through illegal acts (such as breaking and entering), competitors can usually obtain trade secrets. However, so long as the owner of the trade secret can prove that reasonable efforts have been made to keep the information confidential, the information remains a trade secret and generally remains legally protected. Conversely, trade secret owners who cannot evidence reasonable efforts at protecting confidential information risk losing the trade secret, even if the information is obtained by competitors illegally. It is for this reason that trade secret owners shred documents and do not simply recycle them.\nA successful plaintiff is entitled to various forms of judicial relief, including:\nHong Kong does not follow the traditional commonwealth approach, instead recognizing trade secrets where a judgment of the High Court indicates that confidential information may be a property right.\nEuropean Union.\nThe EU adopted a Directive on the Protection of Trade Secrets on 27 May 2016. The goal of the directive is to harmonize the definition of trade secrets in accordance with existing international standards, and the means of obtaining protection of trade secrets within the EU.\nUnlike other protections, like in the US, the trade secrets in the EU are not absolutely seen as an IP right, as it gives the holder no exclusive rights. It is more a protection against the unfair use or publication of the secret information.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, trade secrets generally encompass a company's proprietary information that is not generally known to its competitors, and which provides the company with a competitive advantage.\nAlthough trade secrets law evolved under state common law, prior to 1974, the question of whether patent law preempted state trade secrets law had been unanswered. In 1974, the United States Supreme Court issued the landmark decision, \"Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp.,\" which resolved the question in favor of allowing the states to freely develop their own trade secret laws.\nIn 1979, several U.S. states adopted the Uniform Trade Secrets Act (UTSA), which was further amended in 1985, with approximately 47 states having adopted some variation of it as the basis for trade secret law. Another significant development is the Economic Espionage Act (EEA) of 1996 (\u00a0https://\u2013https://), which makes the theft or misappropriation of a trade secret a federal crime.\nThis law contains two provisions criminalizing two sorts of activity:\nThe statutory penalties are different for the two offenses. The EEA was extended in 2016 to allow companies to file civil suits in federal court.\nOn May 11, 2016, President Obama signed the Defend Trade Secrets Act (DTSA), 18 U.S.C. \u00a7\u00a7 1839 et seq., which for the first time created a federal cause of action for misappropriating trade secrets. The DTSA provides for both a private right of action for damages and injunction and a civil action for injunction brought by the Attorney General.\nThe statute followed state laws on liability in significant part, defining trade secrets in the same way as the Uniform Trade Secrets Act as,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"all forms and types of financial, business, scientific, technical, economic, or engineering information, including patterns, plans, compilations, program devices, formulas, designs, prototypes, methods, techniques, processes, procedures, programs, or codes, whether tangible or intangible, and whether or how stored, compiled, or memorialized physically, electronically, graphically, photographically, or in writing if (A) the owner thereof has taken reasonable measures to keep such information secret; and (B) the information derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable through proper means by, another person who can obtain economic value from the disclosure or use of the information.\"\nHowever, the law contains several important differences from prior law:\nThe DTSA also clarifies that a United States resident (including a company) can be liable for misappropriation that takes place outside the United States, and any person can be liable as long as an act in furtherance of the misappropriation takes place in the United States, 18 U.S.C. \u00a71837. The DTSA provides the courts with broad injunctive powers. 18 U.S.C. \u00a71836(b)(3).\nThe DTSA does not preempt or supplant state laws, but provides an additional cause of action. Because states vary significantly in their approach to the \"inevitable disclosure\" doctrine, its use has limited, if any, application under the DTSA, 18 U.S.C.\u00a71836(b)(3)(A).\nComparison to other intellectual property laws.\nIn the United States, trade secrets are not protected by law in the same way as patents or trademarks. While the U.S. Constitution explicitly authorizes the existence of and the federal jurisdiction over patents and copyrights, it is silent on trade secrets, trademarks, etc. For this reason, Federal Law for the latter types of intellectual property is based on the Commerce Clause (rather than the Copyright Clause) under a theory, that these IP types are used for interstate commerce. On other hand, the application of the Interstate Commerce Theory did not find much judicial support in regulating trade secrets: since a trade secret process is used in a State, where it is protected by state law, federal protection may be needed only when industrial espionage by a foreign entity is involved (given that the States themselves cannot regulate commerce with foreign powers).\nDue to these Constitutional requirements, trademarks and patents enjoy a strong federal protection in the USA (the Lanham Act and Patent Act, respectively), while trade secrets usually have to rely on more limited state laws. Most states have adopted the Uniform Trade Secrets Act (UTSA), except for Massachusetts, New York, and North Carolina. However, since 2016 with the enactment of the Defend Trade Secrets Act (DTSA), some additional trade secrets protection has become also available under federal law. One of the differences between patents and trademarks, on the one hand, and trade secrets, on the other, is that a trade secret is protected only when the owner has taken reasonable measures to protect the information as a secret (see \u00a0https://(3)(A)).\nNations have different trademark policies. Assuming the mark in question meets certain other standards of protectibility, trademarks are generally protected from infringement on the grounds that other uses might confuse consumers as to the origin or nature of the goods once the mark has been associated with a particular supplier. Similar considerations apply to service marks and trade dress. By definition, a trademark enjoys no protection (\"qua\" trademark) until and unless it is \"disclosed\" to consumers, for only then are consumers able to associate it with a supplier or source in the requisite manner. (That a company plans to use a certain trademark might itself be protectable as a trade secret, however, until the mark is actually made public.) To acquire a trademark rights under U.S. law, one must simply use the mark \"in commerce\". It is possible to register a trademark in the United States, both at the federal and state levels. Registration of trademarks confers some advantages, including stronger protection in certain respects, but registration is not required in order to get protection. Registration may be required in order to file a lawsuit for trademark infringement.\nTo acquire a patent, enabling information about the method or product has to be supplied to a patent office and upon publication (usually, years before issuance of a patent), it becomes available to all. After expiration of the patent, competitors can copy the method or product legally. The most important advantage of patents (compared to trade secrets) is that patents assure the monopoly of their owners, even when the patented subject matter is independently invented by others later (there are some exceptions), as well as when the patented subject matter was invented by others prior to the patent's priority date, kept as a trade secret, and used by the other in its business. Although it is legally possible to \"convert\" a trade secret into a patent, the claims in such patent would be limited to things, that are easily discernable from examining such things. This means, that compositions of matter and articles of manufacture can not be patented after they become available to public, while processes can. \nThe temporary monopoly on the patented invention is regarded as a pay-off for disclosing the information to the public. In order to obtain a patent, the inventor must disclose the invention, so that others will be able to both make and use the invention. Often, an invention will be improved after filing of the patent application, and additional information will be learned. None of that additional information must be disclosed through the patent application process, and it may thus be kept as a trade secret. That nondisclosed information will often increase the commercial viability of the patent. Most patent licenses include clauses that require the inventor to disclose any trade secrets they have, and patent licensors must be careful to maintain their trade secrets while licensing a patent through such means as the use of a non-disclosure agreement. Compared to patents, the advantages of trade secrets are that a trade secret is not time limited (it \"continues indefinitely as long as the secret is not revealed to the public\", whereas a patent is only in force for a specified time, after which others may freely copy the invention), a trade secret does not imply any registration costs, has an immediate effect, does not require compliance with any formalities, and does not imply any disclosure of the invention to the public. The disadvantages of trade secrets include that \"others may be able to legally discover the secret and be thereafter entitled to use it\", \"others may obtain patent protection for legally discovered secrets\", and a trade secret is more difficult to enforce than a patent.\nPublic safety.\nUnited States.\nThe Freedom of Information Act of 1966 (FOIA), which requires federal agencies to provide documents to the public on request, includes a discretionary exemption for trade secrets. Thus, trade secret regulations can mask the composition of chemical agents in consumer products, which has long been criticized for allowing the trade secret holders to hide the presence of potentially harmful and toxic substances. It has been argued that the public is being denied a clear picture of such products' safety, whereas competitors are well positioned to analyze its chemical composition. In 2004, the National Environmental Trust tested 40 common consumer products; in more than half of them they found toxic substances not listed on the product label.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29963", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29963", "title": "Tensors", "text": ""}
{"id": "29964", "revid": "936878476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29964", "title": "Trilobites", "text": ""}
{"id": "29965", "revid": "346060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29965", "title": "Tensor", "text": "Algebraic object with geometric applications\nIn mathematics, a tensor is an algebraic object that describes a multilinear relationship between sets of algebraic objects associated with a vector space. Tensors may map between different objects such as vectors, scalars, and even other tensors. There are many types of tensors, including scalars and vectors (which are the simplest tensors), dual vectors, multilinear maps between vector spaces, and even some operations such as the dot product. Tensors are defined independent of any basis, although they are often referred to by their components in a basis related to a particular coordinate system; those components form an array, which can be thought of as a high-dimensional matrix.\nTensors have become important in physics, because they provide a concise mathematical framework for formulating and solving physics problems in areas such as mechanics (stress, elasticity, quantum mechanics, fluid mechanics, moment of inertia, etc.), electrodynamics (electromagnetic tensor, Maxwell tensor, permittivity, magnetic susceptibility, etc.), and general relativity (stress\u2013energy tensor, curvature tensor, etc.). In applications, it is common to study situations in which a different tensor can occur at each point of an object. For example, the stress within an object may vary from one location to another. A family of tensors, that vary across space in this way, is a tensor field. In some areas, tensor fields are so ubiquitous that they are often simply called \"tensors\".\nTullio Levi-Civita and Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro popularised tensors in 1900 \u2013 continuing the earlier work of Bernhard Riemann, Elwin Bruno Christoffel, and others \u2013 as part of the \"absolute differential calculus\". The concept enabled an alternative formulation of the intrinsic differential geometry of a manifold in the form of the Riemann curvature tensor.\nDefinition.\nAs multidimensional arrays.\nAlthough seemingly different, the various approaches to defining tensors describe the same geometric concept using different language and at different levels of abstraction.\nA tensor may be represented as a (potentially multidimensional) array. Just as a vector in an n-dimensional space is represented by a one-dimensional array with n components with respect to a given basis, any tensor with respect to a basis is represented by a multidimensional array. For example, a linear operator is represented in a basis as a two-dimensional square \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" array. The numbers in the multidimensional array are known as the \"components\" of the tensor. They are denoted by indices giving their position in the array, as subscripts and superscripts, following the symbolic name of the tensor. For example, the components of an order-2 tensor T could be denoted \"T\"\"ij\"\u202f, where i and j are indices running from 1 to n, or also by \"T\"\u2009. Whether an index is displayed as a superscript or subscript depends on the transformation properties of the tensor, described below. Thus while \"T\"\"ij\" and \"T\"\u2009 can both be expressed as \"n\"-by-\"n\" matrices, and are numerically related via index juggling, the difference in their transformation laws indicates it would be improper to add them together.\nThe total number of indices (m) required to identify each component uniquely is equal to the \"dimension\" or the number of \"ways\" of an array, which is why a tensor is sometimes referred to as an m-dimensional array or an m-way array. The total number of indices is also called the \"order\", \"degree\" or \"rank\" of a tensor, although the term \"rank\" generally has another meaning in the context of matrices and tensors.\nJust as the components of a vector change when we change the basis of the vector space, the components of a tensor also change under such a transformation. Each type of tensor comes equipped with a \"transformation law\" that details how the components of the tensor respond to a change of basis. The components of a vector can respond in two distinct ways to a change of basis (see \"Covariance and contravariance of vectors\"), where the new basis vectors formula_1 are expressed in terms of the old basis vectors formula_2 as,\nformula_3\nHere \"R\"\" j\"\"i\" are the entries of the change of basis matrix, and in the rightmost expression the summation sign was suppressed: this is the Einstein summation convention, which will be used throughout this article. The components \"v\"\"i\" of a column vector v transform with the inverse of the matrix \"R\",\nformula_4\nwhere the hat denotes the components in the new basis. This is called a \"contravariant\" transformation law, because the vector components transform by the \"inverse\" of the change of basis. In contrast, the components, \"w\"\"i\", of a covector (or row vector), w, transform with the matrix \"R\" itself,\nformula_5\nThis is called a \"covariant\" transformation law, because the covector components transform by the \"same matrix\" as the change of basis matrix. The components of a more general tensor are transformed by some combination of covariant and contravariant transformations, with one transformation law for each index. If the transformation matrix of an index is the inverse matrix of the basis transformation, then the index is called \"contravariant\" and is conventionally denoted with an upper index (superscript). If the transformation matrix of an index is the basis transformation itself, then the index is called \"covariant\" and is denoted with a lower index (subscript).\nAs a simple example, the matrix of a linear operator with respect to a basis is a rectangular array formula_6 that transforms under a change of basis matrix formula_7 by formula_8. For the individual matrix entries, this transformation law has the form formula_9 so the tensor corresponding to the matrix of a linear operator has one covariant and one contravariant index: it is of type (1,1).\nCombinations of covariant and contravariant components with the same index allow us to express geometric invariants. For example, the fact that a vector is the same object in different coordinate systems can be captured by the following equations, using the formulas defined above:\nformula_10,\nwhere formula_11 is the Kronecker delta, which functions similarly to the identity matrix, and has the effect of renaming indices (\"j\" into \"k\" in this example). This shows several features of the component notation: the ability to re-arrange terms at will (commutativity), the need to use different indices when working with multiple objects in the same expression, the ability to rename indices, and the manner in which contravariant and covariant tensors combine so that all instances of the transformation matrix and its inverse cancel, so that expressions like formula_12 can immediately be seen to be geometrically identical in all coordinate systems.\nSimilarly, a linear operator, viewed as a geometric object, does not actually depend on a basis: it is just a linear map that accepts a vector as an argument and produces another vector. The transformation law for how the matrix of components of a linear operator changes with the basis is consistent with the transformation law for a contravariant vector, so that the action of a linear operator on a contravariant vector is represented in coordinates as the matrix product of their respective coordinate representations. That is, the components formula_13 are given by formula_14. These components transform contravariantly, since\nformula_15\nThe transformation law for an order \"p\" + \"q\" tensor with \"p\" contravariant indices and \"q\" covariant indices is thus given as,\nformula_16 formula_17 formula_18\nHere the primed indices denote components in the new coordinates, and the unprimed indices denote the components in the old coordinates. Such a tensor is said to be of order or \"type\" (\"p\", \"q\"). The terms \"order\", \"type\", \"rank\", \"valence\", and \"degree\" are all sometimes used for the same concept. Here, the term \"order\" or \"total order\" will be used for the total dimension of the array (or its generalization in other definitions), \"p\" + \"q\" in the preceding example, and the term \"type\" for the pair giving the number of contravariant and covariant indices. A tensor of type (\"p\", \"q\") is also called a (\"p\", \"q\")-tensor for short.\nThis discussion motivates the following formal definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Definition. A tensor of type (\"p\", \"q\") is an assignment of a multidimensional array\nformula_19\nto each basis f \n (e1, ..., e\"n\") of an \"n\"-dimensional vector space such that, if we apply the change of basis\nformula_20\nthen the multidimensional array obeys the transformation law\nformula_21 formula_22 formula_23\nThe definition of a tensor as a multidimensional array satisfying a transformation law traces back to the work of Ricci.\nAn equivalent definition of a tensor uses the representations of the general linear group. There is an action of the general linear group on the set of all ordered bases of an \"n\"-dimensional vector space. If formula_24 is an ordered basis, and formula_25 is an invertible formula_26 matrix, then the action is given by\nformula_27\nLet \"F\" be the set of all ordered bases. Then \"F\" is a principal homogeneous space for GL(\"n\"). Let \"W\" be a vector space and let formula_28 be a representation of GL(\"n\") on \"W\" (that is, a group homomorphism formula_29). Then a tensor of type formula_28 is an equivariant map formula_31. Equivariance here means that\nformula_32\nWhen formula_28 is a tensor representation of the general linear group, this gives the usual definition of tensors as multidimensional arrays. This definition is often used to describe tensors on manifolds, and readily generalizes to other groups.\nAs multilinear maps.\nA downside to the definition of a tensor using the multidimensional array approach is that it is not apparent from the definition that the defined object is indeed basis independent, as is expected from an intrinsically geometric object. Although it is possible to show that transformation laws indeed ensure independence from the basis, sometimes a more intrinsic definition is preferred. One approach that is common in differential geometry is to define tensors relative to a fixed (finite-dimensional) vector space \"V\", which is usually taken to be a particular vector space of some geometrical significance like the tangent space to a manifold. In this approach, a type (\"p\", \"q\") tensor \"T\" is defined as a multilinear map,\nformula_34\nwhere \"V\"\u2217 is the corresponding dual space of covectors, which is linear in each of its arguments. The above assumes \"V\" is a vector space over the real numbers, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. More generally, \"V\" can be taken over any field \"F\" (e.g. the complex numbers), with \"F\" replacing &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as the codomain of the multilinear maps.\nBy applying a multilinear map \"T\" of type (\"p\", \"q\") to a basis {e\"j\"} for \"V\" and a canonical cobasis {\u03b5\"i\"} for \"V\"\u2217,\nformula_35\na (\"p\" + \"q\")-dimensional array of components can be obtained. A different choice of basis will yield different components. But, because \"T\" is linear in all of its arguments, the components satisfy the tensor transformation law used in the multilinear array definition. The multidimensional array of components of \"T\" thus form a tensor according to that definition. Moreover, such an array can be realized as the components of some multilinear map \"T\". This motivates viewing multilinear maps as the intrinsic objects underlying tensors.\nIn viewing a tensor as a multilinear map, it is conventional to identify the double dual \"V\"\u2217\u2217 of the vector space \"V\", i.e., the space of linear functionals on the dual vector space \"V\"\u2217, with the vector space \"V\". There is always a natural linear map from \"V\" to its double dual, given by evaluating a linear form in \"V\"\u2217 against a vector in \"V\". This linear mapping is an isomorphism in finite dimensions, and it is often then expedient to identify \"V\" with its double dual.\nUsing tensor products.\nFor some mathematical applications, a more abstract approach is sometimes useful. This can be achieved by defining tensors in terms of elements of tensor products of vector spaces, which in turn are defined through a universal property as explained here and here.\nA type (\"p\", \"q\") tensor is defined in this context as an element of the tensor product of vector spaces,\nformula_36\nA basis \"v\"\"i\" of \"V\" and basis \"w\"\"j\" of \"W\" naturally induce a basis \"v\"\"i\" \u2297 \"w\"\"j\" of the tensor product \"V\" \u2297 \"W\". The components of a tensor \"T\" are the coefficients of the tensor with respect to the basis obtained from a basis {e\"i\"} for \"V\" and its dual basis {\u03b5\"j\"}, i.e.\nformula_37\nUsing the properties of the tensor product, it can be shown that these components satisfy the transformation law for a type (\"p\", \"q\") tensor. Moreover, the universal property of the tensor product gives a one-to-one correspondence between tensors defined in this way and tensors defined as multilinear maps.\nThis 1 to 1 correspondence can be achieved in the following way, because in the finite-dimensional case there exists a canonical isomorphism between a vector space and its double dual:\nformula_38\nThe last line is using the universal property of the tensor product, that there is a 1 to 1 correspondence between maps from formula_39 and formula_40.\nTensor products can be defined in great generality\u00a0\u2013 for example, involving arbitrary modules over a ring. In principle, one could define a \"tensor\" simply to be an element of any tensor product. However, the mathematics literature usually reserves the term \"tensor\" for an element of a tensor product of any number of copies of a single vector space \"V\" and its dual, as above.\nTensors in infinite dimensions.\nThis discussion of tensors so far assumes finite dimensionality of the spaces involved, where the spaces of tensors obtained by each of these constructions are naturally isomorphic. Constructions of spaces of tensors based on the tensor product and multilinear mappings can be generalized, essentially without modification, to vector bundles or coherent sheaves. For infinite-dimensional vector spaces, inequivalent topologies lead to inequivalent notions of tensor, and these various isomorphisms may or may not hold depending on what exactly is meant by a tensor (see topological tensor product). In some applications, it is the tensor product of Hilbert spaces that is intended, whose properties are the most similar to the finite-dimensional case. A more modern view is that it is the tensors' structure as a symmetric monoidal category that encodes their most important properties, rather than the specific models of those categories.\nTensor fields.\nIn many applications, especially in differential geometry and physics, it is natural to consider a tensor with components that are functions of the point in a space. This was the setting of Ricci's original work. In modern mathematical terminology such an object is called a tensor field, often referred to simply as a tensor.\nIn this context, a coordinate basis is often chosen for the tangent vector space. The transformation law may then be expressed in terms of partial derivatives of the coordinate functions,\nformula_41\ndefining a coordinate transformation,\nformula_42\nHistory.\nThe concepts of later tensor analysis arose from the work of Carl Friedrich Gauss in differential geometry, and the formulation was much influenced by the theory of algebraic forms and invariants developed during the middle of the nineteenth century. The word \"tensor\" itself was introduced in 1846 by William Rowan Hamilton to describe something different from what is now meant by a tensor. Gibbs introduced dyadics and polyadic algebra, which are also tensors in the modern sense. The contemporary usage was introduced by Woldemar Voigt in 1898.\nTensor calculus was developed around 1890 by Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro under the title \"absolute differential calculus\", and originally presented in 1892. It was made accessible to many mathematicians by the publication of Ricci-Curbastro and Tullio Levi-Civita's 1900 classic text \"M\u00e9thodes de calcul diff\u00e9rentiel absolu et leurs applications\" (Methods of absolute differential calculus and their applications). In Ricci's notation, he refers to \"systems\" with covariant and contravariant components, which are known as tensor fields in the modern sense.\nIn the 20th century, the subject came to be known as \"tensor analysis\", and achieved broader acceptance with the introduction of Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity, around 1915. General relativity is formulated completely in the language of tensors. Einstein had learned about them, with great difficulty, from the geometer Marcel Grossmann. Levi-Civita then initiated a correspondence with Einstein to correct mistakes Einstein had made in his use of tensor analysis. The correspondence lasted 1915\u201317, and was characterized by mutual respect:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I admire the elegance of your method of computation; it must be nice to ride through these fields upon the horse of true mathematics while the like of us have to make our way laboriously on foot.\nTensors and tensor fields were also found to be useful in other fields such as continuum mechanics. Some well-known examples of tensors in differential geometry are quadratic forms such as metric tensors, and the Riemann curvature tensor. The exterior algebra of Hermann Grassmann, from the middle of the nineteenth century, is itself a tensor theory, and highly geometric, but it was some time before it was seen, with the theory of differential forms, as naturally unified with tensor calculus. The work of \u00c9lie Cartan made differential forms one of the basic kinds of tensors used in mathematics, and Hassler Whitney popularized the tensor product.\nFrom about the 1920s onwards, it was realised that tensors play a basic role in algebraic topology (for example in the K\u00fcnneth theorem). Correspondingly there are types of tensors at work in many branches of abstract algebra, particularly in homological algebra and representation theory. Multilinear algebra can be developed in greater generality than for scalars coming from a field. For example, scalars can come from a ring. But the theory is then less geometric and computations more technical and less algorithmic. Tensors are generalized within category theory by means of the concept of monoidal category, from the 1960s.\nExamples.\nAn elementary example of a mapping describable as a tensor is the dot product, which maps two vectors to a scalar. A more complex example is the Cauchy stress tensor T, which takes a directional unit vector v as input and maps it to the stress vector T(v), which is the force (per unit area) exerted by material on the negative side of the plane orthogonal to v against the material on the positive side of the plane, thus expressing a relationship between these two vectors, shown in the figure (right). The cross product, where two vectors are mapped to a third one, is strictly speaking not a tensor because it changes its sign under those transformations that change the orientation of the coordinate system. The totally anti-symmetric symbol formula_43 nevertheless allows a convenient handling of the cross product in equally oriented three dimensional coordinate systems.\nThis table shows important examples of tensors on vector spaces and tensor fields on manifolds. The tensors are classified according to their type (\"n\", \"m\"), where \"n\" is the number of contravariant indices, \"m\" is the number of covariant indices, and \"n\" + \"m\" gives the total order of the tensor. For example, a bilinear form is the same thing as a (0, 2)-tensor; an inner product is an example of a (0, 2)-tensor, but not all (0, 2)-tensors are inner products. In the (0, \"M\")-entry of the table, \"M\" denotes the dimensionality of the underlying vector space or manifold because for each dimension of the space, a separate index is needed to select that dimension to get a maximally covariant antisymmetric tensor.\nRaising an index on an (\"n\", \"m\")-tensor produces an (\"n\" + 1, \"m\" \u2212 1)-tensor; this corresponds to moving diagonally down and to the left on the table. Symmetrically, lowering an index corresponds to moving diagonally up and to the right on the table. Contraction of an upper with a lower index of an (\"n\", \"m\")-tensor produces an (\"n\" \u2212 1, \"m\" \u2212 1)-tensor; this corresponds to moving diagonally up and to the left on the table.\nProperties.\nAssuming a basis of a real vector space, e.g., a coordinate frame in the ambient space, a tensor can be represented as an organized multidimensional array of numerical values with respect to this specific basis. Changing the basis transforms the values in the array in a characteristic way that allows to \"define\" tensors as objects adhering to this transformational behavior. For example, there are invariants of tensors that must be preserved under any change of the basis, thereby making only certain multidimensional arrays of numbers a tensor. Compare this to the array representing formula_44 not being a tensor, for the sign change under transformations changing the orientation.\nBecause the components of vectors and their duals transform differently under the change of their dual bases, there is a covariant and/or contravariant transformation law that relates the arrays, which represent the tensor with respect to one basis and that with respect to the other one. The numbers of, respectively, (contravariant indices) and dual (covariant indices) in the input and output of a tensor determine the \"type\" (or \"valence\") of the tensor, a pair of natural numbers , which determine the precise form of the transformation law. The \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;order\" of a tensor is the sum of these two numbers.\nThe order (also \"degree\" or \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;rank\") of a tensor is thus the sum of the orders of its arguments plus the order of the resulting tensor. This is also the dimensionality of the array of numbers needed to represent the tensor with respect to a specific basis, or equivalently, the number of indices needed to label each component in that array. For example, in a fixed basis, a standard linear map that maps a vector to a vector, is represented by a matrix (a 2-dimensional array), and therefore is a 2nd-order tensor. A simple vector can be represented as a 1-dimensional array, and is therefore a 1st-order tensor. Scalars are simple numbers and are thus 0th-order tensors. This way the tensor representing the scalar product, taking two vectors and resulting in a scalar has order 2 + 0 \n 2, the same as the stress tensor, taking one vector and returning another 1 + 1 \n 2. The formula_44-symbol, mapping two vectors to one vector, would have order 2 + 1 \n 3.\nThe collection of tensors on a vector space and its dual forms a tensor algebra, which allows products of arbitrary tensors. Simple applications of tensors of order 2, which can be represented as a square matrix, can be solved by clever arrangement of transposed vectors and by applying the rules of matrix multiplication, but the tensor product should not be confused with this.\nNotation.\nThere are several notational systems that are used to describe tensors and perform calculations involving them.\nRicci calculus.\nRicci calculus is the modern formalism and notation for tensor indices: indicating inner and outer products, covariance and contravariance, summations of tensor components, symmetry and antisymmetry, and partial and covariant derivatives.\nEinstein summation convention.\nThe Einstein summation convention dispenses with writing summation signs, leaving the summation implicit. Any repeated index symbol is summed over: if the index i is used twice in a given term of a tensor expression, it means that the term is to be summed for all i. Several distinct pairs of indices may be summed this way.\nPenrose graphical notation.\nPenrose graphical notation is a diagrammatic notation which replaces the symbols for tensors with shapes, and their indices by lines and curves. It is independent of basis elements, and requires no symbols for the indices.\nAbstract index notation.\nThe abstract index notation is a way to write tensors such that the indices are no longer thought of as numerical, but rather are indeterminates. This notation captures the expressiveness of indices and the basis-independence of index-free notation.\nComponent-free notation.\nA component-free treatment of tensors uses notation that emphasises that tensors do not rely on any basis, and is defined in terms of the tensor product of vector spaces.\nOperations.\nThere are several operations on tensors that again produce a tensor. The linear nature of tensors implies that two tensors of the same type may be added together, and that tensors may be multiplied by a scalar with results analogous to the scaling of a vector. On components, these operations are simply performed component-wise. These operations do not change the type of the tensor; but there are also operations that produce a tensor of different type.\nTensor product.\nThe tensor product takes two tensors, \"S\" and \"T\", and produces a new tensor, , whose order is the sum of the orders of the original tensors. When described as multilinear maps, the tensor product simply multiplies the two tensors, i.e.,\nformula_46\nwhich again produces a map that is linear in all its arguments. On components, the effect is to multiply the components of the two input tensors pairwise, i.e.,\nformula_47\nIf S is of type (\"l\", \"k\") and T is of type (\"n\", \"m\"), then the tensor product has type .\nContraction.\nTensor contraction is an operation that reduces a type (\"n\", \"m\") tensor to a type (\"n\" \u2212 1, \"m\" \u2212 1) tensor, of which the trace is a special case. It thereby reduces the total order of a tensor by two. The operation is achieved by summing components for which one specified contravariant index is the same as one specified covariant index to produce a new component. Components for which those two indices are different are discarded. For example, a (1, 1)-tensor formula_48 can be contracted to a scalar through formula_49, where the summation is again implied. When the (1, 1)-tensor is interpreted as a linear map, this operation is known as the trace.\nThe contraction is often used in conjunction with the tensor product to contract an index from each tensor.\nThe contraction can also be understood using the definition of a tensor as an element of a tensor product of copies of the space \"V\" with the space \"V\"\u2217 by first decomposing the tensor into a linear combination of simple tensors, and then applying a factor from \"V\"\u2217 to a factor from \"V\". For example, a tensor formula_50 can be written as a linear combination\nformula_51\nThe contraction of \"T\" on the first and last slots is then the vector\nformula_52\nIn a vector space with an inner product (also known as a metric) \"g\", the term contraction is used for removing two contravariant or two covariant indices by forming a trace with the metric tensor or its inverse. For example, a (2, 0)-tensor formula_53 can be contracted to a scalar through formula_54 (yet again assuming the summation convention).\nRaising or lowering an index.\nWhen a vector space is equipped with a nondegenerate bilinear form (or \"metric tensor\" as it is often called in this context), operations can be defined that convert a contravariant (upper) index into a covariant (lower) index and vice versa. A metric tensor is a (symmetric) (0, 2)-tensor; it is thus possible to contract an upper index of a tensor with one of the lower indices of the metric tensor in the product. This produces a new tensor with the same index structure as the previous tensor, but with lower index generally shown in the same position of the contracted upper index. This operation is quite graphically known as \"lowering an index\".\nConversely, the inverse operation can be defined, and is called \"raising an index\". This is equivalent to a similar contraction on the product with a (2, 0)-tensor. This \"inverse metric tensor\" has components that are the matrix inverse of those of the metric tensor.\nApplications.\nContinuum mechanics.\nImportant examples are provided by continuum mechanics. The stresses inside a solid body or fluid are described by a tensor field. The stress tensor and strain tensor are both second-order tensor fields, and are related in a general linear elastic material by a fourth-order elasticity tensor field. In detail, the tensor quantifying stress in a 3-dimensional solid object has components that can be conveniently represented as a 3\u2009\u00d7\u20093 array. The three faces of a cube-shaped infinitesimal volume segment of the solid are each subject to some given force. The force's vector components are also three in number. Thus, 3\u2009\u00d7\u20093, or 9 components are required to describe the stress at this cube-shaped infinitesimal segment. Within the bounds of this solid is a whole mass of varying stress quantities, each requiring 9 quantities to describe. Thus, a second-order tensor is needed.\nIf a particular surface element inside the material is singled out, the material on one side of the surface will apply a force on the other side. In general, this force will not be orthogonal to the surface, but it will depend on the orientation of the surface in a linear manner. This is described by a tensor of type (2, 0), in linear elasticity, or more precisely by a tensor field of type (2, 0), since the stresses may vary from point to point.\nOther examples from physics.\nCommon applications include:\nComputer vision and optics.\nThe concept of a tensor of order two is often conflated with that of a matrix. Tensors of higher order do however capture ideas important in science and engineering, as has been shown successively in numerous areas as they develop. This happens, for instance, in the field of computer vision, with the trifocal tensor generalizing the fundamental matrix.\nThe field of nonlinear optics studies the changes to material polarization density under extreme electric fields. The polarization waves generated are related to the generating electric fields through the nonlinear susceptibility tensor. If the polarization P is not linearly proportional to the electric field E, the medium is termed \"nonlinear\". To a good approximation (for sufficiently weak fields, assuming no permanent dipole moments are present), P is given by a Taylor series in E whose coefficients are the nonlinear susceptibilities:\nformula_55\nHere formula_56 is the linear susceptibility, formula_57 gives the Pockels effect and second harmonic generation, and formula_58 gives the Kerr effect. This expansion shows the way higher-order tensors arise naturally in the subject matter.\nMachine learning.\nThe properties of tensors, especially tensor decomposition, have enabled their use in machine learning to embed higher dimensional data in artificial neural networks. This notion of tensor differs significantly from that in other areas of mathematics and physics, in the sense that a tensor is the same thing as a multidimensional array. Abstractly, a tensor belongs to tensor product of spaces, each of which has a fixed basis, and the dimensions of the factor spaces can be different. Thus, an example of a tensor in this context is a rectangular matrix. Just as a rectangular matrix has two axes, a horizontal and vertical axis to indicate the position of each entry, a more general tensor has as many axes as there are factors in the tensor product to which it belongs, and an entry of the tensor is referred to be a tuple of integers. The various axes have different dimensions in general.\nGeneralizations.\nTensor products of vector spaces.\nThe vector spaces of a tensor product need not be the same, and sometimes the elements of such a more general tensor product are called \"tensors\". For example, an element of the tensor product space \"V\" \u2297 \"W\" is a second-order \"tensor\" in this more general sense, and an order-\"d\" tensor may likewise be defined as an element of a tensor product of \"d\" different vector spaces. A type (\"n\", \"m\") tensor, in the sense defined previously, is also a tensor of order \"n\" + \"m\" in this more general sense. The concept of tensor product can be extended to arbitrary modules over a ring.\nTensors in infinite dimensions.\nThe notion of a tensor can be generalized in a variety of ways to infinite dimensions. One, for instance, is via the tensor product of Hilbert spaces. Another way of generalizing the idea of tensor, common in nonlinear analysis, is via the multilinear maps definition where instead of using finite-dimensional vector spaces and their algebraic duals, one uses infinite-dimensional Banach spaces and their continuous dual. Tensors thus live naturally on Banach manifolds and Fr\u00e9chet manifolds.\nTensor densities.\nSuppose that a homogeneous medium fills R3, so that the density of the medium is described by a single scalar value \"\u03c1\" in kg\u22c5m\u22123. The mass, in kg, of a region \u03a9 is obtained by multiplying \"\u03c1\" by the volume of the region \u03a9, or equivalently integrating the constant \"\u03c1\" over the region:\nformula_59\nwhere the Cartesian coordinates \"x\", \"y\", \"z\" are measured in m. If the units of length are changed into cm, then the numerical values of the coordinate functions must be rescaled by a factor of 100:\nformula_60\nThe numerical value of the density \"\u03c1\" must then also transform by 100\u22123 m3/cm3 to compensate, so that the numerical value of the mass in kg is still given by integral of formula_61. Thus formula_62 (in units of kg\u22c5cm\u22123).\nMore generally, if the Cartesian coordinates \"x\", \"y\", \"z\" undergo a linear transformation, then the numerical value of the density \"\u03c1\" must change by a factor of the reciprocal of the absolute value of the determinant of the coordinate transformation, so that the integral remains invariant, by the change of variables formula for integration. Such a quantity that scales by the reciprocal of the absolute value of the determinant of the coordinate transition map is called a scalar density. To model a non-constant density, \"\u03c1\" is a function of the variables \"x\", \"y\", \"z\" (a scalar field), and under a curvilinear change of coordinates, it transforms by the reciprocal of the Jacobian of the coordinate change. For more on the intrinsic meaning, see \"Density on a manifold\".\nA tensor density transforms like a tensor under a coordinate change, except that it in addition picks up a factor of the absolute value of the determinant of the coordinate transition:\nformula_63\nHere \"w\" is called the weight. In general, any tensor multiplied by a power of this function or its absolute value is called a tensor density, or a weighted tensor. An example of a tensor density is the current density of electromagnetism.\nUnder an affine transformation of the coordinates, a tensor transforms by the linear part of the transformation itself (or its inverse) on each index. These come from the rational representations of the general linear group. But this is not quite the most general linear transformation law that such an object may have: tensor densities are non-rational, but are still semisimple representations. A further class of transformations come from the logarithmic representation of the general linear group, a reducible but not semisimple representation, consisting of an (\"x\", \"y\") \u2208 R2 with the transformation law\nformula_64\nGeometric objects.\nThe transformation law for a tensor behaves as a functor on the category of admissible coordinate systems, under general linear transformations (or, other transformations within some class, such as local diffeomorphisms). This makes a tensor a special case of a geometrical object, in the technical sense that it is a function of the coordinate system transforming functorially under coordinate changes. Examples of objects obeying more general kinds of transformation laws are jets and, more generally still, natural bundles.\nSpinors.\nWhen changing from one orthonormal basis (called a \"frame\") to another by a rotation, the components of a tensor transform by that same rotation. This transformation does not depend on the path taken through the space of frames. However, the space of frames is not simply connected (see orientation entanglement and plate trick): there are continuous paths in the space of frames with the same beginning and ending configurations that are not deformable one into the other. It is possible to attach an additional discrete invariant to each frame that incorporates this path dependence, and which turns out (locally) to have values of \u00b11. A spinor is an object that transforms like a tensor under rotations in the frame, apart from a possible sign that is determined by the value of this discrete invariant.\nSpinors are elements of the spin representation of the rotation group, while tensors are elements of its tensor representations. Other classical groups have tensor representations, and so also tensors that are compatible with the group, but all non-compact classical groups have infinite-dimensional unitary representations as well.\nSee also.\nFoundational.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nApplications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nSpecific.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29966", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29966", "title": "The existence of physical objects", "text": ""}
{"id": "29967", "revid": "1312600641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29967", "title": "Tarragon", "text": "Species of flowering plant in the daisy family Asteraceae\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTarragon (Artemisia dracunculus), also known as estragon, is a species of perennial herb in the family Asteraceae. It is widespread in the wild across much of Eurasia and North America and is cultivated for culinary and medicinal purposes.\nOne subspecies, \"Artemisia dracunculus\" var. \"sativa\", is cultivated to use the leaves as an aromatic culinary herb. In some other subspecies, the characteristic aroma is largely absent. Informal names for distinguishing the variations include \"French tarragon\" (best for culinary use) and \"Russian tarragon\".\nTarragon grows to tall, with slender branches. The leaves are lanceolate, long and broad, glossy green, with an entire margin. The flowers are produced in small capitula diameter, each capitulum containing up to 40 yellow or greenish-yellow florets. French tarragon, however, seldom produces any flowers (or seeds). Some tarragon plants produce seeds that are generally sterile. Others produce viable seeds. Tarragon has rhizomatous roots that it uses to spread and readily reproduce.\nCultivation.\nFrench tarragon is the variety used for cooking in the kitchen and is not grown from seed, as the flowers are sterile; instead, it is propagated by root division.\nRussian tarragon (\"A. dracunculoides\" L.) can be grown from seed but is much weaker in flavor when compared to the French variety. However, Russian tarragon is a far more hardy and vigorous plant, spreading at the roots and growing over a meter tall. This tarragon actually prefers poor soils and happily tolerates drought and neglect. It is not as intensely aromatic and flavorsome as its French cousin, but it produces many more leaves from early spring onwards that are mild and good in salads and cooked food. Russian tarragon loses what flavor it has as it ages and is widely considered useless as a culinary herb, though it is sometimes used in crafts. The young stems in early spring can be cooked as an asparagus substitute. Horticulturists recommend that Russian tarragon be grown indoors from seed and planted in summer. The spreading plants can be divided easily.\nA better substitute for Russian tarragon is Mexican tarragon (\"Tagetes lucida\"), also known as Mexican mint marigold, Texas tarragon, or winter tarragon. It is much more reminiscent of French tarragon, with a hint of anise. Although not in the same genus as the other tarragons, Mexican tarragon has a more robust flavor than Russian tarragon that does not diminish significantly with age. It cannot however be grown as a perennial in cold climates.\nHealth.\nTarragon has a flavor and odor profile reminiscent of anise due largely to the presence of estragole, a known carcinogen and teratogen in mice. Estragole concentration in fresh tarragon leaves is about 2900 mg/kg. However, a European Union investigation concluded that the danger of estragole is minimal. Research studying rat livers found a BMDL10 (Approximately the dose that would cause a 10% increase in background tumor rate) of estragole to be 3.3\u20136.5\u00a0mg/kg body weight per day, which for an 80\u00a0kg human would be ~400\u00a0mg per day, or 130\u00a0g of fresh tarragon leaves per day. As used as a culinary herb, a typical quantity used in a dish could be 5\u00a0g of fresh leaves. Estragole, along with other oils that provide tarragon its flavor, are highly volatile and will vaporise as the leaf is dried, reducing both the health risk and the useability of the herb.\nSeveral other herbs, such as basil, also contain estragole.\nUses.\nCulinary use.\nIn Syria, fresh tarragon is eaten with white Syrian cheese, and also used with dishes such as shish barak and kibbeh labaniyeh.\nIn Iran and Armenia, tarragon is used as a side dish in sabzi khordan/kanachi (fresh herbs), or in stews and Persian or Armenian-style pickles (t\u2018tu), particularly khiar shoor (pickled cucumbers) and other pickled vegetables, or fruits by extension. \nTarragon is one of the four \"fines herbes\" of French cooking and is particularly suitable for chicken, fish, and egg dishes. Tarragon is the main flavoring component of B\u00e9arnaise sauce. Fresh, lightly bruised tarragon sprigs are steeped in vinegar to produce tarragon vinegar. Pounded with butter, it produces an excellent topping for grilled salmon or beef.\nTarragon is used to flavor a popular carbonated soft drink in Armenia, Russia, Georgia (where it originally comes from), and, by extension, Ukraine and Kazakhstan. The drink, named Tarkhuna, is made out of sugar, carbonated water, and tarragon leaves which give it its signature green color.\nTarragon is one of the ingredients in Chakapuli, a Georgian dish.\nChemistry.\nGas chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis has revealed that \"A. dracunculus\" oil contains predominantly phenylpropanoids such as estragole (16.2%), methyl eugenol (35.8%), and \"trans\"-anethole (21.1%). The other major constituents were terpenes and terpenoids, including \u03b1-\"trans\"-ocimene (20.6%), limonene (12.4%), \u03b1-pinene (5.1%), \"allo\"-ocimene (4.8%), methyl eugenol (2.2%), \u03b2-pinene (0.8%), \u03b1-terpinolene (0.5%), bornyl acetate (0.5%) and bicyclogermacrene (0.5%). The organic compound capillin was initially isolated from \"Artemisia capillaris\" in 1956.\n\"cis\"-Pellitorin, an isobutyramide eliciting a pungent taste, has been isolated from the tarragon plant.\nName.\nThe plant is commonly known as in Swedish and Dutch. The use of for the herb or plant in German is outdated. The species name, , means \"little dragon\", and the plant seems to be so named due to its coiled roots. See \"Artemisia\" for the genus name derivative.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29968", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29968", "title": "Thyme", "text": "Herb\nThyme () is a culinary herb consisting of the dried aerial parts of some members of the genus \"Thymus\" of flowering plants in the mint family Lamiaceae. Thymes are native to Eurasia and north Africa. Thymes have culinary, medicinal, and ornamental uses. The species most commonly cultivated and used for culinary purposes is \"Thymus vulgaris\", native to Southeast Europe.\nHistory.\nWild thyme grows in the Levant, where it might have been first cultivated. Ancient Egyptians used common thyme (\"Thymus vulgaris\") for embalming. The ancient Greeks used it in their baths and burnt it as incense in their temples, believing it was a source of courage.\nThe spread of thyme throughout Europe was thought to be due to the Romans, as they used it to purify their rooms and to \"give an aromatic flavour to cheese and liqueurs\". In the European Middle Ages, the herb was placed beneath pillows to aid sleep and ward off nightmares. In this period, women also often gave knights and warriors gifts that included thyme leaves, as it was believed to bring courage to the bearer. Thyme was also used as incense and placed on coffins during funerals, as it was supposed to assure passage into the next life.\nThe name of the genus of fish \"Thymallus\", first given to the grayling (\"T. thymallus\", described in the 1758 edition of \"Systema Naturae\" by Swedish zoologist Carl Linnaeus), originates from the faint smell of thyme that emanates from the flesh.\nCultivation.\nThyme is best cultivated in a hot, sunny location with well-drained soil. It is generally planted in the spring, and thereafter grows as a perennial. It can be propagated by seed, cuttings, or dividing rooted sections of the plant. It tolerates drought well. It can be pruned after flowering to keep from getting woody.\nCulinary use.\nThyme is a common component of the \"bouquet garni\", and of \"herbes de Provence\".\nThyme is sold both fresh and dried. While summer-seasonal, fresh greenhouse thyme is often available year-round. The fresh form is more flavourful but also less convenient; storage life is rarely more than a week. However, the fresh form can last many months if carefully frozen, and thyme retains its flavour on drying better than many other herbs.\nFresh thyme is commonly sold in bunches of sprigs. A sprig is a single stem snipped from the plant. It is composed of a woody stem with paired leaf or flower clusters (\"leaves\") spaced apart. A recipe may measure thyme by the bunch (or fraction thereof), or by the sprig, or by the tablespoon or teaspoon. Dried thyme is widely used in Armenia in tisanes.\nDepending on how it is used in a dish, the whole sprig may be used, or the leaves removed and the stems discarded. Usually, when a recipe mentions a bunch or sprig, it means the whole form; when it mentions spoons, it means the leaves. It is perfectly acceptable to substitute dried for whole thyme. Leaves may be removed from stems either by scraping with the back of a knife, or by pulling through the fingers or tines of a fork.\nChemical and antimicrobial properties.\nThe chemical composition of \"Thymus\" (thyme) includes a variety of essential oils, flavonoids, phenolic acids, triterpenes, and other compounds. The essential oils found in thyme include thymol, which is a major component responsible for the plant's antiseptic properties, and carvacrol, another primary component with similar functions. Other essential oils present are p-cymene, \u03b3-terpinene, linalool, and 1,8-cineole. Gas chromatographic analysis reveals that the most abundant volatile component of thyme leaves is thymol, at 8.55mg/g. Other components are carvacrol, linalool, \u03b1-terpineol, and 1,8-cineole.\nSome of these compounds have beneficial properties. In particular, thymol has been historically used as an antibiotic and antiseptic, especially in traditional medicine. Oil of thyme, the essential oil of common thyme, contains 20\u201354% thymol. Thymol is an active ingredient in various commercially produced mouthwashes, such as Listerine.\nFlavonoids in thyme include luteolin-7-O-glucoside, a glycoside known for its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, as well as apigenin, quercetin, and kaempferol. Phenolic acids such as rosmarinic acid, which is known for its antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antimicrobial activities, along with caffeic acid and chlorogenic acid, are also present in thyme.\nTriterpenes, such as oleanolic acid and ursolic acid, are part of thyme's composition, contributing to its overall health benefits. Additionally, thyme contains tannins, which contribute to its astringent properties, as well as saponins and other minor compounds.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29969", "revid": "12716864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29969", "title": "Tea", "text": "Brewed drink made from tea leaves\nTea is an aromatic beverage prepared by pouring hot or boiling water over cured or fresh leaves of \"Camellia sinensis\", an evergreen shrub native to East Asia which originated in the borderlands of south-western China, north-east India and northern Myanmar. Tea is also made, but rarely, from the leaves of \"Camellia taliensis\" and Camellia formosensis. After plain water, tea is the most widely consumed drink in the world. There are many types of tea; some have a cooling, slightly bitter, and astringent flavour, while others have profiles that include sweet, nutty, floral, or grassy notes. Tea has a stimulating effect in humans, primarily due to its caffeine content.\nAn early credible record of tea drinking dates to the third century AD, in a medical text written by Chinese physician Hua Tuo. It was popularised as a recreational drink during the Chinese Tang dynasty, and tea drinking spread to other East Asian countries. Portuguese priests and merchants introduced it to Europe during the 16th century. During the 17th century, drinking tea became fashionable among the British, who later started to plant tea on a large scale in India, where it had previously been used only as a medicine.\nThe term herbal tea refers to drinks not made from \"Camellia sinensis\". They are the infusions of fruit, leaves, or other plant parts, such as steeps of rosehip, chamomile, or rooibos. These may be called \"tisanes\" or \"herbal infusions\" to prevent confusion with tea made from the tea plant.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the various words for \"tea\" reflects the history of transmission of tea drinking and trade from China. Nearly all of the words for tea worldwide fall into three broad groups: \"te\", \"cha\" and \"chai\", present in English as \"tea\", \"cha\" or \"char\", and \"chai\". The earliest of the three to enter English is \"cha\", which came in the 1590s via the Portuguese, who traded in Macao and picked up the Cantonese pronunciation of the word. The more common \"tea\" form arrived in the 17th century via the Dutch, who acquired it either indirectly from the Malay \"teh\", or directly from the \"t\u00ea\" pronunciation in Min Chinese. The third form \"chai\" (meaning \"spiced tea\") originated from a northern Chinese pronunciation of \"cha\", which travelled overland to Central Asia and Persia where it picked up a Persian ending \"yi\". The Chinese word for tea itself was perhaps derived from the non-Sinitic languages of the botanical homeland of the tea plant in south-west China (or Burma), possibly from an archaic Austro-Asiatic root word *\"la\", meaning \"leaf\".\nOrigin and history.\nBotanical origin.\nTea plants are native to East Asia and the probable center of origin of tea is near the source of the Irrawaddy River from where it spread out fan-wise into southeast China, Indo-China and Assam. The natural home of the tea plant is considered to be within the comparatively small fan-shaped area between Nagaland, Manipur and Mizoram along the Burma frontier in the west, through China as far as the Zhejiang Province in the east, and from this line generally south through the hills to Burma and Thailand to Vietnam. The west\u2013east axis indicated above is about 2,400\u00a0km long extending from longitude 95\u00b0-120\u00b0E. The north\u2013south axis covers about 1,920\u00a0km, starting from the northern part of Burma, latitude 29\u00b0N passing through Yunnan, Tongkin, Thailand, Laos and on to Annan, reaching latitude 11\u00b0N.\nChinese (small-leaf) type tea (\"C. sinensis\" var. \"sinensis\") may have originated in southern China possibly with hybridization of unknown wild tea relatives. Since there are no known wild populations of this tea, its origin is speculative.\nGiven their genetic differences forming distinct clades, Chinese Assam-type tea (\"C. sinensis\" var. \"assamica\") may have two parentages \u2013 one being found in southern Yunnan (Xishuangbanna, Pu'er City) and the other in western Yunnan (Lincang, Baoshan). Many types of Southern Yunnan Assam tea have been hybridized with the closely related species \"Camellia taliensis\". Unlike Southern Yunnan Assam tea, Western Yunnan Assam tea shares many genetic similarities with Indian Assam-type tea (also \"C. sinensis\" var. \"assamica\"). Thus, Western Yunnan Assam tea and Indian Assam tea both may have originated from the same parent plant in the area where southwestern China, Indo-Burma, and Tibet meet. However, as the Indian Assam tea shares no haplotypes with Western Yunnan Assam tea, Indian Assam tea is likely to have originated from an independent domestication. Some Indian Assam tea appears to have hybridized with the species \"Camellia pubicosta\".\nAssuming a generation of 12 years, Chinese small-leaf tea is estimated to have diverged from Assam tea around 22,000 years ago, while Chinese Assam tea and Indian Assam tea diverged 2,800 years ago. The divergence of Chinese small-leaf tea and Assam tea would correspond to the last glacial maximum.\nEarly tea drinking.\nPeople in ancient East Asia ate tea for centuries, perhaps even millennia, before ever consuming it as a beverage. They would nibble on the leaves raw, add them to soups or greens, or ferment them and chew them as areca nut is chewed.\nTea drinking may have begun in the region of Yunnan, where it was used for medicinal purposes. It is believed that in Sichuan, \"people began to boil tea leaves for consumption into a concentrated liquid without the addition of other leaves or herbs, thereby using tea as a bitter yet stimulating drink, rather than as a medicinal concoction.\"\nChinese legends attribute the invention of tea to the mythical Shennong (in central and northern China) in 2737 BC, although evidence suggests that tea drinking may have been introduced from southwest China. The earliest written records of tea come from China. The word \"t\u00fa\" appears in the \"Shijing\" and other ancient texts to signify a kind of \"bitter vegetable\" (), and it is possible that it referred to many different plants such as sow thistle, chicory, or smartweed, as well as tea. In the \"Chronicles of Huayang\", it was recorded that the Ba people in Sichuan presented \"tu\" to the Zhou king. The Qin later conquered the state of Ba and its neighbour Shu, and according to the 17th century scholar Gu Yanwu who wrote in \"Ri Zhi Lu\" (): \"It was after the Qin had taken Shu that they learned how to drink tea.\" Another possible early reference to tea is found in a letter written by the Qin dynasty general Liu Kun who requested that some \"real tea\" to be sent to him.\nThe earliest known physical evidence of tea was discovered in 2016 in the mausoleum of Emperor Jing of Han in Xi'an, indicating that tea from the genus \"Camellia\" was drunk by Han dynasty emperors as early as the second century BC. The Han dynasty work \"The Contract for a Youth\", written by Wang Bao in 59 BC, contains the first known reference to boiling tea. Among the tasks listed to be undertaken by the youth, the contract states that \"he shall boil tea and fill the utensils\" and \"he shall buy tea at Wuyang\". The first record of tea cultivation is dated to this period, during which tea was cultivated on Meng Mountain () near Chengdu. Another early credible record of tea drinking dates to the 3rd century AD, in a medical text by the Chinese physician Hua Tuo, who stated, \"to drink bitter t'u constantly makes one think better.\" However, before the Tang dynasty, tea-drinking was primarily a southern Chinese practice centered in Jiankang. Tea was disdained by the Northern dynasties aristocrats, who describe it as inferior to yogurt. It became widely popular during the Tang dynasty, when it spread to Korea, Japan, and Vietnam. \"The Classic of Tea\", a treatise on tea and its preparations, was written by the 8th century Chinese writer, Lu Yu. The current Chinese word for tea (\u8336) appeared in \"The Classic of Tea\" by removing a stroke from the word \"tu\". Lu was known to have influenced tea drinking on a large part in China.\nDevelopments.\nThrough the centuries, a variety of techniques for processing tea, and a number of different forms of tea, were developed. During the Han and Six Dynasties, tea was steamed and pounded, shaped into cake form, slowly dried over low fire, and suspended to air dry. Chunks of tea were then boiled to drink, flavoured with orange peels, jujube, mint, ginger or scallion. Tea was similarly prepared in cake form during the Tang dynasty, but the technique slowly changed. By the Song dynasty, loose-leaf tea was developed and became popular. During the Yuan and Ming dynasties, unoxidized tea leaves were first stirred in a hot dry pan, then rolled and air-dried, a process that stops the oxidation process that would have turned the leaves dark, thereby allowing tea to remain green. In the 15th century, oolong tea, in which the leaves are allowed to partially oxidize before being heated in the pan, was developed. Western tastes, however, favoured the fully oxidized black tea, and the leaves were allowed to oxidize further. Yellow tea was an accidental discovery in the production of green tea during the Ming dynasty, when apparently careless practices allowed the leaves to turn yellow, which yielded a different flavour.\nWorldwide spread.\nTea was first introduced to Western priests and merchants in China during the 16th century, at which time it was termed \"ch\u00e1\". The earliest European reference to tea, written as \"chiai\", came from \"Delle navigationi e viaggi\" written by Venetian Giambattista Ramusio in 1545. The first recorded shipment of tea by a European nation was in 1607 when the Dutch East India Company moved a cargo of tea from Macao to Java, then two years later, the Dutch bought the first assignment of tea which was from Hirado in Japan to be shipped to Europe. Tea became a fashionable drink in The Hague in the Netherlands, and the Dutch introduced the drink to Germany, France, and across the Atlantic to New Amsterdam (New York).\nIn 1567, Russian people came in contact with tea when the Cossack Atamans Petrov and Yalyshev visited China. The Mongolian Khan donated to Tsar Michael I four poods (65\u201370\u00a0kg) of tea in 1638. According to Jeremiah Curtin, it was possibly in 1636 that Vassili Starkov was sent as envoy to the Altyn Khan. He was given 250 pounds of tea as a gift to the tsar. Starkov at first refused, seeing no use for a load of dead leaves, but the Khan insisted. Thus was tea introduced to Russia. In 1679, Russia concluded a treaty on regular tea supplies from China via camel caravan in exchange for furs. It is today considered the \"de facto\" national beverage.\nThe first record of tea in English came from a letter written by Richard Wickham, who ran an East India Company office in Japan, writing to a merchant in Macao requesting \"the best sort of chaw\" in 1615. Peter Mundy, a traveller and merchant who came across tea in Fujian in 1637, wrote, \"\"chaa\" \u2013 only water with a kind of herb boyled in it\". Tea was sold in a coffee house in London in 1657, Samuel Pepys tasted tea in 1660, and Catherine of Braganza took the tea-drinking habit to the English court when she married Charles II in 1662. Tea, however, was not widely consumed in the British Isles until the 18th century and remained expensive until the latter part of that period. English drinkers preferred to add sugar and milk to black tea, and black tea overtook green tea in popularity in the 1720s. Tea smuggling during the 18th century led to the general public being able to afford and consume tea. The British government removed the tax on tea, thereby eliminating the smuggling trade, by 1785. In Britain and Ireland, tea was initially consumed as a luxury item on special occasions, such as religious festivals, wakes, and domestic work gatherings. The price of tea in Europe fell steadily during the 19th century, especially after Indian tea began to arrive in large quantities; by the late 19th century tea had become an everyday beverage for all levels of society. The popularity of tea played a role in historical events \u2013 the Tea Act of 1773 provoked the Boston Tea Party that escalated into the American Revolution. The need to address the issue of British trade deficit because of the trade in tea resulted in the Opium Wars. The Qing Kangxi Emperor had banned foreign products from being sold in China, decreeing in 1685 that all goods bought from China must be paid for in silver coin or bullion. Traders from other nations then sought to find another product, in this case opium, to sell to China to earn back the silver they were required to pay for tea and other commodities. The subsequent attempts by the Chinese Government to curtail the trade in opium led to war.\nChinese small-leaf-type tea was introduced into India in 1836 by the British in an attempt to break the Chinese monopoly on tea. In 1841, Archibald Campbell brought seeds of Chinese tea from the Kumaun region and experimented with planting tea in Darjeeling. The Alubari tea garden was opened in 1856, and Darjeeling tea began to be produced. In 1848, Robert Fortune was sent by the East India Company on a mission to China to bring the tea plant back to Great Britain. He began his journey in high secrecy as his mission occurred in the lull between the First Opium War and the Second Opium War. The Chinese tea plants he brought back were introduced to the Himalayas, though most did not survive. The British had discovered that a different variety of tea was endemic to Assam and the northeast region of India, which was then hybridized with Chinese small-leaf-type tea. Using Chinese planting and cultivation techniques, the British colonial government established a tea industry by offering land in Assam to any European who agreed to cultivate it for export. Tea was originally consumed only by Anglo-Indians; however, it became widely popular in India in the 1950s because of a successful advertising campaign by the India Tea Board. The British introduced tea industry to Sri Lanka (then Ceylon) in 1867.\nChemical composition.\nPhysically speaking, tea has properties of both a solution and a suspension. It is a solution of the water-soluble compounds extracted from the tea leaves, such as the polyphenols and amino acids. Tea infusions are among most consumed beverages globally.\nCaffeine makes up about 3% of tea's dry weight, which translates to between 30 and 90 milligrams per cup depending on the type, brand, and brewing method. A study found that the caffeine content of one gram of black tea ranged from 22 to 28\u00a0mg, while the caffeine content of one gram of green tea ranged from 11 to 20\u00a0mg, reflecting a significant difference. Tea contains small amounts of theobromine and theophylline, which are xanthines and stimulants, similar to caffeine.\nThe astringency in tea can be attributed to the presence of polyphenols. These are the most abundant compounds in tea leaves, making up 30\u201340% of their composition. Polyphenols in tea include flavonoids, epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), and other catechins. Although there has been preliminary clinical research on whether green or black teas may protect against various human diseases, there is no evidence that tea polyphenols have any effect on health or lowering disease risk.\nHealth effects.\nAlthough health benefits have been assumed throughout the history of \"Camellia sinensis\"'s consumption, there is no high-quality evidence showing that tea consumption gives significant benefits other than possibly increasing alertness, an effect caused by caffeine in the tea leaves. In clinical research conducted in the early 21st century, it was found there is no scientific evidence to indicate that consuming tea affects any disease or improves health.\nBlack and green teas contain no essential nutrients in significant amounts, with the exception of the dietary mineral manganese, at 0.5\u00a0mg per cup or 26% of the Reference Daily Intake (RDI). Fluoride is sometimes present in tea; certain types of \"brick tea\", made from old leaves and stems, have the highest levels, enough to pose a health risk if much tea is drunk, which has been attributed to high levels of fluoride in soils, acidic soils, and long brewing.\nCultivation and harvesting.\n\"Camellia sinensis\" is an evergreen plant that grows mainly in tropical and subtropical climates. Some varieties can tolerate oceanic climates and are cultivated as far north as Cornwall in England, Perthshire in Scotland, Washington in the United States, and Vancouver Island in Canada. In the Southern Hemisphere, tea is grown as far south as Hobart in Tasmania and Waikato in New Zealand.\nTea plants are propagated from seed and cuttings; about 4 to 12 years are needed for a plant to bear seed and about three years before a new plant is ready for harvesting. In addition to a zone 8 climate or warmer, tea plants require at least of rainfall per year and prefer acidic soils. Many high-quality tea plants are cultivated at elevations of up to above sea level. Though at these heights the plants grow more slowly, they acquire a better flavour.\nTwo principal varieties are used: \"Camellia sinensis\" var. \"sinensis,\" which is used for most Chinese, Formosan and Japanese teas, and \"C. sinensis\" var. \"assamica,\" used in Pu-erh and most Indian teas (but not Darjeeling). Within these botanical varieties, many strains and modern clonal varieties are known. Leaf size is the chief criterion for the classification of tea plants, with three primary classifications being: Assam type, characterised by the largest leaves; China type, characterised by the smallest leaves; and Cambodian type, characterised by leaves of intermediate size. The Cambodian-type tea (\"C. assamica\" subsp. \"lasiocaly\") was originally considered a type of Assam tea. However, later genetic work showed that it is a hybrid between Chinese small-leaf tea and Assam-type tea. Darjeeling tea appears to be a hybrid between Chinese small-leaf tea and Assam-type large-leaf tea.\nA tea plant will grow into a tree of up to if left undisturbed, but cultivated plants are generally pruned to waist height for ease of plucking. The short plants bear more new shoots which provide new and tender leaves and increase the quality of the tea. Only the top of the mature plant are picked. These buds and leaves are called 'flushes'. A plant will grow a new flush every 7 to 15 days during the growing season. Leaves that are slow in development tend to produce better-flavoured teas. Several teas are available from specified flushes; for example, Darjeeling tea is available as first flush (at a premium price), second flush, monsoon and autumn. Assam second flush or \"tippy\" tea is considered superior to first flush, because of the gold tips that appear on the leaves.\nPests that can afflict tea plants include mosquito bugs, genus \"Helopeltis\", which are true bugs and not to be confused with dipterous insects of family \"Culicidae\" ('mosquitos'). Mosquito bugs can damage leaves both by sucking plant materials, and by the laying of eggs (oviposition) within the plant. Spraying with synthetic insecticides may be deemed appropriate. Other pests are Lepidopteran leaf feeders and various tea diseases.\nProduction.\nTea is mainly grown in Asia and Africa, with smaller areas in South America and around the Black and Caspian Seas. The four biggest tea-producing countries are China, India, Kenya and Sri Lanka, together representing 81% of world tea production. Smaller hubs of production include such places as S\u00e3o Miguel Island, Azores, in Portugal, and Guria, in Georgia. In 2022, global production of tea was 29.8\u00a0million tonnes, led by China with 49% and India with 20% of the world total. Kenya, Sri Lanka, and Turkey were secondary producers.\nStorage.\nStorage conditions determine the shelf life of tea; black tea shelf life is greater than that of green teas. Some, such as flower teas, may last only a month or so. Others, such as pu-erh, improve with age. To remain fresh and prevent mold, tea needs to be stored away from heat, light, air, and moisture. Tea must be kept at room temperature in an air-tight container. Black tea in a bag within a sealed opaque canister may keep for two years. Green tea deteriorates more rapidly, usually in less than a year. Tightly rolled gunpowder tea leaves keep longer than the more open-leafed Chun Mee tea.\nStorage life for all teas can be extended by using desiccant or oxygen-absorbing packets, vacuum sealing, or refrigeration in air-tight containers (except green tea, where discrete use of refrigeration or freezing is recommended and temperature variation kept to a minimum).\nProcessing and classification.\nTea is divided into categories based on how it is processed. At least six different types are produced:\nAfter picking, the leaves of \"C. sinensis\" soon begin to wilt and oxidize unless immediately dried. An enzymatic oxidation process triggered by the plant's intracellular enzymes causes the leaves to turn progressively darker as their chlorophyll breaks down and tannins are released. This darkening is stopped at a predetermined stage by heating, which deactivates the enzymes responsible. In the production of black teas, halting by heating is carried out simultaneously with drying. Without careful moisture and temperature control during manufacture and packaging, growth of undesired molds and bacteria may make tea unfit for consumption.\nBlending and additives.\nAfter basic processing, teas may be altered through additional processing steps before being sold and is often consumed with additions to the basic tea leaf and water added during preparation or drinking. Examples of additional processing steps that occur before tea is sold are blending, flavouring, scenting, and decaffeination of teas. Examples of additions added at the point of consumption include milk, sugar and lemon.\nTea blending is the combination of different teas together to achieve the final product. Such teas may combine others from the same cultivation area or several different ones. The aim is to obtain consistency, better taste, higher price, or some combination of the three.\nFlavoured and scented teas are enhancements of the base tea. This can be accomplished through directly adding flavouring agents, such as ginger, cloves, mint leaves, cardamom, bergamot (found in Earl Grey), vanilla, and spearmint. Alternatively, because tea easily retains odours, it can be placed in proximity to an aromatic ingredient to absorb its aroma, as in traditional jasmine tea.\nThe addition of milk to tea in Europe was first mentioned in 1680 by the epistolist Madame de S\u00e9vign\u00e9. Many teas are traditionally drunk with milk in cultures where dairy products are consumed. These include Indian masala chai and British tea blends. These teas tend to be very hearty varieties of black tea which can be tasted through the milk, such as Assams, or the East Friesian blend. Milk is thought to neutralise remaining tannins and reduce acidity. The Han Chinese do not usually drink milk with tea but the Manchus do, and the elite of the Qing Dynasty of the Chinese Empire continued to do so. Hong Kong-style milk tea is based on British habits. Tibetans and other Himalayan peoples traditionally drink tea with milk or yak butter and salt. In Eastern European countries, and in Russia and Italy, tea is commonly served with lemon juice. In Poland, tea is traditionally served with a slice of lemon and is sweetened with either sugar or honey; tea with milk is called a \"bawarka\" (\"Bavarian style\") in Polish and is widely popular. In Australia, tea with milk is known as \"white tea\".\nThe order of steps in preparing a cup of tea is a much-debated topic and can vary widely between cultures and individuals. Some say it is preferable to add the milk to the cup before the tea, as the high temperature of freshly brewed tea can denature the proteins found in fresh milk, similar to the change in taste of UHT milk, resulting in an inferior-tasting beverage. Others insist it is better to add the milk to the cup after the tea, as black tea is often brewed as close to boiling as possible. The addition of milk chills the beverage during the crucial brewing phase, if brewing in a cup rather than using a pot, meaning the delicate flavour of a good tea cannot be fully appreciated. By adding the milk afterwards, it is easier to dissolve sugar in the tea and to ensure the desired amount of milk is added, as the colour of the tea can be observed. Historically, the order of steps was taken as an indication of class: only those wealthy enough to afford good-quality porcelain would be confident of its being able to cope with being exposed to boiling water unadulterated with milk. Higher temperature difference means faster heat transfer, so the earlier milk is added, the slower the drink cools. A 2007 study published in the \"European Heart Journal\" found certain beneficial effects of tea may be lost through the addition of milk.\nPackaging.\nTea bags.\nIn 1907, American tea merchant Thomas Sullivan began distributing samples of his tea in small bags of silk with a drawstring. Consumers noticed they could simply leave the tea in the bag and reuse it with fresh tea. However, the potential of this distribution and packaging method would not be fully realised until later. During World War II, tea was rationed in the United Kingdom. In 1953, after rationing in the UK ended, Yorkshire-based tea manufacturer Tetley launched the tea bag in the UK, and it was an immediate success.\nThe \"pyramid tea bag\" (or sachet), introduced by Lipton and PG Tips/Scottish Blend in 1996, attempts to address one of the connoisseurs' arguments against paper tea bags by way of its three-dimensional tetrahedron shape, which allows more room for tea leaves to expand while steeping. However, some types of pyramid tea bags have been criticised as being environmentally unfriendly, since their synthetic material is not as biodegradable as loose tea leaves and paper tea bags.\nLoose tea.\nThe tea leaves are packaged loosely in a canister, paper bag, or other container such as a tea chest. Some whole teas, such as rolled gunpowder tea leaves, which resist crumbling, are vacuum-packed for freshness in aluminised packaging for storage and retail. The loose tea is individually measured for use, allowing for flexibility and flavour control at the expense of convenience. Strainers, tea balls, tea presses, filtered teapots, and infusion bags prevent loose leaves from floating in the tea and over-brewing. A traditional method uses a three-piece lidded teacup called a gaiwan, the lid of which is tilted to decant the tea into a different cup for consumption.\nCompressed tea.\nTea bricks or compressed tea are produced for convenience in transport, storage, and ageing. It can usually be stored longer without spoilage than loose leaf tea. Compressed tea is prepared by loosening leaves from the cake using a small knife, and steeping the extracted pieces in water. During the Tang dynasty, as described by Lu Yu, compressed tea was ground into a powder, combined with hot water, and ladled into bowls, resulting in a \"frothy\" mixture. In the Song dynasty, the tea powder would instead be whisked with hot water in the bowl. Although no longer practiced in China today, the whisking method of preparing powdered tea was transmitted to Japan by Zen Buddhist monks, and is still used to prepare matcha in the Japanese tea ceremony. Chinese pu-erh is often distributed in the form, as other teas may sometimes be.\nCompressed tea was the most popular form of tea in China during the Tang dynasty. By the beginning of the Ming dynasty, it had been displaced by loose-leaf tea. It remains popular, however, in the Himalayan countries and Mongolian steppes. In Mongolia, tea bricks were ubiquitous enough to be used as a form of currency. Among Himalayan peoples, compressed tea is consumed by combining it with yak butter and salt to produce butter tea.\nInstant tea.\n\"Instant tea\", similar to freeze-dried instant coffee and an alternative to brewed tea, can be consumed either hot or cold. Instant tea was developed in the 1930s, with Nestl\u00e9 introducing the first commercial product in 1946, while Redi-Tea debuted instant iced tea in 1953. Additives such as chai, vanilla, honey or fruit, are popular, as is powdered milk.\nDuring the Second World War British and Canadian soldiers were issued an instant tea in their composite ration (\"compo\") packs. These blocks of instant tea, powdered milk, and sugar were not always well received. As Royal Canadian Artillery Gunner, George C Blackburn observed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But, unquestionably, the feature of Compo rations destined to be remembered beyond all others is Compo tea...Directions say to \"sprinkle powder on heated water and bring to the boil, stirring well, three heaped teaspoons to one pint of water.\"\nEvery possible variation in the preparation of this tea was tried, but...it always ended up the same way. While still too hot to drink, it is a good-looking cup of strong tea. Even when it becomes just cool enough to be sipped gingerly, it is still a good-tasting cup of tea, if you like your tea strong and sweet. But let it cool enough to be quaffed and enjoyed, and your lips will be coated with a sticky scum that forms across the surface, which if left undisturbed will become a leathery membrane that can be wound around your finger and flipped away...\nBottled and canned tea.\nCanned tea is sold prepared and ready to drink. It was introduced in 1981 in Japan. The first bottled tea was introduced by an Indonesian tea company, PT. Sinar Sosro in 1969 with the brand name Teh Botol Sosro (or Sosro bottled tea). In 1983, Swiss-based Bischofszell Food Ltd. was the first company to bottle iced tea on an industrial scale.\nTea culture.\nIn many cultures, tea is consumed at elevated social events, such as the tea party. Tea ceremonies have arisen in different cultures, such as the Chinese and Japanese traditions, each of which employs certain techniques and ritualised protocol of brewing and serving tea for enjoyment in a refined setting. One form of Chinese tea ceremony is the Gongfu tea ceremony, which typically uses small Yixing clay teapots and oolong tea.\nIn the United Kingdom, 63% of people drink tea daily. It is customary for a host to offer tea to guests soon after their arrival. Tea is consumed both at home and outside the home, often in caf\u00e9s or tea rooms. Afternoon tea with cakes on fine porcelain is a cultural stereotype. In southwest England, many caf\u00e9s serve a cream tea, consisting of scones, clotted cream, and jam alongside a pot of tea.\nIreland, as of 2016, was the second-biggest per capita consumer of tea in the world, after Turkey. Local blends are the most popular in Ireland, including Irish breakfast tea, using Rwandan, Kenyan and Assam teas. The annual national average of tea consumption in Ireland is 2.7\u00a0kg to 4\u00a0kg per person. Tea in Ireland is usually taken with milk or sugar and brewed longer for a stronger taste.\nTurkish tea is an important part of that country's cuisine and is the most commonly consumed hot drink, despite the country's long history with coffee. In 2004, Turkey produced 205,500 tonnes of tea (6.4% of the global total), which made it one of the largest tea markets in the world, with 120,000 tons being consumed in Turkey and the rest being exported. In 2010, Turkey had the highest per capita consumption in the world at 2.7\u00a0kg. As of 2013, the per-capita consumption of Turkish tea exceeds 10 cups per day and 13.8\u00a0kg per year. Tea is grown mostly in Rize Province on the Black Sea coast.\nRussia has a long, rich tea history dating to 1638 when tea was introduced to Tsar Michael. Social gatherings were considered incomplete without tea, which was traditionally brewed in a samovar.\nIn Pakistan, both black and green teas are popular and are known locally as \"sabz chai\" and \"kahwah\", respectively. The popular green tea is often served after every meal in the Pashtun belt of Balochistan and in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. In central and southern Punjab and the metropolitan Sindh region of Pakistan, tea with milk and sugar (sometimes with pistachios, cardamom, etc.), commonly referred to as \"chai\", is widely consumed. It is the most common beverage of households in the region. In the northern Pakistani regions of Chitral and Gilgit-Baltistan, a salty, buttered Tibetan-style tea is consumed.\nIndian tea culture is strong; the drink is the most popular hot beverage in the country. It is consumed daily in almost all houses, offered to guests, consumed in high amounts in domestic and official surroundings, and is made with the addition of milk with or without spices, and usually sweetened. It is sometimes served with biscuits to be dipped in the tea and eaten before consuming the tea. More often than not, it is drunk in \"doses\" of small cups (referred to as \"cutting\" chai if sold at street tea vendors) rather than one large cup.\nIranians have one of the highest per capita rates of tea consumption in the world. \"Ch\u00e2ikh\u00e2nes\" (teahouses) are common in Iran. Iranian tea is typically served in traditional Iranian glasses with a traditional saucer and teaspoon. Tea is cultivated in northern Iran along the shores of the Caspian Sea.\nIn Burma (Myanmar), tea is consumed not only as hot drinks, but also as sweet tea and green tea known locally as \"laphet-yay\" and \"laphet-yay-gyan\", respectively. Pickled tea leaves, known locally as \"lahpet\", are a national delicacy. Pickled tea is usually eaten with roasted sesame seeds, crispy fried beans, roasted peanuts and fried garlic chips.\nIn Mali, gunpowder tea is served in series of three, starting with the highest oxidisation or strongest, unsweetened tea, locally referred to as \"strong like death\", followed by a second serving, where the same tea leaves are boiled again with some sugar added (\"pleasant as life\"), and a third one, where the same tea leaves are boiled for the third time with yet more sugar added (\"sweet as love\"). Green tea is the central ingredient of a distinctly Malian custom, the \"Grin\", an informal social gathering that cuts across social and economic lines, starting in front of family compound gates in the afternoons and extending late into the night, and is widely popular in Bamako and other large urban areas.\nIn the United States, 80% of tea is consumed as iced tea. Sweet tea is native to the southeastern U.S. and is iconic in its cuisine due to its refreshing temperature and large amount of sweetener.\nEconomics.\nProducers and consumers.\nTea is the most popular manufactured drink consumed in the world, equaling all others \u2013 including coffee, soft drinks, and alcohol\u00a0\u2013 combined. Most tea consumed outside East Asia is produced on large plantations in the hilly regions of India and Sri Lanka and is destined to be sold to large businesses. Opposite this large-scale industrial production are many small \"gardens,\" sometimes minuscule plantations, that produce highly sought-after teas prized by gourmets. These teas are both rare and expensive and can be compared to some of the most expensive wines in this respect.\nIndia is the world's largest tea-drinking nation, although the per capita consumption of tea remains a modest per person every year. Turkey, with of tea consumed per person per year, is the world's greatest per capita consumer.\nCertification.\nSeveral bodies independently certify the production of tea, such as Rainforest Alliance, Fairtrade, UTZ Certified, and Organic. From 2008 to 2016, sustainability standards-certified tea production experienced a compound annual growth rate of about 35%, accounting for at least 19% of overall tea production. In 2016, at least 1.15\u00a0million tonnes of sustainably certified tea was produced, valued at US$2\u00a0billion.\nRainforest Alliance certified tea is sold by Unilever brands Lipton and PG Tips in Western Europe, Australia and the U.S. Fairtrade certified tea is sold by a large number of suppliers around the world. UTZ Certified tea is sold by Pickwick tea.\nIssues.\nSafety.\nTests of commercially popular teas have detected residues of banned toxic pesticides.\nFraud.\nTea is a common target of food fraud. Lower cost ingredients may be substituted for tea, or a tea may be adulterated with undeclared and possibly toxic colors and flavours. The origin of the tea, picking season, and the processing techniques may be intentionally misidentified. Tea powders which undergo additional processing are more susceptible to food fraud.\nLabour.\nTea production in Kenya, Malawi, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda uses child labour, according to the U.S. Department of Labor's \"List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor.\" Workers who pick and pack tea on plantations in developing countries can face harsh working conditions and may earn below the living wage.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29970", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29970", "title": "Tank", "text": "Tracked heavy armoured fighting vehicle\nA tank is an armoured fighting vehicle intended as a primary offensive weapon in front-line ground combat. Tank designs are a balance of heavy firepower, strong armour, and battlefield mobility provided by tracks and a powerful engine; their main armament is often mounted within a turret. They are a mainstay of modern 20th and 21st century ground forces and a key part of combined arms combat.\nModern tanks are versatile mobile land weapons platforms whose main armament is a large-calibre tank gun mounted in a rotating gun turret, supplemented by machine guns or other ranged weapons such as anti-tank guided missiles or rocket launchers. They have heavy vehicle armour which provides protection for the crew, the vehicle's munition storage, fuel tank and propulsion systems. The use of tracks rather than wheels provides improved operational mobility which allows the tank to overcome rugged terrain and adverse conditions such as mud and ice/snow better than wheeled vehicles, and thus be more flexibly positioned at advantageous locations on the battlefield. These features enable the tank to perform in a variety of intense combat situations, simultaneously both offensively (with direct fire from their powerful main gun) and defensively (as fire support and defilade for friendly troops due to the near invulnerability to common infantry small arms and good resistance against heavier weapons, although anti-tank weapons used in 2022, some of them man-portable, have demonstrated the ability to destroy older generations of tanks with single shots), all while maintaining the mobility needed to exploit changing tactical situations. Fully integrating tanks into modern military forces spawned a new era of combat called armoured warfare.\nUntil the invention of the main battle tank, tanks were typically categorized either by weight class (ultralight, light, medium, heavy or superheavy tanks) or doctrinal purpose (breakthrough-, cavalry-, infantry-, cruiser-, antinfantry-, antitank-, operational-, qualitative reinforcement-, combined arms-, special operations-, or reconnaissance tanks). Some are larger and more thickly armoured and with large guns, while others are smaller, lightly armoured, and equipped with a smaller caliber and lighter gun. These smaller tanks move over terrain with speed and agility and can perform a reconnaissance role in addition to engaging hostile targets. The smaller, faster tank would not normally engage in battle with a larger, heavily armoured tank, except during a surprise flanking manoeuvre.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe word \"tank\" was first applied in a military context to British \"landships\" in 1915 to keep their nature secret before they entered service.\nOrigins.\nOn 24 December 1915, a meeting took place at the Inter-Departmental Conference (including representatives of the Director of Naval Construction's Committee, the Admiralty, the Ministry of Munitions, and the War Office). Its purpose was to discuss the progress of the plans for what were described as \"Caterpillar Machine Gun Destroyers or Land Cruisers.\" In his autobiography, Albert Gerald Stern (Secretary to the Landship Committee, later head of the Mechanical Warfare Supply Department) says that at that meeting:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. (Thomas J.) Macnamara (M.P., and Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty) then suggested, for secrecy's sake, to change the title of the Landship Committee. Mr. d'Eyncourt agreed that it was very desirable to retain secrecy by all means, and proposed to refer to the vessel as a \"Water Carrier\". In Government offices, committees and departments are always known by their initials. For this reason I, as Secretary, considered the proposed title totally unsuitable. In our search for a synonymous term, we changed the word \"Water Carrier\" to \"Tank,\" and became the \"Tank Supply\" or \"T.S.\" Committee. That is how these weapons came to be called Tanks.\nHe incorrectly added, \"and the name has now been adopted by all countries in the world.\"\nLieutenant-Colonel Ernest Swinton, who was secretary to the meeting, says that he was instructed to find a non-committal word when writing his report of the proceedings. In the evening he discussed it with a fellow officer, Lt-Col Walter Dally Jones, and they chose the word \"tank\". \"That night, in the draft report of the conference, the word 'tank' was employed in its new sense for the first time.\" Swinton's \"Notes on the Employment of Tanks\", in which he uses the word throughout, was published in January 1916.\nIn July 1918, \"Popular Science Monthly\" reported:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Because a fellow of the Royal Historical Society* has unintentionally misled the British public as to the origin of the famous \"tanks\", Sir William Tritton, who designed and built them, has published the real story of their name\u00a0... Since it was obviously inadvisable to herald \"Little Willie's\" reason for existence to the world he was known as the \"Instructional Demonstration Unit.\" \"Little Willie's\" hull was called in the shop orders a \"water carrier for Mesopotamia\"; no one knew that the hull was intended to be mounted on a truck. Naturally, the water carrier began to be called a \"tank\". So the name came to be used by managers and foremen of the shop, until now it has a place in the army vocabulary and will probably be so known in history for all time.\nD'Eyncourt's account differs from Swinton's and Tritton's:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0when the future arrangements were under discussion for transporting the first landships to France a question arose as to how, from a security point of view, the consignment should be labelled. To justify their size we decided to call them 'water-carriers for Russia'\u00a0\u2014the idea being that they should be taken for some new method of taking water to forward troops in the battle areas. Lt.-Col. Swinton\u00a0... raised a humorous objection to this, remarking that the War Office pundits would probably contract the description to 'W.C.'s for Russia', and that we had better forestall this by merely labelling the packages 'Tanks'. So tanks they became, and tanks they have remained.\"\nThis appears to be an imperfect recollection. He says that the name problem arose \"when we shipped the first two vehicles to France the following year\" (August 1916), but by that time the name \"tank\" had been in use for eight months. The tanks were labelled \"With Care to Petrograd,\" but the belief was encouraged that they were a type of snowplough.\nInternational.\nThe term \"tank\" is used throughout the English-speaking world, but other countries use different terminology. In France, the second country to use tanks in battle, the word or was adopted initially, but was then, largely at the insistence of Colonel J.B.E. Estienne, rejected in favour of (\"assault vehicle\") or simply (\"vehicle\"). During World War I, German sources tended to refer to British tanks as and to their own as . Later, tanks became referred to as \"\" (lit.\u2009'armour'), a shortened form of the full term \"\", literally \"armoured fighting vehicle\". In Arabic, tanks are called . The same word is used in Turoyo (a western dialect of Aramaic), but Swadaya, an eastern dialect, uses instead. In Italian, a tank is a \"\" (lit.\u2009'armed wagon'). Norway uses the term and Sweden the similar (lit.\u2009'battle wagon', also used for chariots), whereas Denmark uses (lit.\u2009'fight wagon'). Finland uses (armoured wagon), although is also used colloquially. The Polish name , derived from verb (\"to crawl\"), is used, depicting the vehicle's movement and its speed. In Hungarian, the tank is called (combat wagon), albeit is also common. In Japanese, the term (, lit. \"battle vehicle\") is taken from Chinese and used, and this term is likewise borrowed into Korean as (/); more recent Chinese literature uses the English-derived (tank) as opposed to (battle vehicle) used in earlier days.\nDevelopment overview.\nThe modern tank is the result of a century of development from the first primitive armoured vehicles, due to improvements in technology such as the internal combustion engine, which allowed the rapid movement of heavy armoured vehicles. As a result of these advances, tanks underwent tremendous shifts in capability in the years since their first appearance. Tanks in World War I were developed separately and simultaneously by Great Britain and France as a means to break the deadlock of trench warfare on the Western Front. The first British prototype, nicknamed Little Willie, was constructed at William Foster &amp; Co. in Lincoln, England in 1915, with leading roles played by Major Walter Gordon Wilson who designed the gearbox and hull, and by William Tritton of William Foster and Co., who designed the track plates. This was a prototype of a new design that would become the British Army's Mark I tank, the first tank used in combat in September 1916 during the Battle of the Somme. The name \"tank\" was adopted by the British during the early stages of their development, as a security measure to conceal their purpose (see etymology). While the British and French built thousands of tanks in World War I, Germany was unconvinced of the tank's potential, and did not have enough resources, thus it built only twenty.\nTanks of the interwar period evolved into the much larger and more powerful designs of World War II. Important new concepts of armoured warfare were developed; the Soviet Union launched the first mass tank/air attack at Khalkhin Gol (Nomonhan) in August 1939, and later developed the T-34, one of the predecessors of the main battle tank. Less than two weeks later, Germany began their large-scale armoured campaigns that would become known as blitzkrieg (\"lightning war\") \u2013 massed concentrations of tanks combined with motorized and mechanized infantry, artillery and air power designed to break through the enemy front and collapse enemy resistance.\nThe widespread introduction of high-explosive anti-tank warheads during the second half of World War II led to lightweight infantry-carried anti-tank weapons such as the Panzerfaust, which could destroy some types of tanks. Tanks in the Cold War were designed with these weapons in mind, and led to greatly improved armour types during the 1960s, especially composite armour. Improved engines, transmissions and suspensions allowed tanks of this period to grow larger. Aspects of gun technology changed significantly as well, with advances in shell design and aiming technology.\nDuring the Cold War, the main battle tank concept arose and became a key component of modern armies. In the 21st century, with the increasing role of asymmetrical warfare and the end of the Cold War, that also contributed to the increase of cost-effective anti-tank rocket propelled grenades (RPGs) worldwide and its successors, the ability of tanks to operate independently has declined. Modern tanks are more frequently organized into combined arms units which involve the support of infantry, who may accompany the tanks in infantry fighting vehicles, and supported by reconnaissance or ground-attack aircraft.\nHistory.\n20th-century.\nConceptions.\nThe tank is the 20th-century realization of an ancient concept: that of providing troops with mobile protection and firepower. The internal combustion engine, armour plate, and continuous track were key innovations leading to the invention of the modern tank.\nDuring the 119 BC Battle of Mobei of the Han\u2013Xiongnu War, the Han general Wei Qing led his army through a fatiguing expeditionary march across the Gobi desert only to find Yizhixie chanyu's main force waiting to encircle them on the other side. Using armored heavy wagons known as \"Wu Gang Wagon\" (Chinese: \u6b66\u525b\u8eca) in ring formations that provided Chinese archers, crossbowmen and infantry protection from the Xiongnu's powerful cavalry charges, and allowed Han troops to utilize their ranged weapons' advantages of precision. This forced a stalemate and allowed time for his troops to recover strength, before using the cover of a sandstorm to launch a counteroffensive which overran the nomads.\nMany sources imply that Leonardo da Vinci and H. G. Wells in some way foresaw or \"invented\" the tank. Leonardo's late-15th-century drawings of what some describe as a \"tank\" show a man-powered, wheeled vehicle surrounded by cannons. However, the human crew would have difficulty moving the heavy vehicle over long distances, while usage of animals was problematic in a space so confined. In the 15th century, Jan \u017di\u017eka built armoured wagons known as \u2018\"Wagenburg\"\u2019 containing cannons and used them effectively in several battles during the Hussite-wars. The continuous \"caterpillar track\" arose from attempts to improve the mobility of wheeled vehicles by spreading their weight, reducing ground pressure, and increasing their traction. Experiments can be traced back as far as the 17th century, and by the late nineteenth they existed in various recognizable and practical forms in several countries.\nIt is frequently claimed that Richard Lovell Edgeworth created a caterpillar track. It is true that in 1770 he patented a \"machine, that should carry and lay down its own road\", but this was Edgeworth's choice of words. His own account in his autobiography is of a horse-drawn wooden carriage on eight retractable legs, capable of lifting itself over high walls. The description bears no similarity to a caterpillar track. Armoured trains appeared in the mid-19th century, and various armoured steam and petrol-engined vehicles were also proposed.\nThe machines described in Wells's 1903 short story \"The Land Ironclads\" are a step closer, insofar as they are armour-plated, have an internal power plant, and are able to cross trenches. Some aspects of the story foresee the tactical use and impact of the tanks that later came into being. However, Wells's vehicles were driven by steam and moved on pedrail wheels, technologies that were already outdated at the time of writing. After seeing British tanks in 1916, Wells denied having \"invented\" them, writing, \"Yet let me state at once that I was not their prime originator. I took up an idea, manipulated it slightly, and handed it on.\" It is, though, possible that one of the British tank pioneers, Ernest Swinton, was subconsciously or otherwise influenced by Wells's tale.\nThe first combinations of the three principal components of the tank appeared in the decade before World War One. In 1903, Captain L\u00e9on Ren\u00e9 Levavasseur of the French artillery proposed mounting a field gun in an armoured box on tracks. Major William E. Donohue, of the British Army's Mechanical Transport Committee, suggested fixing a gun and armoured shield on a British type of track-driven vehicle. The first armoured car was produced in Austria in 1904. However, all were restricted to rails or reasonably passable terrain. It was the development of a practical caterpillar track that provided the necessary independent, all-terrain mobility.\nIn a memorandum of 1908, Antarctic explorer Robert Falcon Scott presented his view that man-hauling to the South Pole was impossible and that motor traction was needed. Snow vehicles did not yet exist, however, and so his engineer Reginald Skelton developed the idea of a caterpillar track for snow surfaces. These tracked motors were built by the Wolseley Tool and Motor Car Company in Birmingham and tested in Switzerland and Norway, and can be seen in action in Herbert Ponting's 1911 documentary film of Scott's Antarctic Terra Nova Expedition. Scott died during the expedition in 1912, but expedition member and biographer Apsley Cherry-Garrard credited Scott's \"motors\" with the inspiration for the British World War I tanks, writing: \"Scott never knew their true possibilities; for they were the direct ancestors of the 'tanks' in France\".\nIn 1911, a Lieutenant Engineer in the Austrian Army, G\u00fcnther Burstyn, presented to the Austrian and Prussian War Ministries plans for a light, three-man tank with a gun in a revolving turret, the so-called Burstyn-Motorgesch\u00fctz. In the same year an Australian civil engineer named Lancelot de Mole submitted a basic design for a tracked, armoured vehicle to the British War Office. In Russia, Vasiliy Mendeleev designed a tracked vehicle containing a large naval gun. All of these ideas were rejected and, by 1914, forgotten (although it was officially acknowledged after the war that de Mole's design was at least the equal to the initial British tanks). Various individuals continued to contemplate the use of tracked vehicles for military applications, but by the outbreak of the War no one in a position of responsibility in any army seems to have given much thought to tanks.\nWorld War I.\nUnited Kingdom.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The direct military impact of the tank can be debated but its effect on the Germans was immense, it caused bewilderment, terror and concern in equal measure. It was also a huge boost to the civilians at home. After facing the Zeppelins, at last Britain had a wonder weapon. Tanks were taken on tours and treated almost like film stars.\nFrom late 1914 a small number of middle-ranking British Army officers tried to persuade the War Office and the Government to consider the creation of armoured vehicles. Amongst their suggestions was the use of caterpillar tractors, but although the Army used many such vehicles for towing heavy guns, it could not be persuaded that they could be adapted as armoured vehicles. The consequence was that early tank development in the United Kingdom was carried out by the Royal Navy.\nAs the result of an approach by Royal Naval Air Service officers who had been operating armoured cars on the Western Front, the First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, formed the Landship Committee, on 20 February 1915. The Director of Naval Construction for the Royal Navy, Eustace Tennyson d'Eyncourt, was appointed to head the Committee in view of his experience with the engineering methods it was felt might be required; the two other members were naval officers, and a number of industrialists were engaged as consultants. So many played a part in its long and complicated development that it is not possible to name any individual as the sole inventor of the tank.\nHowever leading roles were played by Lt Walter Gordon Wilson R.N. who designed the gearbox and developed practical tracks and by William Tritton whose agricultural machinery company, William Foster &amp; Co. in Lincoln, Lincolnshire, England built the prototypes. On 22 July 1915, a commission was placed to design a machine that could cross a trench 4\u00a0ft wide. Secrecy surrounded the project with the designers locking themselves in a room at the White Hart Hotel in Lincoln. The committee's first design, Little Willie, ran for the first time in September 1915 and served to develop the form of the track but an improved design, better able to cross trenches, swiftly followed and in January 1916 the prototype, nicknamed \"Mother\", was adopted as the design for future tanks. The first order for tanks was placed on 12 February 1916, and a second on 21 April. Fosters built 37 (all \"male\"), and Metropolitan Railway Carriage and Wagon Company, of Birmingham, 113 (38 \"male\" and 75 \"female\"), a total of 150. Production models of \"Male\" tanks (armed with naval cannon and machine guns) and \"Females\" (carrying only machine-guns) would go on to fight in history's first tank action at the Somme in September 1916. Great Britain produced about 2,600 tanks of various types during the war. The first tank to engage in battle was designated \"D1\", a British Mark I Male, during the Battle of Flers-Courcelette (part of the wider Somme offensive) on 15 September 1916. Bert Chaney, a nineteen-year-old signaller with the 7th London Territorial Battalion, reported that \"three huge mechanical monsters such as [he] had never seen before\" rumbled their way onto the battlefield, \"frightening the Jerries out of their wits and making them scuttle like frightened rabbits.\" When the news of the first use of the tanks emerged, Prime Minister David Lloyd George commented,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is really to Mr Winston Churchill that the credit is due more than to anyone else. He took up with enthusiasm the idea of making them a long time ago, and he met with many difficulties. He converted me, and at the Ministry of Munitions he went ahead and made them. The admiralty experts were invaluable, and gave the greatest possible assistance. They are, of course, experts in the matter of armour plating. Major Stern, (formerly an officer in the Royal Naval Air Service) a business man at the Ministry of Munitions had charge of the work of getting them built, and he did the task very well. Col Swinton and others also did valuable work.\u2014\u200a\nFrance.\nWhilst several experimental machines were investigated in France, it was a colonel of artillery, J.B.E. Estienne, who directly approached the Commander-in-Chief with detailed plans for a tank on caterpillar tracks, in late 1915. The result was two largely unsatisfactory types of tank, 400 each of the Schneider and Saint-Chamond, both based on the Holt tractor.\nThe following year, the French pioneered the use of a full 360\u00b0 rotation turret in a tank for the first time, with the creation of the Renault FT light tank, with the turret containing the tank's main armament. In addition to the traversable turret, another innovative feature of the FT was its engine located at the rear. This pattern, with the gun located in a mounted turret and the engine at the back, has become the standard for most succeeding tanks across the world even to this day. The FT was the most numerous tank of the war; over 3,000 were made by late 1918.\nGermany.\nGermany fielded very few tanks during World War I, and started development only after encountering British tanks on the Somme. The A7V, the only type made, was introduced in March 1918 with just 20 being produced during the war. The first tank \"versus\" tank action took place on 24 April 1918 at the Second Battle of Villers-Bretonneux, France, when three British Mark IVs met three German A7Vs. Captured British Mk IVs formed the bulk of Germany's tank forces during World War I; about 35 were in service at any one time. Plans to expand the tank programme were under way when the War ended.\nUnited States.\nThe United States Tank Corps used tanks supplied by France and Great Britain during World War I. Production of American-built tanks had just begun when the War came to an end.\nItaly.\nItaly also manufactured two Fiat 2000s towards the end of the war, too late to see service. \nRussia.\nRussia independently built and trialed two prototypes early in the War; the tracked, two-man Vezdekhod and the huge Lebedenko, but neither went into production. A tracked self-propelled gun was also designed but not produced.\nAlthough tank tactics developed rapidly during the war, piecemeal deployments, mechanical problems, and poor mobility limited the military significance of the tank in World War I, and the tank did not fulfil its promise of rendering trench warfare obsolete. Nonetheless, it was clear to military thinkers on both sides that tanks in some way could have a significant role in future conflicts.\nInterwar period.\nIn the interwar period tanks underwent further mechanical development. In terms of tactics, J.F.C. Fuller's doctrine of spearhead attacks with massed tank formations was the basis for work by Heinz Guderian in Germany, Percy Hobart in Britain, Adna R. Chaffee, Jr., in the US, Charles de Gaulle in France, and Mikhail Tukhachevsky in the USSR. Liddell Hart held a more moderate view that all arms \u2013 cavalry, infantry and artillery \u2013 should be mechanized and work together. The British formed the all-arms Experimental Mechanized Force to test the use of tanks with supporting forces.\nIn the Second World War only Germany would initially put the theory into practice on a large scale, and it was their superior tactics and French blunders, not superior weapons, that made the \"blitzkrieg\" so successful in May 1940. For information regarding tank development in this period, see tank development between the wars.\nGermany, Italy and the Soviet Union all experimented heavily with tank warfare during their clandestine and \"volunteer\" involvement in the Spanish Civil War, which saw some of the earliest examples of successful mechanized combined arms\u00a0\u2014such as when Republican troops, equipped with Soviet-supplied tanks and supported by aircraft, eventually routed Italian troops fighting for the Nationalists in the seven-day Battle of Guadalajara in 1937. However, of the nearly 700 tanks deployed during this conflict, only about 64 tanks representing the \"Franco\" faction and 331 from the \"Republican\" side were equipped with cannon, and of those 64 nearly all were World War I vintage Renault FT tanks, while the 331 Soviet supplied machines had 45mm main guns and were of 1930s manufacture. The balance of \"Nationalist\" tanks were machine gun armed. The primary lesson learned from this war was that machine gun armed tanks had to be equipped with cannon, with the associated armour inherent to modern tanks.\nThe five-month-long war between the Soviet Union and the Japanese 6th Army at \"Khalkhin Gol\" (Nomonhan) in 1939 brought home some lessons. In this conflict, the Soviets fielded over two thousand tanks, to the around 73 cannon armed tanks deployed by the Japanese, the major difference being that Japanese armour were equipped with diesel engines as opposed to the Russian tanks equipped with petrol engines. After General Georgy Zhukov inflicted a defeat on the Japanese 6th Army with his massed combined tank and air attack, the Soviets learned a lesson on the use of gasoline engines, and quickly incorporated those newly found experiences into their new T-34 medium tank during World War II.\nPrior to World War II, the tactics and strategy of deploying tank forces underwent a revolution. In August 1939, Soviet General Georgy Zhukov used the combined force of tanks and airpower at Nomonhan against the Japanese 6th Army; Heinz Guderian, a tactical theoretician who was heavily involved in the formation of the first independent German tank force, said \"Where tanks are, the front is\", and this concept became a reality in World War II. Guderian's armoured warfare ideas, combined with Germany's existing doctrines of \"Bewegungskrieg\" (\"maneuver warfare\") and infiltration tactics from World War I, became the basis of blitzkrieg in the opening stages of World War II.\nWorld War II.\nGermany.\nDuring World War II, the first conflict in which armoured vehicles were critical to battlefield success, the tank and related tactics developed rapidly. Armoured forces proved capable of tactical victory in an unprecedentedly short amount of time, yet new anti-tank weaponry showed that the tank was not invulnerable. During the Invasion of Poland, tanks performed in a more traditional role in close cooperation with infantry units, but in the Battle of France deep independent armoured penetrations were executed by the Germans, a technique later called \"blitzkrieg\". Blitzkrieg used innovative combined arms tactics and radios in all of the tanks to provide a level of tactical flexibility and power that surpassed that of the Allied armour. The French Army, with tanks equal or superior to the German tanks in both quality and quantity, employed a linear defensive strategy in which the armoured cavalry units were made subservient to the needs of the infantry armies to cover their entrenchment in Belgium. In addition, they lacked radios in many of their tanks and headquarters, which limited their ability to respond to German attacks.\nIn accordance with blitzkrieg methods, German tanks bypassed enemy strongpoints and could radio for close air support to destroy them, or leave them to the infantry. A related development, motorized infantry, allowed some of the troops to keep up with the tanks and create highly mobile combined arms forces. The defeat of a major military power within weeks shocked the rest of the world, spurring tank and anti-tank weapon development.\nThe North African Campaign also provided an important battleground for tanks, as the flat, desolate terrain with relatively few obstacles or urban environments was ideal for conducting mobile armoured warfare. However, this battlefield also showed the importance of logistics, especially in an armoured force, as the principal warring armies, the German Afrika Korps and the British Eighth Army, often outpaced their supply trains in repeated attacks and counter-attacks on each other, resulting in complete stalemate. This situation would not be resolved until 1942, when during the Second Battle of El Alamein, the Afrika Korps, crippled by disruptions in their supply lines, had 95% of its tanks destroyed and was forced to retreat by a massively reinforced Eighth Army, the first in a series of defeats that would eventually lead to the surrender of the remaining Axis forces in Tunisia.\nSoviets.\nWhen Germany launched its invasion of the Soviet Union, Operation Barbarossa, the Soviets had a superior tank design, the T-34. A lack of preparations for the Axis surprise attack, mechanical problems, poor training of the crews and incompetent leadership caused the Soviet machines to be surrounded and destroyed in large numbers. However, interference from Adolf Hitler, the geographic scale of the conflict, the dogged resistance of the Soviet combat troops, and the Soviets' massive advantages in manpower and production capability prevented a repeat of the German successes of 1940. Despite early successes against the Soviets, the Germans were forced to up-gun their Panzer IVs, and to design and build both the larger and more expensive Tiger heavy tank in 1942, and the Panther medium tank the following year. In doing so, the \"Wehrmacht\" denied the infantry and other support arms the production priorities that they needed to remain equal partners with the increasingly sophisticated tanks, in turn violating the principle of combined arms they had pioneered. Soviet developments following the invasion included upgunning the T-34, development of self-propelled anti-tank guns such as the SU-152, and deployment of the IS-2 in the closing stages of the war, with the T-34 being the most produced tank of World War II, totalling up to some 65,000 examples by May 1945.\nUnited States.\nMuch like the Soviets, when entering World War II six months later (December 1941), the United States' mass production capacity enabled it to rapidly construct thousands of relatively cheap M4 Sherman medium tanks. A compromise all round, the Sherman was reliable and formed a large part of the Anglo-American ground forces, but in a tank-versus-tank battle was no match for the Panther or Tiger. Numerical and logistical superiority and the successful use of combined arms allowed the Allies to overrun the German forces during the Battle of Normandy. Upgunned versions with the 76 mm gun M1 and the 17-pounder were introduced to improve the M4's firepower, but concerns about protection remained\u2014despite the apparent armour deficiencies, a total of some 42,000 Shermans were built and delivered to the Allied nations using it during the war years, a total second only to the T-34.\nTank hulls were modified to produce flame tanks, mobile rocket artillery, and combat engineering vehicles for tasks including mine-clearing and bridging. Specialized self-propelled guns, most of which could double as tank destroyers, were also both developed by the Germans\u2014with their \"Sturmgesch\u00fctz\", \"Panzerj\u00e4ger\" and \"Jagdpanzer\" vehicles\u2014and the \"Samokhodnaya ustanovka\" families of AFV's for the Soviets: such turretless, casemate-style tank destroyers and assault guns were less complex, stripped down tanks carrying heavy guns, solely firing forward. The firepower and low cost of these vehicles made them attractive but as manufacturing techniques improved and larger turret rings made larger tank guns feasible, the gun turret was recognized as the most effective mounting for the main gun to allow movement in a different direction from firing, enhancing tactical flexibility.\nCold War.\nDuring the Cold War, tension between the Warsaw Pact countries and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) countries created an arms race that ensured that tank development proceeded largely as it had during World War II. The essence of tank designs during the Cold War had been hammered out in the closing stages of World War II. Large turrets, capable suspension systems, greatly improved engines, sloped armour and large-caliber (90\u00a0mm and larger) guns were standard. Tank design during the Cold War built on this foundation and included improvements to fire control, gyroscopic gun stabilization, communications (primarily radio) and crew comfort and saw the introduction of laser rangefinders and infrared night vision equipment. Armour technology progressed in an ongoing race against improvements in anti-tank weapons, especially antitank guided missiles like the TOW.\nMedium tanks of World War II evolved into the \"main battle tank\" (MBT) of the Cold War and took over the majority of tank roles on the battlefield. This gradual transition occurred in the 1950s and 1960s due to anti-tank guided missiles, sabot ammunition and high-explosive anti-tank warheads. World War II had shown that the speed of a light tank was no substitute for armour &amp; firepower and medium tanks were vulnerable to newer weapon technology, rendering them obsolete.\nIn a trend started in World War II, economies of scale led to serial production of progressively upgraded models of all major tanks during the Cold War. For the same reason many upgraded post-World War II tanks and their derivatives (for example, the T-55 and T-72) remain in active service around the world, and even an obsolete tank may be the most formidable weapon on battlefields in many parts of the world. Among the tanks of the 1950s were the British Centurion and Soviet T-54/55 in service from 1946, and the US M48 from 1951. These three vehicles formed the bulk of the armoured forces of NATO and the Warsaw Pact throughout much of the Cold War. Lessons learned from tanks such as the Leopard 1, M48 Patton series, Chieftain, and T-72 led to the contemporary Leopard 2, M1 Abrams, Challenger 2, C1 Ariete, T-90 and Merkava IV.\nTanks and anti-tank weapons of the Cold War era saw action in a number of proxy wars like the Korean War, Vietnam War, Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, Soviet\u2013Afghan War and Arab-Israeli conflicts, culminating with the Yom Kippur War. The T-55, for example, has seen action in no fewer than 32 conflicts. In these wars the U.S. or NATO countries and the Soviet Union or China consistently backed opposing forces. Proxy wars were studied by Western and Soviet military analysts and provided a contribution to the Cold War tank development process.\n21st century.\nThe role of tank vs. tank combat is becoming diminished. Tanks work in concert with infantry in urban warfare by deploying them ahead of the platoon. When engaging enemy infantry, tanks can provide covering fire on the battlefield. Conversely, tanks can spearhead attacks when infantry are deployed in personnel carriers.\nTanks were used to spearhead the initial US invasion of Iraq in 2003. As of 2005, there were 1,100 M1 Abrams used by the United States Army in the course of the Iraq War, and they have proven to have an unexpectedly high level of vulnerability to roadside bombs. A relatively new type of remotely detonated mine, the explosively formed penetrator has been used with some success against American armoured vehicles (particularly the Bradley fighting vehicle). However, with upgrades to their armour in the rear, M1s have proven invaluable in fighting insurgents in urban combat, particularly at the Battle of Fallujah, where the US Marines brought in two extra brigades. Israeli Merkava tanks contain features that enable them to support infantry in low intensity conflicts (LIC) and counter-terrorism operations. Such features are the rear door and rear corridor, enabling the tank to carry infantry and embark safely; the IMI APAM-MP-T multi-purpose ammunition round, advanced C4IS systems and recently: TROPHY active protection system which protects the tank from shoulder-launched anti-tank weapons. During the Second Intifada further modifications were made, designated as \"Merkava Mk. 3d Baz LIC\".\nResearch and development.\nIn terms of firepower, the focus of 2010s-era R&amp;D was increased detection capability such as thermal imagers, automated fire control systems for the guns and increased muzzle energy from the gun to improve range, accuracy and armour penetration. The most mature future gun technology is the electrothermal-chemical gun. The XM291 electrothermal-chemical tank gun has gone through successful multiple firing sequences on a modified American M8 Armored Gun System chassis. To improve tank protection, one field of research involves making the tank invisible to radar by adapting stealth technologies originally designed for aircraft. Improvements to camouflage or and attempts to render it invisible through active camouflage, which changes according to where the tank is located, are being pursued. Research is also ongoing in electromagnetic armour systems to disperse or deflect incoming shaped charges, as well as various forms of active protection systems to prevent incoming projectiles (RPGs, missiles, etc.) from striking the tank.\nMobility may be enhanced in future tanks by the use of diesel\u2013electric or turbine\u2013electric series hybrid drives\u2014first used in a primitive, gasoline-engined form with Porsche's \"Elefant\" German tank destroyer of 1943\u2014improving fuel efficiency while reducing the size and weight of the power plant. Furthermore, advances in gas turbine technology, including the use of advanced recuperators, have allowed for reduction in engine volume and mass to less than 1 m3 and 1 metric ton, respectively, while maintaining fuel efficiency similar to that of a diesel engine. In line with the new doctrine of network-centric warfare, the 2010s-era modern battle tank shows increasing sophistication in its electronics and communication systems. The future of tanks has been challenged by the proliferation of relatively inexpensive anti tank guided missiles and rockets during the Russo-Ukrainian War.\nDesign.\nThe three traditional factors determining a tank's capability effectiveness are its \"firepower\", \"protection\", and \"mobility\". Firepower is the ability of a tank's crew to identify, engage, and destroy enemy tanks and other targets using its large-caliber cannon. Protection is the degree to which the tank's armour, profile and camouflage enables the tank crew to evade detection, protect themselves from enemy fire, and retain vehicle functionality during and after combat. Mobility includes how well the tank can be transported by rail, sea, or air to the operational staging area; from the staging area by road or over terrain towards the enemy; and tactical movement by the tank over the battlefield during combat, including traversing of obstacles and rough terrain. The variations of tank designs have been determined by the way these three fundamental features are blended. For instance, in 1937, the French doctrine focused on firepower and protection more than mobility because tanks worked in intimate liaison with the infantry. There was also the case of the development of a heavy cruiser tank, which focused on armour and firepower to challenge Germany's Tiger and Panther tanks.\nClassification.\nTanks have been classified by weight, role, or other criteria, that has changed over time and place. Classification is determined by the prevailing theories of armoured warfare, which have been altered in turn by rapid advances in technology. No one classification system works across all periods or all nations; in particular, weight-based classification is inconsistent between countries and eras.\nIn World War I, the first tank designs focused on crossing wide trenches, requiring very long and large vehicles, such as the British Mark I; these became classified as heavy tanks. Tanks that fulfilled other combat roles were smaller, like the French Renault FT; these were classified as light tanks or tankettes. Many late-war and inter-war tank designs diverged from these according to new, though mostly untried, concepts for future tank roles and tactics. Tank classifications varied considerably according to each nation's own tank development, such as \"cavalry tanks\", \"fast tanks\", and \"breakthrough tanks\".\nDuring World War II, many tank concepts were found unsatisfactory and discarded, mostly leaving the more multi-role tanks; these became easier to classify. Tank classes based on weight (and the corresponding transport and logistical needs) led to new definitions of heavy and light tank classes, with medium tanks covering the balance of those between. The British maintained cruiser tanks, focused on speed, and infantry tanks that traded speed for more armour. Tank destroyers are tanks or other armoured fighting vehicles specifically designed to defeat enemy tanks. Assault guns are armoured fighting vehicles that could combine the roles of infantry tanks and tank destroyers. Some tanks were converted to flame tanks, specializing on close-in attacks on enemy strongholds with flamethrowers. As the war went on, tanks tended to become larger and more powerful, shifting some tank classifications and leading to super-heavy tanks.\nExperience and technology advances during the Cold War continued to consolidate tank roles. With the worldwide adoption of the modern main battle tank designs, which favour a modular universal design, most other classifications are dropped from modern terminology. All main battle tanks tend to have a good balance of speed, armour, and firepower, even while technology continues to improve all three. Being fairly large, main battle tanks can be complemented with light tanks, armoured personnel carriers, infantry fighting vehicles or similar relatively lighter armoured fighting vehicles, typically in the roles of armoured reconnaissance, amphibious or air assault operations, or against enemies lacking main battle tanks.\nOffensive capabilities.\nThe main weapon of modern tanks is typically a single, large-caliber cannon mounted in a fully traversing (rotating) gun turret. The typical modern tank gun is a smoothbore weapon capable of firing a variety of ammunition, including armour-piercing kinetic energy penetrators (KEP), also known as armour-piercing discarding sabot (APDS), and/or armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS) and high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT) shells, and/or high-explosive squash head (HESH) and/or anti-tank guided missiles (ATGM) to destroy armoured targets, as well as high-explosive (HE) shells for shooting at \"soft\" targets (unarmoured vehicles or troops) or fortifications. Canister shot may be used in close or urban combat situations where the risk of hitting friendly forces with shrapnel from HE rounds is unacceptably high.\nA gyroscope is used to stabilise the main gun, allowing it to be effectively aimed and fired at the \"short halt\" or on the move. Modern tank guns are also commonly fitted with insulating thermal sleeves to reduce gun-barrel warping caused by uneven thermal expansion, bore evacuators to minimise gun firing fumes entering the crew compartment and sometimes muzzle brakes to minimise the effect of recoil on accuracy and rate of fire.\nTraditionally, target detection relied on visual identification. This was accomplished from within the tank through telescopic periscopes; often, however, tank commanders would open up the hatch to view the outside surroundings, which improved situational awareness but incurred the penalty of vulnerability to sniper fire. Though several developments in target detection have taken place, these methods are still common practice. In the 2010s, more electronic target detection methods are available.\nIn some cases spotting rifles were used to confirm proper trajectory and range to a target. These spotting rifles were mounted co-axially to the main gun, and fired tracer ammunition ballistically matched to the gun itself. The gunner would track the movement of the tracer round in flight, and upon impact with a hard surface, it would give off a flash and a puff of smoke, after which the main gun was immediately fired. However this slow method has been mostly superseded by laser rangefinding equipment.\nModern tanks also use sophisticated light intensification and thermal imaging equipment to improve fighting capability at night, in poor weather and in smoke. The accuracy of modern tank guns is pushed to the mechanical limit by computerized fire-control systems. A fire-control system uses a laser rangefinder to determine the range to the target, a thermocouple, anemometer and wind vane to correct for weather effects and a muzzle referencing system to correct for gun-barrel temperature, warping and wear. Two sightings of a target with the range-finder enable calculation of the target movement vector. This information is combined with the known movement of the tank and the principles of ballistics to calculate the elevation and aim point that maximises the probability of hitting the target.\nUsually, tanks carry smaller caliber armament for short-range defense where fire from the main weapon would be ineffective or wasteful, for example when engaging infantry, light vehicles or close air support aircraft. A typical complement of secondary weapons is a general-purpose machine gun mounted coaxially with the main gun, and a heavier anti-aircraft-capable machine gun on the turret roof. Some tanks also have a hull-mounted machine gun. These weapons are often modified variants of those used by infantry, and so use the same kinds of ammunition.\nProtection and countermeasures.\nThe measure of a tank's protection is the combination of its ability to avoid detection (due to having a low profile and through the use of camouflage), to avoid being hit by enemy fire, its resistance to the effects of enemy fire, and its capacity to sustain damage whilst still completing its objective, or at least protecting its crew. This is done by a variety of countermeasures, such as armour plating and reactive defenses, as well as more complex ones such as heat-emissions reduction.\nIn common with most unit types, tanks are subject to additional hazards in dense wooded and urban combat environments which largely negate the advantages of the tank's long-range firepower and mobility, limit the crew's detection capabilities and can restrict turret traverse. Despite these disadvantages, tanks retain high survivability against previous-generation rocket-propelled grenades aimed at the most-armoured sections.\nHowever, as effective and advanced as armour plating has become, tank survivability against newer-generation tandem-warhead anti-tank missiles is a concern for military planners. Tandem-warhead RPGs use two warheads to fool active protection systems; a first dummy warhead is fired first, to trigger the active defenses, with the real warhead following it. For example, the RPG-29 from the 1980s is able to penetrate the frontal hull armour of the Challenger II and also managed to damage a M1 Abrams. As well, even tanks with advanced armour plating can have their tracks or gear cogs damaged by RPGs, which may render them immobile or hinder their mobility. Despite all of the advances in armour plating, a tank with its hatches open remains vulnerable to Molotov cocktail (gasoline bombs) and grenades. Even a \"buttoned up\" tank may have components which are vulnerable to Molotov cocktails, such as optics, extra gas cans and extra ammunition stored on the outside of the tank.\nAvoiding detection.\nA tank avoids detection using the doctrine of countermeasures known as CCD: camouflage (looks the same as the surroundings), concealment (cannot be seen) and deception (looks like something else).\nCamouflage.\nCamouflage can include disruptive painted shapes on the tank to break up the distinctive appearance and silhouette of a tank. Netting or actual branches from the surrounding landscape are also used. Prior to development of infrared technology, tanks were often given a coating of camouflage paint that, depending on environmental region or season, would allow it to blend in with the rest of its environment. A tank operating in wooded areas would typically get a green and brown paintjob; a tank in a winter environment would get white paint (often mixed with some darker colors); tanks in the desert often get khaki paintjobs.\nThe Russian Nakidka camouflage kit was designed to reduce the optical, thermal, infrared, and radar signatures of a tank, so that acquisition of the tank would be difficult. According to Nii Stali, the designers of Nakidka, Nakidka would reduce the probabilities of detection via \"visual and near-IR bands by 30%, the thermal band by 2\u20133-fold, radar band by 6-fold, and radar-thermal band to near-background levels.\nConcealment.\nConcealment can include hiding the tank among trees or digging in the tank by having a combat bulldozer dig out part of a hill, so that much of the tank will be hidden. A tank commander can conceal the tank by using \"hull down\" approaches to going over upward-sloping hills, so that she or he can look out the commander's cupola without the distinctive-looking main cannon cresting over the hill. Adopting a turret-down or hull-down position reduces the visible silhouette of a tank as well as providing the added protection of a position in defilade.\nWorking against efforts to avoid detection is the fact that a tank is a large metallic object with a distinctive, angular silhouette that emits copious heat and engine noise. A tank that is operating in cold weather or which needs to use its radio or other communications or target-detecting electronics will need to start its engine regularly to maintain its battery power, which will create engine noise. Consequently, it is difficult to effectively camouflage a tank in the absence of some form of cover or concealment (e.g., woods) it can hide its hull behind. The tank becomes easier to detect when moving (typically, whenever it is in use) due to the large, distinctive auditory, vibration and thermal signature of its engine and power plant. Tank tracks and dust clouds also betray past or present tank movement.\nSwitched-off tanks are vulnerable to infra-red detection due to differences between the thermal conductivity and therefore heat dissipation of the metallic tank and its surroundings. At close range the tank can be detected even when powered down and fully concealed due to the column of warmer air above the tank and the smell of diesel or gasoline. Thermal blankets slow the rate of heat emission and some thermal camouflage nets use a mix of materials with differing thermal properties to operate in the infra-red as well as the visible spectrum.\nGrenade launchers can rapidly deploy a smoke screen that is opaque to infrared light, to hide it from the thermal viewer of another tank. In addition to using its own grenade launchers, a tank commander could call in an artillery unit to provide smoke cover. Some tanks can produce a smoke screen.\nSometimes camouflage and concealment are used at the same time. For example, a camouflage-painted and branch-covered tank (camouflage) may be hidden in a behind a hill or in a dug-in-emplacement (concealment).\nDeception.\nSome armoured recovery vehicles (often tracked, tank chassis-based \"tow trucks\" for tanks) have dummy turrets and cannons. This makes it less likely that enemy tanks will fire on these vehicles. Some armies have fake \"dummy\" tanks made of wood which troops can carry into position and hide behind obstacles. These \"dummy\" tanks may cause the enemy to think that there are more tanks than are actually possessed.\nArmour.\nTo effectively protect the tank and its crew, tank armour must counter a wide variety of antitank threats. Protection against kinetic energy penetrators and high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT) shells fired by other tanks is of primary importance, but tank armour also aims to protect against infantry mortars, grenades, rocket-propelled grenades, anti-tank guided missiles, anti-tank mines, anti-tank rifles, bombs, direct artillery hits, and (less often) nuclear, biological and chemical threats, any of which could disable or destroy a tank or its crew.\nSteel armour plate was the earliest type of armour. The Germans pioneered the use of face hardened steel during World War II and the Soviets also achieved improved protection with sloped armour technology. World War II developments led to the obsolescence of homogeneous steel armour with the development of shaped-charge warheads, exemplified by the Panzerfaust and bazooka infantry-carried weapons which were effective, despite some early success with spaced armour. Magnetic mines led to the development of anti-magnetic paste and paint. From WWII to the modern era, troops have added improvised armour to tanks while in combat settings, such as sandbags or pieces of old armour plating.\nBritish tank researchers took the next step with the development of Chobham armour, or more generally composite armour, incorporating ceramics and plastics in a resin matrix between steel plates, which provided good protection against HEAT weapons. High-explosive squash head warheads led to anti-spall armour linings, and kinetic energy penetrators led to the inclusion of exotic materials like a matrix of depleted uranium into a composite armour configuration.\nReactive armour consists of small explosive-filled metal boxes that detonate when hit by the metallic jet projected by an exploding HEAT warhead, causing their metal plates to disrupt it. Tandem warheads defeat reactive armour by causing the armour to detonate prematurely. Modern reactive armour protects itself from Tandem warheads by having a thicker front metal plate to prevent the precursor charge from detonating the explosive in the reactive armour. Reactive armours can also reduce the penetrative abilities of kinetic energy penetrators by deforming the penetrator with the metal plates on the Reactive armour, thereby reducing its effectiveness against the main armour of the tank.\nActive protection system.\nThe latest generation of protective measures for tanks are active protection systems. The term \"active\" is used to contrast these approaches with the armour used as the primary protective approach in earlier tanks.\nMobility.\nThe mobility of a tank is described by its battlefield or tactical mobility, its operational mobility, and its strategic mobility.\nTanks have high tactical mobility and can travel over most types of terrain due to their continuous tracks and advanced suspension. The tracks disperse the weight of the vehicle over a large area, resulting in less ground pressure. A tank can travel at approximately across flat terrain and up to on roads, but due to the mechanical strain this places on the vehicle and the logistical strain on fuel delivery and tank maintenance, these must be considered exceptional \"burst\" speeds.\nTanks are susceptible to mechanical failure of engine and transmission systems, particularly at maximum burst speeds. Consequently, wheeled tank transporters and rail transport are used wherever possible for non-combat tank transport. Tank mobility is very restricted compared to wheeled armoured fighting vehicles. Most operational mobility in blitzkrieg tank operations was conducted at the pedestrian pace of , and that was only achieved on the roads of France.\nSuspension and running gear.\nTank agility is a function of the weight of the tank due to its inertia while manoeuvring and its ground pressure, the power output of the installed power plant and the tank transmission and track design. In addition, rough terrain effectively limits the tank's speed through the stress it puts on the suspension and the crew. A breakthrough in this area was achieved during World War II when improved suspension systems were developed that allowed better cross-country performance and limited firing on the move. Systems like the earlier Christie or later torsion-bar suspension developed by Ferdinand Porsche dramatically improved the tank's cross-country performance and overall mobility.\nEngine.\nThe tank's power plant supplies kinetic energy to move the tank, and electric power via a generator to components such as the turret rotation motors and the tank's electronic systems.\nThe tank power plant evolved from predominantly petrol and adapted large-displacement aeronautical or automotive engines to diesel engines. Japan was the first to begin transitioning to this engine type beginning with the Type 89B in 1934. The main advantage of diesel is their higher fuel economy, which allows for greater operating ranges. Diesel engines can also run on a variety of fuels, such as aviation kerosene and even gasoline. Advanced multi-fuel diesel engines have been adopted. Gas turbines are powerful per unit weight but fuel-hungry; they have been used in a few tanks, including the Soviet T-80 and American M1 Abrams.\nFording.\nIn the absence of combat engineers, most tanks can only ford small rivers. The typical fording depth for MBTs is approximately , being limited by the height of the engine air intake and driver's position. Modern tanks such as the Russian T-90 and the German Leopard 1 and Leopard 2 tanks can ford to a depth of when properly prepared and equipped with a snorkel to supply air for the crew and engine. Tank crews usually strongly dislike deep fording, but it adds considerable scope for surprise and tactical flexibility in water-crossing operations by opening new and unexpected avenues of attack.\nAmphibious tanks are specially designed or adapted for water operations, such as by including snorkels and skirts, but they are rare in modern armies. Purpose-built amphibious assault vehicles or armoured personnel carriers are used, without tanks, in amphibious assaults. Advances such as the EFA mobile bridge and armoured vehicle-launched scissors bridges have also reduced the impediment to tank advance that rivers posed in World War II.\nCrew.\nMost modern tanks most often have four crew members, or three if an auto-loader is installed. These are the:\nOperating a tank is a team effort. For example, the loader is assisted by the rest of the crew in stowing ammunition. The driver is assisted in maintaining the automotive features.\nHistorically, crews have varied from two to twelve members. First World War tanks carried the crew needed to man the multiple guns and machine guns, and up to four crewmen to drive the tank: the commander drove the tank and manned the brakes, steering via orders to his gears-men; a co-driver operated the gearbox and throttle; and two gears-men, one for each track, steered by setting their side to idle, allowing the track on the other side to slew the tank to one side. Pre-World War II French tanks were noted for having a two-man crew, in which the overworked commander had to load and fire the gun in addition to commanding the tank.\nWith World War II the multi-turreted tanks proved impracticable, and as the single turret on a low hull design became standard, crews became standardized around a crew of four or five. In those tanks with a fifth crew member, usually three were located in the turret (as described above) while the fifth was most often seated in the hull next to the driver, and operated the hull machine gun in addition to acting as a co-driver or radio operator. Well-designed crew stations, giving proper consideration to comfort and ergonomics, are important to the combat-effectiveness of a tank, as they limit fatigue and speed up individual actions.\nEngineering constraints.\nA noted author on the subject of tank design engineering, Richard Ogorkiewicz, outlined the following basic engineering sub-systems that are commonly incorporated into a tank's technological development:\nTo the above can be added unit communication systems and electronic anti-tank countermeasures, crew ergonomic and survival systems (including flame suppression), and provision for technological upgrading.\nFew tank designs have survived their entire service lives without some upgrading or modernization, particularly during wartime, including some that have changed almost beyond recognition, such as the latest Israeli Magach versions.\nThe characteristics of a tank are determined by the performance criteria required for the tank. The obstacles that must be traversed affect the vehicle's front and rear profiles. The types of terrain specified to be traversed determine the maximum permissible track ground pressure.\nTank design is a compromise between technological and budgetary constraints and tactical capability requirements. It is not possible to maximise firepower, protection and mobility simultaneously, while also incorporating the latest technology and being economically viable.\nFor example, in the case of tactical capability requirements, increasing protection by adding armour will result in an increase in weight and therefore decrease in mobility; increasing firepower by installing a larger gun will force the designer team to increase armour, the therefore weight of the tank by retaining same internal volume to ensure crew efficiency during combat. In the case of the Abrams MBT which has good firepower, speed and armour, these advantages are counterbalanced by its engine's notably high fuel consumption, which ultimately reduces its range, and in a larger sense its mobility. And most enhancements add to cost.\nSince the Second World War the economics of tank production, governed by the complexity of manufacture and cost and the impact of a given tank design on logistics and field maintenance capabilities, have also been accepted as important in determining how many tanks a nation can afford to field in its force structure.\nSome tank designs that were fielded in significant numbers, such as Tiger I and M60A2 proved to be too complex or expensive to manufacture, and made unsustainable demands on the logistics services support of the armed forces. The \"affordability of the design\" therefore takes precedence over the combat capability requirements.\nNowhere was this principle illustrated better than during the Second World War when two Allied designs, the Soviet T-34 and the US M4 Sherman, although both simple designs which accepted engineering compromises, were used successfully against more sophisticated designs by Germany that were more complex and expensive to produce, and more demanding on overstretched logistics of the Wehrmacht. Given that a tank crew will spend most of its time occupied with maintenance of the vehicle, engineering simplicity has become the primary constraint on tank design since the Second World War despite advances in mechanical, electrical and electronics technologies.\nSince the Second World War, tank development has incorporated experimenting with significant mechanical changes to the tank design while focusing on technological advances in the tank's many subsystems to improve its performance. However, a number of novel designs appeared, with mixed success, including the firepower of the Soviet IT-1 and T-64, and the crew protection of the Israeli Merkava and Swedish S-tank, while for decades the US's M551 remained the only light tank deployable by parachute.\nCommand, control, and communications.\nCommanding and coordinating tanks in the field has always been subject to particular problems, particularly in the area of communications, but in modern armies these problems have been partially alleviated by networked, integrated systems that enable communications and contribute to enhanced situational awareness.\n20th century.\nWorld War I and Interwar period.\nArmoured bulkheads, engine noise, intervening terrain, dust and smoke, and the need to operate with hatches closed are severe detriments to communication and lead to a sense of isolation for small tank units, individual vehicles, and tank crew. Radios were not portable or robust enough to be mounted in a tank, although Morse code transmitters were installed in some Mark IVs at Cambrai as messaging vehicles. The mounting of a field telephone to the rear was not a practice. During World War I when these failed or were unavailable, situation reports were sent back to headquarters by some crews releasing carrier pigeons through loopholes or hatches and communications between vehicles was accomplished using hand signals, handheld semaphore flags which continued in use in the Red Army/Soviet Army through the Second and Cold wars, or by foot or horse-mounted messengers.\nWorld War II.\nFrom the beginning, the German military stressed wireless communications, equipping their combat vehicles with radios, and drilled all units to rely on disciplined radio use as a basic element of tactics. This allowed them to respond to developing threats and opportunities during battles, giving the Germans a notable tactical advantage early in the war; even where Allied tanks initially had better firepower and armour, they generally lacked individual radios. By mid-war, Western Allied tanks adopted full use of radios, although Russian use of radios remained relatively limited.\nCold War era.\nOn the modern battlefield an intercom mounted in the crew helmet provides internal communications and a link to the radio network, and on some tanks an external intercom on the rear of the tank provides communication with co-operating infantry. Radio networks employ radio voice procedure to minimize confusion and \"chatter\".\nA recent development in AFV equipment and doctrine is integration of information from the fire control system, laser rangefinder, Global Positioning System and terrain information via hardened military specification electronics and a battlefield network to display information on enemy targets and friendly units on a monitor in the tank. The sensor data can be sourced from nearby tanks, planes, UAVs or, in the future infantry (such as the US Future Force Warrior project). This improves the tank commander's situational awareness and ability to navigate the battlefield and select and engage targets. In addition to easing the reporting burden by automatically logging all orders and actions, orders are sent via the network with text and graphical overlays. This is known as Network-centric warfare by the US, Network Enabled Capability (UK) or Digital Army Battle Management System \u05e6\u05d9\"\u05d3 (Israel). Advanced battle tanks, including the K-2 Black Panther, have taken up the first major step forward in adopting a fully radar integrated Fire Control System which allows it to detect tanks from a further distance and identify it as a friend-or-foe as well as increasing the tank's accuracy as well as its capability to lock onto tanks.\n21st century.\nPerforming situational awareness and communication is the one of four primary MBT functions in the 21st century. \nTo improve the crew's situational awareness MBTs use circular review system with a combination of Augmented reality and Artificial Intelligence technologies.\nFurther advancements in tank defense systems have led to the development of active protection systems, which may be classified as either:\nBoth these active protection systems can be found on several main battle tanks including the K2 Black Panther, the Merkava and the Leopard 2A7.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29972", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29972", "title": "Herbal tea", "text": "Beverage made from infusing or decocting plant material in hot water\nHerbal teas or herb teas, technically known as herbal infusions, and less commonly called tisanes, are beverages made from the infusion or decoction of any herbs, spices, or other plant material in water that is not derived from the tea plant (\"Camellia sinensis\"). Many herbs used in teas/tisanes are also used in herbal medicine and in folk medicine. Herbal teas are not technically teas because they are not brewed from the tea plant. \nThe term \"herbal tea\" is often used to distinguish these infusions from true teas (e.g., black, green, white, yellow, oolong), which are prepared from the tea plant (\"Camellia sinensis\") or, more rarely, its close relatives (such as \"Camellia taliensis\")\".\" Beverages actually created from tea and combined with material from other plants are known as \"blended teas\", \"scented teas\", or \"flavored teas\". Examples include jasmine tea, genmaicha, and Earl Grey tea. Unlike true teas, most tisanes do not naturally contain caffeine (though tea can be decaffeinated, i.e., processed to remove caffeine).\nA number of plants, however, \"do\" contain psychoactive compounds, such as caffeine or another stimulant, like theobromine, cocaine or ephedrine. Some have the opposite effect, acting as a sedative. Some common infusions have specific names such as \"mate\" (yerba mate) and \"rooibos\" (red bush).\nEtymology.\nDictionaries commonly record that the word \"tea\" is used to refer to other plants beside the tea plant and to beverages made from these other plants. The term \"herbal tea\" is well established and more common than \"tisane\" for this usage \nFurthermore, in the \"Etymology of tea,\" the most ancient term for tea was \u837c (pronounced \"tu\") which originally referred to various plants such as sow thistle, chicory, or smartweed, and was later used to exclusively refer to \"Camellia sinensis\" (true \"tea\"). \nThe word \"tisane\" was rare in its modern sense before the 20th century, when it was borrowed in the modern sense from French. This is why some people feel it should be pronounced as in French, but the original English pronunciation continues to be more common in US English and especially in UK English.\nThe word had already existed in late Middle English in the sense of \"medicinal drink\" and had already been borrowed from French (Old French). The Old French word came from the Latin word , which came from the Ancient Greek word (), which meant \"peeled\" barley, in other words pearl barley, and a drink made from this that is similar to modern barley water.\nComposition and usage.\nHerbal teas can be made with any part of a plant, including fresh or dried flowers, fruit, leaves, stems, seeds, or roots. These parts may be steeped fully raw (as picked) or processed in some way (such as drying, roasting, crushing, tearing/cutting, steaming, etc.). \nHerbal infusions may be made by pouring hot or boiling water over the plant parts and letting them steep for some time. The infusion temperature and time can vary depending on the type of plant part used and its properties. For example, some plant parts are covered in oils, which may take some time to separate. Brewing with cold water will also take much longer, usually several hours. \nAn herbal tea may be strained or not (as with mate, where a special straw called a bombilla is used for drinking).\nSome herbal teas are blends that include various herbs or plant parts. Herbal infusions may also be sweetened, spiced, salted, or combined with other additives, like milk or lemon juice.\nVarieties.\nHerbal teas can be made from any edible plant material, below is a list of common herbal infusions. Some herbal teas are made from plants which contain caffeine, and other herbal infusions may contain other psychoactive compounds. However, many other common herbal teas have not been shown psychoactive properties when compared to placebos, though they may still have some physical effects. \nMany herbal teas on the market may also be blends which include various herbs or plant parts. These blends may also include additives, like flavorings.\nHealth risks.\nWhile most herbal teas are safe for regular consumption, some herbs have toxic or allergenic effects. Among the greatest causes of concern are:\nHerbal teas can also have different effects from person to person, and this is further compounded by the problem of potential misidentification. The deadly foxglove, for example, can be mistaken for the much more benign (but still relatively toxic to the liver) comfrey. Care must be taken not to use any poisonous plants.\nThe US does not require herbal teas to have any evidence concerning their efficacy, but does treat them technically as food products and require that they be safe for consumption.\nFruit or fruit-flavored tea is usually acidic and thus may contribute to erosion of tooth enamel.\nAdverse herb\u2013drug interactions.\nSome phytochemicals found in herbs and fruits can adversely interact with others and over the counter or prescription medications, among other ways by affecting their metabolism by the body. Herbs and fruits that inhibit or induce the body's Cytochrome P450 enzyme complex function can either cause the drug to be dangerously ineffective, or increase its effective absorbed dose to potentially toxic levels, respectively. Best known examples of adverse herb\u2011drug interactions are grapefruit or St John's wort, contraindicated for several medications including Paxlovid and oral contraceptives, but other herbs also affect the CYP enzyme family, showing herb\u2011drug interactions.\nContamination.\nDepending on the source of the herbal ingredients, herbal teas, like any crop, may be contaminated with pesticides or heavy metals.\nAccording to Naithani &amp; Kakkar (2004), \"all herbal preparations should be checked for toxic chemical residues to allay consumer fears of exposure to known neuro-toxicant pesticides and to aid in promoting global acceptance of these products\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29973", "revid": "50206681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29973", "title": "Turmeric", "text": "Plant used as spice\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurmeric (), or Curcuma longa (), is a flowering plant in the ginger family Zingiberaceae. It is a perennial, rhizomatous, herbaceous plant native to the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia that requires temperatures between and high annual rainfall to thrive. Plants are gathered each year for their rhizomes, some for propagation in the following season and some for consumption or dyeing.\nThe rhizomes can be used fresh, but they are often boiled in water and dried, after which they are ground into a deep orange-yellow shelf-stable spice powder commonly used as a coloring and flavoring agent in many Asian cuisines, especially for curries (curry powder). Turmeric powder has a warm, bitter, black pepper-like flavor and earthy, mustard-like aroma.\nAlthough long used in Ayurvedic medicine, there is no high-quality clinical evidence that consuming turmeric or the principal turmeric constituent, curcumin, is effective for treating any disease. Curcumin, a bright yellow chemical produced by the turmeric plant, is approved as a food additive by the World Health Organization, European Parliament, and United States Food and Drug Administration. Turmeric and its extract curcumin are generally safe but have recently been linked, especially in high-bioavailability forms, to rare cases of immune-mediated acute liver injury that typically resolve after stopping use, though severe outcomes can occur if use continues.\nOrigin and distribution.\nThe greatest diversity of \"Curcuma\" species by number alone is in India, at around 40 to 45 species. Thailand has a comparable 30 to 40 species. Other countries in tropical Asia also have numerous wild species of \"Curcuma\". Recent studies have also shown that the taxonomy of \"C. longa\" is problematic, with only the specimens from South India being identifiable as \"C. longa\". The phylogeny, relationships, intraspecific and interspecific variation, and even identity of other species and cultivars in other parts of the world still need to be established and validated. Various species currently utilized and sold as \"turmeric\" in other parts of Asia have been shown to belong to several physically similar taxa, with overlapping local names.\nHistory.\nTurmeric has been used in Asia for centuries and is a major part of Ayurveda, Siddha medicine, traditional Chinese medicine, Unani, and the animistic rituals of Austronesian peoples. It was first used as a dye, and then later for its supposed properties in folk medicine.\nIn India, it spread with Hinduism and Buddhism, as the yellow dye is used to color the robes of monks and priests.\nIn Island Southeast Asia, there is linguistic and circumstantial evidence of the ancient use of turmeric among the Austronesian peoples soon after dispersal from Taiwan (starting c.\u20093000 BCE), before contact with India. In Indonesia and the Philippines, turmeric was used for food, dyeing textiles, medicine, as well as body painting. It was commonly an important ingredient in various animistic rituals. Kikusawa and Reid (2007) have concluded that *kunij, the oldest reconstructed Proto-Malayo-Polynesian form for \"turmeric\" in the Austronesian languages, is primarily associated with the importance of its use as a dye. Other members of the genus \"Curcuma\" native to Southeast Asia (like \"Curcuma zedoaria\") were also used for food and spice, but not as dyes.\nTurmeric (along with \"Curcuma zedoaria\") was also spread with the Lapita people of the Austronesian expansion into Oceania. Turmeric can only be propagated with rhizomes, thus its pre-contact distribution into the Pacific Islands can only be via human introduction. The populations in Micronesia, Island Melanesia, and Polynesia (including as far as Hawaii and Easter Island) use turmeric widely for both food and dye before European contact. In Micronesia, it was an important trade item in the \"sawei\" maritime exchange between Yap and further atolls in the Carolines, where it couldn't grow. In some smaller islands, the dye was extracted from the leaves, since the rhizomes remained too small in sandy soils. It was also carried by the Austronesian migrations to Madagascar.\nTurmeric was found in Farmana, dating to between 2600 and 2200 BCE, and in a merchant's tomb in Megiddo, Israel, dating from the second millennium BCE. It was noted as a dye plant in the Assyrians' Cuneiform medical texts from Ashurbanipal's library at Nineveh from 7th century BCE. In Medieval Europe, turmeric was called \"Indian saffron.\"\nEtymology.\nThe name possibly derives from Middle English or Early Modern English as ' or '. It may be of Latin origin, \"\" (\"deserved earth\"). The Latin specific epithet \"longa\" means long.\nDescription.\nTurmeric is a perennial herbaceous plant that reaches up to tall. It has highly branched, yellow to orange, cylindrical, aromatic rhizomes.\nThe leaves are alternate and arranged in two rows. They are divided into leaf sheath, petiole, and leaf blade. From the leaf sheaths, a false stem is formed. The petiole is long. The simple leaf blades are usually long and rarely up to . They have a width of and are oblong to elliptical, narrowing at the tip.\nInflorescence, flower, and fruit.\nAt the top of the inflorescence, stem bracts are present on which no flowers occur; these are white to green and sometimes tinged reddish-purple, and the upper ends are tapered.\nThe hermaphrodite flowers are zygomorphic and threefold. The three sepals are long, fused, and white, and have fluffy hairs; the three calyx teeth are unequal. The three bright-yellow petals are fused into a corolla tube up to long. The three corolla lobes have a length of and are triangular with soft-spiny upper ends. While the average corolla lobe is larger than the two lateral, only the median stamen of the inner circle is fertile. The dust bag is spurred at its base. All other stamens are converted to staminodes. The outer staminodes are shorter than the labellum. The labellum is yellowish, with a yellow ribbon in its center and it is obovate, with a length from . Three carpels are under a constant, trilobed ovary adherent, which is sparsely hairy. The fruit capsule opens with three compartments.\nIn East Asia, the flowering time is usually in August. Terminally on the false stem is an inflorescence stem, long, containing many flowers. The bracts are light green and ovate to oblong with a blunt upper end with a length of .\nPhytochemistry.\nTurmeric powder is about 60\u201370% carbohydrates, 6\u201313% water, 6\u20138% protein, 5\u201310% fat, 3\u20137% dietary minerals, 3\u20137% essential oils, 2\u20137% dietary fiber, and 1\u20136% curcuminoids. The golden yellow color of turmeric is due to curcumin.\nPhytochemical components of turmeric include diarylheptanoids, a class including numerous curcuminoids, such as curcumin, demethoxycurcumin, and bisdemethoxycurcumin. Curcumin constitutes an average of 3.14% by weight of assayed commercial samples of turmeric powder; curry powder contains much less (an average of 0.29%). Some 34 essential oils are present in turmeric, among which turmerone, germacrone, atlantone, and zingiberene are major constituents.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nTurmeric is one of the key ingredients in many Asian dishes, imparting a mustard-like, earthy aroma and pungent, slightly bitter flavor to foods. It is used mostly in savory dishes, but also is used in some sweet dishes, such as the Lebanese cake \"sfouf\". In India, turmeric leaf is used to prepare special sweet dishes, \"patoleo\", by layering rice flour and coconut-jaggery mixture on the leaf, then closing and steaming it in a special utensil (\"chondr\u00f5\"). Most turmeric is used in the form of rhizome powder to impart a golden yellow color. It is used in many products such as canned beverages, baked products, dairy products, ice cream, yogurt, yellow cakes, orange juice, biscuits, popcorn, cereals and sauces. It is a principal ingredient in curry powders. Although typically used in its dried, powdered form, turmeric also is used fresh, like ginger.\nTurmeric is used widely as a spice in South Asian and Middle Eastern cooking. Various Iranian \"khoresh\" recipes begin with onions caramelized in oil and turmeric. The Moroccan spice mix ras el hanout typically includes turmeric. In South Africa, turmeric is used to give boiled white rice a golden color, known as \"geelrys\" (yellow rice) traditionally served with bobotie. In Vietnamese cuisine, turmeric powder is used to color and enhance the flavors of certain dishes, such as \"b\u00e1nh x\u00e8o\", \"b\u00e1nh kh\u1ecdt\", and \"m\u00ec Qu\u1ea3ng\". The staple Cambodian curry paste, \"kroeung\", used in many dishes, including fish amok, typically contains fresh turmeric. In Indonesia, turmeric leaves are used for Minang or Padang curry base of Sumatra, such as \"rendang\", \"sate padang\", and many other varieties. In the Philippines, turmeric is used in the preparation and cooking of \"kuning\", \"satti\", and some variants of \"adobo\". In Thailand, fresh turmeric rhizomes are used widely in many dishes, in particular in the southern Thai cuisine, such as yellow curry and turmeric soup. Turmeric is used in a hot drink called \"turmeric latte\" or \"golden milk\" that is made with milk, frequently coconut milk. The turmeric milk drink known as \"hald\u012b d\u016bdh\" (\"hald\u012b\" [] means turmeric in Hindi) is a traditional Indian recipe. Sold in the US and UK, the drink known as \"golden milk\" uses nondairy milk and sweetener, and sometimes black pepper after the traditional recipe (which may also use ghee). Turmeric can also be used in various other drinks such as turmeric juices and teas. \nTurmeric is approved for use as a food color, assigned the code E100. The oleoresin is used for oil-containing products.\nIn combination with annatto (E160b), turmeric has been used to color numerous food products. Turmeric is used to give a yellow color to some prepared mustards, canned chicken broths, and other foods\u2014often as a much cheaper replacement for saffron.\nTraditional uses.\nIn 2019, the European Medicines Agency concluded that turmeric herbal teas, or other forms taken by mouth, on the basis of their long-standing traditional use, could be used to relieve mild digestive problems, such as feelings of fullness and flatulence.\nTurmeric grows wild in the forests of South and Southeast Asia, where it is collected for use in classical Indian medicine (Siddha or Ayurveda). In Eastern India, the plant is used as one of the nine components of along with young plantain or banana plant, taro leaves, barley (), wood apple (), pomegranate (), \"Saraca indica\", (\"Arum\"), or , and rice paddy. The Haldi ceremony called in Bengal (literally \"yellow on the body\") is a ceremony observed during wedding celebrations of people of Indian culture all throughout the Indian subcontinent.\nIn Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh, as a part of the Tamil\u2013Telugu marriage ritual, a dried turmeric tuber tied with a string is used to create a Thali necklace. In western and coastal India, during weddings of the Marathi and Konkani people, Kannada Brahmins, turmeric tubers are tied with strings by the couple to their wrists during a ceremony, \"Kankana Bandhana\". In many Hindu communities, turmeric paste is applied to the bride and groom as part of pre-wedding festivities known as the haldi ceremony.\nTurmeric makes a poor fabric dye, as it is not light fast, but is commonly used in Indian clothing, such as saris and Buddhist monks' robes. During the late Edo period (1603\u20131867), turmeric was used to dilute or substitute more expensive safflower dyestuff in the production of . Friedrich Ratzel reported in \"The History of Mankind\" during 1896, that in Micronesia, turmeric powder was applied for embellishment of body, clothing, utensils, and ceremonial uses. Native Hawaiians who introduced it to Hawaii () make a bright yellow dye out of it.\nIndicator.\nTurmeric paper, also called curcuma paper or in German literature , is paper steeped in a tincture of turmeric and allowed to dry. It is used in chemical analysis as a pH indicator. The paper is yellow in acidic and neutral solutions and turns brown to reddish-brown in alkaline solutions, with transition between pH of 7.4 and 9.2.\nAdulteration.\nAs turmeric and other spices are commonly sold by weight, the potential exists for powders of toxic, cheaper agents with a similar color to be added, such as lead(II,IV) oxide (\"red lead\"). These additives give turmeric an orange-red color instead of its native gold-yellow, and such conditions led the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to issue import alerts from 2013 to 2019 on turmeric originating in India and Bangladesh. Imported into the United States in 2014 were approximately of turmeric, some of which was used for food coloring, traditional medicine, or dietary supplement. Lead detection in turmeric products led to recalls across the United States, Canada, Japan, Korea, and the United Kingdom through 2016.\nLead chromate, a bright yellow chemical compound, was found as an adulterant of turmeric in Bangladesh, where turmeric is used commonly in foods and the contamination levels were up to 500 times higher than the national limit. Researchers identified a chain of sources adulterating the turmeric with lead chromate: from farmers to merchants selling low-grade turmeric roots to \"polishers\" who added lead chromate for yellow color enhancement, to wholesalers for market distribution, all unaware of the potential consequences of lead toxicity.\nAnother common adulterant in turmeric, metanil yellow (also known as acid yellow 36), is considered by the British Food Standards Agency as an illegal dye for use in foods.\nMedical research.\nTurmeric and curcumin have been studied in various, low-quality clinical trials, with no good evidence of an anti-disease effect or health benefit. There is no scientific evidence that curcumin reduces inflammation, as of 2019[ [update]]. There is weak evidence that turmeric extracts may relieve symptoms of knee osteoarthritis and lower muscle pain following physical exercise.\nTurmeric supplements are associated with rare but potentially serious liver injuries, particularly in genetically susceptible individuals.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29974", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29974", "title": "Total war", "text": "Conflict in which all of a nation's resources are deployed\nTotal war is a type of warfare that mobilizes the totality of national resources to sustain war production, blurring the line between military and civilian activities and legitimates attacks on civilian targets as part of a war without restriction as to the combatants, territory or objectives involved. \nThe term has been defined as \"A war that is unrestricted in terms of the weapons used, the territory or combatants involved, or the objectives pursued, especially one in which the laws of war are disregarded.\"\nIn the mid-19th century, scholars identified what later became known as total war as a separate class of warfare. In a total war, the differentiation between combatants and non-combatants diminishes due to the capacity of opposing sides to consider nearly every human, including non-combatants, as resources that are used in the war effort.\nCharacteristics.\nTotal war is a concept that has been extensively studied by scholars of conflict and war. One of the most notable contributions to this field of research is the work of Stig F\u00f6rster, who has identified four dimensions of total war: total purposes, total methods, total mobilisation, and total control. Tiziano Peccia has built upon F\u00f6rster's work by adding a fifth dimension of \"total change.\" Peccia argues that total war not only has a profound impact on the outcome of the conflict but also produces significant changes in the political, cultural, economic, and social realms beyond the end of the conflict. As Peccia puts it, \"total war is an earthquake that has the world as its epicenter.\"\nThe four dimensions of total war identified by F\u00f6rster are:\n1) Total purposes: The aim of continuous growth of the power of the parties involved and hegemonic visions.\n2) Total methods: Similar and common methodologies among countries that intend to increase their spheres of influence.\n3) Total mobilisation: Inclusion in the conflict of parties not traditionally involved, such as women and children or individuals who are not part of the armed bodies.\n4) Total control: Multisectoral centralisation of the powers and orchestration of the activities of the countries in a small circle of dictators or oligarchs, with cross-functional control over education and culture, media/propaganda, economic, and political activities.\nPeccia's contribution of \"total change\" adds to this framework by emphasising the long-term effects of total war on society.\n5) Total change: This includes changes in social attitudes, cultural norms, and political structures, as well as economic and technological developments.\nIn Peccia's view, total war not only transforms the military and political landscape but also has far-reaching and long-time implications for society as a whole.\nActions that may characterise the post-19th century concept of total war include:\nBackground.\nThe phrase \"total war\" seemingly originated amongst French writers during World War I and French writer L\u00e9on Daudet published a collection of essays called \"La Guerre Totale\" (\"The total war\") in 1918. The phrase was popularised by the 1935 publication of German general Erich Ludendorff's World War I memoir, \"Der totale Krieg\" (\"The total war\"). Some authors extend the concept back as far as classic work of Carl von Clausewitz, \"On War\", as \"absoluter Krieg\" (absolute war), even though he did not use the term; others interpret Clausewitz differently. Total war also describes the French \"guerre \u00e0 outrance\" during the Franco-Prussian War.\nIn his 24 December 1864 letter to his chief of staff during the American Civil War, Union general William Tecumseh Sherman wrote the Union was \"not only fighting hostile armies, but a hostile people, and must make old and young, rich and poor, feel the hard hand of war, as well as their organized armies,\" defending Sherman's March to the Sea, the operation that inflicted widespread destruction of infrastructure in Georgia.\nUnited States Air Force General Curtis LeMay updated the concept for the nuclear age. In 1949, he first proposed that a total war in the nuclear age would consist of delivering the entire nuclear arsenal in a single overwhelming blow, going as far as \"killing a nation\".\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nWritten by academics at Eastern Michigan University, the \"Cengage Advantage Books: World History\" textbook claims that while total war \"is traditionally associated with the two global wars of the twentieth century... it would seem that instances of total war predate the twentieth century.\" They write:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As an aggressor nation, the ancient Mongols, no less than the modern Nazis, practiced total war against an enemy by organizing all available resources, including military personnel, non-combatant workers, intelligence, transport, money, and provisions.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nEurope.\nIn his book, \"The First Total War: Napoleon's Europe and the Birth of Warfare as We Know it\", David A Bell, a French History professor at Princeton University argues that the French Revolutionary Wars introduced to mainland Europe some of the first concepts of total war, such as mass conscription. He claims that the new republic found itself threatened by a powerful coalition of European nations and used the entire nation's resources in an unprecedented war effort that included lev\u00e9e en masse (mass conscription). By 23 August 1793, the French front line forces grew to some 800,000 with a total of 1.5\u00a0million in all services\u2014the first time an army in excess of a million had been mobilised in Western history:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From this moment until such time as its enemies shall have been driven from the soil of the Republic all Frenchmen are in permanent requisition for the services of the armies. The young men shall fight; the married men shall forge arms and transport provisions; the women shall make tents and clothes and shall serve in the hospitals; the children shall turn old lint into linen; the old men shall betake themselves to the public squares in order to arouse the courage of the warriors and preach hatred of kings and the unity of the Republic.\nDuring the Russian campaign of 1812 the Russians retreated while destroying infrastructure and agriculture in order to effectively hamper the French and strip them of adequate supplies. In the campaign of 1813, Allied forces in the German theatre alone amounted to nearly one million whilst two years later in the Hundred Days a French decree called for the total mobilisation of some 2.5\u00a0million men (though at most a fifth of this was managed by the time of the French defeat at Waterloo). During the prolonged Peninsular War from 1808 to 1814 some 300,000 French troops were kept permanently occupied by, in addition to several hundred thousand Spanish, Portuguese and British regulars, an enormous and sustained guerrilla insurgency\u2014ultimately French deaths would amount to 300,000 in the Peninsular War alone.\nThe Franco-Prussian War was fought in breach of the recently signed Geneva Convention of 1864, when \"European opinion increasingly expected that civilians and soldiers should be treated humanely in war\".\nNorth America.\nThe Sullivan Expedition of 1779 was an example of total warfare. As Native American and Loyalist forces massacred American farmers, killed livestock and burned buildings in remote frontier areas, General George Washington sent General John Sullivan with 4,000 troops to seek \"the total destruction and devastation of their settlements\" in upstate New York. There was only one small battle as the expedition devastated \"14 towns and most flourishing crops of corn.\" The Native Americans escaped to Canada where the British fed them; they remained there after the war.\nSherman's March to the Sea in the American Civil War\u2014from 15 November 1864, through 21 December 1864\u2014is sometimes considered to be an example of total war, for which Sherman used the term hard war. Some historians challenge this designation, as Sherman's campaign assaulted primarily military targets and Sherman ordered his men to spare civilian homes.\nSouth America.\nHistorian Milda Rivarola from Harvard University states that the Paraguayan War (from 1864 to 1870) was the first total war of the American continent, citing both Paraguay's vision of victory or utter defeat and mobilizing the whole of Paraguayan society, economy and territory.\n20th century.\nWorld War I.\nAir Warfare.\nBombing civilians from the air was adopted as a strategy for the first time in World War I, and a leading advocate of this strategy was Peter Strasser \"Leader of Airships\" (\"F\u00fchrer der Luftschiffe\"; \"F.d.L.\"). Strasser, who was chief commander of German Imperial Navy Zeppelins during World War I, the main force operating German strategic bombing across Europe and the UK, saw bombing of civilians as well as military targets as an essential element of total war. He argued that causing civilian casualties and damaging domestic infrastructure served both as propaganda and as a means of diverting resources from the front line.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We who strike the enemy where his heart beats have been slandered as 'baby killers' ... Nowadays, there is no such animal as a noncombatant. Modern warfare is total warfare.\u2014\u200a\nPropaganda.\nOne of the features of total war in Britain was the use of government propaganda posters to divert all attention to the war on the home front. Posters were used to influence public opinion about what to eat and what occupations to take, and to change the attitude of support towards the war effort. Even music halls were used as propaganda, with propaganda songs aimed at recruitment.\nAfter the failure of the Battle of Neuve Chapelle, the large British offensive in March 1915, the British Commander-in-Chief Field Marshal John French blamed the lack of progress on insufficient and poor-quality artillery shells. This led to the Shell Crisis of 1915 which brought down both the Liberal government and Premiership of H. H. Asquith. He formed a new coalition government dominated by Liberals and appointed David Lloyd George as Minister of Munitions. It was a recognition that the whole economy would have to be geared for war if the Allies were to prevail on the Western Front.\nCarl Schmitt, a supporter of Nazi Germany, wrote that total war meant \"total politics\"\u2014authoritarian domestic policies that imposed direct control of the press and economy. In Schmitt's view the total state, which directs fully the mobilisation of all social and economic resources to war, is antecedent to total war. Scholars consider that the seeds of this total state concept already existed in the German state of World War I, which exercised full control of the press and other aspects economic and social life as espoused in the statement of state ideology known as the \"Ideas of 1914\".\nRationing.\nAs young men left the farms for the front, domestic food production in Britain and Germany fell. In Britain, the response was to import more food, which was done despite the German introduction of unrestricted submarine warfare, and to introduce rationing. The Royal Navy's blockade of German ports prevented Germany from importing food and hastened German capitulation by creating a food crisis in Germany.\nAlmost the whole of Europe and some of the European colonial empires mobilised soldiers. Rationing occurred on the home fronts. Bulgaria went so far as to mobilise a quarter of its population, or 800,000 people, a greater share of its population than any other country during the war.\nWorld War II.\nThe Second World War was the quintessential total war of modernity. The level of national mobilisation of resources on all sides of the conflict, the battlespace being contested, the scale of the armies, navies, and air forces raised through conscription, the active targeting of non-combatants (and non-combatant property), the general disregard for collateral damage, and the unrestricted aims of the belligerents marked total war on an unprecedented and unsurpassed, multicontinental scale.\nImperial Japan.\nDuring the first part of the Sh\u014dwa era, the government of Imperial Japan launched a string of policies to promote a total war effort against China and occidental powers and increase industrial production. Among these were the National Spiritual Mobilization Movement and the Imperial Rule Assistance Association.\nThe State General Mobilization Law had fifty clauses, which provided for government controls over civilian organisations (including labour unions), nationalisation of strategic industries, price controls and rationing, and nationalised the news media. The laws gave the government the authority to use unlimited budgets to subsidise war production and to compensate manufacturers for losses caused by war-time mobilisation. Eighteen of the fifty articles outlined penalties for violators.\nTo improve its production, Imperial Japan used millions of slave labourers and pressed more than 18 million people in East Asia into forced labour.\nUnited Kingdom.\nBefore the onset of the Second World War, Great Britain drew on its First World War experience to prepare legislation that would allow immediate mobilisation of the economy for war, should future hostilities break out. Rationing of most goods and services was introduced, not only for consumers but also for manufacturers. This meant that factories manufacturing products that were irrelevant to the war effort had more appropriate tasks imposed. All artificial light was subject to legal blackouts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;..There is another more obvious difference from 1914. The whole of the warring nations are engaged, not only soldiers, but the entire population, men, women and children. The fronts are everywhere to be seen. The trenches are dug in the towns and streets. Every village is fortified. Every road is barred. The front line runs through the factories. The workmen are soldiers with different weapons but the same courage.\"\u2014\u200a\nNot only were men conscripted into the armed forces from the beginning of the war (something which had not happened until the middle of World War I), but women were also conscripted as Land Girls to aid farmers and the Bevin Boys were conscripted to work down the coal mines.\nEnormous casualties were expected in bombing raids, so children were evacuated from London and other cities en masse to the countryside for compulsory billeting in households. In the long term this was one of the most profound and longer-lasting social consequences of the whole war for Britain. This is because it mixed up children with adults of other classes. Not only did the middle and upper classes become familiar with the urban squalor suffered by working class children from the slums, but the children got a chance to see animals and the countryside, often for the first time, and experience rural life.\nThe use of statistical analysis, by a branch of science which has become known as Operational Research to influence military tactics, was a departure from anything previously attempted. It was a very powerful tool but it further dehumanised war particularly when it suggested strategies that were counter-intuitive. Examples, where statistical analysis directly influenced tactics include the work done by Patrick Blackett's team on the optimum size and speed of convoys and the introduction of bomber streams, by the Royal Air Force to counter the night fighter defences of the Kammhuber Line.\nNazi Germany.\nIn 1935 General Ludendorff in the book \"Der Totale Krieg\" gave life to the term \"Total War\" in the German lexicon. However, being followers of the stab-in-the-back myth, military and Nazi leadership believed that Germany hadn't lost World War I on the battlefield but solely on the home front.\nTherefore, Germany started the war under the concept which was later named blitzkrieg. Officially, it did not accept that it was in a total war until Joseph Goebbels' Sportpalast speech of 18 February 1943\u2014in which the crowd was told \"Totaler Krieg \u2013 K\u00fcrzester Krieg\" (\"Total War \u2013 Shortest War\".)\nGoebbels and Hitler had spoken in March 1942 about Goebbels' idea to put the entire home front on a war footing. Hitler appeared to accept the concept, but took no action. Goebbels had the support of minister of armaments Albert Speer, economics minister Walther Funk and Robert Ley, head of the German Labour Front, and they pressed Hitler in October 1942 to take action, but Hitler, while outwardly agreeing, continued to dither. Finally, after the holidays in 1942, Hitler sent his powerful personal secretary, Martin Bormann, to discuss the question with Goebbels and Hans Lammers, the head of the Reich Chancellery. As a result, Bormann told Goebbels to go ahead and draw up a draft of the necessary decree, to be signed in January 1943. Hitler signed the decree on 13 January, almost a year after Goebbels first discussed the concept with him. The decree set up a steering committee consisting of Bormann, Lammers, and General Wilhelm Keitel to oversee the effort, with Goebbels and Speer as advisors; Goebbels had expected to be one of the triumvirate. Hitler remained aloof from the project, and it was Goebbels and Hermann G\u00f6ring who gave the \"total war\" radio address from the Sportspalast the next month, on the 10th anniversary of the Nazi's \"seizure of power\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I ask you: Do you want total war? If necessary, do you want a war more total and radical than anything that we can even imagine today?\u2014\u200a\nThe commitment to the doctrine of the short war was a continuing handicap for the Germans; neither plans nor state of mind were adjusted to the idea of a long war until the failure of Operation Barbarossa. A major strategic defeat in the Battle of Moscow led Speer to nationalise German war production.\nCanada.\nIn Canada early use of the term concerned whether or not the country was committing enough to mobilising its resources, rather than whether or not to target civilians of the enemy countries. During the early days of the Second World War, whether or not Canada was committed to a \"total war effort\" was point of partisan political debate between the governing Liberals and the opposition Conservatives. The Conservatives elected as their national leader Arthur Meighen, who had been the cabinet minister responsible for implementing conscription during the First World War, and advocated for conscription again. Prime Minister W.L. Mackenzie King argued that Canada could still be said to have a \"total war effort\" without conscription, and delivered nationally broadcast speeches to this effect 1942. Meighen failed to win his seat in by-election in 1942, and the issue subsided for a short time. But eventually, national conscription was introduced in Canada in 1944, as well as dramatically increased taxation, another symbol of the \"total war effort\".\nSoviet Union.\nThe Soviet Union (USSR) was a command economy which already had an economic and legal system allowing the economy and society to be redirected into fighting a total war. The transportation of factories, and whole labour forces east of the Urals as the Germans advanced across the USSR in 1941, was an impressive feat of planning. Only those factories which were useful for war production were moved because of the total war commitment of the Soviet government.\nThe Eastern Front of the European Theatre of World War II encompassed the conflict in central and eastern Europe from 22 June 1941, to 9 May 1945. It was the largest theatre of war in history in terms of numbers of soldiers, equipment and casualties and was notorious for its unprecedented ferocity, destruction, and immense loss of life (see World War II casualties). The fighting involved millions of German, Hungarian, Romanian and Soviet troops along a broad front hundreds of kilometres long. It was by far the deadliest single theatre of World War II. Scholars now believe that at most 27\u00a0million Soviet citizens died during the war, including at least 8.7\u00a0million soldiers who fell in battle against Hitler's armies or died in POW camps. Millions of civilians died from starvation, exposure, atrocities, and massacres. The Axis lost over 5\u00a0million soldiers in the east as well as many thousands of civilians.\nDuring the Battle of Stalingrad, newly built T-34 tanks were driven\u2014unpainted because of a paint shortage\u2014from the factory floor straight to the front. This came to symbolise the USSR's commitment to a policy of total war.\nUnited States.\nThe United States underwent an unprecedented mobilisation of national resources for the Second World War, creating a military-industrial complex. Although the United States was not in existential danger, the national sense after Pearl Harbor was to use all of the nation's resources to defeat Germany and Japan. Most non-essential activities were rationed, prohibited or restrained, and most fit, unmarried young men were drafted. There was little urgency before 1940, when the collapse of France ended the Phoney War and revealed urgent needs. Nevertheless, President Franklin Roosevelt moved to first solidify public opinion before acting. In 1940 the first peacetime draft was instituted, along with Lend-Lease programs to aid the British, and covert aid was passed to the Chinese as well.\nAmerican public opinion was still opposed to involvement in the problems of Europe and Asia, however. In 1941, the Soviet Union became the latest nation to be invaded, and the U.S. gave its aid as well. American ships began defending aid convoys to the Allied nations against submarine attacks, and a total trade embargo against the Empire of Japan was instituted to deny its military the raw materials its factories and military forces required to continue its offensive actions in China.\nIn late 1941, Japan's Army-dominated government decided to seize by military force the strategic resources of South-East Asia and Indonesia since the Western powers would not give Japan these goods by trade. Planning for this action included surprise attacks on American and British forces in Hong Kong, the Philippines, Malaya, and the U.S. naval base and warships at Pearl Harbor. In response to these attacks, the UK and U.S. declared war the next day. Nazi Germany declared war on the U.S. a few days later, along with Fascist Italy; the U.S. found itself fully involved in a second world war.\nAs the United States began to gear up for a major war, information and propaganda efforts were set in motion. Civilians (including children) were encouraged to take part in fat, grease, and scrap metal collection drives. Many factories making non-essential goods retooled for war production. Levels of industrial productivity previously unheard of were attained during the war; multi-thousand-ton convoy ships were routinely built in a month and a half, and tanks poured out of the former automobile factories. Within a few years of the U.S. entry into the Second World War, nearly every man without children fit for service, between 18 and 30, was conscripted into the military \"for the duration\" of the conflict, and unprecedented numbers of women took up jobs previously held by them. Strict systems of rationing of consumer staples were introduced to redirect productive capacity to war needs.\nPreviously untouched sections of the nation mobilised for the war effort. Academics became technocrats; home-makers became bomb-makers (massive numbers of women worked in industry during the war); union leaders and businessmen became commanders in the massive armies of production. The great scientific communities of the United States were mobilised as never before, and mathematicians, doctors, engineers, and chemists turned their minds to the problems ahead of them.\nBy the war's end, a multitude of advances had been made in medicine, physics, engineering, and the other sciences. This included the efforts of the theoretical physicists working at the Los Alamos National Laboratory on the Manhattan Project, which led to the Trinity nuclear test and thus brought about the Atomic Age.\nIn the war, the United States lost 407,316 military personnel, but had managed to avoid the extensive level of damage to civilian and industrial infrastructure that other participants suffered. The U.S. emerged as one of the two superpowers after the war.\nUnconditional surrender.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Actually Dresden was a mass of munitions works, an intact government centre, and a key transportation point to the East. It is now none of these things.\u2014\u200a\nAfter the United States entered World War II, Franklin D. Roosevelt declared at Casablanca Conference to the other Allies and the press that unconditional surrender was the objective of the war against the Axis Powers of Germany, Italy, and Japan. Prior to this declaration, the individual regimes of the Axis Powers could have negotiated an armistice similar to that at the end of World War I and then a conditional surrender when they perceived that the war was lost.\nThe unconditional surrender of the major Axis powers caused a legal problem at the post-war Nuremberg Trials, because the trials appeared to be in conflict with Articles 63 and 64 of the Geneva Convention of 1929. Usually if such trials are held, they would be held under the auspices of the defeated power's own legal system as happened with some of the minor Axis powers, for example in the post-World War II Romanian People's Tribunals. To circumvent this, the Allies argued that the major war criminals were captured after the end of the war, so they were not prisoners of war and the Geneva Conventions did not cover them. Further, the collapse of the Axis regimes created a legal condition of total defeat (\"debellatio\") so the provisions of the 1907 Hague Convention over military occupation were not applicable.\nPost-World War II.\nSince the end of World War II, no industrial nation has fought such a large, decisive war. This is likely due to the availability of nuclear weapons, whose destructive power and quick deployment render a full mobilisation of a country's resources such as in World War II logistically impractical and strategically irrelevant. \nBy the end of the 1950s, the ideological stand-off of the Cold War between the Western world and the Soviet Union had resulted in thousands of nuclear weapons being aimed by each side at the other. Strategically, the equal balance of destructive power possessed by each side manifests in the doctrine of mutually assured destruction (MAD), which determines that a nuclear attack by one superpower would result in a nuclear counter-strike by the other. This would result in hundreds of millions of deaths in a world where, in words widely attributed to Nikita Khrushchev, \"The living will envy the dead\".\nDuring the Cold War, the two superpowers sought to avoid open conflict between their respective forces, as both sides recognised that such a clash could very easily escalate, and quickly involve nuclear weapons. Instead, the superpowers fought each other through their involvement in proxy wars, military buildups, and diplomatic standoffs.\nIn the case of proxy wars, each superpower supported its respective allies in conflicts with forces aligned with the other superpower, such as in the Vietnam War and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Nonetheless, there are cases of states enduring total war who were not nuclear powers nor closer allies, such as the 1980s Iraq-Iran conflict.\nOther conflicts.\nThe following post-World War II conflicts have been characterized as \"total war\":\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29975", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29975", "title": "The Coen brothers", "text": ""}
{"id": "29977", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29977", "title": "TheChurchOfJesusChristofLatterdaySaints", "text": ""}
{"id": "29980", "revid": "33839581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29980", "title": "Time constraint", "text": "In law, time constraints are placed on certain actions and filings in the interest of speedy justice, and additionally to prevent the evasion of the ends of justice by waiting until a matter is moot. The penalty for violating a legislative or court-imposed time constraint may be anything from a small fine to judicial determination of an entire case against one's interests.\nFor example, if a complaining party files an action and then fails to cause the papers pertaining thereto to be served on the opposing party within the time established by local rules, and is unable to convince the court that there was good and sufficient reason for the delay, he risks having his action dismissed with prejudice. If the opposing party is served with the papers and fails to respond within the time limit provided for his answer, he risks having the case decided against him by default.\nIf one is aggrieved by the judicial outcome of an action and wishes to appeal, he may be forever barred from doing so if he fails to meet the deadline by which his appeal may be filed.\nBy court order, or by local rule, there may be other time constraints. One may be required to answer interrogatories or a request to produce or other discovery pleadings within a given time. He may be required to give a certain number of days' advance notice before he intends to depose a party or witness. A court may order that there will be only a certain number of weeks or months allowed during which the parties to an action may conduct discovery. There may be a limitation placed upon a deposition, requiring that the party taking it conclude his questioning within a certain number of hours or days.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29981", "revid": "32220457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29981", "title": "TS", "text": "TS or Ts may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29983", "revid": "5016021", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29983", "title": "Texas holdem2", "text": ""}
{"id": "29984", "revid": "34017952", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29984", "title": "Taurus (constellation)", "text": "Zodiac constellation straddling the celestial equator\nTaurus (Latin, 'Bull') is one of the constellations of the zodiac and is located in the northern celestial hemisphere. Taurus is a large and prominent constellation in the Northern Hemisphere's winter sky. It is one of the oldest constellations, dating back to the Early Bronze Age at least, when it marked the location of the Sun during the spring equinox. Its importance to the agricultural calendar influenced various bull figures in the mythologies of Ancient Sumer, Akkad, Assyria, Babylon, Egypt, Greece, and Rome. Its traditional astrological symbol is (\u2649\ufe0e), which resembles a bull's head.\nA number of features exist that are of interest to astronomers. Taurus hosts two of the nearest open clusters to Earth, the Pleiades and the Hyades, both of which are visible to the naked eye. At first magnitude, the red giant Aldebaran is the brightest star in the constellation. In the northeast part of Taurus is Messier 1, more commonly known as the Crab Nebula, a supernova remnant containing the Crab Pulsar. One of the closest regions of active star formation, the Taurus-Auriga complex, crosses into the northern part of the constellation. The variable star T Tauri is the prototype of a class of pre-main-sequence stars.\nCharacteristics.\nTaurus is a large and prominent constellation in the Northern Hemisphere's winter sky, between Aries to the west and Gemini to the east; to the north lies Perseus and Auriga, to the southeast Orion, to the south Eridanus, and to the southwest Cetus. In late November-early December, Taurus reaches opposition (furthest point from the Sun) and is visible the entire night. By late March, it is setting at sunset and completely disappears behind the Sun's glare from May to July.\nThis constellation forms part of the zodiac and hence is intersected by the ecliptic. This circle across the celestial sphere forms the apparent path of the Sun as the Earth completes its annual orbit. As the orbital plane of the Moon and the planets lie near the ecliptic, they can usually be found in the constellation Taurus during some part of each year. The galactic plane of the Milky Way intersects the northeast corner of the constellation and the galactic anticenter is located near the border between Taurus and Auriga. Taurus is the only constellation crossed by all three of the galactic equator, celestial equator, and ecliptic. A ring-like galactic structure known as Gould's Belt passes through the constellation.\nThe recommended three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is \"Tau\". The official constellation boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of 26 segments. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 03h 23.4m and 05h 53.3m, while the declination coordinates are between 31.10\u00b0 and \u22121.35\u00b0. Because a small part of the constellation lies to the south of the celestial equator, this can not be a completely circumpolar constellation at any latitude.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nThere are four stars above magnitude 3 in Taurus.\nThe brightest member of this constellation is Aldebaran, an orange-hued, spectral class K5\u00a0III giant star. Its name derives from \"\", Arabic for \"the follower\", probably from the fact that it follows the Pleiades during the nightly motion of the celestial sphere across the sky. Forming the profile of a Bull's face is a \"V\" or \"K\"-shaped asterism of stars. This outline is created by prominent members of the Hyades, the nearest distinct open star cluster after the Ursa Major Moving Group. In this profile, Aldebaran forms the bull's bloodshot eye, which has been described as \"glaring menacingly at the hunter Orion\", a constellation that lies just to the southeast. Aldebaran has around 116% the mass of the Sun. It also hosts a candidate exoplanet.\nThe Hyades span about 5\u00b0 of the sky, so that they can only be viewed in their entirety with binoculars or the unaided eye. It includes a naked eye double star, Theta Tauri (the proper name of Theta2 Tauri is \"Chamukuy\"), with a separation of 5.6\u00a0arcminutes.\nIn the northwestern quadrant of the Taurus constellation lie the Pleiades (M45), one of the best known open clusters, easily visible to the naked eye. The seven most prominent stars in this cluster are at least visual magnitude six, and so the cluster is also named the \"Seven Sisters\". However, many more stars are visible with even a modest telescope. Astronomers estimate that the cluster has approximately 500\u20131,000 stars, all of which are around 100 million years old. However, they vary considerably in type. The Pleiades themselves are represented by large, bright stars; also many small brown dwarfs and white dwarfs exist. The cluster is estimated to dissipate in another 250 million years. The Pleiades cluster is classified as a Shapley class c and Trumpler class I 3 r n cluster, indicating that it is irregularly shaped and loose, though concentrated at its center and detached from the star-field.\nTo the east, the two horns of the bull are formed by Beta (\u03b2) Tauri and Zeta (\u03b6) Tauri; two star systems that are separated by 8\u00b0. Beta is a white, spectral class B7 III giant star known as \"El Nath\", which comes from the Arabic phrase \"the butting\", as in butting by the horns of the bull. At magnitude 1.65, it is the second brightest star in the constellation, and shares the border with the neighboring constellation of Auriga. As a result, it also bears the designation Gamma Aurigae. Zeta Tauri (the proper name is \"Tianguan\") is an eclipsing binary star that completes an orbit every 133 days.\nThe star Lambda (\u03bb) Tauri is an eclipsing binary star. This system consists of a spectral class B3 star being orbited by a less massive class A4 star. The plane of their orbit lies almost along the line of sight to the Earth. Every 3.953 days the system temporarily decreases in brightness by 1.1 magnitudes as the brighter star is partially eclipsed by the dimmer companion. The two stars are separated by only 0.1 astronomical units, so their shapes are modified by mutual tidal interaction. This results in a variation of their net magnitude throughout each orbit.\nLocated about 1.8\u00b0 west of Epsilon (\u03b5) Tauri is T Tauri, the prototype of a class of variable stars called T Tauri stars. This star undergoes erratic changes in luminosity, varying between magnitude 9 to 13 over a period of weeks or months. This is a newly formed stellar object that is just emerging from its envelope of gas and dust, but has not yet become a main sequence star. The surrounding reflection nebula NGC 1555 is illuminated by T Tauri, and thus is also variable in luminosity. To the north lies Kappa Tauri, a visual double star consisting of two A7-type components. The pair have a separation of just 5.6 arc minutes, making them a challenge to split with the naked eye.\nDeep-sky objects.\nIn the northern part of the constellation to the northeast of the Pleiades lies the Crystal Ball Nebula, known by its catalogue designation of NGC 1514. This planetary nebula is of historical interest following its discovery by German-born English astronomer William Herschel in 1790. Prior to that time, astronomers had assumed that nebulae were simply unresolved groups of stars. However, Herschel could clearly resolve a star at the center of the nebula that was surrounded by a nebulous cloud of some type. In 1864, English astronomer William Huggins used the spectrum of this nebula to deduce that the nebula is a luminous gas, rather than stars.\nNorth-west of \u03b6 Tauri by 1.15 degrees is the Crab Nebula (M1), a supernova remnant. This expanding nebula was created by a Type II supernova explosion, which was seen from Earth on July 4, 1054. It was bright enough to be observed during the day and is mentioned in Chinese historical texts. At its peak, the supernova reached magnitude \u22124, but the nebula is currently magnitude 8.4 and requires a telescope to observe. North American peoples also observed the supernova, as evidenced from a painting on a New Mexican canyon and various pieces of pottery that depict the event. However, the remnant itself was not discovered until 1731, when John Bevis found it.\nThis constellation includes part of the Taurus-Auriga complex, or Taurus dark clouds, a star-forming region containing sparse, filamentary clouds of gas and dust. This spans a diameter of and contains 35,000\u00a0solar masses of material, which is both larger and less massive than the Orion Nebula. At a distance of , this is one of the nearest active star forming regions. Located in this region, about 10\u00b0 to the northeast of Aldebaran, is an asterism NGC 1746 spanning a width of 45 arcminutes.\nMeteor showers.\nDuring November, the Taurid meteor shower appears to radiate from the general direction of this constellation. The Beta Taurid meteor shower occurs during the months of June and July in the daytime, and is normally observed using radio techniques. Between 18 and 29 October, both the Northern Taurids and the Southern Taurids are active; though the latter stream is stronger. However, between November 1 and 10, the two streams equalize.\nHistory and mythology.\nThe identification of the constellation of Taurus with a bull is very old, certainly dating to the Chalcolithic, and perhaps even to the Upper Paleolithic. Michael Rappengl\u00fcck of the University of Munich believes that Taurus is represented in a cave painting at the Hall of the Bulls in the caves at Lascaux (dated to roughly 15,000 BC), which he believes is accompanied by a depiction of the Pleiades. The name \"seven sisters\" has been used for the Pleiades in the languages of many cultures, including indigenous groups of Australia, North America and Siberia. This suggests that the name may have a common ancient origin.\nTaurus marked the point of vernal (spring) equinox in the Chalcolithic and the Early Bronze Age, from about 4000 BC to 1700 BC, after which it moved into the neighboring constellation Aries. The Pleiades were closest to the Sun at vernal equinox around the 23rd century BC. In Babylonian astronomy, the constellation was listed in the MUL.APIN as , \"The Bull of Heaven\". Although it has been claimed that \"when the Babylonians first set up their zodiac, the vernal equinox lay in Taurus,\" there is a claim that the MUL.APIN tablets indicate that the vernal equinox was marked by the Babylonian constellation known as \"the hired man\" (the modern Aries).\nIn the Old Babylonian \"Epic of Gilgamesh\", the goddess Ishtar sends Taurus, the Bull of Heaven, to kill Gilgamesh for spurning her advances. Enkidu tears off the bull's hind part and hurls the quarters into the sky where they become the stars we know as Ursa Major and Ursa Minor. Some locate Gilgamesh as the neighboring constellation of Orion, facing Taurus as if in combat, while others identify him with the sun whose rising on the equinox vanquishes the constellation. In early Mesopotamian art, the Bull of Heaven was closely associated with Inanna, the Sumerian goddess of sexual love, fertility, and warfare. One of the oldest depictions shows the bull standing before the goddess' standard; since it has 3 stars depicted on its back (the cuneiform sign for \"star-constellation\"), there is good reason to regard this as the constellation later known as Taurus.\nThe same iconic representation of the Heavenly Bull was depicted in the Dendera zodiac, an Egyptian bas-relief carving in a ceiling that depicted the celestial hemisphere using a planisphere. In these ancient cultures, the orientation of the horns was portrayed as upward or backward. This differed from the later Greek depiction where the horns pointed forward. To the Egyptians, the constellation Taurus was a sacred bull that was associated with the renewal of life in spring. When the spring equinox entered Taurus, the constellation would become covered by the Sun in the western sky as spring began. This \"sacrifice\" led to the renewal of the land. To the early Hebrews, Taurus was the first constellation in their zodiac and consequently it was represented by the first letter in their alphabet, Aleph.\nIn Greek mythology, Taurus was identified with Zeus, who assumed the form of a magnificent white bull to abduct Europa, a legendary Phoenician princess. In illustrations of Greek mythology, only the front portion of this constellation is depicted; this was sometimes explained as Taurus being partly submerged as he carried Europa out to sea. A second Greek myth portrays Taurus as Io, a mistress of Zeus. To hide his lover from his wife Hera, Zeus changed Io into the form of a heifer. Greek mythographer Acusilaus marks the bull Taurus as the same that formed the myth of the Cretan Bull, one of The Twelve Labors of Heracles.\nTaurus became an important object of worship among the Druids. Their Tauric religious festival was held while the Sun passed through the constellation. Among the arctic people known as the Inuit, the constellation is called Sakiattiat and the Hyades is Nanurjuk, with the latter representing the spirit of the polar bear. Aldebaran represents the bear, with the remainder of the stars in the Hyades being dogs that are holding the beast at bay.\nIn Buddhism, legends hold that Gautama Buddha was born when the full moon was in Vaisakha, or Taurus. Buddha's birthday is celebrated with the Wesak Festival, or Ves\u0101kha, which occurs on the first or second full moon when the Sun is in Taurus.\nIn 1990, due to the precession of the equinoxes, the position of the Sun on the first day of summer (June 21) crossed the IAU boundary of Gemini into Taurus. The Sun will slowly move through Taurus at a rate of 1\u00b0 east every 72 years until approximately 2600 AD, at which point it will be in Aries on the first day of summer.\nAstrology.\nAs of 2008[ [update]], the Sun appears in the constellation Taurus from May 13 to June 21. In tropical astrology, the Sun is considered to be in the sign Taurus from April 20 to May 20.\nSpace exploration.\nThe space probe \"Pioneer 10\" is moving in the direction of this constellation, though it will not be nearing any of the stars in this constellation for many thousands of years, by which time its batteries will be long dead.\nSolar eclipse of May 29, 1919.\nSeveral stars in the Hyades star cluster, including Kappa Tauri, were photographed during the total solar eclipse of May 29, 1919, by the expedition of Arthur Eddington in Pr\u00edncipe and others in Sobral, Brazil, that confirmed Albert Einstein's prediction of the bending of light around the Sun according to his general theory of relativity which he published in 1915.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBook references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29985", "revid": "50154082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29985", "title": "Taco", "text": "Mexican filled tortilla dish\nA taco (, , 11px|Listen]]}}) is a traditional Mexican dish consisting of a small hand-sized corn- or wheat-based tortilla topped with a filling. The tortilla is then folded around the filling and eaten by hand. A taco can be made with a variety of fillings, including beef, pork, chicken, seafood, beans, vegetables, and cheese, and garnished with various condiments, such as salsa, guacamole, or sour cream, and vegetables, such as lettuce, coriander, onion, tomatoes, and chiles. Tacos are a common form of antojitos, or Mexican street food, which have spread around the world.\nTacos can be contrasted with similar foods such as burritos, which are often much larger and rolled rather than folded; taquitos, which are rolled and fried; or chalupas/tostadas, in which the tortilla is fried before filling.\nEtymology.\nThe origins of the taco are not precisely known, and etymologies for the culinary usage of the word are generally theoretical. \"Taco\" in the sense of a typical Mexican dish comprising a maize tortilla folded around food is just one of the meanings connoted by the word, according to the Real Academia Espa\u00f1ola, publisher of \"Diccionario de la Lengua Espa\u00f1ola.\" This meaning of the Spanish word \"taco\" is a Mexican innovation, but the word \"taco\" is used in other contexts to mean \"wedge; wad, plug; billiard cue; blowpipe; ramrod; short, stocky person; [or] short, thick piece of wood.\" The etymological origin of this sense of the word is Germanic and has cognates in other European languages, including the French word and the English word \"tack\".\nIn Spain, the word \"taco\" can also be used in the context of \"tacos de jam\u00f3n\": these are diced pieces of ham, or sometimes bits and shavings of ham leftover after a larger piece is sliced. They can be served on their own as tapas or street food, or can be added to other dishes such as salmorejo, omelettes, stews, empanadas, or \"mel\u00f3n con jam\u00f3n\".\nAccording to one etymological theory, the culinary origin of the term \"taco\" in Mexico can be traced to its employment, among Mexican silver miners, as a term signifying \"plug.\" The miners used explosive charges in plug form, consisting of a paper wrapper and gunpowder filling.\nIndigenous origins are also proposed. One possibility is that the word derives from the Nahuatl word , meaning \"half\" or \"in the middle\", in the sense that food would be placed in the middle of a tortilla. Furthermore, dishes analogous to the taco were known to have existed in Pre-Columbian society\u2014for example, the Nahuatl word (a type of corn tortilla).\nHistory.\nThere is significant debate about the origins of the taco in Mexico, with some arguing that the taco predates the arrival of the Spanish in Mexico, since there is anthropological evidence that the indigenous people living in the lake region of the Valley of Mexico traditionally ate tacos filled with small fish. Writing at the time of the Spanish conquistadors, Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo documented the first taco feast enjoyed by Europeans, a meal which Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s arranged for his captains in Coyoac\u00e1n. Others argue that the advent of the taco is much more recent, with one of the more popular theories being that the taco was invented by silver miners in the 18th century.\nOne of the oldest mentions of the term \"taco\" comes from an 1836 cookbook \u2014\"Nuevo y sencillo arte de cocina, reposteria y refrescos\"\u2014 by Antonia Carrillo; in a recipe for a rolled pork loin (lomo de cerdo enrollado), she instructs the readers to roll the loin like they would a \"taco de tortilla\" or tortilla taco. \nAnother mention of the word taco comes from the novel \u2014\"El hombre de la situaci\u00f3n\" (1861)\u2014 by Mexican writer Manuel Payno: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cThey surrounded the father's bed, and he, putting a pillow on his legs, which served as a table, began to give the example, and a pleasant gathering was formed, which was completed by the mother, who always entered last, waving with one hand (from right to left) a large cup of white atole, while with the other, she carried right to her mouth, a tortilla taco filled with a spread of red chile. These instances disprove the theory that the first mention of the word \"taco\" in Mexico was in the 1891 novel Los bandidos de R\u00edo Fr\u00edo by Manuel Payno. \nIt should also be noted that term \"taco\" was regional, specifically from Mexico City and surrounding areas, and that other regional names existed. In Guanajuato, Guerrero, Michoac\u00e1n, and San Luis Potos\u00ed, the terms used were \"burrito\" and \"burro\"; while in Yucat\u00e1n and Quintana Roo the term used was \"codzito\" (co\u00e7ito). Due to the cultural influence of Mexico City, the term \"taco\" became the default, and terms like \"burrito\" and \"codzito\", either became forgotten or evolved to mean something different in modern times.\nIn 2024, El Califa de Le\u00f3n in Mexico City became the first taco stand to win a Michelin star.\nTraditional variations.\nAs an accompaniment to tacos, many taco stands will serve whole or sliced red radishes, lime slices, salt, pickled or grilled chilis (hot peppers), and occasionally cucumber slices, or grilled cambray onions.\nNon-traditional variations.\nHard-shell tacos.\nThe hard-shell or crispy taco is a tradition that developed in the United States. This type of taco is typically served as a crisp-fried corn tortilla filled with seasoned ground beef, cheese, lettuce, and sometimes tomato, onion, salsa, sour cream, and avocado or guacamole. Such tacos are sold by restaurants and by fast food chains, while kits are readily available in most supermarkets. Hard shell tacos are sometimes known as (\"golden tacos\") in Spanish, a name that they share with taquitos.\nVarious sources credit different individuals with the invention of the hard-shell taco, but some form of the dish likely predates all of them. Beginning from the early part of the twentieth century, various types of tacos became popular in the country, especially in Texas and California but also elsewhere. By the late 1930s, companies like Ashley Mexican Food and Absolute Mexican Foods were selling appliances and ingredients for cooking hard shell tacos, and the first patents for hard-shell taco cooking appliances were filed in the 1940s. The first cookbook to provide a recipe for the hard-shell taco was \"The Good Life: New Mexican food\", written by Fabiola Cabeza de Baca Gilbert and published in Santa Fe, New Mexico, in 1949. \nIn the mid-1950s, Glen Bell opened Taco Tia, and began selling a simplified version of the tacos being sold by Mexican restaurants in San Bernardino, particularly the \"tacos dorados\" being sold at the Mitla Cafe, owned by Lucia and Salvador Rodriguez across the street from another of Bell's restaurants. Over the next few years, Bell owned and operated a number of restaurants in southern California including four called El Taco. The tacos sold at Bell's restaurants were many Anglo Americans' first introduction to Mexican food. Bell sold the El Tacos to his partner and built the first Taco Bell in Downey in 1962. Kermit Becky, a former Los Angeles police officer, bought the first Taco Bell franchise from Glen Bell in 1964, and located it in Torrance. The company grew rapidly, and by 1967, the 100th restaurant opened at 400 South Brookhurst in Anaheim. In 1968, its first franchise location east of the Mississippi River opened in Springfield, Ohio.\nSoft-shell tacos.\nTraditionally, soft-shelled tacos referred to corn tortillas that were cooked to a softer state than a hard taco \u2013 usually by grilling or steaming. More recently, the term has come to include flour-tortilla-based tacos mostly from large manufacturers and restaurant chains. In this context, \"soft tacos\" are tacos made with wheat flour tortillas and filled with the same ingredients as a hard taco.\nBreakfast taco.\nThe breakfast taco, found in Tex-Mex cuisine, is a soft corn or flour tortilla filled with meat, eggs, or cheese, which can also contain other ingredients. Some have claimed that Austin, Texas, is the home of the breakfast taco. However, food writer and \"OC Weekly\" editor Gustavo Arellano responded that such a statement reflects a common trend of \"whitewashed\" foodways reporting, noting that predominantly Hispanic San Antonio, Texas, \"never had to brag about its breakfast taco love\u2014folks there just call it 'breakfast'\".\nIndian taco.\nIndian tacos, or \"Navajo tacos\", are made using frybread instead of tortillas. They are commonly eaten at pow-wows, festivals, and other gatherings by and for indigenous people in the United States and Canada.\nThis kind of taco is not known to have been present before the arrival of Europeans in what is now the Southwestern United States. Navajo tradition indicates that frybread came into use in the 1860s when the government forced the tribe to relocate from their homeland in Arizona in a journey known as the Long Walk of the Navajo. It was made from ingredients given to them by the government to supplement their diet since the region could not support growing the agricultural commodities that had been previously used.\nPuffy tacos, taco kits, and tacodillas.\nSince at least the late 1930s, a variation called the \"puffy taco\" has been popular in the Lower Rio Grande Valley and the surrounding area. Henry's Puffy Tacos, opened by Henry Lopez in San Antonio, Texas, popularized the variation, in which uncooked corn tortillas (flattened balls of masa dough) are quickly fried in hot oil until they expand and become \"puffy\". Fillings are similar to hard-shell versions. Restaurants offering this style of taco have since appeared in other Texas cities, as well as in California, where Henry's brother, Arturo Lopez, opened Arturo's Puffy Taco in Whittier, not long after Henry's opened. Henry's continues to thrive, managed by the family's second generation.\nKits are available at grocery and convenience stores and usually consist of taco shells (corn tortillas already fried in a U-shape), seasoning mix and taco sauce. Commercial vendors for the home market also market soft taco kits with tortillas instead of taco shells.\nThe tacodilla contains melted cheese in between the two folded tortillas, thus resembling a quesadilla.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29987", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29987", "title": "The Penguins", "text": "American doowop band\nThe Penguins were an American doo-wop group from Los Angeles, California, that were active during the 1950s and early 1960s. They are known for their 1954 hit song, \"Earth Angel\", which was one of the first rhythm and blues songs to cross over to the pop charts. The song would ultimately prove to be their only success. The song peaked at No. 8 on the US \"Billboard\" Best Sellers in Stores pop chart but had a three-week run at No. 1 on the R&amp;B chart.\nEarly career.\nThe original members of The Penguins were tenor Cleveland Duncan (July 23, 1935 \u2013 November 7, 2012), Curtis Williams (baritone/bass)(December 11, 1934 \u2013 August 10, 1979), Dexter Tisby (tenor)(March 10, 1935 \u2013 May 2019) and Bruce Tate (baritone)(January 27, 1937 \u2013 June 20, 1973). Duncan and Williams were former classmates at Fremont High School in Los Angeles, California, and Williams had become a member of The Hollywood Flames. In late 1953, they decided to form a new vocal group and added Tisby and Tate. Their midtempo performance style was a cross between rhythm and blues and rock and roll. Williams brought with him a song, \"Earth Angel\", on which he had worked with Gaynel Hodge, another member of the Hollywood Flames.\nThe Penguins were one of a number of doo-wop groups of the period named after birds (such as The Orioles, The Flamingos, and The Crows). One of the members smoked Kool cigarettes, which, at the time, had \"Willie the Penguin\" as its cartoon advertising character. They considered themselves \"cool\" and accordingly decided to call themselves \"The Penguins\".\nDootone Records released The Penguins' single \"Hey Senorita\" in late 1954 as the intended A-side, but a radio DJ flipped the record over to the B-side: \"Earth Angel\" worked its way up to No. 1 on the \"Billboard\" R&amp;B chart (the only Penguins song to chart that high) and held that place for three weeks early in 1955. By 1966, the disc had sold four million copies. The Penguins followed up this hit with a Christmas release \"A Christmas prayer\" with \"Jingle Jangle.\"\nThe Penguins performed for the eleventh famed Cavalcade of Jazz concert held at Wrigley Field in Los Angeles which was produced by Leon Hefflin, Sr. on July 24, 1955. Also featured Big Jay McNeely, Lionel Hampton and his Orchestra, The Medallions and James Moody and his Orchestra.\nDuncan sang lead on \"Earth Angel\". He reprised his performance a decade later on Frank Zappa's \"Memories of El Monte\", an elegiac 1963 song in which he suddenly breaks into \"Earth Angel\" as one of the various songs remembered. El Monte, a city near Los Angeles, had spawned such popular performers as Tony Allan, Marvin &amp; Johnny, and The Shields as well as the Penguins. Those groups were also emulated as part of Zappa's tribute to early days of rock and roll.\nIn a common practice of the time, radio stations frequently featured segregated playlists. Thus, \"Earth Angel\" was simultaneously recorded by the white group The Crew-Cuts in 1955. The Crew-Cuts cover peaked at No. 3 on the Hot 100 chart, five spots higher than the Penguins version. The single's success contributed to the Crew-Cuts' own successful career of recording crossover-friendly covers of R&amp;B hits.\nThe songwriting genesis for \"Earth Angel\" was a matter of some dispute, eventually ending up in a split credit between Penguins bass-baritone Curtis Williams, Gaynel Hodge, and Jesse Belvin.\nAfter \"Earth Angel\".\nComing off the success of \"Earth Angel\", the Penguins approached Buck Ram to manage them. Ram's primary interest was in managing The Platters, who at that point had no hit singles, but were a profitable touring group. With the Penguins in hand, Ram was able to swing a 2-for-1 deal with Mercury Records, in which the company agreed to take on the Platters as a condition for getting the Penguins (the group that Mercury really wanted). The Platters became the label's more successful act, the Penguins never scoring another hit single.\nIn 1955, Bruce Tate left the group. He was replaced by Randy Jones (who would later sing with the Cadets). During the summer of 1956, Jones and Tisby were briefly out of the group, and were replaced by Ray Brewster and Teddy Harper, respectively. Jones and Tisby returned shortly afterwards. Curtis Williams left in December 1957, with Harper rejoining as his permanent replacement. The Penguins never had another national hit, but their 1957 cover of \"Pledge of Love\" reached No. 15 on the R&amp;B chart.\nLater years.\nThe group broke up in 1962. Cleveland Duncan continued recording as \"The Penguins\", with new member Walter Saulsberry and a backing group, the Viceroys. Later, the group was Duncan, Saulsberry, Vesta and Evelyn King, and Vera Walker. (Duncan and the King sisters had recorded a record as \"Cleve Duncan and the Radiants\" in 1959.) By the late 1960s, the group was being billed as the \"Fabulous Penguins\", and featured Duncan, Walker, and new member Rudy Wilson. By the 1970s, the members were Duncan, the returning Walter Saulsberry, and new member Glenn Madison, formerly of the Delcos (Indiana). This was the current line up of the group until 2012.\nThe group performed on the PBS television special, \"Doo Wop 50\". Duncan, Madison, and Saulsberry also performed with Randy Jones as guest, in 2001. It was planned for Jones to appear with the Penguins the following year but he suffered a stroke while rehearsing with the group and died shortly thereafter. Jones also performed with the reunited Jacks/Cadets in the 1990s. Duncan died on November 7, 2012, in Los Angeles at the age of 77.\nThe group is mentioned in the Paul Simon song \"Rene and Georgette Magritte with Their Dog after the War\". In interviews, Simon has told about hearing \"Earth Angel,\" the first R&amp;B song he said he had heard; he describes trying to explain to his father, a big band musician, how great the song was.\nAward.\nThe Penguins were inducted into The Vocal Group Hall of Fame in 2004.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29988", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29988", "title": "Tenochtitlan", "text": "Former city-state in the Valley of Mexico\n, also known as Mexico-Tenochtitlan, was a large Mexican in what is now the historic center of Mexico City. The exact date of the founding of the city is unclear, but the date 13 March 1325 was chosen in 1925 to celebrate the 600th anniversary of the city. The city was built on an island in what was then Lake Texcoco in the Valley of Mexico. The city was the capital of the expanding Aztec Empire in the 15th century until it was captured by the Tlaxcaltec and the Spanish in 1521.\nAt its peak, it was the largest city in the pre-Columbian Americas. It subsequently became a \"cabecera\" of the Viceroyalty of New Spain. Today, the ruins of are in the historic center of the Mexican capital. The World Heritage Site of contains what remains of the geography (water, boats, floating gardens) of the Mexica capital.\n was one of two Mexica (city-states or polities) on the island, the other being .\nEtymology.\nTraditionally, the name was thought to come from Nahuatl (\"rock\") and (\"prickly pear\") and is often thought to mean, \"Among the prickly pears [growing among] rocks.\" However, one attestation in the late 16th-century manuscript known as \"the Bancroft dialogues\" suggests the second vowel was short, so that the true etymology remains uncertain. However, it is also thought that the city was named after Tenoch.\nGeography.\n covered an estimated , situated on the western side of the shallow Lake Texcoco.\nAt the time of Spanish conquests, Mexico City comprised both and . The city extended from north to south, from the north border of to the swamps, which by that time were gradually disappearing to the west; the city ended more or less at the present location of .\nThe city was connected to the mainland by bridges and causeways leading to the north, south, and west. The causeways were interrupted by bridges that allowed canoes and other water traffic to pass freely. The bridges could be pulled away, if necessary, to protect the city. The city was interlaced with a series of canals, so that all sections of the city could be visited either on foot or via canoe.\nLake was the largest of five interconnected lakes. Since it formed in an endorheic basin, Lake was brackish. During the reign of Moctezuma I, the \"levee of \" was constructed, reputedly designed by . Estimated to be in length, the levee was completed c.\u20091453. The levee kept fresh spring-fed water in the waters around and kept the brackish waters beyond the dike, to the east.\nTwo double aqueducts, each more than long and made of terracotta, provided the city with fresh water from the springs at . This was intended mainly for cleaning and washing. For drinking, water from mountain springs was preferred. Most of the population liked to bathe twice a day; was said to take four baths a day. According to the context of Aztec culture in literature, the soap that they most likely used was the root of a plant called (\"Saponaria americana\"), and to clean their clothes they used the root of (\"Agave americana\"). Also, the upper classes and pregnant women washed themselves in a , similar to a sauna bath, which is still used in the south of Mexico. This was also popular in other Mesoamerican cultures.\nCity planning.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When we saw so many cities and villages built in the water and other great towns on dry land we were amazed and said that it was like the enchantments (...) on account of the great towers and cues and buildings rising from the water, and all built of masonry. And some of our soldiers even asked whether the things that we saw were not a dream? (...) I do not know how to describe it, seeing things as we did that had never been heard of or seen before, not even dreamed about.\u2014\u200a\nThe city was divided into four zones, or \"camps\"; each \"camp\" was divided into 20 districts (\"calpullis\", , , meaning \"large house\"); and each \"calpulli\", or 'big house', was crossed by streets or . There were three main streets that crossed the city, each leading to one of the three causeways to the mainland of , , and . Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo reported that they were wide enough for ten horses. Surrounding the raised causeways were artificial floating gardens with canal waterways and gardens of plants, shrubs, and trees. The \"calpullis\" were divided by channels used for transportation, with wood bridges that were removed at night.\nThe earliest European images of the city were woodcuts published in Augsburg around 1522.\nMarketplaces.\nEach \"calpulli\" had its own (marketplace), but there was also a main marketplace in \u2013 's sister city. Spanish conquistador Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s estimated it was twice the size of the city of Salamanca with about 60,000 people trading daily. Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan provides a more conservative population estimate of 20,000 on ordinary days and 40,000 on feast days. There were also specialized markets in the other central Mexican cities.\nPublic buildings.\nIn the center of the city were the public buildings, temples, and palaces. Inside a walled square, to a side, was the ceremonial center. There were about 45 public buildings, including: the Templo Mayor, which was dedicated to the Aztec patron deity and the Rain God ; the temple of ; the (ball game court) with the or rack of skulls; the Sun Temple, which was dedicated to ; the Eagle's House, which was associated with warriors and the ancient power of rulers; the platforms for the gladiatorial sacrifice; and some minor temples.\nOutside was the palace of Moctezuma with 100 rooms, each with its own bath, for the lords and ambassadors of allies and conquered people. Also located nearby was the , or house of the songs, and the .\nThe city had great symmetry. All constructions had to be approved by the , a functionary in charge of the city planning.\nPalaces of Moctezuma II.\nThe palace of Moctezuma II also had two houses or zoos, one for birds of prey and another for other birds, reptiles, and mammals. About 300 people were dedicated to the care of the animals.\nThere was also a botanical garden and an aquarium. The aquarium had ten ponds of salt water and ten ponds of fresh water, containing various fish and aquatic birds. Places like this also existed in , , (now called Oaxtepec), and .\nSocial classes.\nTenochtitlan can be considered the most complex society in Mesoamerica in regard to social stratification. The complex system involved many social classes. The were commoners who lived outside the island city of Tenochtitlan. The were noblemen who were relatives of leaders and former leaders, and lived in the confines of the island. , or eagle nobles, were commoners who impressed the nobles with their martial prowess, and were treated as nobles. were the highest class, rulers of various parts of the empire, including the king. were slaves or indentured servants. Finally, the were merchants who traveled all of Mesoamerica trading. The membership of this class was based on heredity. could become very rich because they did not pay taxes, but they had to sponsor the ritual feast of Xocotl Huetzi from the wealth that they obtained from their trade expeditions.\nStatus was displayed by the location and type of house where a person lived. Ordinary people lived in houses made of reeds plastered with mud and roofed with thatch. People who were better off had houses of adobe brick with flat roofs. The wealthy had houses of stone masonry with flat roofs. They most likely made up the house complexes that were arranged around the inner court. The higher officials in Tenochtitlan lived in the great palace complexes that made up the city.\nAdding even more complexity to Aztec social stratification was the . is a group of families related by either kinship or proximity. These groups consist of both elite members of Aztec society and commoners. Elites provided commoners with arable land and nonagricultural occupations, and commoners performed services for chiefs and gave tribute.\nHistory.\nTenochtitlan was the capital of the Mexican civilization of the Mexica people, founded in 1325. The state religion of the Mexica civilization awaited the fulfillment of an ancient prophecy: the wandering tribes would find the destined site for a great city whose location would be signaled by an eagle with a snake in its beak perched atop a cactus (\"Opuntia\"), which had grown from the heart of Copil.\nThe Mexica saw this vision on what was then a small swampy island in Lake , a vision that is now immortalized in Mexico's coat of arms and on the Mexican flag. Not deterred by the unfavourable terrain, they set about building their city, using the system (misnamed as \"floating gardens\") for agriculture and to dry and expand the island.\nA thriving culture developed, and the Mexica civilization came to dominate other tribes around Mexico. The small natural island was perpetually enlarged as grew to become the largest and most powerful city in Mesoamerica. Commercial routes were developed that brought goods from places as far as the Gulf of Mexico, the Pacific Ocean and perhaps even the Inca Empire.\nAfter a flood of Lake Texcoco, the city was rebuilt during the rule of , which was between 1486 and 1502, in a style that made it one of the grandest ever in Mesoamerica.\nHernan Cort\u00e9s arrived in Tenochtitlan on 8 November 1519. Although there are no precise numbers, the city's population has been estimated at between 200,000 and 400,000 inhabitants, placing Tenochtitlan among the largest cities in the world at that time. Compared to the cities of Europe, only Paris, Venice and Constantinople might have rivaled it. It was five times the size of the London of Henry VIII. In a letter to the Spanish king, Cort\u00e9s wrote that was as large as Seville or C\u00f3rdoba. Cort\u00e9s' men were in awe at the sight of the splendid city and many wondered if they were dreaming.\nAlthough some popular sources put the number as high as 350,000 the most common estimates of the population are of over 200,000 people. One of the few comprehensive academic surveys of Mesoamerican city and town sizes arrived at a population of 212,500 living on . It is also said that at one time, Moctezuma had rule over an empire of almost five million people in central and southern Mexico because he had extended his rule to surrounding territories to gain tribute and prisoners to sacrifice to the gods.\nConquest.\nWhen Cort\u00e9s and his men invaded , Moctezuma II chose to welcome Cort\u00e9s as an ambassador rather than risk a war which might quickly be joined by aggrieved indigenous people.\nAs Cort\u00e9s approached , the celebrated Toxcatl. At this event the most prominent warriors of each would dance in front of a huge statue of . The Spanish leader, Pedro de Alvarado, who was left in charge, worried that the natives planned a surprise attack. He captured three natives and tortured them until they said that this was indeed planned to happen. During the festival, the Spaniards came heavily armed and closed off every exit from the courtyard so that no one would escape. This happened during their last days in Tenochtitlan.\nNobles lined each side of the city's main causeway, which extended about a league (4.83 km). Walking down the center came Moctezuma II, with two lords at his side, one his brother, the ruler of . Cort\u00e9s dismounted and was greeted by the ruler and his lords, but forbidden to touch him. Cort\u00e9s gave him a necklace of crystals, placing it over his neck.\nThey were then brought to a large house that would serve as their home for their stay in the city. Once they were settled, Moctezuma himself sat down and spoke with Cort\u00e9s. The great ruler declared that anything that they needed would be theirs to have. He was thrilled to have visitors of such stature. Although the Spaniards were seeking gold, Moctezuma expressed that he had very little of the sort, but all of it was to be given to Cort\u00e9s if he desired it.\nSoon after arriving in , Cort\u00e9s came up against problems. At Vera Cruz, the officer left in charge received a letter from , the leader of Nueva Almer\u00eda, asking to become a vassal of the Spaniards. He requested that officials be sent to him so that he could confirm his submission. To reach the province, the officers would have to travel through hostile land. The officer in charge of Vera Cruz decided to send four officers to meet with Qualpopoca.\nWhen they arrived, they were captured and two were killed, the other two escaping through the woods. Upon their return to Vera Cruz, the officer in charge was infuriated, and led troops to storm Almer\u00eda. Here they learned that Moctezuma was supposedly the one who ordered the officers executed. Back in , Cort\u00e9s detained Moctezuma and questioned him. Though no serious conclusions were reached, this negatively affected the relationship between Moctezuma and the Spaniards.\nCort\u00e9s subsequently besieged for over 90 days, causing a famine. Having gained control, he then directed the systematic destruction and leveling of the city; and began its rebuilding, despite opposition. The reconstruction involved the creation of a central area designated for Spanish use (the \"traza\"). The outer Indian section, now dubbed \"San Juan Tenochtitlan\", continued to be governed by the previous indigenous elite and was divided into the same subdivisions as before.\nThe people of were soon exposed to diseases to which they had no immunity. Symptoms were often delayed for up to ten days, when the infection would spread throughout the body, causing sores, pain, and high fever. People were weak to the point that they could not move, nor obtain food and water. Burial of the dead became difficult to impossible, due to the pervasiveness of the people's illness. The people of Tenochtitlan began to starve and weaken. The death toll rose steadily over the course of the next 60 days.\nColonial era.\nCort\u00e9s founded the Spanish capital of Mexico City on the ruins of Tenochtitlan. Despite the extensive damage to the built environment, the site retained symbolic power and legitimacy as the capital of the Aztec empire, which Cort\u00e9s sought to appropriate. For a time this , the highest rank in the Spanish hierarchy of settlement designation, was called Mexico\u2013Tenochtitlan. Charles Gibson devotes the final chapter of his classic work, \"The Aztecs Under Spanish Rule\", to what he called \"The City\", with later historians building on his work. The Spaniards established a or town council, which had jurisdiction over the Spanish residents. The Spanish established a Europeans-only zone in the center of the city, an area of 13 blocks in each direction of the central plaza, which was the . Although many native residents died during the siege of Tenochtitlan, the indigenous still had a strong presence in the city, and were settled in two main areas of the island, designated San Juan Tenochtitlan and Santiago Tlatelolco, each with a municipal council that functioned the entire colonial period. San Juan Tenochtitlan was a Spanish administrative creation, which amalgamated four indigenous sections, with each losing territory to the Spanish . The Spanish laid out the streets of the in a checker board pattern, with straight streets and plazas at intervals, whereas the indigenous portions of the city were irregular in layout and built of modest materials. In the colonial period both San Juan Tenochtitlan and Santiago Tlatelolco retained jurisdiction over settlements on the mainland that they could draw on for labor and tribute demanded by the Spanish, but increasingly those subordinate settlements () were able to gain their autonomy with their own rulers and separate relationship with the Spanish rulers. Concern about the health of the indigenous population in early post-conquest Mexico\u2013Tenochtitlan led to the founding of a royal hospital for indigenous residents.\nThere are a number of colonial-era pictorial manuscripts dealing with Tenochtitlan\u2013Tlatelolco, which shed light on litigation between Spaniards and indigenous over property. An account with information about the war of Tenochtitlan against its neighbor Tlatelolco in 1473 and the Spanish conquest in 1521 is the . Anthropologist Susan Kellogg has studied colonial-era inheritance patterns of Nahuas in Mexico City, using Nahuatl- and Spanish-language testaments. \nOn the 13th of August 1521, after over two months of fighting, Spanish conquistador Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s succeeded in bringing about the fall of Tenochtitlan, the capital of the Aztec empire, and consequently brought an end to the Aztec empire.\nRuins.\nTenochtitlan's main temple complex, the Templo Mayor, was dismantled and the central district of the Spanish colonial city was constructed on top of it. The great temple was destroyed by the Spanish during the construction of a cathedral. The location of the Templo Mayor was rediscovered in the early 20th century, but major excavations did not take place until 1978\u20131982, after utility workers came across a massive stone disc depicting the nude dismembered body of the moon goddess Coyolxauhqui. The disc is in diameter, and is held at the Templo Mayor Museum.\nThe ruins, constructed over seven periods, were built on top of each other. The resulting weight of the structures caused them to sink into the sediment of Lake Texcoco; the ruins now rest at an angle instead of horizontally.\nMexico City's Z\u00f3calo, the Plaza de la Constituci\u00f3n, is located at the site of Tenochtitlan's original central plaza and market, and many of the original \"calzadas\" still correspond to modern city streets. The Aztec calendar stone was located in the ruins. This stone is in diameter and weighs over . It was once located half-way up the great pyramid. This sculpture was carved around 1470 under the rule of King Axayacatl, the predecessor of Tizoc, and is said to tell the history of the Mexicas and to prophesy the future.\nIn August 1987, archaeologists discovered a mix of 1,789 human bones below street level in Mexico City. The burial dates back to the 1480s and lies at the foot of the main temple in the sacred ceremonial precinct of the Aztec capital. The bones are from children, teenagers and adults. A complete skeleton of a young woman was also found at the site.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "29989", "revid": "10044298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29989", "title": "Triassic", "text": "First period of the Mesozoic Era\nThe Triassic (; sometimes symbolized as \ud83d\udf48) is a geologic period and a stratigraphic system that spans 50.5 million years from the end of the Permian Period 251.902 Ma (million years ago) to the beginning of the Jurassic Period 201.4 Ma. The Triassic Period is the first and shortest geologic period of the Mesozoic Era, and the seventh period of the Phanerozoic Eon. The start and the end of the Triassic Period featured major extinction events.\nChronologically, the Triassic Period is divided into three epochs: (i) the Early Triassic, (ii) the Middle Triassic, and (iii) the Late Triassic. The Triassic Period began after the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event that much reduced the biosphere of planet Earth. The fossil record of the Triassic Period presents three categories of organisms: (i) animals that survived the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event, (ii) new animals that briefly flourished in the Triassic biosphere, and (iii) new animals that evolved and dominated the Mesozoic Era. Reptiles, especially archosaurs, were the chief terrestrial vertebrates during this time. A specialized group of archosaurs, called dinosaurs, first appeared in the Late Triassic but did not become dominant until the succeeding Jurassic Period. Archosaurs that became dominant in this period were primarily pseudosuchians, relatives and ancestors of modern crocodilians, while some archosaurs specialized in flight, the first time among vertebrates, becoming the pterosaurs. Therapsids, the dominant vertebrates of the preceding Permian period, saw a brief surge in diversification in the Triassic, with dicynodonts and cynodonts quickly becoming dominant, but they declined throughout the period with the majority becoming extinct by the end. However, the first stem-group mammals (mammaliamorphs), themselves a specialized subgroup of cynodonts, appeared during the Triassic and would survive the extinction event, allowing them to radiate during the Jurassic. Amphibians were primarily represented by the temnospondyls, giant aquatic predators that had survived the end-Permian extinction and saw a new burst of diversification in the Triassic, before going extinct by the end; however, early crown-group lissamphibians (including stem-group frogs, salamanders and caecilians) also became more common during the Triassic and survived the extinction event. The earliest known neopterygian fish, including early holosteans and teleosts, appeared near the beginning of the Triassic, and quickly diversified to become among the dominant groups of fish in both freshwater and marine habitats.\nThe vast supercontinent of Pangaea dominated the globe during the Triassic, but in the latest Triassic (Rhaetian) and Early Jurassic it began to gradually rift into two separate landmasses: Laurasia to the north and Gondwana to the south. The global climate during the Triassic was mostly hot and dry, with deserts spanning much of Pangaea's interior. However, the climate shifted and became more humid as Pangaea began to drift apart. The end of the period was marked by yet another major mass extinction, the Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction event, that wiped out many groups, including most pseudosuchians, and allowed dinosaurs to assume dominance in the Jurassic.\nEtymology.\nThe Triassic was named in 1834 by Friedrich August von Alberti, after a succession of three distinct rock layers (Greek meaning 'triad') that are widespread in southern Germany: the lower Buntsandstein (colourful sandstone\")\", the middle Muschelkalk (shell-bearing limestone) and the upper Keuper (coloured clay).\nDating and subdivisions.\nOn the geologic time scale, the Triassic is usually divided into Early, Middle, and Late Triassic Epochs, and the corresponding rocks are referred to as Lower, Middle, or Upper Triassic. The faunal stages from the youngest to oldest are:\nPaleogeography.\nAt the beginning of the Triassic, all the major continents were amalgamated into the supercontinent of Pangea. Centred on the equator, this stretched in an arc from the north to south polar regions with Laurussia in the north and Gondwana in the south. The Paleo- and Neo-Tethys oceans lay within the arc of the supercontinent with the vast Panthalassa Ocean beyond. North China and Amuria, and South China were separated from Pangea by the Paleoasian Ocean, but this closed by the Late Triassic.\nPangea was surrounded by subduction zones that dipped beneath the supercontinent. The great mountain ranges that marked the Late Paleozoic continental collisions were largely eroded and were being replaced by regions of thinned crust that lay along the lines of the future Atlantic, Indian and Southern oceans.\nThe supercontinent changed motion from drifting westward to rotating counterclockwise during late Permian. This continued until the Carnian (c. 230 Ma), after which it resumed the westward motion. These changes in motion were triggered by the opening of the Neo-Tethys, and closing of the Paleo-Tethys respectively, and affected tectonic regimes particularly along the southern and western margins.\nThe narrow Cimmerian terranes that had rifted from the northern margin of Gondwana in the Permian continued to drift northwards; the Paleo-Tethys Ocean closing in front of them and the Neo-Tethys opening behind.\nEruptions of the Siberian Traps Large Igneous Province (LIP) persisted into the Early Triassic and the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP) were active by the Late Triassic as a prelude to seafloor spreading in the Central Atlantic at the boundary of the Triassic and Jurassic.\nNorthern Pangea (Laurussia).\nIn northern-eastern Pangea, the Siberian Traps LIP continued to erupt into the Middle Triassic. Lower Triassic major deltaic systems (including the Triassic Boreal Ocean delta plain) advanced across the shallow Arctic Ocean. Their catchment areas the high ground of the Urals, Fennoscandinavia, the Canada-Greenland Shield and the Lomonosov High. During the Late Triassic, in response to the opening of the Central Atlantic to the south, tectonic movements between North America and Baltica led to convergence in the High Arctic with uplift, folding and thrusting in the Barents Sea and North Siberian margin.\nMajor extensional tectonic movements, that began in the late Permian, continued across Laurussia from North/Central Europe in the east to eastern Canada in the west, with north-south trending graben systems developing across Europe, including further subsidence in the Northern and Southern Permian basins. Lower Triassic sediments deposited in these basins are continental to brackish marine in nature. They are overlain by shallow marine carbonates and mudstones and evaporites of the Zechstein Sea.\nFurther south, during the Norian, the opening of the Central Atlantic led to the formation of narrow, deep water basins in the Eastern Mediterranean area. Corsica, Sardinia, Calabria, and the Balearic terranes were attached to Europe, whilst Apulia, Adria, and the terranes of southern Turkey remained attached to the African plate.\nAlong the western margin of Laurussia, a continental magmatic arc extended from the southwestern United States to the Arctic with an associated continental-scale foreland basin system. Localised back-arc basins developed within this, in regions of extension. Along the northern section of the margin, the Permian to Early Triassic counterclockwise rotation of Pangea resulted in the closure of the narrow Slide Mountain Ocean and the Sonoma orogeny. In south, it led to a reduction in the dip of the subducting slab and thickening of the continental crust.\nSouthern Pangea (Gondwana).\nMuch of Africa was stable and above sea level, with only a few Triassic-aged lake sediments known, although along the northern coast marine sediments were deposited during periods of higher sea levels.\nNortheast-southwest trending rifting along the eastern edge of Africa between Madagascar (Indian plate) and eastern Africa (Somalian plate) continued from the Late Carboniferous into the Triassic, with substantial mountains rising along the edge of the rift and the formation of a series of pull-apart basins. Gradual marine incursions from the Neo-Tethys resulted in the deposition of Lower and Middle Triassic marine sediments in these basins. Upper Triassic sediments are continental in nature and this rift system ultimately failed and a new north-south trending rift system developed in the Jurassic.\nThe opening of the Neo-Tethys created passive margins along the Arabian and Indian margins. Rifting in the Neo-Tethys extended westwards between the Pontides and Taurides terranes of Turkey during the Late Triassic. The Tethyan Himalayan block remained attached to India but was separated by the thinned crust of Greater India, the northern margin of which supplied sediments to the passive margin.\nThe counterclockwise rotation of Pangea precipitated dextral transpression across the NNE-SSW trending, west-dipping subduction zone, along the eastern Australian margin, which culminated in the Hunter-Bowen orogeny (c. 260-230 Ma). Following this, the magmatic arc rotated to north-south and compression gave way to extension. This was accompanied by subduction rollback and back-arc basin formation.\nAlong the southwestern margin of South America, low plate convergence and subduction rates, triggered by the assembly and rotation of Pangea, resulted in subduction rollback and extension across the back-arc region. This generated large amounts of felsic magmatism. These extensional forces stretched across the continent with the formation of large northwest-trending basins with thick sedimentary deposits and the extension related magmatism.\nClosure of the Paleo-Tethys.\nThe Paleo-Tethys ocean formed as the continents surrounding it assembled to form Pangea in the Late Palaeozoic. The Eurasian sector of Pangea lay along its north and northwestern margin. To the northeast, the narrow Paleoasian Ocean (a branch of the Paleo-Tethys) lay between Eurasia, and North China and Tarim, and to the east, South China and Annamia (Southeast Asia). To the south were the Cimmerian terranes (Central Iran, Qiangtang(north Tibet), Lhasa (south Tibet), and Sibumasu (eastern Myanmar, Thailand, Malay peninsula and Sumatra). These terranes had rifted from northeastern Gondwana during the Permian. As they drifted northwards through the Triassic, the Paleo-Tethys closed in front of them, and the Neotethys opened behind.\nThe Paleo-Tethys was being consumed by subduction zones along the southern margin of North China, much of the Eurasian margin, and along the northern margin of the Qiangtang-Annamia and Lhasa-Sibumasu blocks.\nCollisions between Annamia and South China (c. 246-230 Ma); between Sibumasu and South China\u2013Annamia (c. 240-230 Ma); and, between Qiangtang and Lhasa (c. 250\u2013230 Ma) resulted in the Indosinian orogeny and the formation of a single large Eastern Asian continent. At about the same time (c. 240-230 Ma), the final closure of the Paleoasian Ocean led to the collision of Tarim and North China with the Kazakhstan and Siberian regions of Pangea, to form the Central Asian orogenic belt. South China collided with North China (c. 220 Ma), forming the Central China orogenic belt. The segment of the Paleo-Tethys between North China and Qiangtang may never have fully closed, but was filled with Permo-Triassic turbidites preserved in the West Kunlun and Bayanhar belts of the Central China orogenic belt.\nThe amalgamation of these East Asian blocks with Pangea in the Late Triassic maximised the land area of the supercontinent. It coincided with a period of dramatic climate change and the development of the megamonsoon, although the relationship between these is the subject of ongoing research.\nThe western Paleo-Tethys remained open until about 205 Ma, when the Iranian blocks collided with the Turan platform, on the southern margin of Eurasia, resulting in the Cimmerian orogeny. This extended from the Anatolian Plateau in the northwest, and merged with the Indosinian orogenic belt in the east. Late Triassic deformation across the Eastern Mediterranean area and much of the Middle East was complex, with regional scale strike-slip faulting and continued subduction below the Iranian margin.\nOpening of the Central Atlantic.\nBeginning in the latest Permian, a broad zone of lithospheric extension developed across Pangea along the line of the future Central Atlantic Ocean. The location of this rifting followed the pre-existing structures of the Variscan orogeny, and began immediately after the orogenic collapse of the Variscan belt. Extension began in the northern Central Atlantic region in the Anisian, and in the southern Central Atlantic in the Carnian.\nMajor rift basins formed along the present-day eastern North American margin from Florida to Newfoundland (Newark Supergroup basins), and along the Europe/African margin (Moroccan and Iberian basins). The Moroccan basins are the equivalent of Nova Scotian basins, and the Iberian the equivalent of the Newfoundland basins. These basins formed broad depressions on the continental crust that extended for hundreds of kilometres across central Pangea, with localised faulting formed sub-basins. The basins were filled by mainly continental deposits from regional-scale river systems and lakes, with only minor, late marine incursions in some areas.\nThe period of rifting came to an end with the emplacement of the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP) around 201 Ma. This was followed by seafloor spreading and the opening of the Central Atlantic Ocean. The CAMP is one of the largest LIPs and covered a region of about 10 million\u202fkm2 across North America, northeastern South America, northwestern Africa, and southwestern Europe. The magmatism produced dense dyke swarms, with individual dykes up to 800 km long, massive sill complexes, and lava fields that covered several hundred kilometres. Despite its size, the period of magmatism was brief, lasting only about 1 million years. Such intense igneous activity indicates widespread mantle melting, rather than a simple plume within the mantle. The varied petrological composition of the CAMP magmatism reflects local contamination of the upper mantle by continental lithosphere, including partial melting of previously subducted slabs. The magmatism, with its large scale injection of carbon and sulphur into the atmosphere, precipitated volcanic winters. This was followed by longer-term climate warming and ocean acidification, which caused the end-Triassic mass extinction.\nPanthalassic Ocean.\nAlthough no direct evidence remains, Panthalassa is thought to have been divided into three major tectonic plates: the Farallon; Izanagi; and, Phoenix. These were separated by oceanic spreading ridges. In the northeast, the smaller Cache Creek plate was being subducted beneath the western margin of North America, and beneath the Farallon plate to the south.\nPaleooceanography.\nEustatic sea level in the Triassic was consistently low compared to the other geological periods. The beginning of the Triassic was around present sea level, rising to about above present-day sea level during the Early and Middle Triassic. Sea level rise accelerated in the Ladinian, culminating with a sea level up to above present-day levels during the Carnian. Sea level began to decline in the Norian, reaching a low of below present sea level during the mid-Rhaetian. Low global sea levels persisted into the earliest Jurassic. The long-term sea level trend is superimposed by 22 sea level drop events widespread in the geologic record, mostly of minor (less than ) and medium () magnitudes. A lack of evidence for Triassic continental ice sheets suggest that glacial eustasy is unlikely to be the cause of these changes. It has generally been assumed that the cause was changes in volume of the global ocean basin due to variations in oceanic volcanism, with largest volumes occurring in volcanism's absence when the ocean basins were subsiding. Variation in water and sediment delivery to the oceans, with higher sea levels during pluvial eras lasting up to four million years, is also hypothesised to be behind these sea level variations.\nClimate.\nThe Triassic continental interior climate was generally hot and dry, so that typical deposits are red bed sandstones and evaporites. There is no evidence of glaciation at or near either pole; in fact, the polar regions were apparently moist and temperate, providing a climate suitable for forests and vertebrates, including reptiles. Pangaea's large size limited the moderating effect of the global ocean; its continental climate was highly seasonal, with very hot summers and cool winters. The strong contrast between the Pangea supercontinent and the global ocean triggered intense cross-equatorial monsoons, sometimes referred to as the Pangean megamonsoons.\nThe Triassic may have mostly been a dry period, but evidence exists that it was punctuated by several episodes of increased rainfall in tropical and subtropical latitudes of the Tethys Sea and its surrounding land. Sediments and fossils suggestive of a more humid climate are known from the Anisian to Ladinian of the Tethysian domain, and from the Carnian and Rhaetian of a larger area that includes also the Boreal domain (e.g., Svalbard Islands), the North American continent, the South China block and Argentina. The best-studied of such episodes of humid climate, and probably the most intense and widespread, was the Carnian Pluvial Event. \nEarly Triassic.\nThe Early Triassic was the hottest portion of the entire Phanerozoic, seeing as it occurred during and immediately after the discharge of titanic volumes of greenhouse gases from the Siberian Traps. The Early Triassic began with the Permian-Triassic Thermal Maximum (PTTM) and was followed by the brief Dienerian Cooling (DC) from 251 to 249 Ma, which was in turn followed by the Latest Smithian Thermal Maximum (LSTT) around 249 to 248 Ma. During the Latest Olenekian Cooling (LOC), from 248 to 247 Ma, temperatures cooled by about 6 \u00b0C.\nMiddle Triassic.\nThe Middle Triassic was cooler than the Early Triassic, with temperatures falling over most of the Anisian, with the exception of a warming spike in the latter portion of the stage. From 242 to 233 Ma, the Ladinian-Carnian Cooling (LCC) ensued. \nLate Triassic.\nAt the beginning of the Carnian, global temperatures continued to be relatively cool. The eruption of the Wrangellia Large Igneous Province around 234 Ma caused abrupt global warming, terminating the cooling trend of the LCC. This warming was responsible for the Carnian Pluvial Event and resulted in an episode of widespread global humidity. The CPE ushered in the Mid-Carnian Warm Interval (MCWI), which lasted from 234 to 227 Ma. At the Carnian-Norian boundary occurred a positive \u03b413C excursion believed to signify an increase in organic carbon burial. From 227 to 217 Ma, there was a relatively cool period known as the Early Norian Cool Interval (ENCI), after which occurred the Mid-Norian Warm Interval (MNWI) from 217 to 209 Ma. The MNWI was briefly interrupted around 214 Ma by a cooling possibly related to the Manicouagan impact. Around 212 Ma, a 10 Myr eccentricity maximum caused a paludification of Pangaea and a reduction in the size of arid climatic zones. The Rhaetian Cool Interval (RCI) lasted from 209 to 201 Ma. At the terminus of the Triassic, there was an extreme warming event referred to as the End-Triassic Thermal Event (ETTE), which was responsible for the Triassic-Jurassic mass extinction. Bubbles of carbon dioxide in basaltic rocks dating back to the end of the Triassic indicate that volcanic activity from the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province helped trigger climate change in the ETTE.\nFlora.\nLand plants.\nDuring the Early Triassic, lycophytes, particularly those of the order Isoetales (which contains living quillworts), rose to prominence due to the environmental instability following the Permian-Triassic extinction, with one particularly notable example being the genus \"Pleuromeia,\" which grew in columnar like fashion, sometimes reaching a height of . The relevance of lycophytes declined from the Middle Triassic onwards, following the return of more stable environmental conditions.\nWhile having first appeared during the Permian, the extinct seed plant group Bennettitales first became a prominent element in global floras during the Late Triassic, a position they would hold for much of the Mesozoic. In the Southern Hemisphere landmasses of Gondwana, the tree \"Dicroidium\", an extinct \"seed fern\" belong to the order Corystospermales was a dominant element in forest habitats across the region during the Middle-Late Triassic. During the Late Triassic, the Ginkgoales (which today are represented by only a single species, \"Ginkgo biloba\") underwent considerable diversification. Conifers were abundant during the Triassic, and included the Voltziales (which contains various lineages, probably including those ancestral to modern conifers), as well as the extinct family Cheirolepidiaceae, which first appeared in the Late Triassic, and would be prominent throughout most of the rest of the Mesozoic.\nCoal.\nNo known coal deposits date from the start of the Triassic Period. This is known as the Early Triassic \"coal gap\" and can be seen as part of the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event. Possible explanations for the coal gap include sharp drops in sea level at the time of the Permo-Triassic boundary; acid rain from the Siberian Traps eruptions or from an impact event that overwhelmed acidic swamps; climate shift to a greenhouse climate that was too hot and dry for peat accumulation; evolution of fungi or herbivores that were more destructive of wetlands; the extinction of all plants adapted to peat swamps, with a hiatus of several million years before new plant species evolved that were adapted to peat swamps; or soil anoxia as oxygen levels plummeted.\nPhytoplankton.\nBefore the Permian extinction, Archaeplastida (red and green algae) had been the major marine phytoplanktons since about 659\u2013645 million years ago, when they replaced marine planktonic cyanobacteria, which first appeared about 800 million years ago, as the dominant phytoplankton in the oceans. In the Triassic, secondary endosymbiotic algae became the most important plankton.\nFauna.\nMarine invertebrates.\nIn marine environments, new modern types of corals appeared in the Early Triassic, forming small patches of reefs of modest extent compared to the great reef systems of Devonian or modern times. At the end of the Carnian, a reef crisis occurred in South China. Serpulids appeared in the Middle Triassic. Microconchids were abundant. The shelled cephalopods called ammonites recovered, diversifying from a single line that survived the Permian extinction. Bivalves began to rapidly diversify during the Middle Triassic, becoming highly abundant in the oceans.\nInsects.\nAquatic insects rapidly diversified during the Middle Triassic, with this time interval representing a crucial diversification for Holometabola, the clade containing the majority of modern insect species.\nFish.\nIn the wake of the Permian-Triassic mass extinction event, the fish fauna was remarkably uniform, with many families and genera exhibiting a cosmopolitan distribution. Coelacanths show their highest post-Devonian diversity in the Early Triassic. Ray-finned fishes (actinopterygians) went through a remarkable diversification in the beginning of the Triassic, leading to peak diversity during the Middle Triassic; however, the pattern of this diversification is still not well understood due to a taphonomic megabias. The first stem-group teleosts appeared during the Triassic (teleosts are by far the most diverse group of fish today). Predatory actinopterygians such as saurichthyids and birgeriids, some of which grew over in length, appeared in the Early Triassic and became widespread and successful during the period as a whole. Lakes and rivers were populated by lungfish (Dipnoi), such as \"Ceratodus\", which are mainly known from the dental plates, abundant in the fossils record. Hybodonts, a group of shark-like cartilaginous fish, were dominant in both freshwater and marine environments throughout the Triassic. Last survivors of the mainly Palaeozoic Eugeneodontida are known from the Early Triassic.\nAmphibians.\nTemnospondyl amphibians were among those groups that survived the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction. Once abundant in both terrestrial and aquatic environments, the terrestrial species had mostly died out during the extinction event. The Triassic survivors were aquatic or semi-aquatic, and were represented by \"Tupilakosaurus\", \"Thabanchuia\", Branchiosauridae and \"Micropholis\", all of which died out in Early Triassic, and the successful Stereospondyli, with survivors into the Cretaceous Period. The largest Triassic stereospondyls, such as \"Mastodonsaurus,\" were up to in length. Some lineages (e.g. trematosaurs) flourished briefly in the Early Triassic, while others (e.g. capitosaurs) remained successful throughout the whole period, or only came to prominence in the Late Triassic (e.g. \"Plagiosaurus\", metoposaurs).\nThe first Lissamphibians (modern amphibians) appear in the Triassic, with the progenitors of the first frogs already present by the Early Triassic. However, the group as a whole did not become common until the Jurassic, when the temnospondyls had become very rare.\nMost of the Reptiliomorpha, stem-amniotes that gave rise to the amniotes, disappeared in the Triassic, but two water-dwelling groups survived: Embolomeri that only survived into the early part of the period, and the Chroniosuchia, which survived until the end of the Triassic.\nReptiles.\nArchosauromorphs.\nThe Permian\u2013Triassic extinction devastated terrestrial life. Biodiversity rebounded as the surviving species repopulated empty terrain, but these were short-lived. Diverse communities with complex food-web structures took 30 million years to reestablish. Archosauromorph reptiles, which had already appeared and diversified to an extent in the Permian Period, exploded in diversity as an adaptive radiation in response to the Permian-Triassic mass extinction. By the Early Triassic, several major archosauromorph groups had appeared. Long-necked, lizard-like early archosauromorphs were known as protorosaurs, which is likely a paraphyletic group rather than a true clade. Tanystropheids were a family of protorosaurs which elevated their neck size to extremes, with the largest genus \"Tanystropheus\" having a neck longer than its body. The protorosaur family Sharovipterygidae used their elongated hindlimbs for gliding. Other archosauromorphs, such as rhynchosaurs and allokotosaurs, were mostly stocky-bodied herbivores with specialized jaw structures.\nRhynchosaurs, barrel-gutted herbivores, thrived for only a short period of time, becoming extinct about 220 million years ago. They were exceptionally abundant in the middle of the Triassic, as the primary large herbivores in many Carnian-age ecosystems. They sheared plants with premaxillary beaks and plates along the upper jaw with multiple rows of teeth. Allokotosaurs were iguana-like reptiles, including \"Trilophosaurus\" (a common Late Triassic reptile with three-crowned teeth), \"Teraterpeton\" (which had a long beak-like snout), and \"Shringasaurus\" (a horned herbivore which reached a body length of ).\nOne group of archosauromorphs, the archosauriforms, were distinguished by their active predatory lifestyle, with serrated teeth and upright limb postures. Archosauriforms were diverse in the Triassic, including various terrestrial and semiaquatic predators of all shapes and sizes. The large-headed and robust erythrosuchids were among the dominant carnivores in the early Triassic. Phytosaurs were a particularly common group which prospered during the Late Triassic. These long-snouted and semiaquatic predators resemble living crocodiles and probably had a similar lifestyle, hunting for fish and small reptiles around the water's edge. However, this resemblance is only superficial and is a prime-case of convergent evolution.\nTrue archosaurs appeared in the early Triassic, splitting into two branches: Avemetatarsalia (the ancestors to birds) and Pseudosuchia (the ancestors to crocodilians). Avemetatarsalians were a minor component of their ecosystems, but eventually produced the earliest pterosaurs and dinosaurs in the Late Triassic. Early long-tailed pterosaurs appeared in the Norian and quickly spread worldwide. Triassic dinosaurs evolved in the Carnian and include early sauropodomorphs and theropods. Most Triassic dinosaurs were small predators and only a few were common, such as \"Coelophysis\", which was long. Triassic sauropodomorphs primarily inhabited cooler regions of the world.\nThe large predator \"Smok\" was most likely also an archosaur, but it is uncertain if it was a primitive dinosaur or a pseudosuchian.\nPseudosuchians were far more ecologically dominant in the Triassic, including large herbivores (such as aetosaurs), large carnivores (\"rauisuchians\"), and the first crocodylomorphs (\"sphenosuchians\"). Aetosaurs were heavily-armored reptiles that were common during the last 30 million years of the Late Triassic until they died out at the Triassic-Jurassic extinction. Most aetosaurs were herbivorous and fed on low-growing plants, but some may have eaten meat. \"rauisuchians\" (formally known as paracrocodylomorphs) were the keystone predators of most Triassic terrestrial ecosystems. Over 25 species have been found, including giant quadrupedal hunters, sleek bipedal omnivores, and lumbering beasts with deep sails on their backs. They probably occupied the large-predator niche later filled by theropods. \"Rauisuchians\" were ancestral to small, lightly-built crocodylomorphs, the only pseudosuchians which survived into the Jurassic.\nMarine reptiles.\nThere were many types of marine reptiles. These included the Sauropterygia, which featured pachypleurosaurs and nothosaurs (both common during the Middle Triassic, especially in the Tethys region), placodonts, the earliest known herbivorous marine reptile \"Atopodentatus\", and the first plesiosaurs. The first of the lizard-like Thalattosauria (\"Askeptosaurus\") and the highly successful ichthyopterygians, which appeared in Early Triassic seas, soon diversified. By the Middle Triassic, some ichthyopterygians were achieving very large body masses.\nOther reptiles.\nAmong other reptiles, the earliest turtles, like \"Proganochelys\" and \"Proterochersis\", appeared during the Norian Age (Stage) of the Late Triassic Period. The Lepidosauromorpha, specifically the Sphenodontia, are first found in the fossil record of the earlier Carnian Age, though the earliest lepidosauromorphs likely occurred in the Permian. The Procolophonidae, the last surviving parareptiles, were an important group of small lizard-like herbivores. The drepanosaurs were a clade of unusual, chameleon-like arboreal reptiles with birdlike heads and specialised claws.\nSynapsids.\nThree therapsid groups survived into the Triassic: dicynodonts, therocephalians, and cynodonts. The cynodont \"Cynognathus\" was a characteristic top predator in the Olenekian and Anisian of Gondwana. Both kannemeyeriiform dicynodonts and gomphodont cynodonts remained important herbivores during much of the period. Therocephalians included both large predators (\"Moschorhinus\") and herbivorous forms (bauriids) until their extinction midway through the period. Ecteniniid cynodonts played a role as large-sized, cursorial predators in the Late Triassic. During the Carnian (early part of the Late Triassic), some advanced cynodonts gave rise to the first mammals.\nDuring the Triassic, archosaurs displaced therapsids as the largest and most ecologically prolific terrestrial amniotes. This \"Triassic Takeover\" may have contributed to the evolution of mammals by forcing the surviving therapsids and their mammaliaform successors to live as small, mainly nocturnal insectivores. Nocturnal life may have forced the mammaliaforms to develop fur and a higher metabolic rate.\nLagerst\u00e4tten.\nTwo Early Triassic lagerst\u00e4tten (high-quality fossil beds), the Dienerian aged Guiyang biota and the earliest Spathian aged Paris biota stand out due to their exceptional preservation and diversity. They represent the earliest lagerst\u00e4tten of the Mesozoic era and provide insight into the biotic recovery from the Permian-Triassic mass extinction event.\nThe Monte San Giorgio lagerst\u00e4tte, now in the Lake Lugano region of northern Italy and southern Switzerland, was in Middle Triassic times a lagoon behind reefs with an anoxic bottom layer, so there were no scavengers and little turbulence to disturb fossilization, a situation that can be compared to the better-known Jurassic Solnhofen Limestone lagerst\u00e4tte. The remains of fish and various marine reptiles (including the common pachypleurosaur \"Neusticosaurus\", and the bizarre long-necked archosauromorph \"Tanystropheus\"), along with some terrestrial forms like \"Ticinosuchus\" and \"Macrocnemus\", have been recovered from this locality. All these fossils date from the Anisian and Ladinian ages (about 242 Ma ago).\nTriassic\u2013Jurassic extinction event.\nThe Triassic Period ended with a mass extinction, which was particularly severe in the oceans; the conodonts disappeared, as did all the marine reptiles except ichthyosaurs and plesiosaurs. Invertebrates like brachiopods and molluscs (such as gastropods) were severely affected. In the oceans, 22% of marine families and possibly about half of marine genera went missing.\nThough the end-Triassic extinction event was not equally devastating in all terrestrial ecosystems, several important clades of crurotarsans (large archosaurian reptiles previously grouped together as the thecodonts) disappeared, as did most of the large labyrinthodont amphibians, groups of small reptiles, and most synapsids. Some of the early, primitive dinosaurs also became extinct, but more adaptive ones survived to evolve into the Jurassic. Surviving plants that went on to dominate the Mesozoic world included modern conifers and cycadeoids.\nThe cause of the Late Triassic extinction is uncertain. It was accompanied by huge volcanic eruptions that occurred as the supercontinent Pangaea began to break apart about 202 to 191 million years ago (40Ar/39Ar dates), forming the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP), one of the largest known inland volcanic events since the planet had first cooled and stabilized. Other possible but less likely causes for the extinction events include global cooling or even a bolide impact, for which an impact crater containing Manicouagan Reservoir in Quebec, Canada, has been singled out. However, the Manicouagan impact melt has been dated to 214\u00b11 Mya. The date of the Triassic-Jurassic boundary has also been more accurately fixed recently, at Mya. Both dates are gaining accuracy by using more accurate forms of radiometric dating, in particular the decay of uranium to lead in zircons formed at time of the impact. So, the evidence suggests the Manicouagan impact preceded the end of the Triassic by approximately 10\u00b12 Ma. It could not therefore be the immediate cause of the observed mass extinction.\nThe number of Late Triassic extinctions is disputed. Some studies suggest that there are at least two periods of extinction towards the end of the Triassic, separated by 12 to 17 million years. But arguing against this is a recent study of North American faunas. In the Petrified Forest of northeast Arizona there is a unique sequence of late Carnian-early Norian terrestrial sediments. An analysis in 2002 found no significant change in the paleoenvironment. Phytosaurs, the most common fossils there, experienced a change-over only at the genus level, and the number of species remained the same. Some aetosaurs, the next most common tetrapods, and early dinosaurs, passed through unchanged. However, both phytosaurs and aetosaurs were among the groups of archosaur reptiles completely wiped out by the end-Triassic extinction event.\nIt seems likely then that there was some sort of end-Carnian extinction, when several herbivorous archosauromorph groups died out, while the large herbivorous therapsids\u2014the kannemeyeriid dicynodonts and the traversodont cynodonts\u2014were much reduced in the northern half of Pangaea (Laurasia).\nThese extinctions within the Triassic and at its end allowed the dinosaurs to expand into many niches that had become unoccupied. Dinosaurs became increasingly dominant, abundant and diverse, and remained that way for the next 150 million years. The true \"Age of Dinosaurs\" is during the following Jurassic and Cretaceous periods, rather than the Triassic.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29990", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29990", "title": "Titanic Thompson", "text": "American gambler, golfer, and hustler\nAlvin Clarence Thomas (November 30, 1893 \u2013 May 19, 1974), better known as Titanic Thompson, was an American gambler, golfer, and hustler, who killed five men but was never charged with a crime.\nThompson traveled the country wagering at cards, dice games, golf, shooting, billiards, horseshoes and proposition bets of his own devising. As an ambidextrous golfer, card player, marksman and pool shark, his skills and reputation were compared to \"Merlin himself\". Writer Damon Runyon allegedly based the character Sky Masterson, the gambler-hero of \"The Idyll of Miss Sarah Brown\" (on which the musical \"Guys and Dolls\" is based), on Thompson. In 1928, Thompson was involved in a high-stakes poker game that led to the shooting death of New York City crime boss Arnold Rothstein, then called the \"crime of the century\". The following year he testified in the trial of George McManus, who was charged with Rothstein's murder, but later acquitted.\nEarly life.\nThomas was born in Monett, Missouri, but was raised mainly on a farm 50 miles to the south, near Rogers, Arkansas, in the Ozark Mountains. His mother remarried following desertion by Thomas' father, who was himself a gambler. Thomas began conducting his nomadic, lucrative career of hustling in the rural south-central United States \"circa\" 1908, leaving home at age 16 with less than one dollar in his pocket. Unable to read or write effectively, he had attended school only sporadically, and felt unwelcome in the home of his stepfather. Thomas spent most of his youth developing skills he would use later, such as shooting and understanding odds at card games through marathon dealing of hands.\nTrapshooting career.\nAs a young boy, Thomas was known by his uncles for his precise shooting. Allegedly, they had seen him down birds with a shot between the eyes from fifty yards away. These skills would land him work with Captain Adam Henry Bogardus in his \"Miracle Medicine Show\". During the show, Thomas would entertain onlookers by shooting pie tins, cabbages, and by tricking viewers into thinking he shot a silver dollar out of the air. In 1951, many years after his \"Miracle Medicine Show\" days, Thomas showed off his still-sharp shooting skills by winning the Arizona State Trapshooting Championship four years in a row from 1951\u20131954.\nMilitary service.\nThomas was drafted in early 1918, several months after the United States entered World War I. Following basic training, where he excelled, he was promoted to the rank of sergeant. Thomas remained stateside, trained younger draftees, and did not see overseas service or combat before the war ended in November 1918, when he was discharged. Thomas also taught gambling skills to many of his trainees, and then proceeded to win substantial money from them. He ended the war with more than $50,000 in cash, and used much of this money to buy his mother a house in Monett, Missouri, his birthplace.\nGambling style and favorite bets.\nLater, when Thompson had honed his skills, he became a \"road gambler\", a traveling hustler who became an underground legend by winning at all manner of propositions, many of them tricky if not outright fraudulent. Among his favorites were: betting he could throw a walnut over a building (he had weighted the hollowed shell with lead beforehand), throwing a large room key into its lock, and moving a road mileage sign before betting that the listed distance to the town was in error. Thompson once bet that he could drive a golf ball 500 yards, using a hickory-shafted club, at a time when an expert player's drive was just over 200 yards. He won by waiting until winter and driving the ball onto a frozen lake, where it bounced past the required distance on the ice.\nThompson's partners in \"the hustling game\" included pool player Minnesota Fats, who considered Titanic a genius, \"the greatest action man of all time\".\nThompson's one weakness, as he admitted, was betting on horse racing, where he lost millions of dollars during his life in failed bets.\nExpert golfer.\nGifted with extraordinary eyesight and hand\u2013eye coordination, he was a skilled athlete, crack shot and a golfer good enough to turn professional. Raised in a poor environment far from exclusive golf courses, Thomas did not take up golf seriously until he was in his early thirties, but he improved very quickly during an extended stint in San Francisco, where he took lessons from club professionals and honed his skills. From then on he played several times per week for the next 20 years. In an era when the top pro golfers would be fortunate to make $30,000 a year, Thomas (who, after a misprint in a New York newspaper, let people think his name was Thompson) could make that much in a week hustling rich country club players. Asked whether he would ever turn professional, he replied, \"I could not afford the cut in pay\". Hall of Fame golfer Ben Hogan, who traveled with him in the early 1930s for money games, later called Titanic the best shotmaker he ever saw. \"He can play right- or left-handed, you can't beat him\", said Hogan. One hustle of his was to beat a golfer playing right-handed, and then offer double or nothing to play the course again left-handed as an apparent concession. One thing his opponent usually did not know was that Thomas was naturally left-handed. Thomas' genius was in figuring out the odds on almost any proposition and heavily betting that way. He also had to perform under pressure, and most often did.\nAs he aged, Thompson liked to pick promising young players as his golf partners. Several of these who went on to later PGA Tour stardom included young and then-unknown Ben Hogan, Ky Laffoon, Herman Keiser and Lee Elder. Other well-known golfers who left behind first-hand documented accounts of their dealings and matches with Thompson include Harvey Penick, Paul Runyan, Byron Nelson and Sam Snead, all of whom were inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame.\nMarriages and family.\nMarried five times, Thompson fathered three children, all boys, with three different wives. He was also romantically linked with many women. Among his alleged trysts were actresses Myrna Loy and Jean Harlow. He typically married a young woman, lived with her for a few months, then returned to his road hustling, while leaving comfortable housing and financial support for his newly divorced wife.\nKillings.\nThompson killed five men. The first was in 1910, in rural Arkansas, when a man named Jim Johnson accused him of cheating at dice and threw him off the boat on which they were traveling (and which Thompson had recently won when gambling with its previous owner, a friend of Johnson's). When Thompson climbed back on board, Johnson drew a knife and threatened Thompson's girlfriend, who was also on board. Thompson seized a hammer and struck Johnson several times on the head before throwing him overboard. The unconscious Johnson drowned. Thompson showed no remorse, stating it was Johnson's fault for not being able to swim. The sheriff gave Thompson the choice of standing trial, or handing over the deed to the boat and leaving town; he chose the latter.\nThe other four men Thompson killed were shot in self-defense when they tried to rob him of gambling winnings. Two were killed in one incident in St. Louis in 1919 (the local police chief thanked him for killing two wanted bank robbers). The third came in St. Joseph, where Thompson and his hired bodyguard between them shot two men attempting to rob a poker game (again, the victims were known criminals and no charges were pressed). Thompson's last killing came near a country club in Texas in 1932 when he shot a masked figure who was holding him at gunpoint. This turned out to be sixteen-year-old Jimmy Frederick, who had caddied for Thompson earlier that day in a winning match. The dying Frederick confirmed to witnesses that he had been trying to rob Thompson.\nArnold Rothstein case.\nOn November 4, 1928, Arnold Rothstein was murdered, allegedly because he refused to pay his debts from a poker game, held the previous month, which he believed to have been fixed. This game had been organized by George McManus, who stood trial for the murder the next year, in a proceeding heavily covered by the media. McManus was eventually acquitted due to lack of evidence, and no one else was ever tried for Rothstein's death. Thompson had been present at the game, and an active participant in it; and it was he who, in association with one Nate Raymond, allegedly fixed the game, leaving Rothstein with total debts estimated at $500,000. Thompson, who was not present at the shooting, gave evidence at McManus's trial, without revealing his own role in the poker game. Rothstein had stood to recoup his losses by successful heavy bets on the 1928 elections of Herbert Hoover (new president) and Franklin Delano Roosevelt (new governor of New York), which did take place, shortly after Rothstein's death. Thompson later told close friends that he knew the real killer had been Rothstein's bodyguard.\nOrigin of the nickname.\nIn his own story, published in \"Sports Illustrated\" in 1972, Alvin Thomas, listed as a co-author, said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the spring of 1912 I went to Joplin, Missouri, just about the time the \"Titanic\" liner hit an iceberg and sank with more than 1,500 people on board. I was in a pool room there and beat a fellow named Snow Clark out of $500. To give him a chance to get even, I bet $200 I could jump across his pool table without touching it. If you think that's easy, try it. But I could jump farther than a herd of bullfrogs in those days. I put down an old mattress on the other side of the table. Then I took a run and dived headfirst across the pool table. While I was counting my money, somebody asked Clark what my name was. \"It must be Titanic,\" said Clark. \"He sinks everybody.\" So I was Titanic from then on.\nMinnesota Fats, real name Rudolf Wanderone, said in an interview with the \"Los Angeles Times\" that \"Titanic got his nickname when he went down with the Titanic in 1912. He put on ladies' clothes to save himself. Got off the boat first.\"\nTrevino vs. Floyd match.\nIn the 1960s, Thompson settled in Dallas and, although approaching 70 years of age, kept up a good standard of golf, and frequently hustled games at Tenison Park, a municipal golf course, and at posh Glen Lakes Country Club. Mid-decade, Thompson sponsored a young Raymond Floyd, then early in his PGA Tour career but already a winner, in a big-money stakes match against Lee Trevino, then an unknown assistant pro, in El Paso, at Trevino's home course. After three days of play, honors and bets were equal, with both players well under par each round. Trevino gained confidence from the match, and within a few years became a Tour star himself, while Floyd's career also ascended.\nLater years.\nThompson participated in the first World Series of Poker in Las Vegas, Nevada, in 1970. He lived out his final years in a nursing home near Dallas. Thompson had made gambling trips with eldest son Tommy for many years, but after his father died, Tommy, who also had become a skilled, successful gambler, gave up gambling for a church ministry and later counseled prisoners, preaching to convince others to stay away from gambling.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29991", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29991", "title": "The Shockwave Rider", "text": "1975 science fiction novel by John Brunner\nThe Shockwave Rider is a science fiction novel by John Brunner, originally published in 1975. It is notable for its hero's use of computer hacking skills to escape pursuit in a dystopian future, and for the coining of the word \"worm\" to describe a program that propagates itself through a computer network. It also introduces the concept of a \"Delphi pool\", perhaps derived from the RAND Corporation's Delphi method \u2013 a prediction market on world events which bears close resemblance to DARPA's controversial and cancelled Policy Analysis Market.\nOrigin of the title.\nThe title derives from the futurist work \"Future Shock\" by Alvin Toffler. The protagonist is a survivor in a world of quickly changing identities, fashions, and lifestyles, where individuals are oppressed by a powerful, secretive state apparatus. His highly-developed computer skills enable him to use any public telephone to punch in a new identity, thus reinventing himself, within hours. As a fugitive, he must do this from time to time to avoid capture.\nPlot introduction.\nThe novel shows a dystopian early 21st-century America dominated by computer networks. The hero, Nick Haflinger, is a runaway from Tarnover, a government program intended to find, educate and indoctrinate highly gifted children to further the interests of the state in a future where quantitative analysis backed by the tacit threat of coercion has replaced overt military and economic power as the deciding factor in international competition. In parallel with this, the government has become a oligarchy that is effectively an offshoot of organised crime.\nNick's talent extends to programming the network using only a touch-tone telephone. One of his handlers at Tarnover explains that this is like a classical pianist being able to play entire sonatas and concertos from memory. However, Nick also has some personality flaws, amounting almost to a deathwish. These become manifest in exhibitions of his abilities, revealing his identity to his pursuers.\nThe background to the story includes a massive earthquake laying waste to the San Francisco Bay Area in California. Millions die and millions more are left to live on government handouts. The subsequent economic depression, coupled with the rootlessness enabled by access to online data and strong social pressure to be flexible (the results of corporations wanting highly mobile workforces without strong local ties), results in a fragmentation of society along religious, ethnic, and a variety of class markers, what Toffler called \"subcults\", including what would in 2010 be described as gangs. The equitable distribution of data access and data privacy is a prominent theme in the book; characters who have access to information which is nominally secret enjoy demonstrable economic advantages over others lacking access to such data. In the novel, data privacy is reserved for corporations and powerful individuals, who may then conceal wrongdoing; by contrast, normal citizens do not enjoy significant privacy.\nThe world described in the book is dystopian, with laissez-faire economics portrayed as leading to disaster as greed trumps long-term planning. The educational system is dysfunctional, with teachers unable to perform their jobs due to strictures. The only functional educational system seen in the book is portrayed as an enclave, the tightly controlled Tarnover school. Communities are either walled enclaves of privilege or largely lawless areas entirely lacking protection from corrupt civil authorities. Infrastructure has been allowed to crumble, and characters who reside within \"paid avoidance zones\" receive compensation from the government in lieu of actual services.\nPlot summary.\nThe novel is set in the weeks following Nick's recapture after several years on the run, alternating between moral arguments with his interrogator, who is trying to discover why the program's star pupil had absconded, and flashbacks of his career. The interrogator is Paul Freeman, a graduate of another secret installation known as Electric Skillet, which focuses on weapons and defence strategy.\nAlthough he had initially felt at home at Tarnover, Nick eventually becomes aware of experiments in genetic engineering being performed there. These produce monstrous deformed children who are disposed of when they are no longer needed for study. At this point Nick becomes determined to escape. He studies data processing, steals a personal ID code intended for privileged individuals who wish to live their lives without surveillance, and goes on the run. He uses the stolen 4GH computer access code to cover his data trails and create new identities for himself, easily adopting entire new personas. One is the pastor of a popular church, another is a successful computer consultant.\nIn this last role, calling himself Sandy Locke, he becomes the lover of Ina Grierson, a top executive at Ground to Space Industries, a powerful \"hypercorp\" known to all as G2S. Intending to use the computer facilities at G2S to ensure that his stolen code is still valid, he signs on as a \"systems rationalizer\" with the company. This brings him into contact with Ina's daughter, Kate, who attracts him despite her plain appearance and simple lifestyle. At the age of 22, Nick's age when he left Tarnover, Kate is a perpetual student at the University of Missouri\u2013Kansas City. She is perceptive enough to penetrate Nick's adopted persona, deeply disturbing him even though she fascinates him. He visits her at home, helping her to clean out some of her possessions, and meeting her tame cougar, Bagheera \u2013 the product of her late father's genetic research into intelligence. He died shortly after abandoning the research because the government was using it to produce animals for military uses.\nThe 21st-century lifestyle produces a symptom called \"overload\" in many people, and most, including Nick, take tranquilizers to some degree. However Nick collapses completely when told that a representative from Tarnover is coming to his promotional interview at G2S. He returns to Kate and confesses that he is not what he seems, asking for her help. She conducts him to one of the \"paid avoidance areas\" in California, where people are paid to do without the full panoply of modern technology, as an alternative to spending billions to rebuild infrastructure after the earthquake. After Nick risks exposure yet again in one of these places, they move to the least known one, a town called Precipice.\nPrecipice turns out to be a Utopian community of a few thousand people. The nearest comparison would be an agrarian, cottage industry community designed by William Morris. Precipice is also the home of Hearing Aid, an anonymous telephone confession service accessible to anyone in the country. Hearing Aid is also known as the \"Ten Nines\", after the phone number used to call it: 999-999-9999. People call the service, a human operator answers, and they simply talk while the operator listens. Some rant, others seek sympathy, still others commit suicide while on the phone. Hearing Aid's promise is that nobody else, not even the government, will hear the call. The only response Hearing Aid gives to a caller is \"Only I heard that, I hope it helped.\"\nNick and Kate settle into the community. The inhabitants include intelligent dogs that escaped from the projects that Kate's father worked on. These act as companions, guards, nannies, and even lie detectors, using their sense of smell. Nick rewrites the \"computer tapeworm\" that prevents the calls to Hearing Aid being monitored. While at G2S he became aware of massive backups of data being performed, clearly in anticipation of a major network outage. The Hearing Aid worm is designed to scramble network traffic if attacked, but Nick realises that it could be destroyed if the authorities were prepared for the effects and ready to recover from them. His new worm, which he calls a \"phage\", cannot be removed without dismantling the entire network.\nPossibly encouraged by the government, local gangs and tribes raid Precipice, burning down Nick and Kate's house before being overwhelmed by the dogs. Nick, suffering another overload, blames Kate for the incident, since she, following Hearing Aid policy, cut off a call from someone attempting to warn Precipice. He hits her, and then, filled with remorse, leaves the town. He finally reveals his location to the authorities when, encountering one of the \"Roman circus\" operations which broadcast live fights and other bloody exhibitions to the country, he responds to an \"all comers\" challenge by the father of the leader of one of the gangs, and cripples him in front of a nationwide audience.\nAt Tarnover, Paul Freeman takes charge of the interrogation. He was the representative whom Nick, as Sandy Locke, was supposed to meet at G2S. Freeman, a tall gaunt African-American, gradually comes to realise that he has more sympathy with Nick's views than his employer's, and eventually absconds himself, giving Nick computer access so that Nick can make his own escape. The precipitating event in this case is Kate's abduction by government agents, who bring her to Tarnover for further questioning and to threaten Nick.\nWith the code he gets from Freeman, he sets up an identity as an Army major, with Kate as his prisoner. Once clear of Tarnover, they disappear together. This time around, Nick has another plan, and rather than running and hiding, he and Kate spend a number of months travelling the country, aided by an \"invisible college\" of academics who are allies or former residents of Precipice. He creates a new \"worm\" which is designed to destroy all secrecy. (Brunner invented the term \"worm\" for this program, as a self-replicating program that propagates across a computer network \u2013 the word was later adopted by computer researchers as the name for this type of program.)\nThe worm is eventually activated, and the details of all the government's dark secrets (clandestine genetic experimentation that produces crippled children, bribes and kickbacks from corporations, concealed crimes of high public officials) now become accessible from anywhere on the network \u2013 in fact, those most affected by a particular crime of a government official are emailed the full details. In place of the old system, Nick has designed the worm to enforce a kind of utilitarian socialism, with people's worth being defined by their roles in society, not their connections in high places. In effect, the network becomes the entire government and financial system, policing income for illegal money, freezing the accounts of criminals, while making sure money (or credit) flows to places where people are in need. This will only happen fully if the results of a plebiscite, again conducted over the network, allow it.\nIn a final atavistic attempt at revenge, the government orders a nuclear strike by a single aircraft from a local Air Force base. Warned by Hearing Aid, Nick is able to penetrate the military computers and manufacture a counter-order to stop the plane just before it reaches the town. The book ends optimistically, with there being no more privileged hiding of information, no more secret conspiracies of the rich and powerful.\nReception.\nSpider Robinson gave the novel a mixed review, saying that while \"the book reads well\u00a0..., [i]ndividual sections are often brilliant, [and] the message is incisive and timely\", that \"as a story it limps\" and that many characters, including the main antagonists, \"are cut from cardboard\". \"The New York Times\" reviewer Gerald Jonas was even more critical, saying that while Brunner was attempting to write \"slice-of-life\" fiction about a future society, the result of his arbitrary choices about social details is that \"the entire fictional edifice collapses like a house of cards.\"\nThemes.\nThe novel was written shortly after two pivotal events of the 1970s, the resignation of Richard Nixon and the overthrow of the Chilean President Salvador Allende, which are cited in the novel as examples, in Nixon's case, of a failed attempt by organised crime to suborn the Presidency, and in the second, of the consequences of working against multinational commercial interests.\nMost of the characters live with the feeling that their lives could be turned upside down in an instant because of someone breaking into the data held on the network. They also believe that the network knows more about them than they do about themselves. This is an extension of the sense of paranoia felt by many people in the 1970s, believing themselves to be powerless in the face of political and economic forces over which they had no control.\nPerception is a recurrent theme in the novel. In particular, Brunner is concerned with perceptual patterns and how they can both help and mislead. Nick projects patterns of behaviour to assume his personas, but Kate has \"natural wisdom\" which means that she ignores surface patterns to perceive the truth beneath. When they arrive in Precipice, the couple have to abandon their normal \"urban pattern\" to see the ways in which the town's unique design merges public and private space, along with natural and artificial structures.\nThe theme of patterns in perception runs through the entire novel. Future shock arises when reality and change disrupt patterns. People respond by falling into strong patterns within human nature, particularly tribalism.\nOthers try to convince themselves that all change is good, adopting the \"plug-in\" lifestyle where they feel able to relocate to another city and insert themselves into a new social niche with a minimum of inconvenience. Their mobility is, however, a reflection of the failure of the lifestyle to satisfy them, resulting in more moves.\nIn this world of confusion are also companies specialising in psychological intervention. One such is Anti-Trauma Inc. which is hired to \"normalise\" children in a process akin to deprogramming, the (often violent) attempt to force people to renounce their association with groups perceived as cults. Anti-Trauma does significant harm to its charges, although as so often happens in Brunner's interconnected society, it also spends much money and time covering up its failures.\nThe worm.\nBrunner's concept of the computer worm was inspired by analogy with the tapeworm, a digestive parasite. A biological tapeworm consists of a head attached to a long train of reproductive segments, each of which can produce more worms when detached. Brunner's \"data-net tapeworm\" consists of a head followed by other segments, each being some kind of code which has effects on databases and other systems. Several are unleashed in the book. Besides the two Hearing Aid tapeworms, and Nick's ultimate tapeworm, there is a \"denunciation tapeworm\" created as revenge by a representative of Anti-Trauma Inc. whom Nick insults and curses. At the time, Nick was playing the role of a priest in a revivalist church. The worm's intent was to destroy the church by cancelling all its utility services. Nick in turn sends another worm into the network to destroy that one.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29992", "revid": "45916690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29992", "title": "Turkish language", "text": "Turkic language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nTurkish ( , , also known as 'Turkish of Turkey') is the most widely spoken of the Turkic languages with around 90 million speakers. It is the national language of Turkey and one of two official languages of Cyprus. Significant smaller groups of Turkish speakers also exist in Germany, Austria, Bulgaria, North Macedonia, Greece, other parts of Europe, the South Caucasus, and some parts of Central Asia, Iraq, and Syria. Turkish is the 18th-most spoken language in the world.\nTo the west, the influence of Ottoman Turkish\u2014the variety of the Turkish language that was used as the administrative and literary language of the Ottoman Empire\u2014spread as the Ottoman Empire expanded. In 1928, as one of Atat\u00fcrk's reforms in the early years of the Republic of Turkey, the Perso-Arabic script-based Ottoman Turkish alphabet was replaced with the Latin script-based Turkish alphabet.\nSome distinctive characteristics of the Turkish language are vowel harmony and extensive agglutination. The basic word order of Turkish is subject\u2013object\u2013verb. Turkish has no noun classes or grammatical gender. The language makes usage of honorifics and has a strong T\u2013V distinction which distinguishes varying levels of politeness, social distance, age, courtesy or familiarity toward the addressee. The plural second-person pronoun and verb forms can be used for referring to a single person out of respect.\nClassification.\nTurkish is a member of the Oghuz group of the Turkic family. Other members include Azerbaijani, spoken in Azerbaijan and north-west Iran, Gagauz of Gagauzia, Qashqai of south Iran, and Turkmen of Turkmenistan.\nHistorically the Turkic family was seen as a branch of the larger Altaic family, including Japanese, Korean, Mongolian and Tungusic, with various other language families proposed for inclusion by linguists.\nAltaic theory has fallen out of favour since the 1960s, and a majority of linguists now consider Turkic languages to be unrelated to any other language family, though the Altaic hypothesis still has a small degree of support from individual linguists. The nineteenth-century Ural-Altaic theory, which grouped Turkish with Finnish, Hungarian and Altaic languages, is considered even less plausible in light of Altaic's rejection. The theory was based mostly on the fact these languages share three features: agglutination, vowel harmony and lack of grammatical gender.\nHistory.\nThe earliest known Old Turkic inscriptions are the three monumental Orkhon inscriptions found in modern Mongolia. Erected in honour of the prince Kul Tigin and his brother Emperor Bilge Khagan, these date back to the Second Turkic Khaganate (dated 682\u2013744 CE). After the discovery and excavation of these monuments and associated stone slabs by Russian archaeologists in the wider area surrounding the Orkhon Valley between 1889 and 1893, it became established that the language on the inscriptions was the Old Turkic language written using the Old Turkic alphabet, which has also been referred to as \"Turkic runes\" or \"runiform\" due to a superficial similarity to the Germanic runic alphabets.\nWith the Turkic expansion during Early Middle Ages (c.\u20096th\u201311th centuries), peoples speaking Turkic languages spread across Central Asia, covering a vast geographical region stretching from Siberia all the way to Europe and the Mediterranean. The Seljuqs of the Oghuz Turks, in particular, brought their language, Oghuz\u2014the direct ancestor of today's Turkish language\u2014into Anatolia during the 11th century. Also during the 11th century, an early linguist of the Turkic languages, Mahmud al-Kashgari from the Kara-Khanid Khanate, published the first comprehensive Turkic language dictionary and map of the geographical distribution of Turkic speakers in the \"D\u012bw\u0101n Lugh\u0101t al-Turk\" ().\nOttoman Turkish.\nFollowing the adoption of Islam around the year 950 by the Kara-Khanid Khanate and the Seljuq Turks, who are both regarded as the ethnic and cultural ancestors of the Ottomans, the administrative language of these states acquired a large collection of loanwords from Arabic and Persian. Turkish literature during the Ottoman period, particularly Divan poetry, was heavily influenced by Persian, including the adoption of Persian poetic meters and a great quantity of imported Persian words. The literary and official language during the Ottoman Empire period (c.\u20091299\u20131922) is termed Ottoman Turkish, which was a mixture of Turkish, Persian, and Arabic that differed considerably from today's modern Turkish and was largely unintelligible to the period's everyday Turkish. The everyday Turkish, known as or 'vulgar Turkish', spoken by the less-educated, lower and also rural members of Ottoman society, contained a higher percentage of native vocabulary and served as the basis for the modern Turkish language.\nWhile visiting the region between Ad\u0131yaman and Adana, Evliya \u00c7elebi recorded the \"Turkman language\" and compared it with his own Turkish:\nLanguage reform and modern Turkish.\nAfter the foundation of the modern state of Turkey and the script reform, the Turkish Language Association (TDK) was established in 1932 under the patronage of Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk, with the aim of conducting research on Turkish. One of the tasks of the newly established association was to initiate a language reform to replace loanwords of Arabic and Persian origins with Turkish equivalents. By banning the usage of imported words in the press, the association succeeded in removing several hundred foreign words from the language. While most of the words introduced to the language by the TDK were newly derived from Turkic roots, it also opted for reviving Old Turkish words which had not been used for centuries. In 1935, the TDK published a bilingual Ottoman-Turkish/Pure Turkish dictionary that documents the results of the language reform.\nOwing to this sudden change in the language, older and younger people in Turkey started to differ in their vocabularies. While the generations born before the 1940s tend to use the older terms of Arabic and Persian origins, the younger generations favor new expressions. It is considered particularly ironic that Atat\u00fcrk himself, in his lengthy speech to the new Parliament in 1927, used the formal style of Ottoman Turkish that had been common at the time amongst statesmen and the educated strata of society in the setting of formal speeches and documents. After the language reform, the Turkish education system discontinued the teaching of literary Ottoman Turkish, and over time the speaking and writing ability of society atrophied to the point that later generations of Turkish speakers would perceive the speech as sounding so alien that it had to be \"translated\" three times into modern Turkish: first in 1963, again in 1986, and most recently in 1995.\nThe past few decades have seen the continuing work of the TDK to coin new Turkish words to express new concepts and technologies as they enter the language, mostly from English. Many of these new words, particularly information technology terms, have received widespread acceptance. However, the TDK is occasionally criticized for coining words which sound contrived and artificial. Some earlier changes\u2014such as Turkic to replace Arabic , 'political party'\u2014also failed to meet with popular approval (the Arabic loanword has been replaced by the French loanword ). Some words restored from Old Turkic have taken on specialized meanings; for example (originally meaning 'book') is now used to mean 'script' in computer science while the Arabic loanword \"kitap\" remains for 'book' in Turkish.\nSome examples of modern Turkish words and the old loanwords are:\nGeographic distribution.\nTurkish is natively spoken by the Turkish people in Turkey and by the Turkish diaspora in some 30 other countries. The Turkish language is mutually intelligible with Azerbaijani. In particular, Turkish-speaking minorities exist in countries that formerly (in whole or part) belonged to the Ottoman Empire, such as Iraq, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Greece (primarily in Western Thrace), the Republic of North Macedonia, Romania, and Serbia. More than two million Turkish speakers live in Germany; and there are significant Turkish-speaking communities in the United States, France, the Netherlands, Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Due to the cultural assimilation of Turkish immigrants in host countries, not all ethnic members of the diaspora speak the language with native fluency.\nIn 2005, 93% of the population of Turkey were native speakers of Turkish, about 67 million at the time, with Kurdish languages making up most of the remainder.\nAzerbaijani language, official in Azerbaijan, is mutually intelligible with Turkish and speakers of both languages can understand them without noticeable difficulty, especially when discussion comes on ordinary, daily language. Turkey has very good relations with Azerbaijan, with a multitude of Turkish companies and authorities investing there, while the influence of Turkey in the country is very high. The rising presence of this very similar language in Azerbaijan and the fact that many children use Turkish words instead of Azerbaijani words due to satellite TV has caused concern that the distinctive features of the language will be eroded. Many bookstores sell books in Turkish language along Azerbaijani language ones, with Agalar Mahmadov, a leading intellectual, voicing his concern that Turkish language has \"already started to take over the national and natural dialects of Azerbaijan\". However, the presence of Turkish as foreign language is not as high as Russian. In Uzbekistan, the second most populated Turkic country, a new TV channel \"Foreign Languages TV\" was established in 2022. This channel has been broadcasting Turkish lessons along with English, French, German and Russian lessons.\nOfficial status.\nTurkish is the official language of Turkey and is one of the official languages of Cyprus. Turkish has official status in 38 municipalities in Kosovo, including Mamusha, two in the Republic of North Macedonia and two in Iraq. Cyprus has requested the European Union to add Turkish as an official language, as it is one of the two official languages of the country.\nIn Turkey, the regulatory body for Turkish is the Turkish Language Association (\"T\u00fcrk Dil Kurumu\" or TDK), which was founded in 1932 under the name \"T\u00fcrk Dili Tetkik Cemiyeti\" (\"Society for Research on the Turkish Language\"). The Turkish Language Association was influenced by the ideology of linguistic purism: indeed one of its primary tasks was the replacement of loanwords and of foreign grammatical constructions with equivalents of Turkish origin. These changes, together with the adoption of the new Turkish alphabet in 1928, shaped the modern Turkish language spoken today. The TDK became an independent body in 1951, with the lifting of the requirement that it should be presided over by the Minister of Education. This status continued until August 1983, when it was again made into a governmental body in the constitution of 1982, following the military coup d'\u00e9tat of 1980.\nDialects.\nModern Standard Turkish is based on the dialect of Istanbul. This Istanbul Turkish (\"\u0130stanbul T\u00fcrk\u00e7esi\") constitutes the model of written and spoken Turkish, as recommended by Ziya G\u00f6kalp, \u00d6mer Seyfettin and others.\nDialectal variation persists, in spite of the levelling influence of the standard used in mass media and in the Turkish education system since the 1930s. Academic researchers from Turkey often refer to Turkish dialects as \"a\u011f\u0131z\" or \"\u015five\", leading to an ambiguity with the linguistic concept of accent, which is also covered with these words. Several universities, as well as a dedicated work-group of the Turkish Language Association, carry out projects investigating Turkish dialects. As of 2002[ [update]] work continued on the compilation and publication of their research as a comprehensive dialect-atlas of the Turkish language. Although the Ottoman alphabet, being more phonetically ambiguous than the Latin script, encoded for many of the dialectal variations between Turkish dialects, the modern Latin script fails to do this. Examples of this are the presence of the nasal velar sound [\u014b] in certain eastern dialects of Turkish which was represented by the Ottoman letter /\u06ad/ but that was merged into /n/ in the Latin script. Additionally are letters such as /\u062e/, /\u0642/, /\u063a/ which make the sounds [\u0263], [q], and [x], respectively in certain eastern dialects but that are merged into [g], [k], and [h] in western dialects and are therefore defectively represented in the Latin alphabet for speakers of eastern dialects.\nSome immigrants to Turkey from Rumelia speak Rumelian Turkish, which includes the distinct dialects of Ludogorie, Dinler, and Adakale, which show the influence of the theorized Balkan sprachbund. \"K\u0131br\u0131s T\u00fcrk\u00e7esi\" is the name for Cypriot Turkish and is spoken by the Turkish Cypriots. \"Edirne\" is the dialect of Edirne. \"Ege\" is spoken in the Aegean region, with its usage extending to Antalya. The nomadic Y\u00f6r\u00fcks of the Mediterranean Region of Turkey also have their own dialect of Turkish. This group is not to be confused with the Yuruk nomads of Macedonia, Greece, and European Turkey, who speak Balkan Gagauz Turkish.\nThe Meskhetian Turks who live in Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and Russia as well as in several Central Asian countries, also speak an Eastern Anatolian dialect of Turkish, originating in the areas of Kars, Ardahan, Artvin, Diyarbakir and Erzurum and sharing similarities with Azerbaijani, the language of Azerbaijan.\nThe Central Anatolia Region speaks \"Orta Anadolu\". \"Karadeniz\", spoken in the Eastern Black Sea Region and represented primarily by the Trabzon dialect, exhibits substratum influence from Greek in phonology and syntax; it is also known as \"Laz dialect\" (not to be confused with the Laz language). \"Kastamonu\" is spoken in Kastamonu and its surrounding areas. Karamanli Turkish is spoken in Greece, where it is called . It is the literary standard for the Karamanlides.\nPhonology.\nConsonants.\nAt least one source claims Turkish consonants are laryngeally-specified three-way fortis-lenis (aspirated/neutral/voiced) like Armenian, although only syllable-finally.\nThe phoneme that is usually referred to as \"yumu\u015fak g\" (\"soft g\"), written \u27e8\u011f\u27e9 in Turkish orthography, represents a vowel sequence or a rather weak bilabial approximant between rounded vowels, a weak palatal approximant between unrounded front vowels, and a vowel sequence elsewhere. It never occurs at the beginning of a word or a syllable, but always follows a vowel. When word-final or preceding another consonant, it lengthens the preceding vowel.\nIn native Turkic words, the sounds , , and are mainly in complementary distribution with , , and ; the former set occurs adjacent to front vowels and the latter adjacent to back vowels. The distribution of these phonemes is often unpredictable, however, in foreign borrowings and proper nouns. In such words, , , and often occur with back vowels: some examples are given below. However, there are minimal pairs that distinguish between these sounds, such as kar [k\u0251\u027e] \"snow\" vs k\u00e2r [c\u0251\u027e] \"profit\".\nConsonant devoicing.\nTurkish orthography reflects final-obstruent devoicing, a form of consonant mutation whereby a voiced obstruent, such as , is devoiced to at the end of a word or before a consonant, but retains its voicing before a vowel. In loan words, the voiced equivalent of /k/ is /g/; in native words, it is /\u011f/.\nThis is analogous to languages such as German and Russian, but in the case of Turkish it only applies, as the above examples demonstrate, to stops and affricates, not to fricatives. The spelling is usually made to match the sound. However, in a few cases, such as \"ad\" 'name' (dative \"ada\"), the underlying form is retained in the spelling (cf. \"at\" 'horse', dative \"ata\"). Other exceptions are \"od\" 'fire' vs. \"ot\" 'herb', \"sac\" 'sheet metal', \"sa\u00e7\" 'hair'. Most loanwords, such as \"kitap\" above, are spelled as pronounced, but a few such as \"hac\" 'hajj', \"\u015fad\" 'happy', and \"yad\" 'strange' or 'stranger' also show their underlying forms.\nNative nouns of two or more syllables that end in /k/ in dictionary form are nearly all /\u011f/ in underlying form. However, most verbs and monosyllabic nouns are underlyingly /k/.\nVowels.\nThe vowels of the Turkish language are, in their alphabetical order, \u27e8a\u27e9, \u27e8e\u27e9, \u27e8\u0131\u27e9, \u27e8i\u27e9, \u27e8o\u27e9, \u27e8\u00f6\u27e9, \u27e8u\u27e9, \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9. The Turkish vowel system can be considered as being three-dimensional, where vowels are characterised by how and where they are articulated focusing on three key features: front and back, rounded and unrounded and vowel height. Vowels are classified [\u00b1back], [\u00b1round] and [\u00b1high].\nThe only diphthongs in the language are found in loanwords and may be categorised as falling diphthongs usually analyzed as a sequence of /j/ and a vowel.\nVowel harmony.\nThe principle of vowel harmony, which permeates Turkish word-formation and suffixation, is due to the natural human tendency towards economy of muscular effort. This principle is expressed in Turkish through three rules:\nThe second and third rules minimize muscular effort during speech. More specifically, they are related to the phenomenon of labial assimilation: if the lips are rounded (a process that requires muscular effort) for the first vowel they may stay rounded for subsequent vowels. If they are unrounded for the first vowel, the speaker does not make the additional muscular effort to round them subsequently.\nGrammatical affixes have \"a chameleon-like quality\", and obey one of the following patterns of vowel harmony:\nPractically, the twofold pattern (also referred to as the e-type vowel harmony) means that in the environment where the vowel in the word stem is formed in the front of the mouth, the suffix will take the e-form, while if it is formed in the back it will take the a-form. The fourfold pattern (also called the i-type) accounts for rounding as well as for front/back. The following examples, based on the copula \"-dir\"4 (\"[it] is\"), illustrate the principles of i-type vowel harmony in practice: \"T\u00fcrkiye'dir (\"it is Turkey\"), \"kap\u0131d\u0131r (\"it is the door\"), but \"g\u00fcnd\u00fcr (\"it is the day\"), \"paltodur (\"it is the coat\").\nExceptions to vowel harmony.\nThese are four word-classes that are exceptions to the rules of vowel harmony:\nThe road sign in the photograph above illustrates several of these features:\nThe rules of vowel harmony may vary by regional dialect. The dialect of Turkish spoken in the Trabzon region of northeastern Turkey follows the reduced vowel harmony of Old Anatolian Turkish, with the additional complication of two missing vowels (\u00fc and \u0131), thus there is no palatal harmony. It is likely that \"el\u00fcn\" meant \"your hand\" in Old Anatolian. While the 2nd person singular possessive would vary between back and front vowel, -\u00fcn or -un, as in \"el\u00fcn\" for \"your hand\" and \"kitabun\" for \"your book\", the lack of \u00fc vowel in the Trabzon dialect means -un would be used in both of these cases \u2014 \"elun\" and \"kitabun\".\nWord-accent.\nWith the exceptions stated below, Turkish words are oxytone (accented on the last syllable).\nSyntax.\nSentence groups.\nTurkish has two groups of sentences: verbal and nominal sentences. In the case of a verbal sentence, the predicate is a finite verb, while the predicate in nominal sentence will have either no overt verb or a verb in the form of the copula or (variants of \"be\"). Examples of both are given below:\nNegation.\nThe two groups of sentences have different ways of forming negation. A nominal sentence can be negated with the addition of the word . For example, the sentence above would become ('Necla is not a teacher'). However, the verbal sentence requires the addition of a negative suffix to the verb (the suffix comes after the stem but before the tense): ('Necla did not go to school').\nYes/no questions.\nIn the case of a verbal sentence, an interrogative clitic is added after the verb and stands alone, for example ('Did Necla go to school?'). In the case of a nominal sentence, then comes after the predicate but before the personal ending, so for example ? ('Necla, are you [formal, plural] a teacher?').\nWord order.\nWord order in simple Turkish sentences is generally subject\u2013object\u2013verb, as in Korean and Latin, but unlike English, for verbal sentences and subject-predicate for nominal sentences. However, as Turkish possesses a case-marking system, and most grammatical relations are shown using morphological markers, often the SOV structure has diminished relevance and may vary. The SOV structure may thus be considered a \"pragmatic word order\" of language, one that does not rely on word order for grammatical purposes.\nImmediately preverbal.\nConsider the following simple sentence which demonstrates that the focus in Turkish is on the element that immediately precedes the verb:\nPostpredicate.\nThe postpredicate position signifies what is referred to as background information in Turkish \u2014 information that is assumed to be known to both the speaker and the listener, or information that is included in the context. Consider the following examples:\nTopic.\nThere has been some debate among linguists whether Turkish is a subject-prominent (like English) or topic-prominent (like Japanese and Korean) language, with recent scholarship implying that it is indeed both subject and topic-prominent. This has direct implications for word order as it is possible for the subject to be included in the verb-phrase in Turkish. There can be S/O inversion in sentences where the topic is of greater importance than the subject.\nGrammar.\nTurkish is an agglutinative language and frequently uses affixes, and specifically suffixes, or endings. One word can have many affixes and these can also be used to create new words, such as creating a verb from a noun, or a noun from a verbal root (see the section on Word formation). Most affixes indicate the grammatical function of the word.\nThe only native prefixes are alliterative intensifying syllables used with adjectives or adverbs: for example s\u0131ms\u0131cak\" (\"boiling hot\" &lt; \"s\u0131cak\") and masmavi\" (\"bright blue\" &lt; \"mavi\").\nThe extensive use of affixes can give rise to long words, e.g. \"\u00c7ekoslovakyal\u0131la\u015ft\u0131ramad\u0131klar\u0131m\u0131zdanm\u0131\u015fs\u0131n\u0131zcas\u0131na\", meaning \"In the manner of you being one of those that we apparently couldn't manage to convert to Czechoslovakian\". While this case is contrived, long words frequently occur in normal Turkish, as in this heading of a newspaper obituary column: \"Bayramla\u015famad\u0131klar\u0131m\u0131z\" (Bayram [festival]-Recipr-Impot-Partic-Plur-PossPl1; \"Those of our number with whom we cannot exchange the season's greetings\"). Another example can be seen in the final word of this heading of the online Turkish Spelling Guide (\"\u0130ml\u00e2 K\u0131lavuzu\"): \"Dilde birlik, ulusal birli\u011fin vazge\u00e7ilemezlerindendir\" (\"Unity in language is among the indispensables [dispense-Pass-Impot-Plur-PossS3-Abl-Copula] of national unity ~ Linguistic unity is a \"sine qua non\" of national unity\").\nNouns.\nGender.\nTurkish does not have grammatical gender and the sex of a person does not affect the forms of words. The third-person pronoun \"\" may refer to \"he\", \"she\" or \"it.\" Despite this lack, Turkish still has ways of indicating gender in nouns:\nCase.\nThere is no definite article in Turkish, but definiteness of the object is implied when the accusative ending is used (see below). Turkish nouns decline by taking case endings. There are six noun cases in Turkish, with all the endings following vowel harmony (shown in the table using the shorthand superscript notation). Since the postposition often gets suffixed onto the noun, some analyze it as an instrumental case, although in formal speech it takes the genitive with personal pronouns, singular demonstratives, and interrogative . The plural marker \u00b2 immediately follows the noun before any case or other affixes (e.g. \"of the villages\").\nThe accusative case marker is used only for definite objects; compare \"we saw a tree\" with \"we saw the tree\". The plural marker \u00b2 is generally not used when a class or category is meant: can equally well mean \"we saw trees [as we walked through the forest]\"\u2014as opposed to \"we saw the trees [in question]\".\nThe declension of illustrates two important features of Turkish phonology: consonant assimilation in suffixes () and voicing of final consonants before vowels ().\nAdditionally, nouns can take suffixes that assign person: for example 4, \"our\". With the addition of the copula (for example 4, \"I am\") complete sentences can be formed. The interrogative particle 4 immediately follows the word being questioned, and also follows vowel harmony: \"[going] to the village?\", \"[is it a] tree?\".\nPersonal pronouns.\nThe Turkish personal pronouns in the nominative case are (1s), (2s), (3s), (1pl), (2pl, or 2h), and (3pl). They are declined regularly with some exceptions: (1s gen.); (1pl gen.); (1s dat.); (2s dat.); and the oblique forms of use the root . As mentioned before, all demonstrative singular and personal pronouns take the genitive when is affixed onto it: (1s ins.), (1pl ins.); but (3s ins.), (3pl ins.). All other pronouns (reflexive and so on) are declined regularly.\nNoun phrases (\"tamlama\").\nTwo nouns, or groups of nouns, may be joined in either of two ways:\nThe following table illustrates these principles. In some cases, the constituents of the compounds are themselves compounds; for clarity these subsidiary compounds are marked with [square brackets]. The suffixes involved in the linking are underlined. If the second noun group already had a possessive suffix (because it is a compound by itself), no further suffix is added.\nAs the last example shows, the qualifying expression may be a substantival sentence rather than a noun or noun group.\nThere is a third way of linking the nouns where both nouns take no suffixes (\"tak\u0131s\u0131z tamlama\"). However, in this case the first noun acts as an adjective, e.g. \"Demir kap\u0131\" (iron gate), \"elma yanak\" (\"apple cheek\", i.e. red cheek), \"k\u00f6m\u00fcr g\u00f6z\" (\"coal eye\", i.e. black eye) :\nAdjectives.\nTurkish adjectives are not declined. However most adjectives can also be used as nouns, in which case they are declined: e.g. (\"beautiful\") \u2192 (\"(the) beautiful ones / people\"). Used attributively, adjectives precede the nouns they modify. The adjectives (\"existent\") and (\"non-existent\") are used in many cases where English would use \"there is\" or \"have\", \"e.g.\" (\"there is no milk\", \"lit.\" \"(the) milk (is) non-existent\"); the construction \"\"noun 1\"-GEN \"noun 2\"-POSS \" can be translated \"\"noun 1\" has/doesn't have \"noun 2\"\"; \"the emperor has no clothes\" (\"(the) emperor-\"of\" clothes-\"his\" non-existent\"); (\"my cat had no shoes\", \"lit.\" \"cat-\"my\"-\"of\" shoe-\"plur.\"-\"its\" non-existent-\"past tense\"\").\nVerbs.\nTurkish verbs indicate person. They can be made negative, potential (\"can\"), or non-potential (\"cannot\"). Furthermore, Turkish verbs show tense (present, past, future, and aorist), mood (conditional, imperative, inferential, necessitative, and optative), and aspect. The inferential suffix \"-mi\u015f4\" is also glossed as a direct evidential or a mirative. Negation is expressed by the suffix \"-me\u00b2-\" immediately following the stem.\nVerb tenses.\n(For the sake of simplicity the term \"tense\" is used here throughout, although for some forms \"aspect\" or \"mood\" might be more appropriate.) There are nine simple and 20 compound tenses in Turkish. The nine simple tenses are: simple past (), inferential past (), present continuous, simple present (aorist), future, optative, subjunctive, necessitative (\"must\") and imperative. There are three groups of compound forms. Story () is the witnessed past of the above forms (except command), referral () is the unwitnessed past of the above forms (except simple past and command), conditional () is the conditional form of the first five basic tenses. In the example below, the second person singular of the verb (\"go\"), stem , is shown.\nThere are also so-called combined verbs, which are created by suffixing certain verb stems (like or ) to the original stem of a verb. is the suffix for the sufficiency mood. It is the equivalent of the English auxiliary verbs \"able to\", \"can\" or \"may\". is the suffix for the swiftness mood, for the perpetuity mood and for the approach (\"almost\") mood. Thus, while means \"you went\", means \"you could go\" and means \"you went swiftly\". The tenses of the combined verbs are formed the same way as for simple verbs.\nAttributive verbs (participles).\nTurkish verbs have attributive forms, including present, similar to the English present participle (with the ending \"-en\"2); future (\"-ecek\"2); indirect/inferential past (\"-mi\u015f\"4); and aorist (\"-er\"2 or \"-ir\"4).\nThe most important function of some of these attributive verbs is to form modifying phrases equivalent to the relative clauses found in most European languages. The subject of the verb in an \"-en\"2 form is (possibly implicitly) in the third person (he/she/it/they); this form, when used in a modifying phrase, does not change according to number. The other attributive forms used in these constructions are the future (\"-ecek\"2) and an older form (\"-dik\"4), which covers both present and past meanings. These two forms take \"personal endings,\" which have the same form as the possessive suffixes but indicate the person and possibly number of the subject of the attributive verb; for example, \"yedi\u011fim means \"what I eat,\" \"yedi\u011fin means \"what you eat,\" and so on. The use of these \"personal or relative participles\" is illustrated in the following table, in which the examples are presented according to the grammatical case which would be seen in the equivalent English relative clause.\nVocabulary.\nLatest 2011 edition of \"G\u00fcncel T\u00fcrk\u00e7e S\u00f6zl\u00fck\" (\"Current Turkish Dictionary\"), the official dictionary of the Turkish language published by Turkish Language Association, contains 117,000 words organized into 93,000 entries.\nWord origins.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAround 86% of the Turkish vocabulary is of Turkic origin. The majority of the core vocabulary and the most commonly used words in Turkish, including those first acquired by children as they learn to speak, derive from Turkic. Nevertheless, Turkish vocabulary contains a significant number of loanwords from other languages, in which around 14% of Turkish words are of foreign origin. According to the Turkish Language Association, 6,463 of these foreign words come from Arabic, 4,974 from French, 1,374 from Persian, 632 from Italian, 538 from English, 399 from Greek, and 147 from Latin.\nIn Turkish, there are many pairs of synonyms where one word is of foreign origin and the other of Turkic origin. These pairs are the result of the enrichment of the Turkish vocabulary with loanwords from Arabic, Persian and French, and of the Turkish language reform initiated in the early 20th century that aimed to restore foreign-origin words with Turkic equivalents.\nWord formation.\nTurkish extensively uses agglutination to form new words from nouns and verbal stems. The majority of Turkish words originate from the application of derivative suffixes to a relatively small set of core vocabulary.\nTurkish obeys certain principles when it comes to suffixation. Most suffixes in Turkish will have more than one form, depending on the vowels and consonants in the root- vowel harmony rules will apply; consonant-initial suffixes will follow the voiced/ voiceless character of the consonant in the final unit of the root; and in the case of vowel-initial suffixes an additional consonant may be inserted if the root ends in a vowel, or the suffix may lose its initial vowel. There is also a prescribed order of affixation of suffixes- as a rule of thumb, derivative suffixes precede inflectional suffixes which are followed by clitics, as can be seen in the example set of words derived from a substantive root below:\nAnother example, starting from a verbal root:\nNew words are also frequently formed by compounding two existing words into a new one, as in German. Compounds can be of two types- bare and . The bare compounds, both nouns and adjectives are effectively two words juxtaposed without the addition of suffixes for example the word for girlfriend () or black pepper (). A few examples of compound words are given below:\nHowever, the majority of compound words in Turkish are compounds, which means that the second word will be marked by the 3rd person possessive suffix. A few such examples are given in the table below (note vowel harmony):\nWriting system.\nTurkish is written using a version of Latin script introduced in 1928 by Atat\u00fcrk to replace the Ottoman Turkish alphabet, a version of Perso-Arabic script. The Ottoman alphabet marked only three different vowels\u2014long \"\u0101, \u016b\" and \"\u012b\"\u2014and included several redundant consonants, such as variants of \"z\" (which were distinguished in Arabic but not in Turkish). The omission of short vowels in the Arabic script was claimed to make it particularly unsuitable for Turkish, which has eight vowels.\nThe reform of the script was an important step in the cultural reforms of the period. The task of preparing the new alphabet and selecting the necessary modifications for sounds specific to Turkish was entrusted to a Language Commission composed of prominent linguists, academics, and writers. The introduction of the new Turkish alphabet was supported by public education centers opened throughout the country, cooperation with publishing companies, and encouragement by Atat\u00fcrk himself, who toured the country teaching the new letters to the public. As a result, there was a dramatic increase in literacy from its original, pre-modern levels.\nThe Latin alphabet was applied to the Turkish language for educational purposes even before the 20th-century reform. Instances include a 1635 Latin-Albanian dictionary by Frang Bardhi, who also incorporated several sayings in the Turkish language, as an appendix to his work (e.g. \"alma agatsdan irak duschamas\"\u2014\"An apple does not fall far from its tree\").\nTurkish now has an alphabet suited to the sounds of the language: the spelling is largely phonemic, with one letter corresponding to each phoneme. Most of the letters are used approximately as in English, the main exceptions being \u27e8c\u27e9, which denotes (\u27e8j\u27e9 being used for the found in Persian and European loans); and the undotted \u27e8\u0131\u27e9, representing . As in German, \u27e8\u00f6\u27e9 and \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9 represent and . The letter \u27e8\u011f\u27e9, in principle, denotes but has the property of lengthening the preceding vowel and assimilating any subsequent vowel. The letters \u27e8\u015f\u27e9 and \u27e8\u00e7\u27e9 represent and , respectively. A circumflex is written over back vowels following \u27e8k\u27e9 and \u27e8g\u27e9 when these consonants represent and \u2014almost exclusively in Arabic and Persian loans.\nThe Turkish alphabet consists of 29 letters (q, w, x omitted and \u00e7, \u015f, \u011f, \u0131, \u00f6, \u00fc added); the complete list is:\n\"a, b, c, \u00e7, d, e, f, g, \u011f, h, \u0131, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, \u00f6, p, r, s, \u015f, t, u, \u00fc, v, y\", and \"z\" (Capital of \"i\" is \"\u0130\" and lowercase \"I\" is \"\u0131\".)\nThe specifically Turkish letters and spellings described above are illustrated in this table:\nSample texts.\n\"Dostlar Beni Hat\u0131rlas\u0131n\".\n\"Dostlar Beni Hat\u0131rlas\u0131n\" is a Turkish folk poem by the world-renowned poet and ashik \u00c2\u015f\u0131k Veysel \u015eat\u0131ro\u011flu (1894\u20131973).\n\"\u0130nsan Haklar\u0131 Evrensel Bildirisi\".\nArticle 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Turkish:\nArticle 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in English:\nInternational Phonetic Alphabet transcription:\nTurkish computer keyboard.\nTurkish language uses two standardised keyboard layouts, known as Turkish Q (QWERTY) and Turkish F, with Turkish Q being the most common.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nSources.\nOn-line sources"}
{"id": "29993", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29993", "title": "The Thin Blue Line", "text": "The thin blue line is a colloquial term for police forces.\nThe Thin Blue Line or Thin Blue Line may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29994", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29994", "title": "The Americans with Disabilites Act of 1990", "text": ""}
{"id": "29995", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29995", "title": "The Americans with Disabilites Act of 1990/Findings and Purposes", "text": ""}
{"id": "29996", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29996", "title": "The Americans with Disabilites Act of 1990/Title III", "text": ""}
{"id": "29997", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29997", "title": "The Americans with Disabilites Act of 1990/Definitions", "text": ""}
{"id": "29998", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29998", "title": "The short story", "text": ""}
{"id": "29999", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29999", "title": "The Shining (novel)", "text": "1977 novel by Stephen King\nThe Shining is a 1977 horror novel by American author Stephen King. It is King's third published novel and first hardcover bestseller; its success firmly established King as a preeminent author in the horror genre. The setting and characters are influenced by King's personal experiences, including both his visit to The Stanley Hotel in 1974 and his struggle with alcoholism. The novel was adapted into a 1980 film and a 1997 miniseries. The book was followed by a sequel, \"Doctor Sleep\", published in 2013, which in turn was adapted into a 2019 film.\n\"The Shining\" centers on Jack Torrance, a struggling writer and recovering alcoholic who accepts a position as the off-season caretaker of the historic Overlook Hotel in the Colorado Rockies. His family accompanies him on this job, including his young son, Danny, who possesses \"the shining\", an array of psychic abilities that allow the child to glimpse the hotel's horrific true nature. Soon, after a winter storm leaves the family snowbound, the supernatural forces inhabiting the hotel influence Jack's sanity, leaving his wife Wendy and son in grave danger.\nPlot.\nJack Torrance, an aspiring writer, is hired as the winter caretaker at the Overlook Hotel, an isolated resort hotel in the Colorado Rockies. Jack is a recovering alcoholic with anger issues which previously caused him to accidentally break his son Danny's arm and lose a teaching job after assaulting a student. Jack hopes that the hotel's seclusion will help him reconnect with Danny as well as his wife, Wendy, and give him the motivation needed to complete his unfinished manuscript.\nUnknown to his parents, Danny possesses psychic abilities referred to as \"shining\", which include reading minds, premonitions and clairvoyance. While moving into the hotel on closing day, the Torrances meet the chef, Dick Hallorann, who possesses similar abilities to Danny's, and forms a connection with him.\nAs the Torrances settle in alone at the Overlook, Danny sees ghosts and frightening visions. Danny does not tell either of his parents about his visions, because he senses that the caretaking job is important to his father, and dissuades Wendy from leaving Jack at the Overlook by himself. However, Danny soon realizes that his presence in the hotel makes the supernatural activity more powerful, turning echoes of past tragedies from the hotel's history into dangerous threats. Apparitions take solid form, and the garden's topiary animals come to life. The winter snowfall leaves the Torrances cut off from the outside world.\nThe Overlook has difficulty possessing Danny, so it turns its attention to Jack by frustrating his desire to work and by enticing him with the dark history of the hotel through a scrapbook in the basement. Jack starts to develop cabin fever and becomes increasingly unstable, destroying a two-way radio and sabotaging a snowmobile, the family's only means of escape. After a fight with Wendy, Jack sees the hotel's bar fully stocked with liquor despite being previously empty and finds himself attending a party of ghosts. As he gets drunk, the hotel uses the ghost of Delbert Grady, a previous caretaker who murdered his family, to urge Jack to do the same to Danny and Wendy. He initially resists but ultimately succumbs to his dark side and the hotel.\nWendy and Danny get the better of Jack after he attacks Wendy, locking him inside the pantry, but Grady's ghost releases him after he makes Jack promise to bring him Danny and kill Wendy. Jack attacks Wendy with one of the hotel's roque mallets, seriously injuring her, but she escapes to the caretaker's suite and locks herself in the bathroom. Jack attempts to break the door with the mallet, but Wendy slashes his hand with a razor blade to deter him. Meanwhile, Hallorann, having received a psychic distress call from Danny while working at a winter resort in Florida, rushes back to the Overlook, only to be attacked by the topiary animals and severely injured by Jack.\nAs Jack pursues Danny through the hotel and corners him on the top floor, he briefly gains control of himself and implores Danny to flee. The hotel quickly retakes control of Jack, making him violently batter his own face and skull into ruin with the mallet, leaving his body under the hotel's control. Remembering that Jack has neglected to relieve the pressure on the hotel's unstable boiler, Danny informs the hotel that it is about to explode. As Danny, Wendy, and Hallorann flee, the hotel-creature rushes to the basement in an attempt to vent the pressure, but it is too late. The boiler explodes, killing Jack and destroying the Overlook. Fighting off a last attempt by the hotel to possess him, Hallorann guides Danny and Wendy to safety.\nThe book's epilogue is set during the next summer. Hallorann, who has taken a chef's job at a resort in Maine, comforts Danny over the loss of his father as Wendy recuperates from the injuries Jack inflicted on her.\nBackground.\nAfter writing \"Carrie\" and \"'Salem's Lot\", which are both set in small towns in King's native Maine, King was looking for a change of pace for his next book: \"I wanted to spend a year away from Maine so that my next novel would have a different sort of background\". King opened an atlas of the United States on his kitchen table and randomly pointed to a location, which turned out to be Boulder, Colorado.\nOn October 30, 1974, King and his wife Tabitha checked into The Stanley Hotel in nearby Estes Park, Colorado. They were the only two guests in the hotel that night: \"When we arrived, they were just getting ready to close for the season, and we found ourselves the only guests in the place \u2014 with all those long, empty corridors\".\nTen years earlier, King had read Ray Bradbury's 1950 short story \"The Veldt\" and was inspired to write a story about a person whose dreams would become real. In 1972, King started a novel entitled \"Darkshine\", which was to be about a psychic boy in a psychic amusement park, but the idea never came to fruition and he abandoned the book. During the night at the Stanley, this story came back to him.\nKing and his wife had dinner that evening in the grand dining room, totally alone. They were offered one choice for dinner, the only meal still available. Taped orchestral music played in the room and theirs was the only table set for dining: \"Except for our table all the chairs were up on the tables. So the music is echoing down the hall, and, I mean, it was like God had put me there to hear that and see those things. And by the time I went to bed that night, I had the whole book in my mind\". After dinner, his wife decided to turn in, but King took a walk around the empty hotel. He ended up in the bar and was served drinks by a bartender named Grady.\nIn King's words: \"That night I dreamed of my three-year-old son running through the corridors, looking back over his shoulder, eyes wide, screaming. He was being chased by a fire-hose. I woke up with a tremendous jerk, sweating all over, within an inch of falling out of bed. I got up, lit a cigarette, sat in a chair looking out the window at the Rockies, and by the time the cigarette was done, I had the bones of the book firmly set in my mind\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Sometimes you confess. You always hide what you're confessing to. That's one of the reasons why you make up the story. When I wrote \"The Shining\", for instance, the protagonist of \"The Shining\" is a man who has broken his son's arm, who has a history of child beating, who is beaten himself. And as a young father with two children, I was horrified by my occasional feelings of real antagonism toward my children. Won't you ever stop? Won't you ever go to bed? And time has given me the idea that probably there are a lot of young fathers and young mothers both who feel very angry, who have angry feelings toward their children. But as somebody who has been raised with the idea that father knows best and Ward Cleaver on \"Leave It to Beaver\", and all this stuff, I would think to myself, Oh, if he doesn't shut up, if he doesn't shut up... So when I wrote this book I wrote a lot of that down and tried to get it out of my system, but it was also a confession. Yes, there are times when I felt very angry toward my children and have even felt as though I could hurt them. Well, my kids are older now. Naomi is fifteen and Joey is thirteen and Owen is eight, and they're all super kids, and I don't think I've laid a hand on one of my kids in probably seven years, but there was a time...\n\"The Shining\" was also heavily influenced by Shirley Jackson's 1959 novel \"The Haunting of Hill House\", Edgar Allan Poe's short stories \"The Fall of the House of Usher\" (1839) and \"The Masque of the Red Death\" (1842), and Robert Marasco's 1973 novel \"Burnt Offerings\". The story has often been compared to Guy de Maupassant's story \"The Inn\".\nBefore writing \"The Shining\", King had written the novel \"Roadwork\" and the novella \"The Body\". The first draft of \"The Shining\" took less than four months to complete and he was able to publish it before the others. The title was inspired by the 1970 John Lennon song \"Instant Karma!\", which contained the line \"We all shine on\". Bill Thompson, King's editor at Doubleday Publishing, tried to talk him out of \"The Shining\" because he thought that after writing \"Carrie\" and \"'Salem's Lot\" he would get \"typed\" as a horror writer. King considered that a compliment.\nDeleted prologue and epilogue.\n\"The Shining\" originally included a prologue titled \"Before the Play\" that chronicled earlier events in the Overlook's history, as well as an epilogue titled \"After the Play\". Neither remained part of the published novel. The prologue was later published in \"Whispers\" magazine in August 1982, and an abridged version appeared in the April 26\u2013May 2, 1997 issue of \"TV Guide\" to promote the then-upcoming miniseries of \"The Shining\". The epilogue was thought to have been lost but was re-discovered in 2016 as part of an early manuscript version of the novel. Both \"Before the Play\" and \"After the Play\" were published as part of the Deluxe Special Edition of \"The Shining\" by Cemetery Dance Publications in early 2017.\nSequel.\nIn November 2009, during a reading at the Canon Theatre in Toronto, King described to the audience an idea for a sequel to \"The Shining\". The idea was prompted by the occasional person asking, \"Whatever happened to Danny?\" The story would follow Danny Torrance, now in his 40s, living in New Hampshire, where he works as an orderly at a hospice, where he uses his powers to support terminally ill patients at their death. Later, on December 1, King posted a poll on his official website, asking visitors to vote for which book he should write next, \"Doctor Sleep\" or :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I mentioned two potential projects while I was on the road, one a new Mid-World book (not directly about Roland Deschain, but yes, he and his friend Cuthbert are in it, hunting a skin-man, which are what werewolves are called in that lost kingdom) and a sequel to \"The Shining\" called \"Doctor Sleep\". Are you interested in reading either of these? If so, which one turns your dials more? [We] will be counting your votes (and of course it all means nothing if the muse doesn't speak).\nVoting ended on December 31, and it was revealed that \"Doctor Sleep\" received 5,861 votes, while \"The Wind Through the Keyhole\" received 5,812. In \"Doctor Sleep\", published in September 2013, the plot includes a traveling group of psychic vampires called the True Knot.\nAdaptations.\nThe novel was adapted into a 1980 feature film of the same name directed by Stanley Kubrick and co-written with Diane Johnson. King himself wrote a screenplay, which was initially very faithful to the novel but rejected by Kubrick. Although King himself remains disappointed with the adaptation, having criticized its handling of the book's major themes and of Wendy's character, it is regarded as one of the greatest horror films ever made. King's disdain of the film has not lessened in recent years, with his 2018 novel \"The Outsider\" even including a jab about how poorly done Kubrick's interpretation of the film is. The film adaptation of \"Doctor Sleep\", released in 2019, was written and directed by Mike Flanagan and served as a direct sequel to the Kubrick film, but it also heavily utilizes and adapts elements of \"The Shining\" novel, including Jack's original story being incorporated into the adult Danny's arc, the effects of alcoholism, and the story's conclusion being used for the film's climax, which ultimately led to it earning King's approval.\nThe novel was also later adapted into a television miniseries, which premiered in 1997 on ABC. King wrote and closely monitored the making of the series to ensure that it followed the novel's narrative. The miniseries garnered popular and critical acclaim, but in recent years has been received less fondly by critics compared to Kubrick's film. The novel was adapted into an opera of the same name in 2016. It is also being adapted into a stage play directed by Ivo van Hove and written by Simon Stephens. Ben Stiller is reportedly in talks to play Jack Torrance in a stage adaptation. A spin-off series titled \"Overlook\" is in development by J. J. Abrams and his production company Bad Robot. It was to air on HBO Max and explore the tales of the Overlook Hotel. However, by August 2021, the show did not move forward at HBO Max and was shopped to other outlets before Netflix picked it up the following year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30000", "revid": "50532078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30000", "title": "Taxi Driver", "text": "1976 film by Martin Scorsese\nTaxi Driver is a 1976 American neo-noir psychological thriller film directed by Martin Scorsese and written by Paul Schrader. Set in a morally decaying New York City following the Vietnam War, it stars Robert De Niro as veteran Marine and taxi driver Travis Bickle, whose mental state deteriorates as he works nights in the city. The film also features Jodie Foster, Cybill Shepherd, Harvey Keitel, Peter Boyle, Leonard Harris and Albert Brooks (in his first feature film role).\nFilming began in summer 1975, with actors taking pay cuts to ensure that the project could be completed on its low budget of $1.9 million. For the score, Bernard Herrmann composed what would be his final score. The music was finished mere hours before his death, and the film is dedicated to him.\nTheatrically released by Columbia Pictures on February 8, 1976, the film was critically and commercially successful despite generating controversy for both its graphic violence in the film's climax, and for the casting of 12-year-old Foster as a child prostitute. The film received numerous accolades, including the at the 1976 Cannes Film Festival and four nominations at the 49th Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor (for De Niro) and Best Supporting Actress (for Foster).\nAlthough \"Taxi Driver\" generated further controversy for triggering the delusional John Hinckley Jr.'s attempted assassination of President Ronald Reagan in 1981, the film has remained popular. According to STRAND Magazine, it is considered one of the greatest films ever made, and one of the most culturally significant and inspirational of its time. In 2022, \"Sight &amp; Sound\" named it the 29th-best film ever in its decennial critics' poll, and the 12th-greatest film of all time on its directors' poll, tied with \"Barry Lyndon\". In 1994, the film was designated as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically\" significant by the U.S. Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.\nPlot.\nIn New York City, Vietnam War veteran Travis Bickle takes a job as a night-shift taxi driver to cope with his chronic insomnia and loneliness, frequently visiting adult movie theaters and keeping a diary in which he consciously attempts to include aphorisms such as \"you're only as healthy as you feel\". He becomes disgusted with the crime and urban decay that he witnesses in the city and dreams about getting \"the scum off the streets\".\nTravis becomes infatuated with Betsy, a campaign worker for Senator and presidential candidate Charles Palantine. Travis enters the campaign office where she works and asks her to join him for coffee, to which she agrees. Betsy agrees to go on a second date with him, during which he takes her to an adult movie theater, which she leaves immediately. He attempts to reconcile with her, but fails. Enraged, he storms into the campaign office where she works and berates her before being kicked out of the office.\nExperiencing an existential crisis and seeing various acts of prostitution throughout the city, Travis confides in a fellow taxi driver, nicknamed Wizard, about his violent thoughts. However, Wizard dismisses them and assures him that he will be fine. To find an outlet for his rage, Travis follows an intense physical training regimen. He gets in contact with black market gun dealer Easy Andy and buys four handguns. At home, Travis practices drawing his weapons, going as far as creating a quick-draw firearm hidden in his sleeve. He begins attending Palantine's rallies to scope out his security. One night, Travis shoots a man attempting to rob a convenience store run by his friend, leaving before the cops arrive as the convenience store owner proceeds to beat the non responsive robber.\nIn his trips around the city, Travis regularly encounters Iris, a 12-year-old child prostitute. Tricking her pimp and abusive lover Sport into thinking that he wants to solicit her, Travis meets with her in private and tries to persuade her to stop prostituting herself.\nSoon, Travis shaves his hair into a mohawk and attends a public rally where he plans to assassinate Palantine. However, Secret Service agents see Travis putting his hand inside his jacket and approach him, which escalates to a chase. Travis escapes pursuit and makes it home undetected.\nThat evening, Travis drives to the brothel where Iris works to kill Sport. He enters the building and shoots Sport and one of Iris's clients, a mafioso. Travis is shot several times but manages to kill the two men. He fights with the bouncer, whom he manages to stab through the hand with his knife and kill with a gunshot to the head. Travis attempts to die by suicide, but has no bullets. Severely injured, he slumps on a couch next to a sobbing Iris. As police respond to the scene, a delirious Travis mimics shooting himself in the head with his bloody finger.\nTravis goes into a coma due to his injuries, but he is heralded by the press as a heroic vigilante and not prosecuted for the murders. He receives a letter from Iris's parents in Pittsburgh, who thank him and reveal that she is safe and attending school.\nAfter recovering, Travis returns to work, where he encounters Betsy as a fare. Betsy tells him that she followed his story in the newspapers. Travis drops her at her home but declines to take her money, driving off with a smile. He becomes agitated after noticing something in his rearview mirror, but continues driving into the night.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Robert De Niro as Travis Bickle\nDirector Martin Scorsese plays a (possibly dual) cameo role: once in the background during Betsy's first appearance, and later as an unhinged passenger in Travis' car who intends to murder his unfaithful wife. Diahnne Abbott, who would go on to become De Niro's wife in real life, plays an adult movie theater concession girl who rebuffs Travis' flirtatious advances.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nMartin Scorsese has stated that it was Brian De Palma who introduced him to Paul Schrader, and \"Taxi Driver\" arose from Scorsese's feeling that movies are like dreams or drug-induced reveries. He attempted to evoke within the viewer the feeling of being in a limbo state between sleeping and waking.\nScorsese cites Alfred Hitchcock's \"The Wrong Man\" (1956) and Jack Hazan's \"A Bigger Splash\" (1973) as inspirations for his camerawork in the movie.\nScorsese also noted that Jef Costello (a solitary hitman), portrayed by Alain Delon in \"Le Samoura\u00ef\", inspired the creation of Travis Bickle. The role was, in fact, offered to Alain Delon, among many others.\nBefore Scorsese was hired, John Milius and Irvin Kershner were considered to helm the project. When writing the script, Schrader drew inspiration from the diaries of Arthur Bremer (who shot presidential candidate George Wallace in 1972), as well as the Harry Chapin song \"Taxi\", which is about an old girlfriend getting into a taxi. For the ending of the story, in which Bickle becomes a media hero, Schrader was inspired by Sara Jane Moore's attempted assassination of President Gerald Ford, which resulted in her being on the cover of \"Newsweek\".\nSchrader also used himself as inspiration. In a 1981 interview with Tom Snyder on \"The Tomorrow Show\", he related his experience of living in New York City while battling chronic insomnia, which led him to frequent pornographic bookstores and theaters because they remained open all night. Following a divorce and a breakup with a live-in girlfriend, he spent a few weeks living in his car.\nAfter visiting a hospital for a stomach ulcer, Schrader wrote the screenplay for \"Taxi Driver\" in \"under a fortnight\". He stated, \"The first draft was maybe 60 pages, and I started the next draft immediately, and it took less than two weeks.\" Schrader recalled, \"I realized I hadn't spoken to anyone in weeks [...] that was when the metaphor of the taxi occurred to me. That is what I was: this person in an iron box, a coffin, floating around the city, but seemingly alone.\"\nSchrader decided to make Bickle a Vietnam vet because the national trauma of the war seemed to blend perfectly with Bickle's paranoid psychosis, making his experiences after the war more intense and threatening. Two drafts were written in ten days. \"Pickpocket\", a film by the French director Robert Bresson, was also cited as an influence.\nIn \"Scorsese on Scorsese\", Scorsese mentions the religious symbolism in the story, comparing Bickle to a saint who wants to cleanse or purge both his mind and his body of weakness. Bickle attempts to kill himself near the end of the movie as a tribute to the samurai's \"death with honor\" principle.\nDustin Hoffman was offered the role of Travis Bickle but turned it down because he thought that Scorsese was \"crazy\". Al Pacino and Jeff Bridges were also considered for Travis Bickle.\nPre-production.\nWhile preparing for his role as Bickle, Robert De Niro was filming Bernardo Bertolucci's \"1900\" in Italy. According to Boyle, he would \"finish shooting on a Friday in Rome ... get on a plane ... [and] fly to New York\". De Niro obtained a taxi driver's license and, when on break, would pick up a taxi and drive around New York for a couple of weeks before returning to Rome to resume filming \"1900\".\nAlthough De Niro had already starred in \"The Godfather Part II\" (1974), he was recognized only one time while driving a cab in New York City. De Niro apparently lost 35 pounds (16 kilograms) and was repeatedly listening to a taped reading of the diaries of criminal Arthur Bremer. When he had free time while shooting \"1900\", De Niro visited an army base in Northern Italy and tape-recorded soldiers from the Midwestern United States, whose accents he thought might be appropriate for Travis's character.\nScorsese brought in the film title designer Dan Perri to design the title sequence for \"Taxi Driver\". Perri had been Scorsese's original choice to design the titles for \"Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore\" in 1974, but Warner Bros. would not allow him to hire an unknown designer. By the time when \"Taxi Driver\" was going into production, Perri had established his reputation with his work on \"The Exorcist\", and Scorsese was now able to hire him.\nPerri created the opening titles for \"Taxi Driver\" using second unit footage that he color-treated through a process of film copying and slit-scan, resulting in a highly stylized graphic sequence that evoked the \"underbelly\" of New York City through lurid colors, glowing neon signs, distorted nocturnal images, and deep black levels. Perri went on to design the opening titles for a number of major films, including \"Star Wars\" (1977) and \"Raging Bull\" (1980).\nFilming.\nColumbia Pictures gave Scorsese a budget of $1.3 million in April 1974. On a budget of only $1.9 million, various actors took pay cuts to bring the project to life. De Niro and Cybill Shepherd received $35,000 to make the film, while Scorsese was given $65,000. Overall, $200,000 of the budget was allocated to performers in the movie.\n\"Taxi Driver\" was shot during a New York City summer heat wave and sanitation strike in 1975. The film ran into conflict with the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) due to its violence. Scorsese de-saturated the colors in the final shootout, which allowed the film to get an R rating. To capture the atmospheric scenes in Bickle's taxi, the sound technicians would get in the trunk while Scorsese and his cinematographer Michael Chapman would ensconce themselves on the back seat floor and use available light to shoot. Chapman admitted that the filming style was heavily influenced by New Wave filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard and his cinematographer Raoul Coutard, as the crew did not have the time nor money to do \"traditional things\".\nWhen Bickle decides to assassinate Senator Palantine, he cuts his hair to a mohawk style. This detail was suggested by actor Victor Magnotta, a friend of Scorsese's who had a small role as a Secret Service agent and had served in Vietnam. Scorsese noted that Magnotta told them that, \"in Saigon, if you saw a guy with his head shaved\u2014like a little Mohawk\u2014that usually meant that those people were ready to go into a certain Special Forces situation. You didn't even go near them. They were ready to kill.\"\nFilming took place on New York City's West Side, at a time when the city was on the brink of bankruptcy. According to producer Michael Phillips, \"The whole West Side was bombed out. There really were row after row of condemned buildings and that's what we used to build our sets [...] we didn't know we were documenting what looked like the dying gasp of New York.\"\nThe tracking was shot over the shootout scene, filmed in an actual apartment, and took three months of preparation. The production team had to cut through the ceiling to shoot it.\nMusic.\nBernard Herrmann previously scored De Palma's \"Obsession\", and De Palma introduced Herrmann to Scorsese. The music by Herrmann was his final score before his death on December 24, 1975, several hours after Herrmann completed the recording for the soundtrack, and the film is dedicated to his memory. Scorsese, a longtime admirer of Herrmann, had particularly wanted him to compose the score; Herrmann was his \"first and only choice\". Scorsese considered Herrmann's score of great importance to the success of the film: \"It supplied the psychological basis throughout.\" The album \"The Silver Tongued Devil and I\" from Kris Kristofferson was used in the film, following \"Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore\" (1974), in which Kristofferson played a supporting role. Jackson Browne's \"Late for the Sky\" is also featured.\nControversies.\nCasting of Jodie Foster.\nSome critics showed concern over 12-year-old Foster's presence during the climactic shoot-out. Foster said that she was present during the setup and staging of the special effects used during the scene; the entire process was explained and demonstrated for her, step by step. Moreover, Foster said that she was fascinated and entertained by the behind-the-scenes preparation that went into the scene.\nIn addition, before being given the part, Foster was subjected to psychological testing, attending sessions with a UCLA psychiatrist, to ensure that she would not be emotionally scarred by her role, in accordance with California Labor Board requirements monitoring children's welfare on film sets.\nAdditional concerns surrounding Foster's age focused on the role that she played as Iris, a prostitute. Years later, she confessed how uncomfortable the treatment of her character was on set. Scorsese did not know how to approach different scenes with the actress. The director relied on Robert De Niro to deliver his directions to the young actress. Foster often expressed how De Niro, in that moment, became a mentor to her, stating that her acting career was highly influenced by the actor's advice during the filming of \"Taxi Driver\".\nJohn Hinckley Jr..\n\"Taxi Driver\" formed part of the delusional fantasy of John Hinckley Jr. that triggered his attempted assassination of President Ronald Reagan in 1981, an act for which he was found not guilty by reason of insanity. Hinckley stated that his actions were an attempt to impress Foster, on whom Hinckley was fixated, by mimicking Travis's mohawked appearance at the Palantine rally. His attorney concluded his defense by playing the movie for the jury. When Scorsese heard about Hinckley's motivation behind his assassination attempt, he briefly considered quitting filmmaking as the association brought a negative perception of the film.\nMPAA rating.\nThe climactic shootout was considered intensely graphic by the MPAA, who considered giving the film an X rating. The film was booed at the Cannes Film Festival for its graphic violence. To obtain an R rating, Scorsese had the colors desaturated, making the brightly colored blood less prominent. In subsequent interviews, Scorsese commented that he was pleased by the color change, and considered it an improvement on the original scene. However, in the special-edition DVD, Michael Chapman, the film's cinematographer, expresses regret about the decision and the fact that no print with the unmuted colors exists anymore, as the originals have since deteriorated.\nThemes and interpretations.\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" has written of the film's ending:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There has been much discussion about the ending, in which we see newspaper clippings about Travis's \"heroism\" of saving Iris, and then Betsy gets into his cab and seems to give him admiration instead of her earlier disgust. Is this a fantasy scene? Did Travis survive the shoot-out? Are we experiencing his dying thoughts? Can the sequence be accepted as literally true? ... I am not sure there can be an answer to these questions. The end sequence plays like music, not drama: It completes the story on an emotional, not a literal, level. We end not on carnage but on redemption, which is the goal of so many of Scorsese's characters. They despise themselves, they live in sin, they occupy mean streets, but they want to be forgiven and admired.\nJames Berardinelli, in his review of the film for \"ReelViews\", argues against the dream or fantasy interpretation, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Scorsese and writer Paul Schrader append the perfect conclusion to \"Taxi Driver\". Steeped in irony, the five-minute epilogue underscores the vagaries of fate. The media builds Bickle into a hero, when, had he been a little quicker drawing his gun against Senator Palantine, he would have been reviled as an assassin. As the film closes, the misanthrope has been embraced as the model citizen\u2014someone who takes on pimps, drug dealers, and mobsters to save one little girl.\nOn the 1990 LaserDisc, DVD and Blu-ray, Scorsese acknowledges several critics' interpretation of the film's ending as Bickle's dying dream. He admits that the last scene of Bickle glancing at an unseen object implies that Bickle will fall into rage and recklessness in the future and that he is like \"a ticking time bomb\".\nWriter Paul Schrader confirms this in his commentary on the 30th-anniversary DVD, stating that Travis \"is not cured by the movie's end\", and that \"he's not going to be a hero next time\". When asked on the website Reddit about the film's ending, Schrader said that it is not to be taken as a dream sequence but that he envisions it as returning to the beginning of the film, as if the last frame \"could be spliced to the first frame, and the movie started all over again\".\nThe film has also been associated with the 1970s wave of vigilante films, but it has also been set apart from them as a more reputable New Hollywood film. While it shares similarities with those films, it is not explicitly a vigilante film and does not belong to that particular wave of cinema.\nThe film can be seen as a spiritual successor to \"The Searchers\", according to Roger Ebert. Both films focus on a solitary war veteran who tries to save a young girl who is resistant to his efforts. The main characters in both movies are portrayed as being disconnected from society and incapable of forming normal relationships with others. Although it is unclear whether Paul Schrader sought inspiration from \"The Searchers\" specifically, the similarities between the two films are evident.\nThe film has been labeled as \"neo-noir\" by some critics, while others have referred to it as an antihero film. When shown on television, the ending credits feature a black screen with a disclaimer mentioning that \"the distinction between hero and villain is sometimes a matter of interpretation or misinterpretation of facts\". This disclaimer was thought to have been added after the attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan in 1981, but, in fact, it had been mentioned in a review of the film as early as 1979. \"LA Weekly\", Letterboxd and Yardbarker list this movie as belonging to the vetsploitation subgenre.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film opened at the Coronet Theater in New York City and grossed a house record of $68,000 in its first week. It went on to gross $28.3 million in the United States, making it the 17th-highest-grossing film of 1976.\nCritical response.\n\"Taxi Driver\" received universal critical acclaim. Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" instantly praised it as one of the greatest films he had ever seen, claiming:\n\"Taxi Driver\" is a hell, from the opening shot of a cab emerging from stygian clouds of steam to the climactic killing scene in which the camera finally looks straight down. Scorsese wanted to look away from Travis's rejection; we almost want to look away from his life. But he's there, all right, and he's suffering.\nWriting for \"The New Yorker,\" Pauline Kael called it the \"fevered story of an outsider in New York, a man who can't find any point of entry into human society\" and describes it as \"more feverish\" than \"Mean Streets.\" Kael goes on to say that no other film \"has ever dramatized urban indifference so powerfully.\"\nOn the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 89% based on 162 reviews and an average rating of 9.1/10. The website's critical consensus reads, \"A must-see film for movie lovers, this Martin Scorsese masterpiece is as hard-hitting as it is compelling, with Robert De Niro at his best.\" Metacritic gives the film a score of 94 out of 100, based on reviews from 23 critics, indicating \"universal\" acclaim\".\n\"Taxi Driver\" was ranked by the American Film Institute as the 52nd-greatest American film on its AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) list, and Bickle was voted the 30th-greatest villain in a poll by the same organization. \"The Village Voice\" ranked \"Taxi Driver\" at number 33 in its Top 250 \"Best Films of the Century\" list in 1999, based on a poll of critics. \"Empire\" also ranked him 18th in its \"The 100 Greatest Movie Characters\" poll, and the film ranks at 17 on the magazine's 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time.\n\"Time Out\" magazine conducted a poll of the 100 greatest movies set in New York City. \"Taxi Driver\" topped the list. Schrader's screenplay was ranked the 43rd-greatest ever written by the Writers Guild of America. \"Taxi Driver\" was also ranked as the 44th best-directed film of all time by the Directors Guild of America. In contrast, Leonard Maltin gave a rating of 2 stars (out of 4) and called it a \"gory, cold-blooded story of a sick man's lurid descent into violence\" that was \"ugly and unredeeming\".\nIn 2012, in a \"Sight &amp; Sound\" poll, Iranian filmmaker Asghar Farhadi selected \"Taxi Driver\" as one of his 10 best films of all time. Game designer Hideo Kojima named it as one of his four favorite films, though he noted his preferences shift over time.\nThe February 2020 issue of \"New York\" magazine lists \"Taxi Driver\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars\".\nLegacy.\n\"Taxi Driver\", \"American Gigolo\", \"Light Sleeper\" and \"The Walker\" make up a series referred to variously as the \"Man in a Room\" or \"Night Worker\" films. Screenwriter Paul Schrader (who directed the latter three films) has said that he considers the central characters of the four films to be one character who has changed as he has aged. The film also influenced the Charles Winkler film \"You Talkin' to Me?\" In addition, a tie-in book was published.\nAlthough Meryl Streep had not aspired to become a film actor, De Niro's performance in \"Taxi Driver\" had a profound impact on her. She said to herself, \"That's the kind of actor I want to be when I grow up.\"\nThe 1994 portrayal of psychopath Albie Kinsella by Robert Carlyle in British television series \"Cracker\" was in part inspired by Travis Bickle, and Carlyle's performance has frequently been compared to De Niro's as a result.\nIn the 2012 film \"Seven Psychopaths\", psychotic Los Angeles actor Billy Bickle (Sam Rockwell) believes himself to be the illegitimate son of Travis Bickle.\nThe vigilante ending inspired Jacques Audiard for his 2015 -winning film \"Dheepan\". The French director based the eponymous Tamil Tiger character on the one played by Robert De Niro to make him a \"real movie hero\". The script of \"Joker\" by Todd Phillips also draws inspiration from \"Taxi Driver\".\n\"You talkin' to me?\".\nDe Niro's \"You talkin' to me?\" segment has become a pop culture mainstay. In 2005, it was ranked number 10 on the American Film Institute's AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes.\nIn the relevant scene, the deranged Bickle is looking at himself in a mirror, imagining a confrontation that would give him a chance to draw his gun:\nYou talkin' to me? You talkin' to me? You talkin' to me? Then who the hell else are you talkin' to? You talkin' to me? Well I'm the only one here. Who the fuck do you think you're talking to?\nWhile Scorsese said that he drew inspiration from John Huston's 1967 movie \"Reflections in a Golden Eye\", from a scene in which Marlon Brando's character is facing the mirror, screenwriter Paul Schrader said that De Niro improvised the dialogue, and that his performance was inspired by \"an underground New York comedian\" whom he had once seen, possibly including his signature line.\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" said of the latter part of the phrase, \"I'm the only one here\", that it was \"the truest line in the film... Travis Bickle's desperate need to make some kind of contact somehow\u2014to share or mimic the effortless social interaction he sees all around him, but does not participate in.\"\nIn his 2009 memoir, saxophonist Clarence Clemons said that De Niro explained the line's origins during the production of \"New York, New York\" (1977), with the actor seeing Bruce Springsteen say the line onstage at a concert. In the 2000 film \"The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle\", De Niro would repeat the monologue with some alterations in the role of the character Fearless Leader.\nHome media.\nThe first \"Collector's Edition\" DVD, which was released in 1999, is packaged as a single-disc edition. It contains special features such as behind-the-scenes footage and several trailers, including one for \"Taxi Driver\".\nIn 2006, a 30th-anniversary two-disc \"Collector's Edition\" DVD was released. The first disc contains the film, two audio commentaries (one by writer Schrader and one by Professor Robert Kolker) and trailers. This edition also includes some of the special features from the earlier release on the second disc, as well as some newly produced documentary material.\nTo commemorate the film's 35th anniversary, a Blu-ray was released on April 5, 2011. It includes the special features from the previous two-disc collector's edition, plus an audio commentary by Scorsese that was released in 1991 for the Criterion Collection, which was previously released on LaserDisc.\nAs part of the Blu-ray production, Sony gave the film a full 4K digital restoration, which includes scanning and cleaning the original negative (removing emulsion dirt and scratches). Colors were matched to director-approved prints under guidance from Scorsese and director of photography Michael Chapman.\nAn all-new lossless DTS-HD Master Audio 5.1 soundtrack was also created from the original stereo recordings by Scorsese's personal sound team. The restored print premiered in February 2011 at the Berlin Film Festival. To promote the Blu-ray release, Sony had the print screened at AMC Theatres across the United States on March 19 and 22.\nPossible sequel and remake.\nIn late January 2005, De Niro and Scorsese announced a sequel. At a 25th-anniversary screening of \"Raging Bull\", De Niro talked about the development of a story featuring an older Travis Bickle. In 2000, De Niro expressed interest in returning to the character in a conversation with Actors Studio host James Lipton. In November 2013, he revealed that Schrader had written a first draft, but both he and Scorsese thought that it was not good enough to proceed.\nSchrader disputed this in a 2024 interview, saying, \"Robert is the one who wanted to do that. He asked Marty and I. [...] So he pressed Marty on it and Marty asked me and I said, 'Marty, that's the worst fucking idea I've ever heard.' He said, 'Yeah, but you tell him. Let's have dinner.' So we had dinner at Bob's restaurant and Bob was talking about it. I said, 'Wow, that's the worst fucking idea I've ever heard. That character dies at the end of that movie or dies shortly thereafter. He's gone. Oh, but maybe there is a version of him that I could do. Maybe he became Ted Kaczynski and maybe he's in a cabin somewhere and just sitting there, making letter bombs. Now, that would be cool. That would be a nice Travis. He doesn't have a cab anymore. He just sits there [laughs] making letter bombs.' But Bob didn't cotton to that idea, either.\"\nIn 2010, \"Variety\" reported rumors that Lars von Trier, Scorsese and De Niro planned to work on a remake of the film with the same restrictions used in \"The Five Obstructions\". However, in 2014, Paul Schrader said that the remake was not being made. He commented, \"It was a terrible idea,\" and \"in Marty's mind, it never was something that should be done\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30001", "revid": "32218334", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30001", "title": "Theory of relativity", "text": "Two interrelated physics theories by Albert Einstein\nThe theory of relativity usually encompasses two interrelated physics theories by Albert Einstein: special relativity and general relativity, proposed and published in 1905 and 1915, respectively. Special relativity applies to all physical phenomena in the absence of gravity. General relativity explains the law of gravitation and its relation to the forces of nature. It applies to the cosmological and astrophysical realm, including astronomy.\nThe theory transformed theoretical physics and astronomy during the 20th century, superseding a 200-year-old theory of mechanics created primarily by Isaac Newton. It introduced concepts including 4-dimensional spacetime as a unified entity of space and time, relativity of simultaneity, kinematic and gravitational time dilation, and length contraction. In the field of physics, relativity improved the science of elementary particles and their fundamental interactions, along with ushering in the nuclear age. With relativity, cosmology and astrophysics predicted extraordinary astronomical phenomena such as neutron stars, black holes, and gravitational waves.\nDevelopment and acceptance.\nAlbert Einstein published the theory of special relativity in 1905, building on many theoretical results and empirical findings obtained by Albert A. Michelson, Hendrik Lorentz, Henri Poincar\u00e9 and others. Max Planck, Hermann Minkowski and others did subsequent work.\nEinstein developed general relativity between 1907 and 1915, with contributions by many others after 1915. The final form of general relativity was published in 1916.\nThe term \"theory of relativity\" was based on the expression \"relative theory\" () used in 1906 by Planck, who emphasized how the theory uses the principle of relativity. In the discussion section of the same paper, Alfred Bucherer used for the first time the expression \"theory of relativity\" ().\nBy the 1920s, the physics community understood and accepted special relativity. It rapidly became a significant and necessary tool for theorists and experimentalists in the new fields of atomic physics, nuclear physics, and quantum mechanics.\nBy comparison, general relativity did not appear to be as useful, beyond making minor corrections to predictions of Newtonian gravitation theory. It seemed to offer little potential for experimental test, as most of its assertions were on an astronomical scale. Its mathematics seemed difficult and fully understandable only by a small number of people. Around 1960, general relativity became central to physics and astronomy. New mathematical techniques to apply to general relativity streamlined calculations and made its concepts more easily visualized. As astronomical phenomena were discovered, such as quasars (1963), the 3-kelvin microwave background radiation (1965), pulsars (1967), and the first black hole candidates (1981), the theory explained their attributes, and measurement of them further confirmed the theory.\nSpecial relativity.\nSpecial relativity is a theory of the structure of spacetime. It was introduced in Einstein's 1905 paper \"On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies\" (for the contributions of many other physicists and mathematicians, see History of special relativity). Special relativity is based on two postulates which are contradictory in classical mechanics:\nThe resultant theory copes with experiment better than classical mechanics. For instance, postulate 2 explains the results of the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment. Moreover, the theory has many surprising and counterintuitive consequences. Some of these are:\nThe defining feature of special relativity is the replacement of the Galilean transformations of classical mechanics by the Lorentz transformations. (See Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism.)\nGeneral relativity.\nGeneral relativity is a theory of gravitation developed by Einstein in the years 1907\u20131915. The development of general relativity began with the equivalence principle, under which the states of accelerated motion and being at rest in a gravitational field (for example, when standing on the surface of the Earth) are physically identical. The upshot of this is that free fall is inertial motion: an object in free fall is falling because that is how objects move when there is no force being exerted on them, instead of this being due to the force of gravity as is the case in classical mechanics. This is incompatible with classical mechanics and special relativity because in those theories inertially moving objects cannot accelerate with respect to each other, but objects in free fall do so. To resolve this difficulty Einstein first proposed that spacetime is curved. Einstein discussed his idea with mathematician Marcel Grossmann and they concluded that general relativity could be formulated in the context of Riemannian geometry which had been developed in the 1800s.\nIn 1915, he devised the Einstein field equations which relate the curvature of spacetime with the mass, energy, and any momentum within it.\nSome of the consequences of general relativity are:\nTechnically, general relativity is a theory of gravitation whose defining feature is its use of the Einstein field equations. The solutions of the field equations are metric tensors which define the topology of the spacetime and how objects move inertially.\nExperimental evidence.\nEinstein explained that the theory of relativity falls under a category of scientific frameworks known as \"principle-theories\"\u2014theories that start not from speculative constructs or imagined mechanisms, but from well-established empirical facts and observed regularities in nature. Unlike constructive theories, which attempt to build models of phenomena from assumed underlying processes, principle-theories, such as relativity, adopt an analytic approach: they begin with experimentally verified principles and work deductively to uncover the logical consequences and constraints that any physical process must obey. By observing natural processes, we understand their general characteristics, devise mathematical models to describe what we observed, and by analytical means we deduce the necessary conditions that have to be satisfied. Measurement of separate events must satisfy these conditions and match the theory's conclusions.\nTests of special relativity.\nRelativity is a falsifiable theory: It makes predictions that can be tested by experiment. In the case of special relativity, these include the principle of relativity, the constancy of the speed of light, and time dilation. The predictions of special relativity have been confirmed in numerous tests since Einstein published his paper in 1905, but three experiments conducted between 1881 and 1938 were critical to its validation. These are the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment, the Kennedy\u2013Thorndike experiment, and the Ives\u2013Stilwell experiment. Einstein derived the Lorentz transformations from first principles in 1905, but these three experiments allow the transformations to be induced from experimental evidence.\nMaxwell's equations\u2014the foundation of classical electromagnetism\u2014describe light as a wave that moves with a characteristic velocity. The modern view is that light needs no medium of transmission, but Maxwell and his contemporaries were convinced that light waves were propagated in a medium, analogous to sound propagating in air, and ripples propagating on the surface of a pond. This hypothetical medium was called the luminiferous aether, at rest relative to the \"fixed stars\" and through which the Earth moves. Fresnel's partial ether dragging hypothesis ruled out the measurement of first-order (v/c) effects, and although observations of second-order effects (v2/c2) were possible in principle, Maxwell thought they were too small to be detected with then-current technology.\nThe Michelson\u2013Morley experiment was designed to detect second-order effects of the \"aether wind\"\u2014the motion of the aether relative to the Earth. Michelson designed an instrument called the Michelson interferometer to accomplish this. The apparatus was sufficiently accurate to detect the expected effects, but he obtained a null result when the first experiment was conducted in 1881, and again in 1887. Although the failure to detect an aether wind was a disappointment, the results were accepted by the scientific community. In an attempt to salvage the aether paradigm, FitzGerald and Lorentz independently created an \"ad hoc\" hypothesis in which the length of material bodies changes according to their motion through the aether. This was the origin of FitzGerald\u2013Lorentz contraction, and their hypothesis had no theoretical basis. The interpretation of the null result of the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment is that the round-trip travel time for light is isotropic (independent of direction), but the result alone is not enough to discount the theory of the aether or validate the predictions of special relativity.\nWhile the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment showed that the velocity of light is isotropic, it said nothing about how the magnitude of the velocity changed (if at all) in different inertial frames. The Kennedy\u2013Thorndike experiment was designed to do that, and was first performed in 1932 by Roy Kennedy and Edward Thorndike. They obtained a null result, and concluded that \"there is no effect ... unless the velocity of the solar system in space is no more than about half that of the earth in its orbit\". That possibility was thought to be too coincidental to provide an acceptable explanation, so from the null result of their experiment it was concluded that the round-trip time for light is the same in all inertial reference frames.\nThe Ives\u2013Stilwell experiment was carried out by Herbert Ives and G.R. Stilwell first in 1938 and with better accuracy in 1941. It was designed to test the transverse Doppler effect\u00a0\u2013 the redshift of light from a moving source in a direction perpendicular to its velocity\u2014which had been predicted by Einstein in 1905. The strategy was to compare observed Doppler shifts with what was predicted by classical theory, and look for a Lorentz factor correction. Such a correction was observed, from which was concluded that the frequency of a moving atomic clock is altered according to special relativity.\nThose classic experiments have been repeated many times with increased precision. Other experiments include, for instance, relativistic energy and momentum increase at high velocities, experimental testing of time dilation, and modern searches for Lorentz violations.\nTests of general relativity.\nGeneral relativity has also been confirmed many times, the classic experiments being the perihelion precession of Mercury's orbit, the deflection of light by the Sun, and the gravitational redshift of light. Other tests confirmed the equivalence principle and frame dragging.\nModern applications.\nFar from being simply of theoretical interest, relativistic effects are important practical engineering concerns. Satellite-based measurement needs to take into account relativistic effects, as each satellite is in motion relative to an Earth-bound user, and is thus in a different frame of reference under the theory of relativity. Global positioning systems such as GPS, GLONASS, and Galileo, must account for all of the relativistic effects in order to work with precision, such as the consequences of the Earth's gravitational field. This is also the case in the high-precision measurement of time. Instruments ranging from electron microscopes to particle accelerators would not work if relativistic considerations were omitted.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30003", "revid": "43254542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30003", "title": "Telephone", "text": "Telecommunications device\nA telephone, commonly shortened to phone, is a telecommunications device that enables two or more users to conduct a conversation when they are too far apart to be easily heard directly. A telephone converts sound, typically and most efficiently the human voice, into electronic signals that are transmitted via cables and other communication channels to another telephone which reproduces the sound to the receiving user. The term is derived from and (, \"voice\"), together meaning \"distant voice\".\nIn 1876, Alexander Graham Bell was the first to be granted a United States patent for a device that produced clearly intelligible replication of the human voice at a second device. This instrument was further developed by many others, and became rapidly indispensable in business, government, and in households.\nThe essential elements of a telephone are a microphone (\"transmitter\") to speak into and an earphone (\"receiver\") which reproduces the voice at a distant location. The receiver and transmitter are usually built into a handset which is held up to the ear and mouth during conversation. The transmitter converts the sound waves to electrical signals which are sent through the telecommunications system to the receiving telephone, which converts the signals into audible sound in the receiver or sometimes a loudspeaker. Telephones permit transmission in both directions simultaneously.\nMost telephones also contain an alerting feature, such as a \"ringer\" or a visual indicator, to announce an incoming telephone call. Telephone calls are initiated most commonly with a keypad or dial, affixed to the telephone, to enter a telephone number, which is the address of the call recipient's telephone in the telecommunications system, but other methods existed in the early history of the telephone.\nThe first telephones were directly connected to each other from one customer's office or residence to another customer's location. Being impractical beyond just a few customers, these systems were quickly replaced by manually operated centrally located switchboards. These exchanges were soon connected together, eventually forming an automated, worldwide public switched telephone network. For greater mobility, various radio systems were developed in the mid-20th century for transmission between mobile stations on ships and in automobiles.\nHandheld mobile phones were introduced for personal service starting in 1973. In later decades, the analog cellular system evolved into digital networks with greater capability and lower cost. Convergence in communication services has provided a broad spectrum of capabilities in cell phones, including mobile computing, giving rise to the smartphone, the dominant type of telephone in the world today.\nModern telephones exist in various forms and are implemented through different systems, including fixed-line, cellular, satellite, and Internet-based devices, all of which are integrated into the public switched telephone network (PSTN). This interconnected system allows any telephone, regardless of its underlying technology or geographic location, to reach another through a unique telephone number. While mobile and landline services are fully integrated into the global telecommunication network, some Internet-based services, such as VoIP, may not always be directly connected to the PSTN, though they still allow communication across different systems when a connection is made.\nEarly history.\nBefore the development of the electric telephone, the term \"telephone\" was applied to other inventions, and not all early researchers of the electrical device used the term. Perhaps the earliest use of the word for a communications system was the \"telephon\" created by Gottfried Huth in 1796. Huth proposed an alternative to the optical telegraph of Claude Chappe in which the operators in the signaling towers would shout to each other by means of what he called \"speaking tubes\", but would now be called giant megaphones. A communication device for sailing vessels, called \"telephone\", was invented by Captain John Taylor in 1844. This instrument used four air horns to communicate with vessels in foggy weather.\nJohann Philipp Reis used the term in reference to his invention, commonly known as the Reis telephone, in c. 1860. His device appears to be the first device based on the conversion of sound into electrical impulses.\nThe term \"telephone\" was adopted into the vocabulary of many languages. It is derived from the , \"t\u0113le\", \"far\" and \u03c6\u03c9\u03bd\u03ae, \"ph\u014dn\u0113\", \"voice\", together meaning \"distant voice\".\nCredit for the invention of the electric telephone is frequently disputed. As with other influential inventions such as radio, television, the light bulb, and the computer, several inventors pioneered experimental work on \"voice transmission over a wire\" and improved on each other's ideas. New controversies over the issue still arise from time to time. Charles Bourseul, Antonio Meucci, Johann Philipp Reis, Alexander Graham Bell, and Elisha Gray, amongst others, have all been credited with the invention of the telephone.\nAlexander Graham Bell was the first to be awarded a patent for the electric telephone by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) in March 1876. Before Bell's patent, the telephone transmitted sound in a way that was similar to the telegraph. This method used vibrations and circuits to send electrical pulses, but was missing key features. Bell found that this method produced a sound through intermittent currents, but in order for the telephone to work, a fluctuating current reproduced sounds the best. The fluctuating currents became the basis for the working telephone, creating Bell's patent. That first patent by Bell was the \"master patent\" of the telephone, from which other patents for electric telephone devices and features flowed.\nIn 1876, shortly after Bell's patent application, Hungarian engineer Tivadar Pusk\u00e1s proposed the telephone switch, which allowed for the formation of telephone exchanges, and eventually networks.\nIn the United Kingdom, \"the blower\" is used as a slang term for a telephone. The term came from navy slang for a speaking tube. In the U.S., a somewhat dated slang term refers to the telephone as \"the horn,\" as in \"I couldn't get him on the horn,\" or \"I'll be off the horn in a moment.\"\nEarly commercial instruments.\nEarly telephones were technically diverse. Some used a water microphone, some had a metal diaphragm that induced current in an electromagnet wound around a permanent magnet, and some were dynamic \u2013 their diaphragm vibrated a coil of wire in the field of a permanent magnet or the coil vibrated the diaphragm. The sound-powered dynamic variants survived in small numbers through the 20th century in military and maritime applications, where its ability to create its own electrical power was crucial. Most, however, used the Edison/Berliner carbon transmitter, which was much louder than the other kinds, even though it required an induction coil which was an impedance matching transformer to make it compatible with the impedance of the line. The Edison patents kept the Bell monopoly viable into the 20th century, by which time the network was more important than the instrument.\nEarly telephones were locally powered, using either a dynamic transmitter or by the powering of a transmitter with a local battery. One of the jobs of outside plant personnel was to visit each telephone periodically to inspect the battery. During the 20th century, telephones powered from the telephone exchange over the same wires that carried the voice signals became common.\nEarly telephones used a single wire for the subscriber's line, with ground return used to complete the circuit (as used in telegraphs). The earliest dynamic telephones also had only one port opening for sound, with the user alternately listening and speaking (or rather, shouting) into the same hole. Sometimes the instruments were operated in pairs at each end, making conversation more convenient but also more expensive.\nAt first, the benefits of a telephone exchange were not exploited. Instead, telephones were leased in pairs to a subscriber, who had to arrange for a telegraph contractor to construct a line between them, for example, between a home and a shop. Users who wanted the ability to speak to several different locations would need to obtain and set up three or four pairs of telephones. Western Union, already using telegraph exchanges, quickly extended the principle to its telephones in New York City and San Francisco, and Bell was not slow in appreciating the potential.\nSignalling began in an appropriately primitive manner. The user alerted the other end, or the exchange operator, by whistling into the transmitter. Exchange operation soon resulted in telephones being equipped with a bell in a ringer box, first operated over a second wire, and later over the same wire, but with a condenser (capacitor) in series with the bell coil to allow the AC ringer signal through while still blocking DC (keeping the phone \"on hook\"). Telephones connected to the earliest Strowger switch automatic exchanges had seven wires, one for the knife switch, one for each telegraph key, one for the bell, one for the push-button and two for speaking. Large wall telephones in the early 20th century usually incorporated the bell, and separate bell boxes for desk phones dwindled away in the middle of the century.\nRural and other telephones that were not on a common battery exchange had a magneto hand-cranked generator to produce a high voltage alternating signal to ring the bells of other telephones on the line and to alert the operator. Some local farming communities that were not connected to the main networks set up barbed wire telephone lines that exploited the existing system of field fences to transmit the signal.\nIn the 1890s a new smaller style of telephone was introduced, packaged in three parts. The transmitter stood on a stand, known as a \"candlestick\" for its shape. When not in use, the receiver hung on a hook with a switch in it, known as a \"switchhook\". Previous telephones required the user to operate a separate switch to connect either the voice or the bell. With the new kind, the user was less likely to leave the phone \"off the hook\". In phones connected to magneto exchanges, the bell, induction coil, battery and magneto were in a separate bell box or \"ringer box\". In phones connected to common battery exchanges, the ringer box was installed under a desk, or other out-of-the-way place, since it did not need a battery or magneto.\nCradle designs were also used at this time, having a handle with the receiver and transmitter attached, now called a handset, separate from the cradle base that housed the magneto crank and other parts. They were larger than the \"candlestick\" and more popular.\nDisadvantages of single-wire operation such as crosstalk and hum from nearby AC power wires had already led to the use of twisted pairs and, for long-distance telephones, four-wire circuits. Users at the beginning of the 20th century did not place long-distance calls from their own telephones but made an appointment and were connected with the assistance of a telephone operator.\nWhat turned out to be the most popular and longest-lasting physical style of telephone was introduced in the early 20th century, including Bell's 202-type desk set. A carbon granule transmitter and electromagnetic receiver were united in a single molded plastic handle, which when not in use was secured in a cradle in the base unit. The circuit diagram of the model 202 shows the direct connection of the transmitter to the line, while the receiver was inductively coupled. In local battery configurations, when the local loop was too long to provide sufficient current from the exchange, the transmitter was powered by a local battery and inductively coupled, while the receiver was included in the local loop. The coupling transformer and the ringer were mounted in a separate enclosure, called the subscriber set. The dial switch in the base interrupted the line current by repeatedly but very briefly disconnecting the line one to ten times for each digit, and the hook switch (in the center of the circuit diagram) disconnected the line and the transmitter battery while the handset was on the cradle.\nIn the 1930s, telephone sets were developed that combined the bell and induction coil with the desk set, obviating a separate ringer box. The rotary dial becoming commonplace in the 1930s in many areas enabled customer-dialed service, but some magneto systems remained even into the 1960s. The village of Bryant Pond, Maine is believed to be the last telephone exchange in the U.S. to convert from magneto to direct-dial service on October 11, 1983. After World War II, the telephone networks saw rapid expansion and more efficient telephone sets, such as the model 500 telephone in the United States, were developed that permitted larger local networks centered around central offices. A breakthrough new technology was the introduction of Touch-Tone signaling using push-button telephones by American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company (AT&amp;T) in 1963.\nSound-powered telephones.\nA sound-powered telephone is a telephone which transmits voice communication by wire, powered by the energy of the sound waves of the operator speaking.\nPrinciple of operation.\nA moving-coil microphone converts the sound waves into an electrical signal, which is then converted back into sound waves at the receiver's end. Similar to early regular landline telephones, operators of sound-powered telephones generally alert the receiver of a call using a hand-cranked generator (magneto), which generates an electrical current which activates a buzzer at the receiver's end, sometimes known as a howler or growler. Some telephone systems can use external electrical power to operate ringers or amplifiers, but will revert to sound-powered communications in the event of failure of the external power supply. Stations are usually connected via twisted pair wires to reduce electrical interference, and can be positioned at considerable distances from each other in the order of several kilometers. Using 1mm core diameter twisted-pair wiring, some sound-powered telephone systems can operate a pair of handsets positioned up to 48\u00a0km (30 miles) apart.\nApplications.\nBecause sound-powered telephones do not require external electrical power, they are used where reliable communications are vital even in event of loss of power. They are often used for communications in airports, railways and public utilities, mining, ski slopes, bridges, sporting arenas and shipyards. Because they operate at low voltages, they are suitable for use in situations where there is a risk of explosions or fire, such as chemical plants, oil and gas works, arsenals, mines and quarries. They are frequently used aboard ships, especially naval vessels, and in land military communications.\nAboard naval vessels, sound-powered telephones generally have auxiliary wiring circuits routed through the ship, to reduce the likelihood that all circuits will be rendered inoperable by battle damage.\nDigital telephones and voice over IP.\nThe invention of the transistor in 1947 dramatically changed the technology used in telephone systems and in the long-distance transmission networks over the next several decades. With the development of stored program control and MOS integrated circuits for electronic switching systems, and new transmission technologies such as pulse-code modulation (PCM), telephony gradually evolved towards digital telephony, which improved the capacity, quality, and cost of the network.\nIntegrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) was launched in the 1980's, providing businesses and consumers with access to digital telephony services such as data, voice, video, and fax services.\nThe development of digital data communications methods made it possible to digitize voice and transmit it as real-time data across computer networks and the Internet, giving rise to the field of Internet Protocol (IP) telephony, also known as voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). VoIP has proven to be a disruptive technology that is rapidly replacing traditional telephone network infrastructure.\nBy January 2005, up to 10% of telephone subscribers in Japan and South Korea had switched to this digital telephone service. A January 2005 Newsweek article suggested that Internet telephony may be \"the next big thing.\" The technology has spawned a new industry comprising many VoIP companies that offer services to consumers and businesses. The reported global VoIP market in October 2021 was $85.2 billion with a projection of $102.5 billion by 2026.\nIP telephony uses high-bandwidth Internet connections and specialized customer premises equipment to transmit telephone calls via the Internet, or any modern private data network. The customer equipment may be an analog telephone adapter (ATA) which translates the signals of a conventional analog telephone; an IP Phone, a dedicated standalone device; or a computer softphone application, utilizing the microphone and headset devices of a personal computer or smartphone.\nIn recent years, VoIP technology has evolved to integrate with mobile networks, including Voice over LTE (VoLTE) and Voice over 5G (Vo5G), enabling seamless voice communication over mobile data networks. These advancements have made VoIP not only a primary method for Internet-based communication but also a central feature of modern mobile communication infrastructure.\nWhile traditional analog telephones are typically powered from the central office through the telephone line, digital telephones require a local power supply. Internet-based digital service also requires special provisions to provide the service location to the emergency services when an emergency telephone number is called.\nCordless telephones.\nA cordless telephone or portable telephone consists of a base station unit and one or more portable cordless handsets. The base station connects to a telephone line, or provides service by voice over IP (VOIP). The handset communicates with the base station via radio frequency signals. A handset's operational range is limited, usually to within the same building or within a short distance from the base station.\nBase station.\nBase stations include a radio transceiver which enables full-duplex, outgoing and incoming signals and speech with the handsets. The base station often includes a microphone, audio amplifier, and a loudspeaker to enable hands-free speakerphone conversations, without needing to use a handset. The base station may also have a numeric keypad for dialing, and a display for caller ID. In addition, answering machine function may be built in.\nThe cordless handset contains a rechargeable battery, which the base station recharges when the handset rests in its cradle. Muilt-handset systems generally also have additional charging stands. A cordless telephone typically requires a constant electricity supply to power the base station and charger units by means of a DC transformer which plugs into a wall AC power outlet.\nMobile phones.\nA mobile phone or cellphone or hand phone is a handheld telephone which connects via radio transmissions to a cellular telephone network. The cellular network consists of a network of ground based transmitter/receiver stations with antennas \u2013 which are usually located on towers or on buildings \u2013 and infrastructure connecting to the global telecommunications network. Analog cellular networks first appeared in 1979, followed by the introduction of digital cellular networks in the early 1990s, marking the beginning of the GSM standard. Over time, these networks evolved, with each new generation (2G, 3G, 4G, and beyond) offering improved data transmission capabilities and more advanced features for mobile communication.\nMobile phones require a SIM card to be inserted into the phone. The SIM card is a small PVC card containing a small integrated circuit which stores the user's international mobile subscriber identity (IMSI) number and its related key, which are used to identify and authenticate subscribers to the cellular network.\nMobile phones generally incorporate an LCD or OLED display, with some types, such as smartphones, having touch screens. Since the 1990s, mobile phones have gained other features which are not directly related to their primary function as telephones. These include text messaging, calendars, alarm clocks, personal schedulers, cameras, music players, games and later, internet access and smartphone functionality. Nearly all mobile phones have the ability to send text messages to other users via the SMS (Short Message Service) protocol. The multimedia messaging service (MMS) protocol enables users to send and receive multimedia content, such as photos, audio files and video files. As their functionality has increased over the years, many types of mobile phone, notably smartphones, require an operating system to run. Popular mobile phone operating systems in the past have included Symbian, Palm OS, BlackBerry OS and mobile phone versions of Windows. As of 2022, the most used operating systems are Google's Android and Apple's iOS.\nBefore the era of smartphones, mobile phones were generally manufactured by companies specializing in telecommunications equipment, such as Nokia, Motorola, and Ericsson. Since the advent of smartphones, mobile phone manufacturers have also included consumer electronics companies, such as Apple, Samsung and Xiaomi.\nSmartphones.\nAs of 2022, most mobile phones are smartphones, being a combination of a mobile phone and a personal computing device in the same unit. Most smartphones are primarily operated using a graphical user interface and a touch screen. Many phones have a secondary voice user interface, such as Siri on Apple iPhones, which can operate many of the device's functions, as well as enabling users to use spoken commands to interact with the internet. Typically alphanumeric text input is accomplished via an on-screen virtual keyboard, although some smartphones have a small physical keyboard. Smartphones offer the ability to access internet data through the cellular network and via wi-fi, and usually allow direct connectivity to other devices via Bluetooth or a wired interface, such as USB or Lightning connectors.\nSmartphones, being able to run apps, have vastly expanded functionality compared to previous mobile phones. Having internet access and built in cameras, smartphones have made video calling readily accessible via IP connections. Smartphones also have access to a large number of web services and web apps, giving them functionality similar to traditional computers, although smartphones are often limited by their relatively small screen size and the size of their keyboards. Typically, smartphones feature such tools as cameras, media players, web browsers, email clients, interactive maps, satellite navigation and a variety of sensors, such as a compass, accelerometers and GPS receivers. In addition to voice calls, smartphone users commonly communicate using a wide variety of messaging formats, including SMS, MMS, email, and various proprietary messaging services, such as iMessage and various social media platforms.\nMobile phone usage.\nIn 2002, only 10% of the world's population used mobile phones and by 2005 that percentage had risen to 46%. By the end of 2009, there were a total of nearly 6 billion mobile and fixed-line telephone subscribers worldwide. This included 1.26 billion fixed-line subscribers and 4.6 billion mobile subscribers.\nSatellite phones.\nA satellite telephone, or satphone, is a type of mobile phone that connects to other phones or the telephone network by radio link through satellites orbiting the Earth instead of terrestrial cell sites, as cellphones do. Therefore, they can work in most geographic locations on the Earth's surface, as long as open sky and the line-of-sight between the phone and the satellite is provided. Depending on the architecture of a particular system, coverage may include the entire Earth or only specific regions. Satellite phones provide similar functionality to terrestrial mobile telephones; voice calling, text messaging, and low-bandwidth Internet access are supported through most systems. The advantage of a satellite phone is that it can be used in such regions where local terrestrial communication infrastructures, such as landline and cellular networks, are not available.\nSatellite phones are popular on expeditions into remote locations, hunting, fishing, maritime sector, humanitarian missions, business trips, and mining in hard-to-reach areas, where there is no reliable cellular service. Satellite telephones rarely get disrupted by natural disasters on Earth or human actions such as war, so they have proven to be dependable communication tools in emergency situations, when the local communications system can be compromised.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30004", "revid": "49718617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30004", "title": "Telia Company", "text": "Swedish multinational telecommunication provider\nTelia Company AB is a Swedish multinational telecommunications company and mobile network operator present in Sweden, Finland, Norway, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.\nTelia used to own TV4 Media which includes TV4 in Sweden, MTV Oy in Finland, and C More Entertainment after acquiring them in 2019. Telia sold TV4 Media to Schibsted in 2025 for 6.55 Million Kronor.\nThe company is headquartered in Solna and its stock is traded on the Stockholm Stock Exchange and on the Helsinki Stock Exchange.\nThe company has been linked to corruption scandals in its dealings with the regimes in Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan. Telia's bribery scandal in relation to the Ilham Aliyev regime in Azerbaijan has been described as \"possibly the largest bribery in Swedish history.\"\nHistory.\nTelia Company in its current form was first established as TeliaSonera, as the result of a 2002 merger between the Swedish and Finnish telecommunications companies, Telia and Sonera. This merger followed three years after Telia's failed merger attempt with Norwegian telecommunications company Telenor, now its chief competitor in the Nordic countries.\nBefore privatisation, Telia was a state telephone monopoly. Sonera, on the other hand, had a monopoly only on trunk network calls, while most (c. 75%) of local telecommunication was provided by telephone cooperatives. The separate brands Telia and Sonera continued to be used in the Swedish and Finnish markets respectively until March 2017, when Sonera was rebranded to Telia. Of the stock, 39.5% (31 March 2020) is owned by the Swedish government, and the rest by institutions, companies, and private investors worldwide. The Finnish government (through Solidium) divested from Telia Company in February 2018, when it sold its remaining 3.2% stake.\nTelia.\nThe Swedish Kungl. Telegrafverket (literally: \"Royal Telegraph Agency\") was founded in 1853, when the first electric telegraph line was established between Stockholm and Uppsala. Allm\u00e4nna Telefon found an equipment supplier in Lars Magnus Ericsson. In this early competition, Telegrafverket with its brand Rikstelefon was a latecomer. However, by securing a national monopoly on long-distance telephone lines, it was able with time to control and take over the local networks of quickly growing private telephone companies.\nA de facto telephone monopoly position was reached around 1920, and never needed legal sanction. In 1953 the name was modernised to Televerket. On 1 July 1992, this huge government agency's regulating functions was split off into the Swedish Post and Telecom Authority (, PTS), with similar functions as the Federal Communications Commission of the United States. The operation of the state radio and TV broadcast network was spun off into a company named Teracom. On 1 July 1993, the remaining telephone and mobile network operator was transformed into a government-owned shareholding company, named Telia AB. At the height of the dot-com bubble, on 13 June 2000, close to one-third of Telia's shares were introduced on the Stockholm Stock Exchange.\nIn the 1980s, Televerket was a pioneering mobile network operator with the NMT system, followed in the 1990s by GSM. Private competition in analogue mobile phone systems had already broken the telephone monopoly, and the growing internet allowed more opportunities for competitors. The most important of Telia's Swedish competitors in these areas has been Tele2. When PTS awarded four licenses for the 3rd generation mobile networks in December 2000, Telia was not among the winners, but later established an agreement to build a 3G network jointly with Tele2 using Tele2's licence. SUNAB was founded as the jointly owned company that would in turn build, own and operate the joint 3G network. In December 2018, Telia in cooperation with Ericsson launched Sweden's first 5G network at KTH Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm.\nSonera.\nThe history of Sonera dates back to 1917, when Suomen Lenn\u00e4tinlaitos (Finnish Telegraph Agency) was founded. In 1927, the telegraph agency was merged with the Finnish Post to form a new agency, Post and Telegraph Agency. This agency governed all long distance and international calls until 1994, when competitors were allowed to enter the Finnish market. In the same year, the Post and Telegraph Agency was divided to form two companies, Suomen Posti Oy (Finnish Post), and Telecom Finland Oy. Telecom Finland changed its name to Sonera in 1998, and went on to merge with Telia in 2002, forming TeliaSonera.\nAfter the merger of Telia and Sonera.\nDuring the run-up to the 2006 general election the Swedish liberal-conservative Alliance stated as one of its policy aims to reduce government ownership in commercial entities, and specifically to sell its stake in TeliaSonera. The Alliance went on to win the election and formed a coalition government. After the merger with Sonera, the Swedish State held 46% of the shares and with parliamentary approval the government sold down to 37.3%. \nOn 16 March 2011, the Alliance administration lost a parliamentary vote on sale of publicly owned commercial entities, including TeliaSonera, when a coalition of all opposition parties \u2014 the Left Party, Social Democratic Party, Green Party and Sweden Democrats \u2014 united against the Alliance.\nIn the beginning of 2008, TeliaSonera announced measures to save nearly 500 million euros which would include 2,900 redundancies: 2,000 from Sweden and 900 from Finland. France T\u00e9l\u00e9com (now Orange S.A.) proposed a 33 billion euro acquisition offer for TeliaSonera on 5 June 2008, which was promptly rejected by the company's board.\nFurther divestment of TeliaSonera was presented to the parliament after the 2010 election, at which the Alliance lost its majority but stayed on as a minority administration.\nOn 12 April 2016, the company changed its name to Telia Company, dropping the Sonera part, rebranding the company to aid recovery after bribery and money laundering allegations.\nOn 20 July 2018, Telia Company announced the acquisition proposal of Bonnier Broadcasting Group from Bonnier Group for 9.2 billion SEK (roughly $1 billion), thus owning TV4 AB (commercial television broadcaster in Sweden), MTV Oy (commercial television broadcaster in Finland) and C More Entertainment (pan-Nordic operator of premium television channels). The European Commission approved the deal on 12 November 2019 with certain conditions, and the acquisition was completed on 2 December that year.\nAhead of the completion of Bonnier Broadcasting deal, the Telia Company nomination committee proposed on 20 October 2019, that Marie Ehrling be succeeded by Lars-Johan Jarnheimer, the former CEO of Tele2 until 2008, and then-chair of Egmont Media, as the company's board chair. The proposal was approved on 26 November that year, following the extraordinary general meeting. Meanwhile, on 24 October, Telia Company appointed Allison Kirkby, the former CEO of Tele2 from 2015 until 2018 and then went on to become the president and CEO of TDC, as the company's new president and CEO. Kirkby assumed office on 4 May 2020.\nOn 6 October 2020, Telia Company agreed to sell its Internet backbone unit Telia Carrier to Polhem Infra for roughly US$1 billion. The sale was completed on 1 June 2021.\nOn 25 February 2025, Telia announced that it was selling its media division to Schibsted Media in order to focus on its consumer division, the sale is scheduled to be completed by Q3 2025, pending regulatory approval.\nOperations.\nTelia Company is the largest Nordic and Baltic fixed-voice, broadband, and mobile operator by revenue and customer base. It also owns a TV-media operation which includes TV4 in Sweden and MTV in Finland as well as C More.\nTelia mobile telephone business in Europe:\nEstonia.\nTelia Company owns 100% of Eesti Telekom. Eesti Telekom is one of the largest telecommunication companies in the Baltic countries and the largest telecommunications company in Estonia. TeliaSonera and the Estonian government reached a deal over the sale of Eesti Telekom in September 2009. On 20 January 2016, Eesti Telekom switched its name to Telia Eesti.\nFinland.\nTelia Finland is the second largest mobile operator in Finland and also one of the biggest providers of landline telephone and internet services. \nBefore the rebranding on 23 March 2017, Telia was known in Finland under the brands of Sonera and Tele Finland. In September 1999, Sonera became the world's first mobile operator to launch mobile Internet services via Wireless Application Protocol (WAP).\nSince 2014, Telia Finland and DNA Oyj have jointly deployed a shared 4G LTE network using the 800\u00a0MHz (LTE Band 20) \"digital dividend\" band in remote Northern and Eastern Finland under the \"Suomen Yhteisverkko Oy\" joint venture. Telia Finland owns 51% of \"Suomen Yhteisverkko Oy\".\nLatvia.\nTelia Company owns 49% of LMT (24.5% as Telia Company AB and 24.5% as Sonera Holding B.V.) and 49% of Tet, which owns 23% of LMT. Telia Latvija, a business cable operator and data centre operator, was sold to Tet.\nOn July 15, 2025, Government of Latvia announced that they plan to buy out Telia Company's shares of both LMT and Tet with help from Latvenergo and Latvian State Radio and Television Centre (LVRTC), to make both companies state-owned. Telia confirmed the sale on July 17 by signing a memorandum of understanding with Latvia, Latvenergo and LVRTC, with the transaction expected to be completed in the first half of 2026.\nLithuania.\nTeliaSonera owns 88.15% of Telia Lietuva (Teo LT until 2017), the largest landline phone operator in Lithuania, which recently purchased Omnitel, one of largest mobile network operators there. It was previously owned by TeliaSonera group.\nIn October 2015, TeliaSonera announced the merger of Teo and Omnitel, through the acquisition of Omnitel by Teo.\nOn 1 February 2017, Omnitel and Teo merged under the name of \"Telia Lietuva\".\nNorway.\nIn Norway, Telia first entered after the de-regulation in 1998 as a virtual supplier of fixed telephone and Internet services. This was sold to Enitel during the merger attempt with Telenor, but Telia re-entered in 2000 with the purchase of one of the two mobile network operators, NetCom. In 2006 it also bought the virtual mobile provider Chess Communication.\nOn 1 March 2016, NetCom changed its name to Telia Norge.\nIn July 2018, Telia acquired Get AS and TDC Norway for $2.6 billion.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, Telia Company operates under the consumer brands Telia and its lower-cost flanker brands Halebop and Fello. On the business side, Skanova Access and Cygate are also used. Telia Sverige is currently the largest mobile phone operator in Sweden, both in terms of revenue and customer base. Main competitors include Tele2, Telenor, 3, Allente and Boxer.\nFormer operations.\nAfghanistan.\nIn July 2020, Telia Company announced it has divested its 12.25% share in the Afghan Roshan (telco) cellphone network.\nAzerbaijan.\nOn 15 May 2010, after Azercell went through rebranding, it joined the network of TeliaSonera. On 5 March 2018, Telia confirmed they have sold their stake in Azercell.\nCambodia.\nTeliaSonera purchased a majority stake in Star-Cell in 2008 which was the number four player in the market at that time. By 2010 it exited Cambodia after a $100 million write down and collapse in subscriber numbers. It was subsequently taken over by a more dominant competitor Smart Mobile.\nDenmark.\nIn Denmark, Telia Company operated a mobile operator (Telia), a mobile virtual network operator (Call Me), and a broadband supplier (Telia). The company started in 1995, the result of a merger between Telia Stofa and TeliaSonera. In 2014, Telia and Telenor announced their plan to merge and create a 50/50 joint-venture, but this fell through in 2015 after failed negotiations with the EU regulators. The two companies do operate a 50/50 joint-venture for their network infrastructure operations and spectrum holdings called \"TT-Netv\u00e6rket (\"TT-Network\")\".\nTelia Broadband was relaunched in 2008 because of the need for TeliaSonera to offer both mobile and broadband in all of their home markets (Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Finland). Telia Broadband was the first operator to launch digital TV with their broadband at no extra cost. Stofa is mainly a cable TV operator, but also supplies broadband via the cable TV network.\nTelia Company sold its operations and network assets in Denmark to Norlys a.m.b.a. (Norlys) at an enterprise value of DKK 6.25 billion, on a cash and debt-free basis on 2 April 2024.\nGeorgia.\nFrom 2007 to 2018, Telia Company has owned 58.55% of the Geocell company, while Turkcell owns the remaining 41.45%. Since 2018 Silknet bought full part of Geocell.\nSri Lanka.\nFrom 1996 to 2010, Telia Company has owned 100% of SUNTEL Ltd. Since 2010 Dialog Axiata bought full part of Suntel.\nKazakhstan.\nTelia Company operated in Kazakhstan under the brand Kcell. From 21 December 2018, Kcell sold to Kazakhtelecom.\nMoldova.\nIn February 2020, Telia Company agreed to sell its 100% holding in Moldcell to CG Cell Technologies DAC, for a transaction price of US$31.5 million.\nNepal.\nTeliaSonera owned a majority stake in Ncell, the largest mobile operator in Nepal with US$16.2 billion operating income. On 21 December 2015, TeliaSonera announced its exit from Ncell, selling its 60.4 percent of the shares to Malaysian telecommunications group Axiata. TeliaSonera exited Nepal without settling billions of Capital Gains Tax owed to Nepalese government.\nRussia.\nTelia Company owned 25.2% of MegaFon, the second largest mobile phone operator in Russia. In October 2017, Telia Company agreed to sell their entire MegaFon stake for US$1 billion.\nSpain.\nTelia Company owned a 76.6% holding in the Spanish operator Yoigo until 21 June 2016 when it was sold to .\nTajikistan.\nTelia Company owned 60% of mobile phone operator Tcell. Tcell is a merger of Somoncom and Indigo Tajikistan; the merger was completed in July 2012. On 27 April 2017, it was confirmed that Tcell has been sold.\nTurkey.\nIn October 2020, Telia Company's divestment of its 47.1 percent stake in Turkcell Holding (which holds 51% in the listed leading mobile operator in Turkey) to the state owned Turkey Wealth Fund for US$530 million, was completed.\nUzbekistan.\nIn five years, Ucell, the Uzbek subsidiary, increased the number of its subscribers from 400,000 to 9 million (2012). Some former TeliaSonera executives were under preliminary investigation by Swedish prosecutors for allegations of bribery and money laundering associated with the acquisition of their 3G license in Uzbekistan from Takilant Limited, registered in Gibraltar. Under these investigations involving four Uzbek nationals, hundreds of millions of francs were frozen in Swiss banks. The former executives were acquitted in the first instance in the Swedish legal proceedings in February 2019, the verdict has been appealed. In September 2017 Telia Company announced that a global settlement had been reached with the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Dutch Public Prosecution Service (Openbaar Ministerie, OM) relating to previously disclosed investigations regarding historical transactions in Uzbekistan. The global resolution ended all known corruption related investigations or inquiries into Telia Company.\nEvolution of the Telia brand.\nWhen Telia and Sonera merged in 2002, TeliaSonera used a simple wordmark as the logo. In 2011, TeliaSonera released its new purple pebble logo to the corporation and its affiliate brands. The pebble was designed by Landor Associates.\nIn 2016, TeliaSonera changed name to Telia Company and presented an updated pebble brand profile, designed by Wolff Olins, to be used by all Telia brand companies.\nControversies.\nTeliaSonera has been accused of indirectly supporting dictatorships, allowing them to do man-in-the-middle attacks on their citizens. This was disclosed in the Swedish TV show Uppdrag Granskning in 2012. TeliaSonera responded to these allegations with: \"This is happening every day in all countries and applies to all operators. We are obliged to comply with the legislation of each country.\"\nFurther allegations have been presented in Swedish media and elsewhere that TeliaSonera may have illegally, through bribery, acquired licenses in Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan. As a result of internal investigations on these and other potential violations to the company's policies, several senior managers were dismissed from the company. Telia admitted to this bribery accusations and had to pay US$965 million in settlement in 2017.\nWhen TeliaSonera exited Nepal there were voices raised in the public debate in Nepal that it had evaded an approximately 36 billion rupee capital gains tax owed to the Nepalese government, when it sold its stake to Axiata, a Malaysian Telecom Group, a claim which has been refuted by Telia Company on several occasions. In that context, Telia was criticized by media (TV) even in Sweden where its headquarters is located. Also, a group of Nepalese people started a movement 'No Tax.. No Ncell' to boycott the services of Ncell in Nepal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30005", "revid": "44389974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30005", "title": "Telef\u00f3nica", "text": "Spanish multinational telecommunications company\n, S.A. () is a Spanish multinational telecommunications company. It has headquarters as well as a registered office in Madrid, Spain. It is one of the largest telephone operators and mobile network providers in the world. It provides fixed and mobile telephony, broadband, and subscription television, operating in Europe and the Americas.\nAlong with its brand, it also trades as Movistar, O2, and Vivo. The company is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index. On 15 April 2012, Telef\u00f3nica shut down TVA and Ajacto, which unified the brand into Vivo.\nHistory.\nThe company was created in Madrid in 1924, as Compa\u00f1\u00eda Telef\u00f3nica Nacional de Espa\u00f1a (CTNE), with ITT among its major shareholders. In 1945, the state acquired by law a share of 79.6% of the company, later diluted by a capital increase in 1967.\nUntil the liberalization of the telecom market in 1997, Telef\u00f3nica was the only telephone operator in Spain, where it retained a dominant position. Telef\u00f3nica is present in 12 countries in Latin America and Europe, as of January 2024.\nOwnership.\nTelef\u00f3nica is a publicly listed company with more than 1.5 million direct shareholders. At the end of 2025 its share capital comprised 5,670,161,554 ordinary shares (one euro each) traded on the Spanish Stock Market (Madrid, Barcelona, Bilbao, and Valencia) and on those in London, New York, Lima, and Buenos Aires.\nTelef\u00f3nica is a national defence service provider in Spain, where the government has a regulatory role in its M&amp;A, including shareholders.\nIn September 2023, Saudi Arabia's telecom, STC Group, became Telef\u00f3nica's largest shareholder, with a 9.9% holding, increasing its stake to \u20ac2.1 billion ($US2.23 billion), through shares and convertible financial instruments. Announced in December 2023, the Spanish government subsequently acquired a 10% stake in Telef\u00f3nica, valued at $2.2 billion, in May 2024, to offset the telecom's Saudi ownership stake, through state holding company SEPI.\nStockholders of 5% or more ownership in the company, as at August 13, 2025, are:\nOperations.\nEurope.\nAustria.\nIn May 2022, Telef\u00f3nica announced the acquisition of the European cloud-based services specialist and cloud Microsoft Dynamics partner BE-terna. The deal worth \u20ac350 million includes 1,000 staff, AI, extended service capabilities across Europe, and a cybersecurity services division. The deal aimed to see Telef\u00f3nica increase its geographic scale and aid its digital capabilities.\nSpain.\nTelef\u00f3nica is the second largest corporation in Spain, behind the Santander Group. It operates under the \"movistar\" and \"O2\" brands with the first being the largest broadband and phone (both mobile and landlines) provider in Spain.\nTelef\u00f3nica's FTTH network in Spain is the most extensive fibre-to-home network in Europe, as of April 2016, and the shutdown plan for the legacy copper network is already in progress.\nGermany.\nTelef\u00f3nica was the parent of Telef\u00f3nica Deutschland, which held two alternative IP carriers. The two ISPs, mediaWays and HighwayOne merged in January 2003 after having been purchased by Telef\u00f3nica in 2001 and February 2002 respectively.\nOn 26 January 2006, Telef\u00f3nica completed its \u00a317.7 billion (\u20ac25.7 billion) acquisition of the UK-based operator O2 which also provided mobile phone services in Germany under the O2 brand. Following the purchase, Telef\u00f3nica merged Telef\u00f3nica Deutschland and O2 Germany to form the current business Telef\u00f3nica Germany.\nTelef\u00f3nica Germany, purchased competitor E-Plus on 1 October 2014. As part of the purchase, Telef\u00f3nica reduced its stake in its subsidiary to 62.1%. Integration continues as of August 2015, but the now merged network is Germany's largest in customers.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOn 31 October 2005, O2 agreed to be taken over by Telef\u00f3nica, with a cash offer of \u00a317.7 billion, or \u00a32 per share. According to the merger announcement, O2, which provided mobile phone services in the UK, Ireland, Germany and the Isle of Man (uniquely to the O2 group Manx Telecom also offered fixed-line services), retained its name and continued to be based in the United Kingdom, keeping both the brand and the management team. The merger became unconditional on 23 January 2006 and O2 became a wholly owned subsidiary of Telef\u00f3nica. Manx Telecom was sold by Telef\u00f3nica Europe in June 2010.\nIn January 2015, Li Ka-shing entered into talks with Telef\u00f3nica to buy O2 for around \u00a310.25 billion, aiming to merge it with his subsidiary Three. The acquisition was officially blocked by the European Commission on 11 May 2016, which argued that the merger would reduce consumer choice and lead to a higher cost of services Telef\u00f3nica began to seek a stock market flotation of the business instead.\nAnnounced on 7 May 2020, Liberty Global owner of Virgin Media and Telef\u00f3nica owner of O2, agreed to merge their U.K. businesses in a deal worth \u00a331bn and form one of the UK's largest entertainment and telecommunication companies to rival the BT Group. As of the 1 June 2021, Virgin Media and O2 UK Ltd officially merged to form Virgin Media O2, giving Telef\u00f3nica a 50% stake in the new company, with the other 50% owned by Liberty Global.\nFrance.\nIn France, since 2011, Telef\u00f3nica has a joint venture with the French telecommunications company Bouygues Telecom, part of the Bouygues group, to offer global telecommunication services packages to multinational companies. This cooperation was expanded in June 2015 through the creation of a separate joint venture company named Telef\u00f3nica Global Solutions France, with its own marketing and sales teams offering Telef\u00f3nica and Bouygues Telecom services packages to corporations.\nAmericas.\nTelef\u00f3nica operates the Movistar mobile phone brand throughout Latin America and the Vivo in Brazil. In Mexico it occupies a distant second place and it is the largest in Chile, Venezuela, and Brazil. Telef\u00f3nica plans to divest the majority of its Latin American business in order to focus on the core markets UK, Spain, Germany and Brazil and add \u20ac2 billion in revenue with this programme.\nBrazil.\n's largest fixed-line operation in South America is in Brazil, where it provides broadband, local and long-distance telephone services in the aforementioned state, which alone represents the highest GDP of South America. It also owns a majority stake in the Brazilian mobile operator Vivo, having agreed on 28 July 2010 to buy Portugal Telecom's stake in the firm for \u20ac7.5 billion, after increasing its original offer by \u20ac1.8 billion over three months of incident-rich negotiations. The group has been in the country since 1996 when it acquired CRT, a fixed-line and mobile operator in the southern part of the country. The landline division is currently part of Oi. In July 1998, acquired Telesp, the telephony operator of the Telebr\u00e1s system in the state of S\u00e3o Paulo, forming Telef\u00f4nica Brasil.\nIn June 2009, after four big \"blackouts\" on 's broadband \"Speedy\", ANATEL ordered to stop sales of its broadband service until improvements were made on the infrastructure to provide better-quality service. After the release of sales of broadband internet in August 2009, ANATEL expects the company's service investments to keep on par with the sales. On 24 July 2010, announced that the number of Speedy subscribers had exceeded three million people.\nChile.\n owns \" Chile\", formerly CTC (Compa\u00f1\u00eda de Telecomunicaciones de Chile, formerly known as Compa\u00f1\u00eda de Tel\u00e9fonos de Chile) which is the biggest fixed-line operator and internet service provider in the country. The Group has been in the country since 1989. The mobile business is run by M\u00f3viles through a local subsidiary. On 26 October 2009, Chile changed its name to \"Movistar\", including cellphone, landline, satellite TV, and internet.\nColombia.\nOn 18 April 2006, 's president Cesar Alierta signed an agreement with the Colombian government to buy 50% and one share of the state-owned communications company, Colombia Telecomunicaciones (TELECOM). With this sale, became the largest Colombian land-line operator, and also gained an important presence in the local, long-distance and broadband market. The mobile business is run by M\u00f3viles through the brand Movistar. It is unknown what will happen with their previous established subsidiary Empresas, being most probable a merger with TELECOM. The company is now known as - Telecom.\nCosta Rica.\n signed a contract for 15 years (extendable for 10 additional years) on 12 May 2011 with the government of Costa Rica. It started operations in 2011 under its Movistar branding.\nDominican Republic.\nIn 2000, acquired a 26.5% stake in Tricom when it purchased part of the shares Motorola had obtained in 1993.\nEcuador.\nAfter acquiring 100% of OTECEL S.A. (Bellsouth), M\u00f3viles Ecuador started its operations on 14 October 2004 as Movistar. It is one of only three mobile operators in Ecuador. in Ecuador has started offering 3G service from the second half of 2009.\nPanama.\n started its operations in Panama in 2004 as acquired 100% of Bellsouth Panama. Since then, it has operated using the name Movistar for mobile services. It migrated from CDMA technology used by Bellsouth to GSM 850. It also offers 3G using UMTS 850 and UMTS 1900. In 2015, it launched LTE with coverage expanding in Panama City, Arraijan, Chorrera up to Buenaventura Beach.\nPuerto Rico.\n in the U.S. territory of Puerto Rico has presence through Empresas, Larga Distancia \u2013 TLD, International Wholesale Services \u2013 TIWS (formerly Emergia) and Atento. Moviles, through its Movistar brand, had presence in Puerto Rico until mid-2007 but they sold the Puerto Rico network to a private equity group who renamed it Open Mobile.\nVenezuela.\nIn late 2004, took over the operations of Telcel Bellsouth in Venezuela, the first and largest mobile operator in the South American country at the time. After re-branding as Movistar, its CDMA2000 EvDO was progressively replaced by a GSM UMTS 3G network. is currently rolling out 4G LTE in the country.\nUnited States.\nBased in Miami, Florida, USA, Inc. provides services to U.S.-based multinational companies that have operations in Latin America and Europe. USA also operates the KeyCenter, a data center in Miami built to withstand category 5 hurricanes, from where the company supports Business Continuity and IT services for Enterprise customers in South Florida.\nAsia.\nChina.\nIn 2009, China Unicom agreed to a $1 billion cross-holding with . In January 2011, the two partners agreed to a further $500 million tie-up in each other. Following completion in late 2011, will hold a 9.7% stake in China Unicom, and China Unicom will own 1.4% of the Spanish firm.\nIn 2018, China Unicom and establish a new partnership to combine their services and networks in the internet of things, so as to enable their clients to deploy IoT products and services in China, Europe and Latin America with a single global IoT SIM card.\nFormer operations.\nCzech Republic.\nIn 2005, bought \"\u010cesk\u00fd Telecom\" (Czech Telecom), the former state-owned Czech phone operator which still dominates the Czech fixed-line market. As part of this deal also gained its 100% subsidiary Eurotel, one of three mobile phone operators in the Czech Republic. Starting 1 July 2006, both companies were merged into one legal entity and renamed \" O2 Czech Republic\". In 2011, the company was renamed \" Czech Republic\" and in 2013, it was announced that would sell its stake in the company to PPF. Under the terms of the sale, the company was allowed to continue to trade under the O2 brand for a maximum of four years. In August 2017, the brand license agreement was extended to 2022, with a 5-year extension to 2027 available.\nSlovakia.\nDuring 2006, Telef\u00f3nica won the tender to become the third mobile phone operator in Slovakia, under the O2 brand. It began providing services on 2 February 2007 under the name Telef\u00f3nica O2 Slovakia, s.r.o. It initially launched providing only a prepaid service but in mid-2007 began to sell contract phones. The company was sold along with Telef\u00f3nica Czech Republic to PPF.\nIreland.\nO2 in Ireland was purchased by Telef\u00f3nica as part of its acquisition of O2 plc in the UK in 2005. Telef\u00f3nica Ireland has become the second largest mobile phone operator in Ireland, operating a GSM/EDGE and high-speed HSPA+ wireless broadband network to residential and business customers through its \"O2\" brand. Telef\u00f3nica Ireland also provide fixed broadband to business customers.\nIt was announced on 24 June 2013 that Telef\u00f3nica had agreed to sell its O2 Ireland mobile business for at least \u20ac780 million ($1 billion) in cash to Hutchison Whampoa's subsidiary 3. O2 was merged into Hutchison Whampoa's subsidiary Three Ireland in March 2015.\nItaly.\nTelef\u00f3nica currently owns 46% of Telco, the holding company that controls 22% of Telecom Italia, Italy's former government\u2013owned telephone company. In late 2003, Telef\u00f3nica announced its intention to acquire the entirety of Telco by January 2014, potentially becoming Telecom Italia's largest shareholder. The plan, was however challenged by the Brazilian competition authority since Telef\u00f3nica and Telecom Italia, with Vivo and TIM Brasil respectively, are the two largest telephone companies competing in Brazil. Subsequently, Telef\u00f3nica confirmed in September 2014 that it intended to sell its shares in Telecom Italia following the purchase of Global Village Telecom (GVT) in Brazil from Vivendi. Telef\u00f3nica sold its shares in the business to Vivendi as part of the sale of GVT in June 2015.\nCentral and South America.\nAfter acquiring 100% of Paysand\u00fa S.A., Telef\u00f3nica started its operations in Guatemala 1998 as Telef\u00f3nica Movistar and just Telef\u00f3nica for landlines. In 2004, acquired 100% of BellSouth Guatemala, relaunching mobile operations as Movistar in 2005, with mobile services based on CDMA technology, in 2004 as Telef\u00f3nica Movistar launch national service with GSM/GPRS technology, and CDMA 1x EV-DO for data. Telef\u00f3nica M\u00f3viles Guatemala (renamed in 2005) offered services on UMTS/HSPA starting in June 2009, and it was the last operator to launch commercial services on this technology, with coverage in all major cities in Guatemala.\nOn 24 January 2019, Am\u00e9rica M\u00f3vil announced the that it would acquire both the Guatemalan and El Salvadoran operations of Telef\u00f3nica for US$333 million and $315 million, respectively. The transaction would also acquire all Pay TV operations. The sale was eventually approved in Guatemala and would later become intergraded into Claro. However, the transaction for the El Salvadoran operations to be sold to Am\u00e9rica M\u00f3vil were scrapped due to regulatory hurdles.\nIn February 2019, Millicom announced the purchase of the Panamanian, Costa Rican and Nicaraguan operations of Telef\u00f3nica for US$1,650 Million, with plans to phase out the Movistar brand from those markets within a year after purchase. The transaction was completed in August the same year. Telef\u00f3nica had purchased the Panamanian, Ecuadorian and Guatemalan operations of BellSouth in 2004 for US$1665 Million, followed by a rebranding to Movistar in 2005. The purchase was intended to help Telef\u00f3nica focus on its largest markets, alleviating its debt. \nColombia.\nIn March 2025, Telef\u00f3nica sold its majority stake in Colombian telecom Coltel to Millicom.\nUruguay.\nIn May 2025, Millicom also acquired Telef\u00f3nica's mobile business in Uruguay for $440 million.\nArgentina.\n owned , the largest fixed-line operator in Argentina during 1990-2025, providing broadband, local and long-distance telephone services in the southern part of the country, as well as the Greater Buenos Aires area. The mobile business was then operated by M\u00f3viles through Movistar, a local subsidiary. In January 2025 Telef\u00f3nica had hired investment bank JPMorgan to evaluate a possible sale of its Argentina holdings. The operation was sold to Telecom Argentina for $US1.5 billion in 2025.\nPeru.\nSubsidiary was the largest telecom provider in Peru from 1994, providing local, long-distance, and broadband services nationwide. Its mobile telephone business operated under the Movistar brand, from January 2011 on, and competed with major provider Claro. Its main offices were located in Santa Beatriz. The company filed for bankruptcy protection for its Peruvian business, then agreed to sell the unit, in February 2025, to domestic telecom Integra Tec International, for \u20ac900k (US$1.02 million).\nEcuador.\nTelef\u00f3nica sold Ecuador business to Millicom for $380m.\nSponsorship.\nCycling.\nSince 2011, they are a sponsor of the Spanish UCI ProTour cycling team known as Movistar Team.\nFootball.\nIn football, Tel\u00e9fonica is an official sponsor for several national teams such as Spain (Movistar+) in Europe, and Brazil (vivo), Mexico, Colombia, Peru, or Venezuela in the Americas.\nRugby.\nO2 are the main sponsors of the England national rugby team.\nMotor sports.\nTel\u00e9fonica, through Movistar, was the title sponsor of Yamaha Motor Racing from 2014 to 2018, a motorcycle racing team in MotoGP. It was also the title sponsor of Suzuki's factory team from 2000 to 2002 Sito Pons' Honda team from 1997 to 1999 and Fausto Gresini's Honda team from 2003 to 2005.\nWithin Formula One, Telef\u00f3nica sponsored the Minardi F1 Team in 1999 and 2000, including title sponsorship in 2000, as well a major sponsor of the Renault F1 Team from 2004 to 2006 until Fernando Alonso's departure to McLaren in 2007, and were title sponsors of the Spanish Grand Prix from 2006 to 2010. Through its acquisition of O2, Telef\u00f3nica also indirectly sponsored the BMW Sauber F1 Team.\nIn the World Rally Championship, Telef\u00f3nica sponsored the SEAT Sport WRC Team between 1998 and 2000, under both Movistar and Telef\u00f3nica Movistar. Telef\u00f3nica sponsored the Ford WRC Team in seasons 2000\u20132002 when Spanish rally driver Carlos Sainz drove for the team, and when Sainz moved to the Citro\u00ebn WRC Team for 2003, Telef\u00f3nica followed. The sponsorship was not continued into 2004, despite Sainz staying with the team.\nIn the 2000 CART season, PPI Motorsports raced the #96 Telef\u00f3nica Toyota-Reynard, driven by Spanish rookie Oriol Servi\u00e0. Oriol finished 15th in the standings with a best result of 3rd, and failed to win Rookie of the Year. Teammate da Matta in the #97 Pioneer Toyota-Reynard performed better with 10th and 1 win, however the team retired from open-wheel racing at the end of the season, and the sponsorship ended.\nSailing.\nMovistar- and Telef\u00f3nica-sponsored teams contested the round-the-world Volvo Ocean Race in the 2005\u201306, 2008\u201309, and 2011\u201312 events.\neSports.\nTelef\u00f3nica sponsors, through its Movistar brand, the \"Movistar Riders\" eSports team.\nInvestments and collaborations.\nTelef\u00f3nica is a supporter of the Hybrid Broadcast Broadband TV (HbbTV) initiative that is promoting and establishing an open European standard for hybrid set-top boxes for the reception of broadcast TV and broadband multimedia applications with a single user interface, and has run pilot HbbTV services in Spain.\nTelef\u00f3nica's Wayra subsidiary first launched in Latin America and Spain in 2011 to provide seed investment and mentoring to new companies. Since its inception, Wayra has backed over 300 companies including Trustev, Venddo, Cloudwear and NFWare.\nAs of 1 December 2014, the Firefox web browser includes the \"Firefox Hello\" WebRTC feature, that allows real-time voice and video online chats. \"Firefox Hello\" is powered by Telef\u00f3nica and was also co-developed by Telef\u00f3nica.\nIn September 2017, Nokia and Telef\u00f3nica signed an agreement in order to evaluate technologies enabling an efficient network evolution to 5G in line with Telef\u00f3nica's business objectives.\nIn 2021, Telef\u00f3nica Global Solutions entered into an agreement with IDT Carrier Services (now IDT Global) to enable direct international SMS transmission between the two networks. The partnership was reported by telecom industry media and aimed at improving the efficiency of global messaging interconnection.\nMonopoly.\nTelef\u00f3nica has received several fines due to convictions over unfair competition, abuse of its position as dominant provider, and antitrust violations through the Commission of Telecommunications, European Commission, and Spanish tribunals. These fines include:\nAs of 2008, Telef\u00f3nica had in court two more fines, with a value of 793 million euros.\nOn 5 July 2007, the European Commission ordered Telef\u00f3nica to pay a record antitrust fine of almost \u20ac152 million for activities in the Spanish broadband market which, according to European Union competition commissioner Neelie Kroes, \"harmed Spanish consumers, Spanish businesses and the Spanish economy as a whole, and by extension Europe's economy.\"\nSeveral consumer groups in Spain have reported unnecessary delays in cancelling Telef\u00f3nica's ADSL service. These consumer groups also claim that services continue to be billed after being cancelled and that service cancellation requests are ignored. This has led Spanish people to organize themselves in consumer groups such as the \"Asociaci\u00f3n de Internautas\" and user communities like \"Bandaancha\" in order to defend themselves from Telef\u00f3nica's abuses and to give support and help to each other in their various complaints about Telef\u00f3nica's unfair practices.\nThe practices are claimed to include the complex process involved in cancelling lines. These line cancellation procedures are justified by Telef\u00f3nica as a way of \"defending customers against hoaxes.\" Furthermore, in areas where ADSL lines are scarce, there are also reports of customers who claim to have had their service cancelled or inexplicably transferred to another customer although they have paid their bills. This practice is considered by some to be used by Telef\u00f3nica in certain areas of Spain where there are few broadband connections.\nPositions on network neutrality.\nIn February 2010, Telef\u00f3nica CEO Cesar Alierta expressed in a meeting at Bilbao, Spain that his company intends to charge Google and other search engines for the use of their network. Alierta complained that such search engines were benefiting from the platform without contributing to the company's expenses and that such a trend will change in the near future. Additionally, he said that Telef\u00f3nica will seek to push its own content.\nInnovation.\nIn 2017, Telef\u00f3nica announced the launch of OnLife Networks, intended to infuse innovation into the company.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30006", "revid": "46413876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30006", "title": "The Silence of the Lambs (film)", "text": "1991 horror film by Jonathan Demme\nThe Silence of the Lambs is a 1991 American psychological horror thriller film directed by Jonathan Demme and written by Ted Tally, adapted from Thomas Harris's 1988 novel. It stars Jodie Foster as Clarice Starling, a young FBI trainee who is hunting a serial killer known as \"Buffalo Bill\" (Ted Levine), who skins his female victims. To catch him, she seeks the advice of the imprisoned Hannibal Lecter (Anthony Hopkins), a brilliant psychiatrist and cannibalistic serial murderer. The film also features performances by Scott Glenn, Anthony Heald, and Kasi Lemmons.\nReleased on February 14, 1991, the film was a sleeper hit, grossing $272.7\u00a0million worldwide on a $19\u00a0million budget and becoming the fifth-highest-grossing film of the year. It premiered at the 41st Berlin International Film Festival, where Demme won the Silver Bear for Best Director. At the 64th Academy Awards, it became the third\u2014and most recent\u2014film to win the \"Big Five\" categories: Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor, Best Actress, and Best Adapted Screenplay. It remains the only horror film to have won Best Picture.\n\"The Silence of the Lambs\" is regularly cited by critics, film directors, and audiences as one of the greatest and most influential films. In 2018, \"Empire\" ranked it 48th on its list of the 500 greatest movies of all time. The American Film Institute ranked it the sixty-fifth greatest film in American cinema and the fifth-greatest thriller, while Starling and Lecter were included among the greatest film heroines and villains. The film was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically\" significant by the U.S. Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry in 2011.\nThe film has drawn criticism for its portrayal of gender identity, particularly regarding the character of Buffalo Bill, which some critics argue perpetuates harmful stereotypes. Director Jonathan Demme and others have defended the film's intentions, noting that the character is not explicitly transgender.\nThe film launched a franchise that includes the sequel \"Hannibal\" (2001), the prequels \"Red Dragon\" (2002) and \"Hannibal Rising\" (2007), and two television adaptations.\nPlot.\nClarice Starling, a young FBI trainee at the Quantico Academy, is recruited by Behavioral Science Unit chief Jack Crawford to interview Dr. Hannibal Lecter, a brilliant and cannibalistic psychiatrist imprisoned at the Baltimore State Hospital for the Criminally Insane. Under the guise of soliciting his participation in a psychological survey, Crawford secretly aims to leverage Lecter's insights to apprehend \"Buffalo Bill\", a serial killer who murders young women and removes their skin.\nAt the hospital, Dr. Frederick Chilton, the facility's manipulative director, makes unwelcome advances toward Starling before escorting her to Lecter's cell. Initially courteous, Lecter grows dismissive upon deducing Crawford's ulterior motive. As Starling departs, inmate Miggs flings semen at her, provoking Lecter's disgust. He summons her back and offers a clue as an anagram that leads her to a storage unit containing a severed head in a jar\u2014later revealed to belong to Benjamin Raspail, a former patient of Lecter's and whose killer is believed to be Buffalo Bill. Soon afterward, Miggs is found dead in his cell, having swallowed his own tongue\u2014an act implicitly orchestrated by Lecter as retribution for his assault on Starling. Lecter agrees to assist the investigation in exchange for a transfer away from Chilton. Meanwhile, another victim is discovered with a death's-head moth lodged in her throat\u2014the same species later found inside the severed head.\nWhen Buffalo Bill abducts Catherine Martin, daughter of U.S. Senator Ruth Martin, Crawford authorizes Starling to offer Lecter a fraudulent deal: a prison transfer in return for actionable intelligence. Lecter instead demands a \"quid pro quo\", extracting personal details from Starling. She reveals that her father, a police officer, was murdered when she was ten, leaving her orphaned. In exchange, Lecter reveals that Buffalo Bill is not a genuine transsexual but mistakenly assumes that he is, possibly having been rejected from gender-reassignment clinics due to psychological instability. Unbeknownst to Starling, Chilton records the conversation and later exposes her deceit, offering Lecter a new arrangement: relocation to Tennessee in exchange for information. Lecter complies and is flown to Memphis, where he provides Senator Martin with accurate details about Buffalo Bill's appearance but falsely identifies him as \"Louis Friend\".\nStarling deciphers \"Louis Friend\" as an anagram for \"iron sulfide\" (fool's gold) and confronts Lecter in his temporary cell at a Memphis courthouse. Lecter demands deeper revelations, offering a final cryptic clue\u2014\"we covet what we see every day\"\u2014before Starling, compelled by his probing, recounts a traumatic childhood incident: after her father's death, she lived on a relative's Montana farm, where she failed to save spring lambs from slaughter. Lecter intuits that saving Catherine might silence this trauma and, satisfied, returns the Buffalo Bill case files. That night, Lecter orchestrates a gruesome escape by using a piece of Chilton's pen to unlock his restraints and murder his two guards. He later peels the face off one of the guards and wears it as a disguise, fooling paramedics into wheeling him out of the building.\nAnalyzing Lecter's annotations, Starling deduces that Buffalo Bill knew his first victim, Frederika Bimmel, a tailor from Ohio, and independently follows the lead. At Bimmel's home, she finds unfinished dresses and patterns matching patches of skin removed from the victims, realizing that Bill seeks to construct a \"suit\" from human flesh and that he starves his captives to loosen their skin. Crawford cross-references Lecter's profile with records from sex-reassignment clinics and offender databases to identify Jame Gumb as the prime suspect. While Crawford's team raids Gumb's vacant Illinois residence, Starling interviews Bimmel's acquaintances, arriving at a house where Gumb poses as \"Jack Gordon\". His fa\u00e7ade crumbles when Starling spots a death's-head moth.\nPursuing Gumb into his basement, Starling discovers Catherine trapped in a dry well. Gumb stalks her using night-vision goggles but betrays his position by cocking his revolver. Starling fires blindly, killing him. Catherine is rescued, and Starling graduates from the FBI Academy.\nDuring her graduation celebration, Lecter calls from an unnamed tropical location, asking Starling if \"the lambs have stopped screaming.\" He assures her he has no intention of pursuing her, requesting that she return the favor\u2014a vow she declines. Lecter announces he is \"having an old friend for dinner\" before trailing Chilton into a crowd.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Jodie Foster as Clarice Starling\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nThe movie is based on the 1988 novel by Thomas Harris. It was the second film to feature the character Hannibal Lecter; the first, \"Manhunter\" (1986), directed by Michael Mann, was based on the first novel in the Lecter series, \"Red Dragon\" (1981). Prior to the release of the \"Silence of the Lambs\" novel, Orion Pictures partnered with Gene Hackman to adapt it for film. With Hackman set to direct and star as either Jack Crawford or Hannibal Lecter, negotiations were made to split the $500,000 cost of rights between Hackman and the studio. The producers also had to acquire the rights to the Lecter character, which were owned by \"Manhunter\" producer Dino De Laurentiis. Owing to the financial failure of \"Manhunter\", De Laurentiis lent the rights to Orion for free.\nIn November 1987, Ted Tally was brought on to write the adaptation; Tally had crossed paths with Harris many times, with his interest in adapting \"The Silence of the Lambs\" originating from receiving an advance copy of the book from Harris. When Tally was about halfway through with the first draft, Hackman withdrew from the project as his children wanted him to stop doing violent films, and financing fell through. However, Orion co-founder Mike Medavoy encouraged Tally to keep writing as the studio took care of financing, and searched for a replacement director. Orion sought Jonathan Demme to direct. With the screenplay not yet completed, Demme signed on after reading the novel. From there, the project developed quickly; Tally said: \"[Demme] read my first draft not long after it was finished, and we met. Then I was just startled by the speed of things. We met in May 1989 and were shooting in November. I don't remember any big revisions.\"\nCasting.\nJodie Foster was interested in playing FBI agent Clarice Starling immediately after reading the novel. However, even though she had just won an Academy Award for Best Actress at the 61st Academy Awards for her performance in \"The Accused\" (1988), Demme was not initially convinced that she was right for the role. Demme's first choice for the role of Starling was Michelle Pfeiffer, with whom he had just collaborated on \"Married to the Mob\" (1988). Pfeiffer turned it down, later saying, \"It was a difficult decision, but I got nervous about the subject matter.\" He then approached Meg Ryan, who also turned it down for its gruesome themes. The studio was skeptical about Laura Dern as a bankable choice, so Foster was ultimately awarded the role due to her passion for the character. Molly Ringwald auditioned but was deemed \"too young\".\nFor the role of Lecter, Demme originally approached Sean Connery. After Connery turned it down, Anthony Hopkins was offered the role based on his performance in \"The Elephant Man\" (1980). When Hopkins's agent told him that a script was on his way titled \"The Silence of the Lambs\", Hopkins responded, \"Is it a children's story?\" Hopkins called his agent back after reading the first 10 pages and said, \"This is the best part I've ever read.\" He accepted the role after having dinner with Demme.\nOther actors considered for the role included Al Pacino, Robert De Niro, Dustin Hoffman, Jeremy Irons, Derek Jacobi and Daniel Day-Lewis. Forest Whitaker has stated that he also auditioned for the role. The mask Hopkins wore became an iconic symbol of the film. It was created by Ed Cubberly, of Frenchtown, New Jersey, who had made masks for NHL goalkeepers.\nHopkins developed his portrayal of Lecter by drawing inspiration from the HAL 9000 computer as voiced by Douglas Rain in \",\" as well as the vocal patterns of writer Truman Capote. In a 2001 interview with \"GQ\", Hopkins clarified that he did not base Lecter's vocal cadence on Katharine Hepburn, as some people had thought. He also revealed that the decision to play Lecter as still and unblinking was not influenced by Charles Manson, as some had speculated. Hopkins admitted to being intimidated by Foster, who had just won an Academy Award, and initially felt scared to talk to her.\nScott Glenn was cast to play Jack Crawford, the Agent-in-Charge of the Behavioral Science Unit of the FBI in Quantico, Virginia. In preparation for the role, Glenn met with John E. Douglas. Douglas gave Glenn a tour of the Quantico facility and also played for him an audio tape containing various recordings that serial killers Lawrence Bittaker and Roy Norris had made of themselves raping and torturing a 16-year-old girl. According to Douglas, Glenn wept as he listened to the recordings, and even changed his liberal stance on the death penalty.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography began on November 15, 1989, and wrapped on March 1, 1990. Filming primarily took place in and around Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, with some scenes shot in nearby northern West Virginia. The Victorian home in Perryopolis, Pennsylvania, used as Buffalo Bill's home in the film went up for sale in August 2015 for $300,000. The home sat on the market for nearly a year, before finally selling for $195,000. The exterior of the Western Center near Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, served as the setting for Baltimore State Hospital for the Criminally Insane. A scene set in the FBI Director's office was filmed in the office of United States Secretary of Labor Elizabeth Dole in Washington, D.C. In what was a rare act of cooperation at the time, the FBI allowed scenes to be filmed at the FBI Academy in Quantico; some FBI staff members even acted in bit parts.\nThe design for the basement and pit used by Buffalo Bill was inspired by the real-life kidnappings and murders performed by Gary M. Heidnik.\nMusic.\nThe musical score was composed by Howard Shore, who would also collaborate with Demme on \"Philadelphia\". Recorded in Munich during the latter half of the summer of 1990, the score was performed by the Munich Symphony Orchestra. \"I tried to write in a way that goes right into the fabric of the movie\", explained Shore on his approach. \"I tried to make the music just fit in. When you watch the movie you are not aware of the music. You get your feelings from all elements simultaneously, lighting, cinematography, costumes, acting, music. Jonathan Demme was very specific about the music.\" The music editor was Suzana Peric. A soundtrack album was released by MCA Records on February 5, 1991. Music from the film was later used in the trailers for its 2001 sequel, \"Hannibal\".\nIn addition to Shore's score, recordings of popular music are used prominently in the film. This includes British post-punk music, such as the song \"Hip Priest\" by the Fall which can be heard playing during the climactic scene in which Starling enters Buffalo Bill's house. The song \"Goodbye Horses\" by Q Lazzarus became a cult hit after it was featured in an iconic scene with Buffalo Bill applying makeup and speaking to himself in the mirror.\nRelease and reception.\nBox office.\n\"The Silence of the Lambs\" was released on February 14, 1991, grossing almost $14\u00a0million from 1,497 theaters over the 4-day Presidents' Day weekend, placing at number one at the US box office. It remained at number one for five weeks.\nThe film opened at the Odeon Leicester Square in London in June 1991 and grossed \u00a3290,936 in its opening week, which distributor Rank claimed was a world record opening week from one theatre. The following week, it expanded to 281 screens and grossed \u00a34,260,472 for the week, a UK record.\nThe film grossed $131\u00a0million in the United States and Canada with a total worldwide gross of $273\u00a0million. It was the fourth-highest grossing film of 1991 in North America and the fifth-highest-grossing film worldwide.\nCritical response.\nThe movie was a sleeper hit that gradually gained widespread success and critical acclaim. Foster, Hopkins, and Levine garnered much acclaim for their performances. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 154 critics' reviews are positive. The website's consensus reads: \"Director Jonathan Demme's smart, taut thriller teeters on the edge between psychological study and all-out horror, and benefits greatly from stellar performances by Anthony Hopkins and Jodie Foster.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 86 out of 100, based on 20 critics, indicating . Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\u2212\" on an A+ to F scale.\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" specifically mentioned the \"terrifying qualities\" of Hannibal Lecter. Ebert later added the film to his list of \"The Great Movies\", recognizing the film as a \"horror masterpiece\" alongside such classics as \"Nosferatu\", \"Psycho\", and \"Halloween\". However, the film is also notable for being one of two multi-Academy Award winners (the other being \"Unforgiven\") to get a bad review from Ebert's colleague, Gene Siskel. Writing for the \"Chicago Tribune\", Siskel said, \"Foster's character, who is appealing, is dwarfed by the monsters she is after. I'd rather see her work on another case.\"\nControversy.\nIn the years following its release, \"The Silence of the Lambs\" was subject to much film criticism regarding its themes of human sexuality and sexual politics. Throughout the film, Clarice Starling's gender is emphasized as a distinguishing feature, as she is a minority amongst her numerous male peers, though film scholar Barry Forshaw notes that \"any feminist agenda is never bluntly formulated verbally\".\nSome gay male critics and feminists felt that the film's portrayal of Buffalo Bill negatively associated the LGBT community with deviance, psychopathy, and violence. Despite this, Bill's sexual orientation is never explicitly stated in the film, and Hannibal Lecter expressly states Bill is \"not really transsexual\".\nDirector Jonathan Demme argued that this criticism was misguided, telling \"The New York Times\" that \"I got all this unfounded abuse... [Buffalo Bill] wasn't a gay character. He was a tormented man who hated himself and wished he was a woman because that would have made him as far away from himself as he possibly could be.\" Demme added that he \"came to realize that there is a tremendous absence of positive gay characters in movies\". \nIn a 1992 interview with \"Playboy\" magazine, the feminist and women's rights advocate Betty Friedan stated: \"I thought it was absolutely outrageous that \"The Silence of the Lambs\" won four [\"sic\"] Oscars. [...] I'm not saying that the movie shouldn't have been shown. I'm not denying the movie was an artistic triumph, but it was about the evisceration, the skinning alive of women. That is what I find offensive. Not the \"Playboy\" centerfold.\"\nIn following years the film (and its claims that Bill is \"not really transsexual\") has been criticized for transphobia by transfeminists, who claimed that it is \"one of the most significant and impactful examples of pop culture transmisogyny\" and it \"encourages disbelief of trans people's self-identification\".\nAccolades.\nThe film won the Big Five Academy Awards: Best Picture, Best Director (Demme), Best Actor (Hopkins), Best Actress (Foster), and Best Adapted Screenplay (Ted Tally) at the 64th Academy Awards, making it only the third film in history to accomplish that feat. It was also nominated for Best Sound (Tom Fleischman and Christopher Newman) and Best Film Editing (Craig McKay), but lost to \"\" and \"JFK\", respectively.\nOther awards include Best Film by the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures as well as at the CHI Awards and PEO Awards. Demme won the Silver Bear for Best Director at the 41st Berlin International Film Festival and was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Director at the 49th Golden Globe Awards. The film was nominated for the Grand Prix of the Belgian Film Critics Association. It was also nominated for the British Academy Film Award for Best Film at the 45th British Academy Film Awards. Screenwriter Ted Tally received an Edgar Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay. The film was awarded Best Horror Film of the Year during the 2nd Horror Hall of Fame telecast, with Vincent Price presenting the award to the film's executive producer Gary Goetzman.\nIn 1998, the film was listed as one of the 100 greatest films in the past 100 years by the American Film Institute. In 2006, at the Key Art Awards, the original poster for \"The Silence of the Lambs\" was named best film poster \"of the past 35 years\". \"The Silence of the Lambs\" placed seventh on Bravo's \"The 100 Scariest Movie Moments\" for Lecter's escape scene. The American Film Institute named Hannibal Lecter (as portrayed by Hopkins) the number one film villain of all time and Clarice Starling (as portrayed by Foster) the sixth-greatest film hero of all time. In 2011, ABC aired a prime-time special, \"Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time\", that counted down the best films chosen by fans based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and \"People\" magazine. \"The Silence of the Lambs\" was selected as the best suspense/thriller and Dr. Hannibal Lecter was selected as the fourth-greatest film character. In 2024, Far Out Magazine named the role one of the \"10 most accurate movie psychopaths according to the FBI\", and WhatCulture included the role in top \"10 Most Convincing Movie Psychopath Performances\". In 2012, the Motion Picture Editors Guild listed it as the 26th best-edited film of all time based on a survey of its membership.\nThe film and its characters have appeared in the following AFI \"100 Years\" lists:\nIn 2015, \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s 25th anniversary year, it included \"The Silence of the Lambs\" in its list of the 25 best movies made since the magazine's beginning.\nHome media.\nThe film was released on VHS on October 24, 1991, by Orion Home Video. It was the most rented video in the United States upon release, and ended up as the second most rented video of 1992. The Criterion Collection released the film on LaserDisc in 1991 and 1994. It was released on DVD in 1997 by Image Entertainment, and reissued by Criterion in 1998. A special edition DVD was released by MGM Home Entertainment on March 6, 2001, in both widescreen (1.85:1) and full screen (1.33:1) versions. MGM released it on Blu-ray in 2009. Criterion released a remastered Blu-ray in 2018. It was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray by Kino Lorber in September 2021 using the Criterion master.\nSequels.\nThe sequel \"Hannibal\" (2001) saw the return of only Hopkins after Foster and director Jonathan Demme declined to return because of the onscreen increase of violence and gore. Hopkins again returned to the role of Hannibal Lecter in the prequel film \"Red Dragon\" (2002) while another prequel, \"Hannibal Rising\" (2007), saw Gaspard Ulliel take over the role. The TV series \"Clarice\" (2021) takes place after the events of the film, with actress Rebecca Breeds portraying Clarice. The series \"Hannibal\" (2013\u20132015) is another adaptation of \"Red Dragon\" and \"Hannibal Rising.\"\nLegacy.\nAccording to \"The Guardian\", before \"The Silence of the Lambs\", serial killers in film had been \"claw-handed bogeymen with melty faces and rubber masks. By contrast, Lecter was highly intelligent with impeccable manners\", and played by an actor with \"impeccable credentials\".\nWhen \"The Silence of the Lambs\" was re-released in the United Kingdom in 2017, the British Board of Film Classification reclassified it from an 18 to a 15 certificate. The film's co-producer Ed Saxon said audiences had become desensitized and that the film had become less shocking. However, the BBFC's Craig Lapper felt that audiences had instead become used to procedural crime dramas with serial killers as dramatic tropes, and suggested that \"The Silence of the Lambs\" had created interest in these themes.\nDuring his 2024 presidential campaign, United States president Donald Trump repeatedly referenced Hannibal Lecter and \"The Silence of the Lambs\", claiming that foreign governments were sending \"insane asylum\" patients and convicted criminals to the United States and comparing immigrants to the fictional character. Trump also described Lecter as \"a wonderful man\" and spoke of him as if he were real, prompting Anthony Hopkins to say he was \"shocked and appalled\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
