{"id": "30847", "revid": "3080835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30847", "title": "Toronto Blue Jays", "text": "Major League Baseball franchise in Toronto, Ontario\nThe Toronto Blue Jays are a Canadian professional baseball team based in Toronto. The Blue Jays compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the American League (AL) East Division. Since 1989, the team has played its home games primarily at Rogers Centre in the South Core of downtown Toronto.\nThe name \"Blue Jays\" originates from the blue jay bird, and blue is also the traditional colour of Toronto's collegiate and professional sports teams including the Maple Leafs (ice hockey) and the Argonauts (Canadian football). In 1976, out of the over 4,000 suggestions, 154 people selected the name \"Blue Jays.\" In addition, the team was originally owned by the Labatt Brewing Company, makers of the popular beer Labatt Blue. Colloquially nicknamed the \"Jays,\" the team's official colours are royal blue, white, navy blue, and red. \nAn expansion franchise, the club was founded in Toronto in 1977. Originally based at Exhibition Stadium, the team began playing its home games at SkyDome upon its opening in 1989. They are the second MLB franchise to be based outside the United States, and the only one remaining since the first Canadian franchise, the Montreal Expos, became the Washington Nationals in 2005. Since 2000, the Blue Jays have been owned by Rogers Communications and in 2004, SkyDome was purchased by that company, which renamed it Rogers Centre. The Blue Jays and the Atlanta Braves are the only two MLB teams under corporate ownership; the Blue Jays are the only American League team to be under such ownership. \nDue to border restrictions brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Blue Jays played home games at TD Ballpark in Dunedin, Florida, for April and May of the 2021 season, and Sahlen Field in Buffalo, New York, for the 2020 season as well as June and July 2021, returning home to Toronto on July 30 of that year.\nIn the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Blue Jays went through struggles typical of an expansion team, frequently finishing last in their division. In 1983, they had their first winning season and two years later, became division champions. From 1985 to 1993, the Blue Jays were an AL East powerhouse, winning five division championships in nine seasons, including three consecutive from 1991 to 1993. During that run, the team also became back-to-back World Series champions in 1992 and 1993, led by a core group of award-winning All-Star players, including Hall of Famer Roberto Alomar, Joe Carter, John Olerud, and Devon White. The Blue Jays became the first (and, to date, only) team outside the U.S. to appear in and win a World Series and the fastest AL expansion team to do so, winning in their 16th year. After 1993, the Blue Jays failed to qualify for the playoffs for 21 consecutive seasons until clinching a playoff berth and division championship in 2015. The team clinched a second consecutive playoff berth in 2016, after securing an AL wild card position. In both years, the Blue Jays beat the Texas Rangers in the AL Division Series, but lost the AL Championship Series. Most recently, they qualified for the playoffs as a wild card team in 2020, 2022, and 2023. In 2025, the Blue Jays won their seventh division title and their third American League pennant, but lost in the World Series to the Los Angeles Dodgers.\nFrom 1977 to 2025, the Blue Jays' overall win-loss record is 3,855\u20133,856\u20133 ().\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe Toronto Blue Jays came into existence in 1976 as one of two teams slated to join the American League for the following season via the 1977 Major League Baseball expansion. Toronto had been mentioned as a potential major league city as early as the 1880s and been home to the Toronto Maple Leafs baseball team of the International League from 1896 to 1967. In January 1976, the San Francisco Giants nearly relocated to Toronto after owner Horace Stoneham agreed to sell the team to a Canadian consortium. The group, which included Labatt Breweries of Canada, \"The Globe and Mail\"'s Howard Webster, and the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (CIBC), planned to rebrand the team as the Toronto Giants and play at Exhibition Stadium. However, a court ruling halted the move, and the Giants remained in San Francisco. Despite this setback, Toronto's ambition for an MLB team persisted, leading to their successful bid in the 1976 American League expansion, driven by a need to balance the league after Seattle was granted a team as a result of a lawsuit over their loss of the Pilots.\nThe new Toronto franchise, purchased for $7 million, was named the Toronto Blue Jays following a contest that attracted over 4,000 suggestions. The name reflected Toronto's tradition of using blue in team colours and was influenced by majority owner Labatt Breweries' flagship beer, Labatt Blue. The franchise's first employee, Paul Beeston, began as vice president of business operations, and before the inaugural 1977 season, Peter Bavasi and Pat Gillick were appointed as president and assistant general manager, respectively. The Blue Jays debuted on April 7, 1977, with a win against the Chicago White Sox amid a snowstorm, marking the beginning of a journey from early struggles to eventual success. Throughout the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Blue Jays showed gradual improvement, highlighted by their first winning season in 1983. The team's fortunes rose significantly under manager Bobby Cox in 1985 when they won their first American League East title. The late 1980s and early 1990s, under manager Cito Gaston, were particularly successful, with the Blue Jays winning multiple division titles and back-to-back World Series championships in 1992 and 1993, making them the first team outside the US to achieve this feat. Key players during this golden era included Roberto Alomar, Joe Carter, and Dave Stieb.\nAfter the mid-1990s strike and subsequent downturn, the Blue Jays faced challenges but also saw the rise of talents like Roy Halladay and Carlos Delgado. The late 1990s brought brief revitalization with the acquisition of Roger Clemens. In the early 2000s, general manager J. P. Ricciardi led a rebuilding phase, culminating in a competitive roster by the mid-2000s. The team's resurgence in the 2010s featured playoff appearances in 2015 and 2016, driven by stars like Jos\u00e9 Bautista and Josh Donaldson. The Blue Jays continue to build for future success, with young talents like Vladimir Guerrero Jr., Bo Bichette, and Cavan Biggio leading the charge, though Biggio was later traded in 2024.\n2024 season.\nDuring the off-season, the Blue Jays re-signed Kiermaier and signed utility player Isiah Kiner-Falefa, designated hitter Justin Turner, and pitcher Yariel Rodr\u00edguez. The Blue Jays also traded Santiago Espinal for a pitching prospect.\nDuring the regular season, the Blue Jays designated Cavan Biggio for assignment and traded him for a prospect afterwards. Before the 2024 trade deadline, the Blue Jays traded away Yimi Garc\u00eda, Nate Pearson, Danny Jansen, Justin Turner, Yusei Kikuchi, Trevor Richards, Isiah Kiner-Falefa, and Kevin Kiermaier.\n2025 season.\nThe Toronto Blue Jays signed Anthony Santander and Max Scherzer in the off-season. The Blue Jays extended the contract of Vladimir Guerrero Jr. for $500 million over 14 seasons, making him among the highest paid athletes in the world.\nBefore the 2025 trade deadline, the Blue Jays traded for Seranthony Dom\u00ednguez, Shane Bieber, Louis Varland, and Ty France.\nThe Blue Jays reached the World Series, losing to the Los Angeles Dodgers in seven games with Game 7 going into extra innings.\nPopularity.\n Valuation of the Blue Jays 1991\u2013present (in US dollars)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1977, after just 50 home games, the Blue Jays set an MLB record for a first-year expansion team, with an overall attendance of 1,219,551 during those games. By the end of the season, 1,701,152 fans had attended. After setting an attendance record in 1990, with 3,885,284 fans, in 1991, the Blue Jays became the first MLB team to attract over four million fans, with an attendance of 4,001,526, followed by 4,028,318 in 1992. Each of those records were broken in 1993 by the expansion Colorado Rockies, although the Blue Jays' 1993 attendance of 4,057,947 stood as an AL record for 12 years until it was broken by the 2005 New York Yankees.\nSeveral Blue Jays became very popular in Toronto and throughout the major leagues, starting with Dave Stieb, whose seven All-Star selections is a franchise record. He is closely followed by Roy Halladay and Jos\u00e9 Bautista, who were selected six times each, and by Roberto Alomar and Joe Carter, who were selected five times each. Bautista set a major league record in 2011 (which only stood for a year), with 7,454,753 All-Star votes. In his first season with the Blue Jays in 2015, Josh Donaldson set a new major league record by receiving 14,090,188 All-Star votes.\nThe team is popular throughout Canada, as the only MLB team based in the country following the relocation of the Montreal Expos to Washington. The team has played a number of exhibition games at BC Place in Vancouver including three-game series against the Milwaukee Brewers prior to both the 1984 and 1985 seasons (the Vancouver Canadians were the AAA farm team of the Brewers at the time), as well as single games against the Detroit Tigers and Brewers in 1993 and against the Montreal Expos and Seattle Mariners in 1994 in a series billed as the \"Baseball Classic\". The Jays also played the Cleveland Indians in an exhibition game at War Memorial Stadium in nearby Buffalo, New York in 1987. More recently, the club has hosted a pair of exhibition games at Olympic Stadium in Montreal prior to the start of the season against the New York Mets (2014), Cincinnati Reds (2015), Boston Red Sox (2016), Pittsburgh Pirates (2017), St. Louis Cardinals (2018), Milwaukee Brewers (2019). A series against the New York Yankees was scheduled for 2020, but was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The club also has discussed playing more games at BC Place with the president of the Vancouver Canadians.\nCulture.\n\"OK Blue Jays\".\nDuring the seventh-inning stretch of home games, before singing \"Take Me Out to the Ball Game,\" Blue Jay fans sing and clap to the pop song \"OK Blue Jays\" by Keith Hampshire and The Bat Boys, which was released in 1983. The song was remixed in 2003, and since then, the new, shortened version has been played at home games.\n\"Let's Go Blue Jays\".\nAt home games, the \"Let's Go Blue Jays\" chant is played four times followed by \"Charge\" being played thrice.\nMascots.\nFrom 1979 to 1999, BJ Birdy served as the Blue Jays' sole mascot, played by Kevin Shanahan. In 2000, he was replaced by a duo named Ace and Diamond. After the 2003 season, Diamond was removed by the team, leaving Ace as the team's sole mascot. Since the 2010s, Ace has been accompanied by his younger brother, Junior. This usually happens on the Jr. Jay Saturday promotions until the end of the 2017 season. The promotions were moved to select Sundays since the 2018 season since the Blue Jays can no longer hold early Saturday afternoon games to accommodate American national broadcasts on Fox, though Fox did occasionally broadcast Blue Jays games at the Rogers Centre.\nSunday Salute.\nSince 2012, every Sunday home game, the Blue Jays pay tribute to a member of the Canadian Armed Forces. During the third inning, the team presents the honoured member with a personalized jersey.\nNational anthems.\nSince 2005, \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" has been sung before \"O Canada\" at every home game as all of the Blue Jays' opponents are based in the United States. In some home games (including Canada Day home games), \"O Canada\" is sung in English and French to reflect Canada's bilingual and multicultural heritage and to represent the diverse population of the country. When \"O Canada\" was sung during the Home Opener, Canada Day, playoff games, and World Series, a giant Canadian flag was presented. Due to time constraints and broadcast scheduling, Sportsnet only airs the national anthems during the home opener, Canada Day, playoff games, and World Series because a commercial break occurs during the anthems. On June 29, 2019, \"O Canada\" was sung in Cree and English. On September 30, 2021, the National Day for Truth and Reconciliation, \"O Canada\" was sung in English, French, and Anishinaabemowin. On the following National Day for Truth and Reconciliation, September 30, 2022, \"O Canada\" was sung in French, English, and Blackfoot. For Blue Jays road games, \"O Canada\" is sung before the \"Star-Spangled Banner\" as all road games (since the Expos moved to Washington, DC) for the Blue Jays are in the United States.\nCanada Day.\nThe Blue Jays traditionally host an afternoon home game during Canada Day. During the game, the team wears red jerseys instead of blue jerseys. During the pre-game ceremony, a giant Canadian flag is presented while \"O Canada\" is sung in English and French by Royal Canadian Air Force Band vocalist and Warrant Officer David Grenon since 2022. The game was cancelled in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, the game was held in Buffalo, New York due to Canada\u2013U.S. travel restrictions.\nFan Appreciation Weekend.\nFan Appreciation Weekend traditionally falls on the last weekend of September marking the team's final home games.\nJays Shop.\nThe Blue Jays operate a store called the Jays Shop that sells primarily Blue Jays merchandise. This store has two locations at Rogers Centre, though, until January 2023, there was an additional location in the Toronto Eaton Centre shopping mall.\nUniforms.\n1977\u20131988: Pullovers and powder blue.\nThe Blue Jays wore pullover uniforms during their first decade of existence. The front of the home white uniforms contained the team name in a unique blue/white/blue split-letter style, with the team logo centred below. The road uniforms were powder blue, with the city name in front and the team logo centred below. Initially, the city name was rendered in bold blue letters before gaining a white outline the following season. By 1979, it was replaced by the team name in a split-lettered white/blue/white style. Player numerals also used the split-letter style, except on the road uniform during its first two seasons. Player names in blue were added to both uniforms for the 1980 season but were dropped from the road uniform in 1981. The caps were blue with the Blue Jays logo on a white panel in front.\nIn 2008, the Blue Jays' powder blue road uniform from this era was restored as an alternate home uniform worn every Friday until 2010.\n1989\u20131996: Championship blues.\nThe Blue Jays adopted buttoned uniforms upon moving to Rogers Centre (then SkyDome) in 1989. Aside from the additions of buttons and belts, the only change affecting the home uniforms was the relocation of the team logo to the left chest. The road uniforms changed from powder blue to grey, while the city name and numerals in blue/white/blue split letters were emblazoned, and the logo moved to the left chest. Player names were also added to the road uniform. All-blue caps were worn with their road uniform while keeping the white-panelled blue caps at home. By 1993, the all-blue caps were worn universally, supplanting and eventually retiring the original cap design. The full-time switch to all-blue caps came out of superstition. After the Blue Jays lost five consecutive games of a road trip midway through the 1993 season, they decided to abandon the white-panelled caps for home games in favour of the road all-blue caps, and promptly won their first home game back, en route to winning their second consecutive World Series championship.\nIn 1994 the Blue Jays began wearing blue alternate uniforms with the team name and numerals in white/blue/white split letters.\n1997\u20132003: Red, teal and blue.\nThe Blue Jays updated their logo prior to the 1997 season with a new bird design and an enlarged red maple leaf at the back. The usage of red was greatly increased on the team's new uniforms. On the home uniforms, the letters and numerals were changed to blue/teal/blue split letters, while road uniform letters and numerals were changed to blue/red/blue split letters. On the alternate blue uniforms, split letters and numerals became red/blue/red. Red also appeared on the pant and sleeve stripes, while the new logo occupied the left sleeve. Player names also took on the new block split-letter style. An updated all-blue cap was paired with the home and road uniforms, while a red-brimmed blue cap (with a modified logo without a baseball) was used with the blue alternates.\nIn 1999 the Blue Jays unveiled an alternate sleeveless white uniform, featuring the same lettering style as the regular home uniform. However, the chest numerals were replaced with the primary logo. Blue undershirts were worn with this uniform.\nBefore the 2001 season, slight modifications were made to the uniforms, eliminating the tricolour stripes and adding a single colour piping along the chest and neck. While the home uniforms remained mostly intact, the road uniforms gained blue sleeves in a faux-vest design. On the alternate white uniform (now a faux vest instead of a straight sleeveless design), the new \"T-bird\" logo replaced the primary \"jay leaf\" logo, which moved to the left sleeve. In 2003, the \"T-bird\" logo became the primary, taking over the previous logo's placement on the caps and sleeves, while the alternate white uniforms brought back chest numerals. The \"T-bird\" logo depicts a blue jay flexing its biceps and is nicknamed \"Muscle Jay.\"\n2004\u20132011: The \"Black-and-Graphite Jays\".\nBefore the 2004 season, the Blue Jays adopted a new visual identity, going with a black, silver and graphite motif. The home and black alternates simply read \"Jays\" in front and in a 3D-oriented diagonal arrangement, with the bird connected to the letter \"J.\" Letters and numerals were in graphite with light blue and silver trim. The road uniforms featured the city name in a similar letter style as the logo, with graphite letters and numerals trimmed in light blue and silver. In 2008, however, amid complaints of illegibility, the Blue Jays tweaked their road uniforms to include 3D-style block letters and numerals in light blue trimmed in black and white, along with chest numerals. The \"J-bird\" alternate was added to the left sleeve. A red maple leaf would be added on the right sleeve starting in 2009. The Blue Jays wore all-black caps with the \"J-bird\" logo for much of the uniforms' existence, save for the 2004 and 2005 seasons when they wore all-graphite caps at home, and in 2007 when an alternate all-black cap with the \"T\" from the previous road uniform was used.\n2012\u2013present: Return to traditional look.\nPrior to the 2012 season, the Blue Jays unveiled new uniforms and a new logo. The logo is a modernized version of the original logo used from 1977 to 1996. The bird's head was also made sleeker than its 1977\u20131996 predecessor. The uniforms are similar to the ones used from 1989 to 1996, the team's most successful era. New serifed split letters were also released. In 2015, the Blue Jays began wearing a modernized version of the white-panelled blue caps they originally wore from 1977 to 1993 as an alternate. Initially, the modern white-panelled caps were worn occasionally from 2015 to 2022, but after a two-year hiatus, it was brought back for three of the Blue Jays' final four home games in 2025. The return of the white-panelled caps was suggested by Blue Jays pitcher Jeff Hoffman after the team lost six of their last seven games amid a heated division race with the New York Yankees. Consequently, the Blue Jays finished the season winning the final four games, earning the division title.\nBefore the 2020 season, the Blue Jays unveiled a modernized version of the powder blue uniforms, featuring navy/white/navy serifed split letters and numerals. These uniforms are paired with a powder-brimmed navy cap and an all-navy helmet.\nCanada Day uniforms.\nSince 1996, the Blue Jays wore predominantly red or red-accented uniforms every July 1, Canada Day. The uniforms were based on the team's alternate uniforms they wore at the time but with red as the primary colour. On a few occasions, the Blue Jays added red trim to an existing white uniform (or, in the case of the 2006 uniforms, their black alternates) and sometimes added the flag of Canada or a red maple leaf on the uniform.\nCity Connect uniform.\nIn 2024, the Blue Jays unveiled a City Connect uniform inspired by Toronto's nightlife. The jersey is nicknamed \"Night Mode\" and is a \"pitch blue\" (dark blue) uniform that features an illustration of the Toronto skyline in royal blue, centred by the \"Toronto\" wordmark in red. The \"pitch blue\" colour is a reference to Lake Ontario's reflection at night. The traditional Blue Jays logo patch on the sleeve is recoloured to match the uniform. The cap is also \"pitch blue\" and features a red maple leaf at the centre of a stylized red and blue \"T\" in split letters.\nRivalries.\nDetroit Tigers.\nThe Detroit Tigers are the Blue Jays' geographic and traditional rival, dating back to the 1980s, when the teams were AL East contenders. The Tigers moved to the AL Central in 1998, and the rivalry has died down as a result, with the teams facing each other only six to seven times per year since 2011. Depending on traffic and border delays, Detroit is about a four-hour drive from Toronto via Highway 401. According to \"The Detroit News\", a July 2017 three-game series at Comerica Park against the Blue Jays drew a season-best-to-date total attendance of 115,088.\nSeattle Mariners.\nAlthough the Seattle Mariners are not a divisional rival, many Blue Jays fans from Western Canada travel to Seattle when the Blue Jays play there as Seattle is geographically closer to Western Canada than Toronto is. Depending on traffic and border delays, Seattle is about a three-hour drive from Vancouver. \"The Seattle Times\" estimated that Blue Jays fans represented around 70 percent of the crowd in Safeco Field for a June 2017 weekend series. In 2025, the teams met in a dramatic American League Championship Series (ALCS), with the Blue Jays defeating the Mariners in seven games.\nMontreal Expos.\nThe Montreal Expos were the Blue Jays' geographic National League rival, being the other Canadian MLB team before it was relocated. From 1978 to 1986, the teams played an annual mid-season exhibition game known as the Pearson Cup, named after former Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson. The teams began facing each other in the regular season in 1997 with the advent of interleague play. During the 2003 and 2004 seasons, the Expos' last two seasons before relocating to Washington, D.C., as the Nationals, the Pearson Cup was awarded after a pair of three-game sets.\nBroadcasting.\nRadio.\nThe Blue Jays' former radio play-by-play announcer, Tom Cheek, called every Toronto Blue Jays game from the team's inaugural contest on April 7, 1977, until June 3, 2004, when he took two games off following the death of his father\u2014a streak of 4,306 consecutive regular-season games and 41 postseason games. Cheek later died on October 9, 2005, and the team commemorated him during their 2006 season by wearing a circular patch on the left sleeve of their home and road game jerseys. The patch was adorned with the letters 'TC', Cheek's initials, as well as a stylized microphone. Cheek is also honoured with a place in the Blue Jays' \"Level of Excellence\" in the upper level of the Rogers Centre; the number 4,306 is depicted beside his name. In 2008, Cheek received the third most votes from fans to be nominated for the Ford C. Frick Award for broadcasting excellence. Cheek finally received the Frick Award posthumously in 2013 after nine years on the ballot.\nRadio broadcasts of Blue Jays games originate from Sportsnet 590 CJCL in Toronto, which, like the Blue Jays, is owned by Rogers Communications. After Cheek's retirement in 2005, Jerry Howarth, who had been Cheek's broadcasting partner since 1982, took over as lead play-by-play announcer, with Mike Wilner as the secondary play-by-play announcer. During the 2007 to 2012 seasons, former Blue Jays catcher Alan Ashby was the colour commentator. Former Blue Jays pitcher Jack Morris served as the colour commentator during the 2013 season, after which he was replaced by former Montreal Expos catcher Joe Siddall since the 2014 season.\nFormer Blue Jays pitcher Dirk Hayhurst filled in for Morris for some games during the 2013 season.\nAnother former catcher for the Blue Jays, Gregg Zaun, has served as the occasional colour commentator from the 2011 season until the end of the 2017 season when he was terminated amid accusations of improper conduct from several female employees.\nFollowing Howarth's retirement in the 2017 season, Ben Wagner was hired as the primary radio play-by-play announcer, splitting said duties with Dan Shulman and Mike Wilner.\nIn November 2020, Mike Wilner was laid off by the team. In February 2021, it was announced that \"in an effort to minimize travel and closely adhere to team, league, and government protocols related to the pandemic\", all radio broadcasts for the 2021 season will be a simulcast of the television broadcast. Wagner will assume an alternative role. However, once the Blue Jays returned to Rogers Centre in late July 2021, dedicated radio broadcasts resumed.\nThe Blue Jays have the largest geographical home market in all of baseball, encompassing all of Canada. Despite this, the number of radio stations that broadcast games is actually quite small. Only 18 radio stations across the country aired at least some Blue Jays games during the 2021 season, which is fewer affiliates than most MLB teams, which have more stations covering smaller geographic areas.\nTelevision.\nAll Blue Jays games are carried nationally on Sportsnet (which, like the Blue Jays, is owned by Rogers Communications). As of 2023, Dan Shulman serves as the lead play-by-play announcer, with Buck Martinez as the primary colour commentator; on select series, Toronto Raptors play-by-play announcer Matt Devlin calls the game in place of Shulman, and Joe Siddall works colour commentary in place of Martinez. Prior to that, Martinez had been the primary play-by-play announcer alongside colour commentator Pat Tabler, with Shulman only calling games sporadically since 2016. In previous years, the colour analyst role rotated between Pat Tabler, Rance Mulliniks, Darrin Fletcher, and from 2011 to 2017, Gregg Zaun. Sportsnet became the team's primary carrier soon after it launched in the late 1990s and became the team's exclusive broadcaster in 2010. As of August 2010, Sportsnet One also broadcasts Blue Jays games (often in case of scheduling conflicts with the main Sportsnet channels). Rogers was, however, criticized by fans and critics due to Sportsnet One only being carried by Rogers Cable systems on launch.\nSportsnet's broadcasts of the 2015 American League Division Series involving the Blue Jays were among the highest-rated telecasts in network history, with Game 4 drawing an audience of 4.38 million viewers.\nIn September 2012, AMI-tv simulcast three Blue Jays games with described video provided by CJCL correspondent Sam Cosentino, which included explanations of on-screen graphics. Paul Beeston praised AMI's involvement, stating that \"to our knowledge, we are the first sports organization to have our games provided through this revolutionary approach to accommodating the needs of the blind and low-vision community.\"\nOn June 27, 2013, Rogers' over-the-air Toronto multicultural Omni Television station CJMT-DT simulcast a Blue Jays game, scheduled to be started by Taiwanese player Chien-Ming Wang, with commentary in Mandarin, marking the first ever Canadian MLB broadcast in the language. In June 2018, Omni announced that it would air Sunday afternoon games in Tagalog, the most spoken language of the Philippines, through the remainder of the season. Sportsnet and Omni announced a regular season of Sunday broadcasts in Tagalog for the 2019 season.\nTVA Sports has aired games in French since 2011, with Denis Casavant and Fran\u00e7ois Paquet on play-by-play and Rodger Brulotte on colour. The channel currently has rights to 81 Blue Jay games per season in a three-year deal signed in 2023. Jacques Doucet, former Montreal Expos radio announcer, broadcast the Blue Jays on TVA Sports from 2011 until his retirement in 2022.\nThe Sports Network (TSN), which (like the Jays) was owned by Labatt from 1984 to 1995, served as the primary cable television outlet for the Blue Jays prior to the launch of Sportsnet. TSN (and later, its sister channel TSN2) continued to carry approximately ten Jays games through the 2009 season until May 2010; most recently, Rod Black handled play-by-play while Tabler served as colour commentator on these telecasts. CBC has carried Blue Jays games intermittently throughout the team's history, most recently in 2007 and 2008; those broadcasts featured Jim Hughson as the play-by-play announcer, and former Blue Jays Rance Mulliniks and Jesse Barfield on colour commentary. Games also aired on CTV (except in Montreal) from the team's inception until the late 1990s. The Blue Jays have not appeared over-the-air in Canada in English since 2008.\nIn 2008, Rogers Communications, owner of the Jays, was granted a license by the Canadian Radio-Television Commission (CRTC) for a \"Baseball TV\" specialty channel. The channel would have been dedicated to coverage of baseball, combining content from the United States\u2013based MLB Network with original Canadian content. However, the channel was never launched, and Rogers sponsored an application to allow distribution of the U.S. MLB Network on Canadian providers instead.\nUntil 2022, Sportsnet was not permitted to use its domestic production for Blue Jays games if the team is in postseason play (as it is technically still considered a regional broadcaster) and instead carries the U.S. broadcast (such as Fox in 2015, and TBS in 2016). Buck Martinez has served as a colour commentator for post-season coverage ultimately simulcast by Sportsnet, however, having formerly worked Division Series games for TBS and on the MLB International broadcast of the 2016 World Series. Beginning in 2022, MLB allowed Sportsnet to carry its own production of Blue Jays postseason games as the network's classification was changed from a regional to a national broadcaster.\nMinor league affiliations.\nThe Toronto Blue Jays farm system consists of seven minor league affiliates.\nAwards and other achievements.\nNo-hitters.\nOnly one Blue Jays pitcher has thrown a no-hitter in franchise history. It was accomplished by Dave Stieb on September 2, 1990, against the Cleveland Indians, after losing three no-hit bids with two outs in the ninth inning.\nNo perfect games, a special subcategory of no-hitter, has been thrown in Blue Jays history. The franchise came closest on August 4, 1989, when Stieb gave up a double to Yankees' batter Roberto Kelly with two outs in the ninth, who then scored by the next batter.\nTriple Crown champions.\nRoger Clemens won the pitching Triple Crown in 1997 and 1998.\nBaseball Hall of Famers.\nEleven former Blue Jays, one former manager, and one former general manager have been elected into the Baseball Hall of Fame. Second baseman Roberto Alomar, elected to the Hall of Fame in 2011, is the first player to be inducted based primarily on service as a player for the Blue Jays.\nToronto Blue Jays Hall of Famers\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\nToronto Blue Jays\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBobby Doerr, a second baseman with the Boston Red Sox, served as a hitting coach with the Blue Jays early in their history, 1977\u20131981, and was the first person associated with the franchise to be elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame, in 1986.\nEarly Wynn, the Baseball Hall of Fame pitcher (1972) and career 300-game winner, was a radio broadcaster for the Blue Jays with Tom Cheek during their first few years, 1977\u20131981.\nFord C. Frick Award recipients.\nToronto Blue Jays Ford C. Frick Award recipients\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBBWAA Career Excellence Award recipients.\nNames in bold received the award based primarily on their work covering the Blue Jays.\nRetired numbers.\nSoon after becoming the first person to be inducted in the Hall of Fame as a Blue Jay, on July 31, 2011, second baseman Roberto Alomar was the first person to have his number, #12, retired by the Blue Jays. However, #12 was unretired due to controversies surrounding Alomar. Jordan Hicks became the first Blue Jay since 2011 to wear this number in 2023.\nOn March 29, 2018, the Blue Jays retired #32 in honour of Roy Halladay, who died in an airplane crash on November 7, 2017, becoming the second number to be retired by the Blue Jays.\nLevel of Excellence.\nIn 1996, the Blue Jays instituted a \"Level of Excellence\" on the 500 level of the Rogers Centre, honouring \"tremendous individual achievement.\"\nPlayers' uniform numbers are listed, and in Tom Cheek's case, the number of consecutive games he called for the Blue Jays\u2014until the 2013 All-Star Break, even though, with the exception of Roberto Alomar and Roy Halladay, these numbers have not been retired. During the 2013 All-Star Break, the Level of Excellence was redesigned for the addition of Carlos Delgado's name. The redesign removed all uniform numbers from the Level of Excellence aside from Roberto Alomar's retired #12, Roy Halladay's retired #32 and Tom Cheek's 4306 consecutive called games streak. On April 30, 2021, the Blue Jays announced that they would remove Alomar from the Level of Excellence and take down his banner at Rogers Centre after he was banned from baseball for sexual harassment.\nCharity and partnerships.\nThe Jays Care Foundation is the charitable arm of the Toronto Blue Jays baseball organization and conducts events to support local organizations and community members. They also provide baseball education and life skill workshops to the youth of communities across Canada.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSome text copied via the GFDL from https://"}
{"id": "30848", "revid": "2720564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30848", "title": "Turbine", "text": "Device that extracts energy from a fluid flow\nA turbine ( or ) (from the Greek , \"tyrb\u0113\", or Latin \"turbo\", meaning vortex) is a rotary mechanical device that extracts energy from a fluid flow and converts it into useful work. The work produced can be used for generating electrical power when combined with a generator. A turbine is a turbomachine with at least one moving part called a rotor assembly, which is a shaft or drum with blades attached. Moving fluid acts on the blades so that they move and impart rotational energy to the rotor.\nGas, steam, and water turbines have a casing around the blades that contains and controls the working fluid. Modern steam turbines frequently employ both reaction and impulse in the same unit, typically varying the degree of reaction and impulse from the blade root to its periphery.\nHistory.\nHero of Alexandria demonstrated the turbine principle in an aeolipile in the first century AD and Vitruvius mentioned them around 70 BC.\nEarly turbine examples are windmills and waterwheels.\nThe word \"turbine\" was first applied to this kind of device in 1822 by the French mining engineer Claude Burdin in a memo, \"Des turbines hydrauliques ou machines rotatoires \u00e0 grande vitesse\", which he submitted to the Acad\u00e9mie royale des sciences in Paris. The word derives from the Latin , meaning \"vortex\" or \"top\", and was in use in French to describe certain seashells. However, it was not until 1824 that a committee of the Acad\u00e9mie (composed of Prony, Dupin, and Girard) reported favorably on Burdin's memo. Benoit Fourneyron, a former student of Claude Burdin, built the first practical water turbine.\nCredit for invention of the steam turbine is given both to Anglo-Irish engineer Sir Charles Parsons (1854\u20131931) for invention of the reaction turbine, and to Swedish engineer Gustaf de Laval (1845\u20131913) for invention of the impulse turbine.\nTheory of operation.\nA working fluid contains potential energy (pressure head) and kinetic energy (velocity head). The fluid may be compressible or incompressible. Several physical principles are employed by turbines to collect this energy:\nImpulse turbines change the direction of flow of a high velocity fluid or gas jet. The resulting impulse spins the turbine and leaves the fluid flow with diminished kinetic energy. There is no pressure change of the fluid or gas in the turbine blades (the moving blades), as in the case of a steam or gas turbine, all the pressure drop takes place in the stationary blades (the nozzles). Before reaching the turbine, the fluid's \"pressure head\" is changed to \"velocity head\" by accelerating the fluid with a nozzle. Pelton wheels and de Laval turbines use this process exclusively. Impulse turbines do not require a pressure casement around the rotor since the fluid jet is created by the nozzle prior to reaching the blades on the rotor. Newton's second law describes the transfer of energy for impulse turbines. Impulse turbines are most efficient for use in cases where the flow is low and the inlet pressure is high.\nReaction turbines develop torque by reacting to the gas or fluid's pressure or mass. The pressure of the gas or fluid changes as it passes through the turbine rotor blades. A pressure casement is needed to contain the working fluid as it acts on the turbine stage(s) or the turbine must be fully immersed in the fluid flow (such as with wind turbines). The casing contains and directs the working fluid and, for water turbines, maintains the suction imparted by the draft tube. Francis turbines and most steam turbines use this concept. For compressible working fluids, multiple turbine stages are usually used to harness the expanding gas efficiently. Newton's third law describes the transfer of energy for reaction turbines. Reaction turbines are better suited to higher flow velocities or applications where the fluid head (upstream pressure) is low.\nIn the case of steam turbines, such as would be used for marine applications or for land-based electricity generation, a Parsons-type reaction turbine would require approximately double the number of blade rows as a de Laval-type impulse turbine, for the same degree of thermal energy conversion. Whilst this makes the Parsons turbine much longer and heavier, the overall efficiency of a reaction turbine is slightly higher than the equivalent impulse turbine for the same thermal energy conversion.\nIn practice, modern turbine designs use both reaction and impulse concepts to varying degrees whenever possible. Wind turbines use an airfoil to generate a reaction lift from the moving fluid and impart it to the rotor. Wind turbines also gain some energy from the impulse of the wind, by deflecting it at an angle. Turbines with multiple stages may use either reaction or impulse blading at high pressure. Steam turbines were traditionally more impulse but continue to move towards reaction designs similar to those used in gas turbines. At low pressure the operating fluid medium expands in volume for small reductions in pressure. Under these conditions, blading becomes strictly a reaction type design with the base of the blade solely impulse. The reason is the effect of the rotation speed for each blade. As the volume increases, the blade height increases, and the base of the blade spins at a slower speed relative to the tip. This change in speed forces a designer to change from impulse at the base, to a high reaction-style tip.\nClassical turbine design methods were developed in the mid 19th century. Vector analysis related the fluid flow with turbine shape and rotation. Graphical calculation methods were used at first. Formulae for the basic dimensions of turbine parts are well documented and a highly efficient machine can be reliably designed for any fluid flow condition. Some of the calculations are empirical or 'rule of thumb' formulae, and others are based on classical mechanics. As with most engineering calculations, simplifying assumptions were made.\nVelocity triangles can be used to calculate the basic performance of a turbine stage. Gas exits the stationary turbine nozzle guide vanes at absolute velocity \"V\"a1. The rotor rotates at velocity \"U\". Relative to the rotor, the velocity of the gas as it impinges on the rotor entrance is \"V\"r1. The gas is turned by the rotor and exits, relative to the rotor, at velocity \"V\"r2. However, in absolute terms the rotor exit velocity is \"V\"a2. The velocity triangles are constructed using these various velocity vectors. Velocity triangles can be constructed at any section through the blading (for example: hub, tip, midsection and so on) but are usually shown at the mean stage radius. Mean performance for the stage can be calculated from the velocity triangles, at this radius, using the Euler equation:\nformula_1\nHence:\nformula_2\nwhere:\nformula_3 is the specific enthalpy drop across stage\nformula_4 is the turbine entry total (or stagnation) temperature\nformula_5 is the turbine rotor peripheral velocity\nformula_6 is the change in whirl velocity\nThe turbine pressure ratio is a function of formula_7 and the turbine efficiency.\nModern turbine design carries the calculations further. Computational fluid dynamics dispenses with many of the simplifying assumptions used to derive classical formulas and computer software facilitates optimization. These tools have led to steady improvements in turbine design over the last forty years.\nThe primary numerical classification of a turbine is its specific speed. This number describes the speed of the turbine at its maximum efficiency with respect to the power and flow rate. The specific speed is derived to be independent of turbine size. Given the fluid flow conditions and the desired shaft output speed, the specific speed can be calculated and an appropriate turbine design selected.\nThe specific speed, along with some fundamental formulas can be used to reliably scale an existing design of known performance to a new size with corresponding performance.\nOff-design performance is normally displayed as a turbine map or characteristic.\nThe number of blades in the rotor and the number of vanes in the stator are often two different prime numbers in order to reduce the harmonics and maximize the blade-passing frequency.\nUses.\nA large proportion of the world's electrical power is generated by turbo generators.\nTurbines are used in gas turbine engines on land, sea and air.\nTurbochargers are used on piston engines.\nGas turbines have very high power densities (i.e. the ratio of power to mass, or power to volume) because they run at very high speeds. The Space Shuttle main engines used turbopumps (machines consisting of a pump driven by a turbine engine) to feed the propellants (liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen) into the engine's combustion chamber. The liquid hydrogen turbopump is slightly larger than an automobile engine (weighing approximately 700\u00a0lb) with the turbine producing nearly 70,000 hp (52.2 MW).\nTurboexpanders are used for refrigeration in industrial processes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30849", "revid": "488581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30849", "title": "Toledo, Ohio", "text": "City in Ohio, United States\nToledo ( ) is a city in Lucas County, Ohio, United States, of which it is also the county seat. It is located at the western end of Lake Erie along the Maumee River. Toledo is the fourth-most populous city in Ohio and 86th-most populous city in the U.S., with a population of 270,871 at the 2020 census. The Toledo metropolitan area has an estimated 601,000 residents. Toledo also serves as a major trade center for the Midwest; its port is the fifth-busiest on the Great Lakes.\nThe city was founded in 1833 on the west bank of the Maumee River and originally incorporated as part of the Michigan Territory. It was re-founded in 1837 after the conclusion of the Toledo War, when it was incorporated in Ohio. After the 1845 completion of the Miami and Erie Canal, Toledo grew quickly; it also benefited from its position on the railway line between New York City and Chicago. The first of many glass manufacturers arrived in the 1880s, eventually earning Toledo its nickname as \"The Glass City\". Downtown Toledo has been subject to major revitalization efforts, including a growing entertainment district. Toledo is home to the University of Toledo.\nHistory.\nThe region was part of a larger area controlled by the historic tribes of the Wyandot and the people of the Council of Three Fires (Ojibwe, Potawatomi, and Odawa). The French established trading posts in the area by 1680 to take advantage of the lucrative fur trade. The Odawa moved from Manitoulin Island and the Bruce Peninsula at the invitation of the French, who established a trading post at Fort Detroit, about 60 miles to the north. They settled an area extending into northwest Ohio. By the early 18th century, the Odawa-occupied areas along most of the Maumee River to its mouth. They served as middlemen between the French and tribes further to the west and north. The Wyandot occupied central Ohio, and the Shawnee and Lenape occupied the southern areas.\nWhen the city of Toledo was preparing to pave its streets, it surveyed \"two prehistoric semicircular earthworks, presumably for stockades.\" One was at the intersection of Clayton and Oliver Streets on the south bank of Swan Creek; the other was at the intersection of Fassett and Fort Streets on the right bank of the Maumee River. Such earthworks were typical of mound-building peoples.\n19th century.\nAccording to Charles E. Slocum, the American military built Fort Industry at the mouth of the Swan Creek at about 1805 as a temporary stockade. No official reports support the 19th-century tradition of its earlier history there.\nThe United States continued to work to transition the area's population from Native Americans to Whites. In the Treaty of Detroit (1807), the above four tribes ceded a large land area to the United States of what became southeastern Michigan and northwestern Ohio, to the mouth of the Maumee River (where Toledo later developed). Reserves for the Odawa were set aside in northwestern Ohio for a limited time. The Native Americans signed the treaty at Detroit, Michigan, on November 17, 1807, with William Hull, governor of the Michigan Territory and superintendent of Indian affairs, as the sole representative of the U.S.\nMore American settlers entered the area over the next few years, but many fled during the War of 1812, when British forces raided the area with their Native American allies. Resettlement began around 1818 after a Cincinnati syndicate purchased a tract at the mouth of Swan Creek and named it Port Lawrence, developing it as the modern downtown area of Toledo. Immediately to the north of that, another syndicate founded the town of Vistula, the historic north end. These two towns bordered each other across Cherry Street. This is why present-day streets on the street's northeast side run at a slightly different angle from those southwest of it.\nIn 1824, the Ohio state legislature authorized the construction of the Miami and Erie Canal, and in 1833, its Wabash and Erie Canal extension. The canal's purpose was to connect the city of Cincinnati to Lake Erie for water transportation to eastern markets, including to New York City via the Erie Canal and Hudson River. At that time, no highways had been built in the state, and goods produced locally had great difficulty reaching the larger markets east of the Appalachian Mountains. During the canal's planning phase, many small towns along the northern shores of the Maumee River heavily competed to be the ending terminus of the canal, knowing it would give them a profitable status. The towns of Port Lawrence and Vistula merged in 1833 to better compete against the upriver towns of Waterville and Maumee.\nThe inhabitants of this joined settlement chose the name Toledo:\n\"but the reason for this choice is buried in a welter of legends. One recounts that Washington Irving, who was traveling in Spain at the time, suggested the name to his brother, a local resident; this explanation ignores the fact that Irving returned to the United States in 1832. Others award the honor to Two Stickney, son of the major who quaintly numbered his sons and named his daughters after States. The most popular version attributes the naming to Willard J. Daniels, a merchant, who reportedly suggested Toledo because it 'is easy to pronounce, is pleasant in sound, and there is no other city of that name on the American continent.'\"Despite Toledo's efforts, the canal built the final terminus in Manhattan, to the north of Toledo, because it was closer to Lake Erie. As a compromise, the state placed two sidecuts before the terminus, one in Toledo at Swan Creek and another in Maumee, about 10 miles to the southwest.\nAmong the numerous treaties made between the Ottawa and the United States were two signed in this area: at Miami (Maumee) Bay in 1831 and Maumee, Ohio, upriver of Toledo, in 1833. These actions were among US purchases or exchanges of land to accomplish Indian Removal of the Ottawa from areas wanted for European-American settlement. The last of the Odawa did not leave this area until 1839, when Ottoke, grandson of Pontiac, led his band from their village at the mouth of the Maumee River to Indian Territory in Kansas.\nAn almost bloodless conflict between Ohio and the Michigan Territory, called the Toledo War (1835\u20131836), was \"fought\" over a narrow strip of land from the Indiana border to Lake Erie, now containing the city and the suburbs of Sylvania and Oregon, Ohio. The strip, which varied between five and in width, was claimed by both the state of Ohio and the Michigan Territory due to conflicting legislation concerning the location of the Ohio-Michigan state line. Militias from both states were sent to the border, but never engaged. The only casualty of the conflict was a Michigan deputy sheriff\u2014stabbed in the leg with a penknife by Two Stickney during the arrest of his elder brother, One Stickney, and the loss of two horses, two pigs, and a few chickens stolen from an Ohio farm by lost members of the Michigan militia. Major Benjamin Franklin Stickney, father of One and Two Stickney, had been instrumental in pushing Congress to rule in favor of Ohio gaining Toledo. In the end, the state of Ohio was awarded the land after the state of Michigan was given a larger portion of the Upper Peninsula in exchange. Stickney Avenue in Toledo is named for Major Stickney.\nToledo was very slow to expand during its first two decades of settlement. The first lot was sold in the Port Lawrence section of the city in 1833. It held 1,205 persons in 1835, and five years later, it had gained just seven more persons. Settlers came and went quickly through Toledo and between 1833 and 1836, ownership of land had changed so many times that none of the original parties remained in the town. The canal and its Toledo side-cut entrance were completed in 1843. Soon after the canal was functional, the new canal boats had become too large to use the shallow waters at the terminus in Manhattan. More boats began using the Swan Creek side-cut than its official terminus, quickly putting the Manhattan warehouses out of business and triggering a rush to move business to Toledo. Most of Manhattan's residents moved out by 1844.\nThe 1850 census recorded Toledo as having 3,829 residents and Manhattan 541. The 1860 census shows Toledo with a population of 13,768 and Manhattan with 788. While the towns were only a mile apart, Toledo grew by 359% in 10 years. Manhattan's growth was on a small base and never competed, given the drawbacks of its lesser canal outlet. By the 1880s, Toledo expanded over the vacant streets of Manhattan and Tremainsville, a small town to the west.\nIn the last half of the 19th century, railroads slowly began to replace canals as the major form of transportation. They were faster and had greater capacity. Toledo soon became a hub for several railroad companies and a hotspot for industries such as furniture producers, carriage makers, breweries, and glass manufacturers. Large immigrant populations came to the area.\n20th century.\nIn the 1920s, Toledo had one of the highest rates of industrial growth in the United States.\nToledo continued to expand in population and industry, but because of its dependence on manufacturing, the city was hit hard by the Great Depression. Many large-scale Works Progress Administration projects were constructed to re-employ citizens in the 1930s. Some of these include the amphitheater and aquarium at the Toledo Zoo and a major expansion to the Toledo Museum of Art.\nThe postwar job boom and Great Migration brought thousands of African Americans to Toledo to work in industrial jobs, where they had previously been denied. Due to redlining, many of them settled along Dorr Street, which, during the 1950s and 1960s was lined with flourishing black-owned businesses and homes. Desegregation, a failed urban renewal project, and the construction of I-75 displaced those residents and left behind a struggling community with minimal resources, even as it also drew more established, middle-class people, white and black, out of center cities for newer housing. The city rebounded, but the slump of American manufacturing in the second half of the 20th century during industrial restructuring cost many jobs.\nBy the 1980s, Toledo had a depressed economy. The destruction of many buildings downtown, along with several failed business ventures in housing in the core, which led to a reverse city-suburb wealth problem common in small cities with land to spare.\n21st century.\nSeveral initiatives have been taken by Toledo's citizens to improve the cityscape by urban gardening and revitalizing their communities. Local artists, supported by organizations like the Arts Commission of Greater Toledo and the Ohio Arts Council, have contributed an array of murals and beautification works to replace long standing blight. Many downtown historical buildings such as the Oliver House and Stand-art Lofts have been renovated into restaurants, condominiums, offices and art galleries.\nOn the evening of August 1, 2014, the city of Toledo issued a warning to citizens advising against the use of city water, leaving more than half a million people suddenly without water. A bloom of toxic blue-green algae had formed directly over Toledo's water intake pipe, which was situated a few miles off shore in Lake Erie. Because of the algae bloom forming just above the pipe, the water being pumped into Toledo showed levels of harmful bacteria that made the water unsafe to interact with. On August 3, the Ohio National Guard was brought in to deliver over 10,000 gallons of water to citizens due to a rapid depletion of bottled water locally. The warning against using water lasted nearly three days, finally ending late on August 4.\nIn 2018, Cleveland-Cliffs, Inc. invested $700 million into an East Toledo location as the site of a new hot-briquetted iron plant, designed to modernize the steel industry. The plant was slated to create over 1,200 jobs. Construction was completed in 2020, as planned.\nGeography.\nToledo is located at (41.6525, \u221283.5375). The city has a total area of , of which is covered by water.\nThe city straddles the Maumee River at its mouth at the southern end of Maumee Bay, the westernmost inlet of Lake Erie. The city is located north of what had been the Great Black Swamp, giving rise to another nickname, Frog Town. Toledo sits within the borders of a sandy oak savanna called the Oak Openings Region, an important ecological site that once comprised more than .\nToledo is within by road from seven metropolitan areas that have a population of more than two million people: Detroit, Cleveland, Columbus, Cincinnati, Pittsburgh, Indianapolis, and Chicago. In addition, it is within west of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.\nCityscape.\nNeighborhoods and suburbs.\nThe Old West End is a historic neighborhood of Victorian, Arts &amp; Crafts, and other Edwardian-style houses made in the era. The historic district is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOn January 15, 1936, the first building to be completely covered in glass was constructed in Toledo. It was a building for the Owens-Illinois Glass Company and marked a milestone in architectural design representative of the International style of architecture, which was at that time becoming increasingly popular in the US.\nAccording to the US Census Bureau, the Toledo metropolitan area covers three Ohio counties. Some of Toledo's suburbs in Ohio include Bowling Green, Holland, Lake Township, Maumee, Millbury, Monclova Township, Northwood, Oregon, Ottawa Hills, Perrysburg, Rossford, Springfield Township, Sylvania, Walbridge, Waterville, Whitehouse, and Washington Township. Bedford Township, Michigan, including the communities of Lambertville, Temperance, and Erie Township, includes Toledo's Michigan suburbs.\nClimate.\nToledo, as with much of the Great Lakes region, has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa\"), characterized by four distinct seasons. Lake Erie moderates the climate somewhat, especially in late spring and fall, when air and water temperature differences are maximal. However, this effect is lessened in the winter because Lake Erie (unlike the other Great Lakes) usually freezes over, coupled with prevailing winds that are often westerly, and in the summer, prevailing winds south and west over the lake bring heat and humidity to the city.\nSummers are very warm and humid, with July averaging and temperatures of or more seen on 18.8 days. Winters are cold and somewhat snowy, with a January mean temperature of , and lows at or below on 5.6 nights. The spring months tend to be the wettest time of year, although precipitation is common year-round. November and December can get very cloudy, but January and February usually clear up after the lake freezes. July is the sunniest month overall. About of snow falls per year, much less than the Snow Belt cities, because of the prevailing wind direction. Temperature extremes have ranged from on January 21, 1984, to on July 14, 1936.\nAlgae blooms.\nHarmful blooms of cyanobacteria, or blue-green algae, were so extremely bad in the 1960s that Lake Erie was mocked as a dead zone, said to have \"no life\". However, through clean water rules the lake was revived. Algal blooms have returned and have been negatively affecting Lake Erie since the late 1990s. Heightened levels of blue-green algae can affect both human and ecosystem health by causing fish to die and the water to be discolored and foul smelling, and oxygen-deficient dead zones may even start to form. Sometimes the blooms are so thick that they slow boats. These large blooms are caused by agricultural runoff flowing into the lake. Agricultural runoff dumps phosphorus into the western basin of Lake Erie and acts as a fertilizer for the blue-green algae, and the warmer weather seen in July through October in Northern Ohio helps speed up the growing process. Because of Toledo's closeness to the lake, Toledo citizens are affected each year. Algal blooms can cause water bills to increase in this area $100 per year for a family of five. The effects of these blooms go beyond higher water bills, as heightened blooms can even shut down parts of the economy, such as tourism and fishing industries, and cause property values to drop, costing the local economy tens of millions of dollars.\nDemographics.\nIn 1870, 75.3% of Toledo's foreign-born population were from Germany and Ireland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2010 census, the city proper had a population of 287,128. It is the principal city in the Toledo Metropolitan Statistical Area which had a population of 651,429 and was the sixth-largest metropolitan area in the state of Ohio, behind Cleveland, Columbus, Cincinnati, Dayton, and Akron. The larger Toledo-Fremont Combined Statistical Area had a population of 712,373. According to the Toledo Metropolitan Council of Governments, the Toledo/Northwest Ohio region of 10 counties has over one million residents.\nThe U.S. Census Bureau estimated Toledo's population as 297,806 in 2006 and 295,029 in 2007. In response to an appeal by the City of Toledo, the Census Bureau's July 2007 estimate was revised to 316,851, slightly more than in 2000, which would have been the city's first population gain in 40 years. However, the 2010 census figures released in March 2011 showed the population as of April 1, 2010, at 287,208, indicating a 25% loss of population since its zenith in 1970.\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census there were 270,871 people, 116,257 households, and an average of 2.27 persons per household residing in Toledo. The population per square mile was 3,365.4. The racial makeup of Toledo was 60.6% White, 28.1% African American, 0.3% Native American, Alaska Native or Native Hawaiian, and 1.3% were Asian. 6.7% of the population belonged to two or more races. Hispanic or Latino citizens make up 8.8% of the population. People who identified as White, not Hispanic or Latino, made up 57.3% of the population, down from 61.4% in 2010.\nOut of 270,871 people, 23.3% were under the age of 18, and 14.5% were 65 years old and over. 51.1% of the population were female. 14.1% of the population under 65 years of age were living with a disability, and 8.3% of those under 65 years of age did not have health insurance. Out of the 116,257 households, 83.7% had been living in the same house for one year or longer. 6.4% of households in Toledo spoke a language other than English at home. The total number of housing units was unavailable, however 51.9% of housing units were either owned or co-owned by its inhabitants.\nThe median household income (in 2021 dollars) in Toledo was $41,671, with the per capita income in the past 12 months coming to $23,795. 24.5% of the population was living in poverty, compared to the national average at this time of 11.6% of the U.S. population. For education, 87.1% of people 25 years or older were a high school graduate or higher, with 19.6% of this demographic having a bachelor's degree or higher.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 287,208 people, 119,730 households, and 68,364 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 138,039 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 64.8% White, 27.2% African American, 0.4% Native American, 1.1% Asian, 2.6% from other races, and 3.9% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 7.4% of the population (The majority are Mexican American at 5.1%.) Non-Hispanic Whites were 61.4% of the population in 2010, down from 84% in 1970.\nThere were 119,730 households, of which 30.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 31.6% were married couples living together, 19.9% had a female householder with no husband present, 5.7% had a male householder with no wife present, and 42.9% were non-families. 34.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.33 and the average family size was 3.01. There was a total of 139,871 housing units in the city, of which 10,946 (9.8%) were vacant.\nThe median age in the city was 34.2 years. 24% of residents were under the age of 18; 12.8% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 26.3% were from 25 to 44; 24.8% were from 45 to 64; and 12.1% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.4% male and 51.6% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 313,619 people, and 77,355 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 139,871 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 70.2% White, 23.5% African American, 0.3% Native American, 1.0% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 2.3% from other races, and 2.6% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.5% of the population in 2000. The most common ancestries cited were German (23.4%), Irish (10.8%), Polish (10.1%), English (6.0%), American (3.9%), Italian (3.0%), Hungarian (2.0%), Dutch (1.4%), and Arab (1.2%).\nIn 2000 there were 128,925 households in Toledo, out of which 29.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.2% were married couples living together, 17.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 40.0% were non-families. 32.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 3.04.\nIn the city the population was spread out, with 26.2% under the age of 18, 11.0% from 18 to 24, 29.8% from 25 to 44, 19.8% from 45 to 64, and 13.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.7 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $32,546, and the median income for a family was $41,175. Males had a median income of $35,407 versus $25,023 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,388. About 14.2% of families and 17.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 25.9% of those under age 18 and 10.4% of those age 65 or over.\nCrime.\nIn the second decade of the 21st century, the city had a gradual peak in violent crime. In 2010, there was a combined total of 3,272 burglaries, 511 robberies, 753 aggravated assaults, 25 homicides, as well as 574 motor vehicle thefts out of what was then a decreasing population of 287,208. In 2011, there were 1,562 aggravated assaults, 30 homicides, 1,152 robberies, 8,366 burglaries, and 1,465 cases of motor vehicle theft. In 2012, there were a combined total of 39 murders, 2,015 aggravated assaults, 6,739 burglaries, and 1,334 cases of motor vehicle theft. In 2013 it had a drop in the crime rate. In 2018, the city was ranked 93rd of the Top 100 Most Dangerous Cities in America.\nAccording to a state government task force, Toledo has been identified as the fourth-largest recruitment site for human trafficking in the US.\nThe year 2020 brought the highest number of homicides in 39 years, according to the Toledo Police Department's 50-year trend chart. Beginning with the pandemic in 2020, homicides jumped to a record 61. There were a record of 70 homicides in Toledo in 2021. Toledo was one of 12 major U.S. cities to have broken annual homicide records in 2021.\nEconomy.\nBefore the Industrial Revolution, Toledo was important as a port city on the Great Lakes. With the advent of the automobile, the city became best known for industrial manufacturing. Both General Motors and Chrysler had factories in metropolitan Toledo, and automobile manufacturing has been important at least since Kirk started manufacturing automobiles, which began operations early in the 20th century. The largest employer in Toledo was Jeep for much of the 20th century. Since the late 20th century, industrial restructuring reduced the number of these well-paying jobs.\nThe University of Toledo is influential in the city, contributing to the prominence of healthcare as the city's biggest employer. The metro area contains four Fortune 500 companies: Dana Holding Corporation, Owens Corning, The Andersons, and Owens Illinois. Several Fortune 500 automotive-related companies had their headquarters in Toledo, including Electric AutoLite, Sheller-Globe Corporation, Champion Spark Plug, Questor, and Dana Holding Corporation. Only the latter still operates as an independent entity. Faurecia Exhaust Systems, a subsidiary of France's Faurecia SA, is in Toledo. ProMedica is a Fortune 1000 company headquartered in Toledo. One SeaGate is the location of Fifth Third Bank's Northwest Ohio headquarters.\nToledo is known as the Glass City because of its long history of glass manufacturing, including windows, bottles, windshields, construction materials, and glass art, of which the Toledo Museum of Art has a large collection. Several large glass companies have their origins here. Owens-Illinois, Owens Corning, Libbey Incorporated, Pilkington North America (formerly Libbey-Owens-Ford), and Therma-Tru have long been a staple of Toledo's economy. Other offshoots of these companies also continue to play important roles in Toledo's economy. Fiberglass giant Johns Manville's two plants in the metro area were originally built by a subsidiary of Libbey-Owens-Ford.\nToledo is the Jeep headquarters and has two production facilities dubbed the Toledo Complex, one in the city and one in suburban Perrysburg. During World War II, the city's industries produced important products for the military, particularly the Willys Jeep. Willys-Overland was a major automaker headquartered in Toledo until 1953. General Motors also has operated a transmission plant, in Toledo since 1916 currently owned by Scott Lorenzen. It manufactures and assembles GM's six-speed and eight-speed rear-wheel-drive and six-speed front-wheel-drive transmissions that are used in a variety of GM vehicles.\nIndustrial restructuring and loss of jobs caused the city to adopt new strategies to retain its industrial companies. It offered tax incentives to DaimlerChrysler to expand its Jeep plant. In 2001, a taxpayer lawsuit was filed against Toledo that challenged the constitutionality of that action. In 2006, the city won the case by a unanimous ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court in \"DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno\".\nBelying its Rust Belt history, the city saw growth in \"green jobs\" related to solar energy in the 2000s. The University of Toledo and Bowling Green State University received Ohio grants for solar energy research. Xunlight and First Solar opened plants in Toledo and the surrounding area.\nIn May 2019 Balance Farms began operation of an 8,168 square foot indoor aquaponics farm in downtown Toledo.\nArts and culture.\nFine and performing arts.\nToledo is home to a range of classical performing arts institutions, including the Toledo Opera, Toledo Symphony Orchestra, Toledo Jazz Orchestra and Toledo Ballet. The city is also home to several theaters and performing arts institutions, including the Stranahan Theater, the historic Valentine Theatre, the Toledo Repertoire Theatre, the Collingwood Arts Center and the Ohio Theatre.\nThe Toledo Museum of Art is located in a Greek Revival building in the city's Old West End neighborhood. The Peristyle is the concert hall in Greek Revival style in its East Wing; it is the home of the Toledo Symphony Orchestra, and hosts many international orchestras as well. The Museum's Center for Visual Arts addition was designed by Frank Gehry and opened in the 21st century. In addition, the museum's new Glass Pavilion across Monroe Street opened in August 2006. Toledo was the first city in Ohio to adopt a One Percent for Art program and, as such, boasts many examples of public, outdoor art. A number of walking tours have been set up to explore these works, which include large sculptures, environmental structures, and murals by more than 40 artists, such as Alice Adams, Pierre Clerk, Dale Eldred, Penelope Jencks, Hans Van De Bovenkamp, Jerry Peart, and Athena Tacha.\nMusic.\nToledo has a rich history of music, dating back to their early to mid-20th century glory days as a jazz haven. During this time, Toledo produced or nurtured such jazz legends as Art Tatum, Jon Hendricks, trombonist Jimmy Harrison, pianist Claude Black, guitarist Arv Garrison, pianist Johnny O'Neal, and many, many others. Later jazz greats from Toledo include Stanley Cowell, Larry Fuller, Bern Nix and Jean Holden.\nOther well-known singers and musicians with Toledo roots include Teresa Brewer, Tom Scholz, Anita Baker, Shirley Murdock, American Idol runner-up Crystal Bowersox, The Rance Allen Group, Lyfe Jennings and Weezer bassist Scott Shriner.\nMuseums.\nThe National Museum of the Great Lakes (NMGL) is located in the Marina District, downstream from downtown Toledo. Adjacent to the NMGL, the \"Col. James M. Schoonmaker\" is a former Cleveland-Cliffs lake freighter open to the public as a museum. Moored in the Maumee River, the ship was recently repainted in the original Shenango Furnace fleet colors and, on July 1, 2011, rechristened with her original name.\nThe Imagination Station hands-on science museum (formerly COSI Toledo), is located downtown.\nTony Packo's Cafe is located in the Hungarian neighborhood on the east side of Toledo known as Birmingham; it features hundreds of hot dog buns signed by celebrities, including multiple presidents.\nSports.\nThe Toledo Reign are a women's full-contact tackle football team in the Women's Football Alliance. Established in 2003, the Reign plays regular season games from April through June. The Toledo Crush of the Legends Football League played at the Huntington Center in 2014 after relocating from Cleveland, where it played from 2011 to 2013. The Toledo Maroons played in the Ohio League from 1902 until 1921 and the NFL from 1922 until 1923 before moving to Kenosha, Wisconsin.\nToledo Speedway is a local auto racetrack that features, among other events, stock car racing and concerts. The Automobile Racing Club of America (ARCA) has its headquarters in Toledo.\nInverness Club is a golf club in Toledo. It is known for hosting six major USGA events, most recently the 1993 PGA Championship. In 2020, Inverness Club hosted the LPGA Drive-On Championship, and in 2021, it hosted the Solheim Cup. The U.S. Senior Open took place at Inverness in 2003 and 2011. Highland Meadows Golf Club has been home to the LPGA's Marathon Classic in the nearby suburb of Sylvania since 1984 (yearly except for 1986 and 2011).\nToledo hosted the International Federation of Associated Wrestling Styles (FILA) Congress in 1966, two editions of World Championships (both freestyle and Greco-Roman), seventeen editions of Freestyle Wrestling World Cup, and numerous high-profile international duals were held at the Toledo Field House and Centennial Hall.\nParks and recreation.\nThe Toledo Metroparks system includes over of land, and features the University/Parks Bicycle Trail and the Toledo Botanical Garden.\nThe Toledo Zoo was the first zoo to feature a \"hippoquarium\"-style exhibit. In 2014 it was ranked as the #1 zoo in the country by \"USA Today.\" The R. A. Stranahan Arboretum is a arboretum maintained by the University of Toledo.\nHollywood Casino Toledo opened on May 29, 2012.\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nThe University of Toledo is a public research university based in the Ottawa neighborhood. A member of the University System of Ohio, it is the largest college in Toledo. Tiffin University and Owens Community College have branch campuses in Toledo. Private for-profit colleges include Davis College and the Toledo Professional Skills Institute.\nEducation in the health sciences includes the University of Toledo College of Medicine and Life Sciences, a medical school affiliated with the University of Toledo and Mercy College of Ohio, a private nursing school. The Toledo Academy of Beauty offers classes specializing in esthetics and manicuring.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nThe Toledo City School District operates public schools within much of the city limits, along with the Washington Local School District in northern Toledo. Toledo City School District encompasses 70 square miles and served over 23,000 students in 2019, the fourth largest district in the state. Secondary schools within Toledo City Schools include Bowsher High School, Rogers High School, Scott High School, Start High School, Toledo Early College, Toledo Technology Academy, Waite High School and Woodward High School.\nToledo is also home to several public charter schools including two Imagine Schools, several Leona Group Schools, and top ranking Toledo Preparatory and Fitness Academy. Additionally, several private and parochial primary and secondary schools are present within the Toledo area. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Toledo operates Roman Catholic primary and secondary schools in 19 counties in Northwest Ohio, including Lucas County and the Toledo area. Notable private high schools in Toledo include Maumee Valley Country Day School, Central Catholic High School, St. Francis de Sales High School, St. John's Jesuit High School and Academy, Notre Dame Academy, St. Ursula Academy in Ottawa Hills, Cardinal Stritch Catholic High School in Oregon, Toledo Christian Schools, and Emmanuel Christian School.\nLibraries.\nThe Toledo Lucas County Public Library was 4-star rated for 2009 by the \"Library Journal,\" and it is sixth among the biggest-spending libraries in the United States.\nMedia.\nPrint.\n\"The Blade\", a daily newspaper founded in 1835, is the primary newspaper in Toledo, and promotes itself as \"One of America's Great Newspapers\". The city's arts and entertainment weekly is the \"Toledo City Paper\". From March 2005 to 2015, the weekly newspaper \"Toledo Free Press\" was published, and it had a focus on news and sports. Other weeklies include the \"West Toledo Herald\", \"El Tiempo\", \"La Prensa\", \"Sojourner's Truth\", and \"Toledo Journal\". \"Toledo Tales\" provides satire and parody of life in the Glass City. The \"Toledo Journal\" is an African-American owned newspaper. It is published weekly, and normally focuses on African-American issues.\nTV.\nThe Toledo TV market features seven full power stations, including: WTOL 11 (CBS), WTVG 13 (ABC, with CW on 13.2), WNWO 24 (NBC), PBS member stations WBGU 27 and WGTE 30, WUPW 36 (Fox), and WLMB 40 (Religious independent).\nLow power stations include WMNT 48 (MyNetworkTV).\nRadio.\nThere are 23 full power stations serving the Toledo market. Music stations include Contemporary Christian stations WPOS, WTPG (repeater of the Taylor University owned WBCL in Fort Wayne, IN) and WNKL (K-Love), WYSZ (Christian rock/hip hop), WVKS (Contemporary hits), WRQN, (Classic hits), WXKR (Classic rock), Country stations WMIM, WKKO, WCKY-FM, and WPFX, WIOT (Mainstream rock), WQQO (Hot AC), Urban AC stations WIMX and WJUC, and WJZE (Urban contemporary)\nWSPD serves as the market's only commercial news/talk station, while WCWA serves as the market's only full power sports radio outlet. Religious stations include WJYM, WPAY, WWYC, and WOTL.\nWGTE-FM serves as Toledo's NPR member station, while college and school run stations share the 88.3 FM frequency - WXTS-FM (Toledo Public Schools - 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.) and WXUT (University of Toledo - 8 p.m. to 8 a.m.)\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nMajor highways.\nThree major interstate highways run through Toledo. Interstate 75 (I-75) travels north\u2013south and provides a direct route to Detroit and Cincinnati. The Ohio Turnpike carries east\u2013west traffic on I-80/90. The Turnpike serves Toledo via exits 52, 59, 64, 71, and 81. The Turnpike connects Toledo to Chicago in the west and Cleveland in the east.\nIn addition, there are two auxiliary interstate highways in the area. Interstate 475 is a 20-mile bypass that begins in Perrysburg and ends in west Toledo, meeting I-75 at both ends. It is cosigned with US 23 for its first 13 miles. Interstate 280 is a spur that connects the Ohio Turnpike to I-75 through east and central Toledo. The Veterans' Glass City Skyway is part of this route, which was the most expensive ODOT project ever at its completion. This tall bridge includes a glass covered pylon, which lights up at night, adding a distinctive feature to Toledo's skyline. The Anthony Wayne Bridge, a suspension bridge crossing the Maumee River, has been a staple of Toledo's skyline for more than 80 years. It is locally known as the \"High-Level Bridge\".\nMass transit.\nLocal bus service is provided by the Toledo Area Regional Transit Authority; commonly shortened to TARTA. Toledo area Paratransit Services; TARPS are used for the disabled. Intercity bus service is provided by Greyhound Lines and Barons Bus Lines. The station is located at Martin Luther King, Jr. Plaza which it shares with Amtrak. Barons Bus Lines also provides daily trips to Ann Arbor, Chicago, Cleveland, Detroit, Columbus, and Cincinnati. Toledo has various cab companies within its city limits and other ones that surround the metro.\nAirports.\nToledo Express Airport, located in the suburbs of Monclova and Swanton Townships, is the primary airport that serves the city. Additionally, Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport is 45 miles north. Toledo Executive Airport (formerly Metcalf Field) is a general aviation airport southeast of Toledo near the I-280 and Ohio SR 795 interchange. Toledo Suburban Airport is another general aviation airport located in Lambertville, MI just north of the state border.\nRailroads at present.\nAmtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides service to Toledo and other major cities under the \"Floridian\" and the \"Lake Shore Limited\". Both lines stop at Martin Luther King, Jr. Plaza, which was built as Central Union Terminal by the New York Central Railroad\u2014along its Water Level Route\u2014in 1950. Of the seven Ohio stations served by Amtrak, Toledo was the busiest in fiscal year 2011, boarding or detraining 66,413 passengers. Freight rail service presently in Toledo is operated by the Norfolk Southern Railway, CSX Transportation, Canadian National Railway, Ann Arbor Railroad, and Wheeling and Lake Erie Railway. All except the Wheeling have local terminals; the Wheeling operates into Toledo from the east through trackage rights on Norfolk Southern to connect with the Ann Arbor and CN railroads.\nRailroads in the past.\nHistorically, Toledo was a major rail hub where the New York Central (later, the Penn Central), Baltimore and Ohio, Wabash Railroad, Nickel Plate Road, Ann Arbor Railroad, Detroit, Toledo and Ironton Railroad, Pennsylvania Railroad, Chesapeake and Ohio Railway/Pere Marquette Railway, Wheeling and Lake Erie railroads moved a large amount of freight to and from Toledo's many industries such as Libbey-Owens-Ford Glass, and Willys-Overland (Jeep) Motors. Most of these companies used Central Union Terminal on Emerald Avenue. The Ann Arbor Railroad used its station on Cherry Street. The Pennsylvania Railroad used its station on Summit Street.\nInterurbans.\nToledo had a streetcar system and interurban railways linking it to other nearby towns but these are no longer in existence. Seven interurban companies radiated from Toledo. In the early 1930s, three of the seven, the Cincinnati and Lake Erie from Cincinnati, Columbus, Dayton, and Springfield, the Lake Shore Electric from Cleveland, and the Eastern Michigan Ry from Detroit, moved a large amount of freight and number of passengers between those heavily industrialized cities. The Great Depression and growing inter city competition from trucks on newly improved roads by the Ohio caused abandonment of all by 1938, and some interurban lines much earlier. The interurban station where all lines met and exchanged passengers was on N. Summit Street. Freight was exchanged in a rail yard with a warehouse off Lucas Street.\nHealthcare.\nOriginating in Toledo, ProMedica is an integrated healthcare organization founded in 2009. It has grown rapidly to become the country's 15th largest non-profit health care system in the United States, with 2018 revenues of $7 billion. It is headquartered on Madison Avenue in Downtown Toledo and maintains 13 hospitals in Northwest Ohio and Southeast Michigan, including ProMedica Toledo Hospital, the largest acute care hospital in the area.\nMercy Health - St. Vincent Medical Center, Toledo's first hospital and part of Mercy Health Partners, holds the highest designation for treating high-risk mothers and babies, is a Level I Trauma Center for children and adults, and is an accredited Chest Pain Center. It is located in the Vistula Historic District on the city's north side.\nThere are also 18 community health centers in Toledo. Some examples include the Cordelia Martin Community Health Center, the East Toledo Community Health Center, and the Monroe Street Neighborhood Center.\nWater.\nThe Division of Water Treatment filters an average of 80 million gallons of water per day for 500,000 people in the greater Toledo Metropolitan area. The Division of Water Distribution serves 136,000 metered accounts and 10,000 fire hydrants and maintains more than of water mains. The Toledo Metropolitan Area receives its water from Lake Erie, with the process being managed by the City of Toledo Public Utilities Water Treatment Division, under the authority of the Mayor and City Council with direction provided by the Toledo Regional Water Commission. Water is collected through a water intake pipe that is situated a few miles off the shore of Lake Erie.\nIn August 2014, two samples from a water treatment plant toxin test showed signs of microcystis. Roughly 400,000, including residents of Toledo and several surrounding communities in Ohio and Michigan were affected by the water contamination. Residents were told not to use, drink, cook with, or boil any tap water on the evening of August 1, 2014. The Ohio National Guard delivered water and food to residents living in contaminated areas. As of \u00a03, 2014[ [update]], no one had reported being sick and the governor had declared a state of emergency in three counties. The ban was lifted on August 4.\nIn popular culture.\nThe popular phrase \"Holy Toledo\", is thought to originally be a reference to the city's array of grand church designs from Gothic, Renaissance and Spanish Mission. There are many other theories as well.\nJohn Denver recorded \"Saturday Night In Toledo, Ohio\", composed by Randy Sparks. He wrote it in 1967 after arriving in Toledo with his group and finding no nightlife at 10 p.m. After Denver performed the song on \"The Tonight Show\", Toledo residents objected. In response, the City Fathers recorded a song entitled \"We're Strong For Toledo\". Ultimately the controversy was such that Denver cancelled a concert in Toledo shortly thereafter. But when he returned for a 1980 concert, he set a one-show attendance record at the venue, Centennial Hall, and sang the song to the approval of the crowd.\n\"M*A*S*H\" TV series character Corporal Maxwell Klinger, best known for consistently cross-dressing during the first seven seasons of the show, was from Toledo.\nThe Kenny Rogers 1977 hit song \"Lucille\" was written by Hal Bynum and inspired by his trip to Toledo in 1975.\nToledo is mentioned in the song \"Our Song\" by Yes from their 1983 album \"90125\". According to Yes drummer Alan White, Toledo was especially memorable for a sweltering-hot 1977 show the group did at Toledo Sports Arena.\nThe season 1 episode of the Warner Bros television series \"Supernatural\" titled \"Bloody Mary\" was set in Toledo.\nToledo is the setting for the 2010 television comedy \"Melissa &amp; Joey\", with the first-named character being a city councilwoman.\nThe 2018 sitcom \"A.P. Bio\" is set in Toledo.\nThe 2025 sitcom \"The Paper\", a spinoff of the hit NBC sitcom \"The Office\", is set in Toledo.\nSister cities.\nToledo was twinned with Toledo, Spain, in 1931, creating the first sister city relationship in the United States.\nToledo's sister cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30850", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30850", "title": "Toledo War", "text": "1835\u20131836 Ohio\u2013Michigan dispute\nThe Toledo War (1835\u20131836), also known as the Michigan\u2013Ohio War or Ohio\u2013Michigan War, was a boundary dispute between the U.S. state of Ohio and the adjoining territory of Michigan over what is now known as the Toledo Strip. Control of the Maumee River's mouth and the inland shipping opportunities it represented, and the good farmland to the west, were seen by both parties as valuable economic assets.\nPoor geographical understanding of the Great Lakes helped produce conflicting state and federal legislation between 1787 and 1805, and varying interpretations of the laws led the governments of Ohio and Michigan to both claim jurisdiction over a region along their border. The situation came to a head when Michigan petitioned for statehood in 1835 and sought to include the disputed territory within its boundaries. Both sides passed legislation attempting to force the other side's capitulation, and Ohio's Governor Robert Lucas and Michigan's 24-year-old \"Boy Governor\" Stevens T. Mason helped institute criminal penalties for residents submitting to the other's authority. Both states deployed militias on opposite sides of the Maumee River near Toledo, but besides mutual taunting, there was little interaction between the two forces. The single military confrontation of the war ended with a report of shots being fired into the air, incurring no casualties. The only blood spilled was the non-fatal stabbing of a law enforcement officer.\nDuring the summer of 1836, the United States Congress proposed a compromise whereby Michigan gave up its claim to the strip in exchange for its statehood and the remaining three-quarters of the Upper Peninsula. Although the northern region's mineral wealth later became an economic asset to Michigan, at the time the compromise was considered a poor deal for the new state, and voters in a statehood convention in September soundly rejected it. In December, facing a dire financial crisis and pressure from Congress and President Andrew Jackson, the Michigan government called another convention (called the \"Frostbitten Convention\"), which accepted the compromise, resolving the Toledo War.\nOrigins.\nIn 1787, the Congress of the Confederation enacted the Northwest Ordinance, which created the Northwest Territory in what is now the upper Midwestern United States. The Ordinance specified that the territory was eventually to be divided into \"not less than three nor more than five\" future states. One of the boundaries between them was to be \"an east and west line drawn through the southerly bend or extreme of Lake Michigan\". When Congress passed the Enabling Act of 1802, which authorized Ohio to begin the process of becoming a U.S. state, the language defining Ohio's northern boundary elaborated on that, but was fundamentally the same: \"an east and west line drawn through the southerly extreme of Lake Michigan, running east\u00a0... until it shall intersect Lake Erie or the territorial line [with British North America, now Canada], and thence with the same through Lake Erie to the Pennsylvania line aforesaid\".\nThe most highly regarded map of the time, the \"Mitchell Map\", showed the southerly extreme of Lake Michigan at a latitude north of the mouth of the Detroit River, suggesting that an east\u2013west line would not intersect with Lake Erie at all, until well across the international border. The framers of the 1802 Ohio Constitution therefore believed it was the intent of Congress that Ohio's northern boundary should certainly be north of the mouth of the Maumee River, and possibly even of the Detroit River. Ohio would thus be granted access to most or all of the Lake Erie shoreline west of Pennsylvania, and any other new states carved out of the Northwest Territory would have access to only Lakes Michigan, Huron, or Superior.\nHowever, the delegates allegedly received reports from a fur trapper that Lake Michigan extended significantly farther south than had previously been believed (or mapped). Thus, it was possible that an east\u2013west line extending east from Lake Michigan's southern tip might intersect Lake Erie somewhere southeast of Maumee Bay, or worse, might not intersect the lake at all; the farther south that Lake Michigan actually extended, the more land Ohio would lose, conceivably even the entire Lake Erie shoreline west of Pennsylvania.\nAddressing this contingency, the Ohio delegates included a provision in the draft Ohio constitution that if this report about Lake Michigan's position was correct, the state boundary line would be angled slightly northeast so as to intersect Lake Erie at the \"most northerly cape of the Miami [Maumee] Bay\". This provision would guarantee that most of the Maumee River watershed and the southern shore of Lake Erie west of Pennsylvania would fall in Ohio. The draft constitution with this proviso was accepted by the United States Congress, but before Ohio's admission to the Union in February 1803, the proposed constitution was referred to a Congressional committee. The committee's report stated that the clause defining the northern boundary depended on \"a fact not yet ascertained\" (the latitude of the southern extreme of Lake Michigan), and the members \"thought it unnecessary to take it [the provision], at the time, into consideration.\"\nWhen Congress created the Michigan Territory in 1805, it used the Northwest Ordinance's language to define the territory's southern boundary, disregarding that provision in Ohio's state constitution. This difference, and its potential ramifications, apparently went unnoticed at the time, but it established the legal basis for the conflict that would erupt 30 years later.\nCreation of the Toledo Strip.\nThe location of the border was contested throughout the early 19th century. Residents of the Port of Miami\u2014which would later become Toledo\u2014urged the Ohio government to resolve the border issue. The Ohio legislature, in turn, passed repeated resolutions and requests asking Congress to take up the matter. In 1812, Congress approved a request for an official survey of the line. Delayed because of the War of 1812, it was only after Indiana's admission to the Union in 1816 that work on the survey commenced. At that time, the border between Michigan and Indiana was altered from the Northwest Ordinance boundary \u2013 over the protests of the Michigan Territory \u2013 moving it northward to give the new state substantial frontage on Lake Michigan.\nU.S. Surveyor General Edward Tiffin, who was in charge of the survey, was a former Ohio governor, and employed William Harris to survey not the Ordinance Line, but the line described in the Ohio Constitution of 1802. When completed, the \"Harris Line\" placed the mouth of the Maumee River completely in Ohio, as intended by the drafters of the state constitution. When the results of the survey were made public, Michigan territorial governor Lewis Cass objected, writing in a letter to Tiffin that the survey was biased to favor Ohio and \"is only adding strength to the strong, and making the weak still weaker.\"\nIn response, Michigan commissioned a second survey that was carried out by John A. Fulton. The Fulton survey was based upon the original 1787 Ordinance Line, and after measuring the line eastward from Lake Michigan to Lake Erie, it found the Ohio boundary to lie just southeast of the mouth of the Maumee River. The region between the Harris and Fulton survey lines formed what is now known as the \"Toledo Strip\". This ribbon of land between northern Ohio and southern Michigan spanned a region wide, over which both jurisdictions claimed sovereignty. While Ohio refused to cede its claim, Michigan quietly occupied it for the next several years, setting up local governments, building roads, and collecting taxes throughout the area.\nEconomic significance.\nThe Toledo Strip was (and still is) a commercially important area. Prior to the rise of the railroad industry, rivers and canals were the major \"highways of commerce\" in the American Midwest. A small but important part of the Strip\u2014the area around present-day Toledo and Maumee Bay\u2014fell within the Great Black Swamp, and this area was nearly impossible to navigate by road, especially after spring and summer rains. Draining into Lake Erie, the Maumee River was not necessarily well-suited for large ships, but it did provide an easy connection to Indiana's Fort Wayne. At the time, there were plans to connect the Mississippi River and the Great Lakes through a series of canals. One such canal system approved by the Ohio legislature in 1825 was the Miami and Erie Canal that included a connection to the Ohio River and an outflow into Lake Erie via the Maumee River.\nDuring the conflict over the Toledo Strip, the Erie Canal was built, linking New York City and the Eastern seaboard to the Great Lakes at Buffalo. The canal finished in 1825, and immediately became a major route for trade and migration. Corn and other farm products (from the Midwest) could be shipped to eastern markets for much less expense than the older route along the Mississippi River. In addition, the migration of settlers to the Midwest increased sharply after the canal was finished, turning Buffalo and other port cities into boomtowns.\nThe success of the Erie Canal inspired many other canal projects. Because the western end of Lake Erie offered the shortest overland route to the frontiers of Indiana and Illinois, Maumee Harbor was seen as a site of immediate importance and great value. Detroit was up the Detroit River from Lake Erie, and faced the difficult barrier of the Great Black Swamp to the south. Because of this, Detroit was less suited to new transportation projects such as canals, and later railroads, than was Toledo. From this perspective on the rapidly developing Midwest of the 1820s and 1830s, both states had much to gain by controlling the land in the Toledo Strip.\nIn addition, the Strip west of the Toledo area is good for agriculture, because of its well-drained, fertile loam soil. The area had for many years produced large amounts of corn and wheat per acre. Michigan and Ohio both wanted what seemed strategically and economically destined to become an important port and prosperous farmland.\nPrelude to conflict.\nIn 1820\u201321, the federal land surveys had reached the disputed area from two directions, progressing southward from a baseline in Michigan and northward from one in Ohio. For unknown reasons, Surveyor General Tiffin ordered the two surveys to close on the Northwest Ordinance (Fulton) line, rather than Harris' line, perhaps lending implicit support to Michigan's claims over Ohio's. Thus, townships that were established north of the line assumed they were part of the Michigan Territory. By the early 1820s, the growing Michigan Territory reached the minimum population threshold of 60,000 to qualify for statehood. When it sought to hold a state constitutional convention in 1833, Congress rejected the request because of the still-disputed Toledo Strip.\nOhio asserted that the boundary was firmly established in its constitution and thus Michigan's citizens were simply intruders; the state government refused to negotiate the issue with them. The Ohio Congressional delegation was active in blocking Michigan from attaining statehood, lobbying other states to vote against it. In January 1835, frustrated by the political stalemate, Michigan's territorial governor Stevens T. Mason called for a constitutional convention to be held in May of that year, despite Congress' refusal to approve an enabling act authorizing one.\nIn February 1835, Ohio passed legislation that set up county governments in the Strip. The county in which Toledo sat would, later in 1835, be named after incumbent Governor Robert Lucas, a move that further exacerbated the growing tensions with Michigan. Also, during this period, Ohio attempted to use its power in Congress to revive a previously rejected boundary bill that would formally set the state border to be the Harris Line.\nMichigan, led by the young and hot-headed Mason, responded with the passage of the Pains and Penalties Act just six days after Lucas County was formed; the act made it a criminal offense for Ohioans to carry out governmental actions in the Strip, under penalty of a fine up to $1,000 (), up to five years imprisonment at hard labor, or both. Acting as commander-in-chief of the territory, Mason appointed Brigadier General Joseph W. Brown of the Third U.S. Brigade to head the state militia, with the instructions to be ready to act against Ohio trespassers. Lucas obtained legislative approval for a militia of his own, and he soon sent forces to the Strip area. The Toledo War had begun.\nFormer United States President John Quincy Adams, who at the time represented Massachusetts in Congress, backed Michigan's claim. In 1833, when Congress rejected Michigan's request for a convention, Adams summed up his opinion on the dispute: \"Never in the course of my life have I known a controversy of which all the right was so clearly on one side and all the power so overwhelmingly on the other.\"\nWar.\nActing as commander-in-chief of Ohio's militia, Governor Lucas\u2014along with General John Bell and about 600 other fully armed militiamen\u2014arrived in Perrysburg, Ohio, southwest of Toledo, on March 31, 1835. Shortly thereafter, Governor Mason and General Brown arrived to occupy the city of Toledo proper with around 1,000 armed men, intending to prevent Ohio advances into the Toledo area as well as stopping further border marking from taking place.\nPresidential intervention.\nIn a desperate attempt to prevent armed battle and to avert the resulting political crisis, U.S. President Andrew Jackson consulted his Attorney General, Benjamin Butler, for his legal opinion on the border dispute. At the time, Ohio was a growing political power in the Union, with 19 U.S. representatives and two senators. In contrast, Michigan, still a territory, had only a single non-voting delegate. Ohio was a crucial swing state in presidential elections, and it would have been devastating to the fledgling Democratic Party to lose its electoral votes. Jackson calculated that his party's best interest would be served by keeping the Toledo Strip as part of Ohio. However, Butler held that until Congress dictated otherwise, the land rightfully belonged to Michigan. This presented a political dilemma for Jackson that spurred him to take action that would greatly influence the outcome.\nOn April 3, 1835, Jackson sent two representatives from Washington, D.C. \u2013 Richard Rush of Pennsylvania and Benjamin Chew Howard of Maryland \u2013 to Toledo to arbitrate the conflict and present a compromise to both governments. The proposal, presented on April 7, recommended that a re-survey to mark the Harris Line commence without further interruption by Michigan, and that the residents of the affected region be allowed to choose their own state or territorial governments until Congress could definitively settle the matter.\nLucas reluctantly agreed to the proposal and began to disband his militia, believing the debate to be settled. Three days later, elections in the region were held under Ohio law. Mason refused the deal and continued to prepare for possible armed conflict.\nDuring the elections, Ohio officials were harassed by Michigan authorities, and the area residents were threatened with arrest if they submitted to Ohio's authority. On April 8, 1835, the Monroe County, Michigan sheriff arrived at the home of Major Benjamin F. Stickney, an Ohio partisan. In the first contact between Michigan partisans and the Stickney family, the sheriff arrested two Ohioans under the Pains and Penalties Act on the basis that the men had voted in the Ohio elections.\nBattle of Phillips Corners.\nAfter the election, Lucas believed that the commissioners' actions had alleviated the situation and once again sent out surveyors to mark the Harris Line. The project proceeded without serious incident until April 26, 1835, when the surveying group was attacked by 50 to 60 members of General Brown's militia in the Battle of Phillips Corners. As the only site of armed conflict, the battle's name is sometimes used as a synonym for the entire Toledo War.\nSurveyors wrote to Lucas afterward that while observing \"the blessings of the Sabbath\", Michigan militia forces advised them to retreat. In the ensuing chase, \"nine of our men, who did not leave the ground in time after being fired upon by the enemy, from thirty to fifty shots, were taken prisoners and carried away into Tecumseh, Michigan.\" While the details of the attack are disputed\u2014Michigan claimed it fired no shots, only discharging a few musket rounds in the air as the Ohio group retreated\u2014the battle further infuriated both Ohioans and Michiganders and brought the two sides to the brink of all-out war.\nBloodshed in 1835.\nIn response to allegations that Michigan's militia fired upon Ohioans, Lucas called a special session of Ohio's legislature on June 8 to pass several more controversial acts, including the establishment of Toledo as the county seat of Lucas County, the establishment of a Court of Common Pleas in the city, a law to prevent the forcible abduction of Ohio citizens from the area, and a budget of $300,000 ($ in 2024) to implement the legislation. Michigan's territorial legislature responded with a budget appropriation of $315,000 to fund \"its\" militia.\nIn May and June, Michigan drafted a state constitution, with provisions for a bicameral legislature, a supreme court, and other components of a functional state government. Congress was still not willing to allow Michigan's entry into the Union, and Jackson vowed to reject Michigan's statehood until the border issue and war were resolved.\nLucas ordered his adjutant general, Samuel C. Andrews, to conduct a count of the militia, and was told that 10,000 volunteers were ready to fight. That news became exaggerated as it traveled north, and soon thereafter the Michigan territorial press dared the Ohio \"million\" to enter the Strip as they \"welcomed them to hospitable graves\".\nIn June 1835, Lucas dispatched a delegation consisting of U.S. Attorney Noah Haynes Swayne, former Congressman William Allen, and David T. Disney to Washington D.C. to confer with Jackson. The delegation presented Ohio's case and urged Jackson to address the situation swiftly.\nThroughout mid-1835, both governments continued their practice of oneupmanship, and constant skirmishes and arrests occurred. Citizens of Monroe County joined in a posse to make arrests in Toledo. Partisans from Ohio, angered by the harassment, targeted the offenders with criminal prosecutions. Lawsuits were rampant and served as a basis for retaliatory lawsuits from the opposite side. Partisans of both sides organized spying parties to keep track of the sheriffs of Wood County, Ohio, and Monroe County, Michigan, who were entrusted with the security of the border.\nOn July 15, Monroe County, Michigan, Deputy Sheriff Joseph Wood went into Toledo to arrest Major Benjamin Stickney, but when Stickney and his family resisted, the whole family was subdued and taken into custody. During the scuffle, the major's son Two Stickney stabbed Wood with a penknife and fled into Ohio. Wood's injuries were not life-threatening. When Lucas refused Mason's demand to extradite Two Stickney to Michigan for trial, Mason wrote to Jackson for help, suggesting that the matter be referred to the United States Supreme Court. At the time of the conflict it was not established that the Supreme Court could resolve state boundary disputes, and Jackson declined the request. Looking for peace, Lucas began making his own efforts to end the conflict, again through federal intervention via Ohio's congressional delegation.\nIn August 1835, at the strong urging of Ohio's members of Congress, Jackson removed Mason as Michigan's territorial governor and appointed John S. (\"Little Jack\") Horner in his stead. Before his replacement arrived, Mason ordered 1,000 Michigan militiamen to enter Toledo and prevent the symbolically important first session of the Ohio Court of Common Pleas. While the idea was popular with Michigan residents, the effort failed: the judges held a midnight court before quickly retreating south of the Maumee River, where Ohio forces were positioned.\nFrostbitten Convention and the end of the Toledo War.\nHorner proved extremely unpopular as governor and his tenure was very short. Residents disliked him so much they burned him in effigy and pelted him with vegetables upon his entry into the territorial capital. In the October 1835 elections, voters approved the draft constitution and re-elected Mason governor. The same election saw Isaac E. Crary chosen as Michigan's first U.S. Representative to Congress. Because of the dispute, Congress refused to accept his credentials and seated him as a non-voting delegate. The two U.S. Senators chosen by the state legislature in November, Lucius Lyon and John Norvell, were treated with even less respect, being allowed to sit only as spectators in the Senate gallery.\nAt the time, new states were admitted only in pairs, at the urging of pro-slavery Southern Senators to preserve the balance between pro-slavery and anti-slavery (free) states in the Senate. On June 15, 1836, when Arkansas, as a slave state, was admitted to the Union as the 25th state, as the first state in 15 years, Jackson signed a bill that allowed Michigan to become a (free) state, but only after it ceded the Toledo Strip. In exchange for this concession, Michigan would be granted the western three-quarters of what is now known as the Upper Peninsula (the easternmost portion had already been included in the state boundaries). Because of the perceived worthlessness of the Upper Peninsula's remote wilderness, which was ill-suited for agriculture, a September 1836 special convention in Ann Arbor rejected the offer.\nAs the year wore on, Michigan found itself deep in financial crisis, nearly bankrupt because of the high militia expenses. The government was spurred to action by the realization that a $400,000 surplus ($ in 2024) in the United States Treasury was about to be distributed to the 25 states but not to territorial governments; Michigan would have been ineligible to receive a share.\nThe war unofficially ended on December 14, 1836, at a second convention in Ann Arbor. Delegates passed a resolution to accept Congress's terms. The calling of the convention was itself controversial. It came about only because of an upswelling of private summonses, petitions, and public meetings. Since the legislature did not approve a call to convention, some said the convention was illegal. Whigs boycotted the convention. As a consequence, the resolution was ridiculed by many Michigan residents. Congress questioned the convention's legality, but accepted its results. Because of these factors, as well as a notable cold spell, the event became known as the Frostbitten Convention.\nOn January 26, 1837, Michigan was admitted to the Union as the 26th state, without the Toledo Strip but with the entire Upper Peninsula.\nSubsequent history.\nThe Toledo strip became a permanent part of Ohio. The Upper Peninsula was considered a worthless wilderness by almost all familiar with the area, valuable only for timber and fur trapping. However, the discovery of copper in the Keweenaw Peninsula and iron in the Central Upper Peninsula in the 1840s led to a mining boom that lasted long into the 20th century. Michigan's loss of of agricultural land and the port of Toledo was offset by the gain of of timber and ore-rich land.\nDifferences of opinion about the exact boundary location continued until a definitive re-survey was performed in 1915. Re-survey protocol ordinarily required the surveyors to follow the Harris line exactly, but in this case, the surveyors deviated from it in places. This was done to prevent certain residents near the border from being subject to changes in state residence and land owners from having parcels in both states. The 1915 survey was delineated by 71 granite markers, wide by high. Upon completion, the two states' governors, Woodbridge N. Ferris of Michigan and Frank B. Willis of Ohio, shook hands at the border.\nTraces of the original Ordinance Line can still be seen in northwestern Ohio and northern Indiana. The northernmost boundaries of Ottawa and Wood counties follow it, as well as many township boundaries in Fulton and Williams counties. Many old north\u2013south roads are offset as they cross the line, forcing traffic to jog east while traveling north. The line is identified on United States Geological Survey topographical maps as the \"South [Boundary] Michigan Survey\", and on Lucas County and Fulton County road maps as \"Old State Line Road\".\nWhile the land border was firmly set in the early 20th century, the two states still disagreed on the path of the border to the east, in Lake Erie. In 1973, they finally obtained a hearing before the U.S. Supreme Court on their competing claims to the Lake Erie waters. In \"Michigan v. Ohio\", the court upheld a special master's report and ruled that the boundary between the two states in Lake Erie was angled to the northeast, as described in Ohio's state constitution, and not a straight east\u2013west line. One consequence of the decision was that Turtle Island, just outside Maumee Bay and originally treated as wholly in Michigan, was split between the two states.\nThis decision was the last border adjustment, putting an end to years of debate. In modern times, although a general rivalry between Michiganders and Ohioans persists, overt conflict between the states is restricted primarily to the Michigan\u2013Ohio State rivalry in collegiate American football and to a lesser degree to the rivalry between the Detroit Tigers and Cleveland Guardians in American League baseball; the Toledo War is sometimes cited as the origin of the animosity represented in today's rivalry. \nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30852", "revid": "2628316", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30852", "title": "Toledo Mud Hens", "text": "Minor league baseball team&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox/mobileviewfix.css\"/&gt;\nThe Toledo Mud Hens are a Minor League Baseball team of the International League and the Triple-A affiliate of the Detroit Tigers. They are located in Toledo, Ohio, and play their home games at Fifth Third Field. A baseball team nicknamed the Mud Hens has played in Toledo for most seasons since 1896, including a 50-year history as a member of the now defunct American Association. The current franchise was established in 1965, joining the International League; this league was called the Triple-A East for the 2021 season.\nBackground.\nProfessional baseball had been played off and on in Toledo since 1883, and the Mud Hens era began in 1896 with the \"Swamp Angels\", who played in the Interstate League. They played in Bay View Park, which was outside the Toledo city limits and therefore not covered by the city's blue laws. The park was located near marshland inhabited by American coots, also known as \"mud hens.\" For this reason, the local press soon dubbed the team the \"Mud Hens\"\u2014a nickname that has stuck to Toledo baseball teams for all but a few years since. The name \"Mud Hens\" became permanent in 1965. After only one season, the team moved to Armory Park.\nHistory.\n1896\u20131914.\nA Mud Hens team played in the Interstate League from 1896 through 1900, then a Toledo team known as the Swamp Angels played in the Western Association in 1901, followed by a Mud Hens team in the American Association from 1902 through 1913. The American Association Mud Hens moved to League Park in Cleveland in 1914 and became the Cleveland Bearcats, playing in Cleveland for two seasons. During the 1914 season, a Class C Mud Hens team played in the Southern Michigan League. No Toledo team was fielded in 1915.\n1916\u20131952.\nThe team resumed play in the American Association in 1916 as the Iron Men, a nickname they used through 1918. The Mud Hens name returned in 1919, and the team competed in the American Association until 1952.\nMid-season in 1952, team owner Danny Menendez moved the Mud Hens to Charleston, West Virginia, where they competed as the Charleston Senators through 1960. Toledo fielded a replacement franchise in the American Association from 1953 to 1955, the Toledo Sox, which was the former Milwaukee Brewers minor-league team. That franchise subsequently moved to Wichita, Kansas, for the 1956 season, where it competed as the Wichita Braves through 1958.\n1965\u2013present.\nIn 1965, the Richmond Virginians franchise of the International League moved to Toledo and became the current incarnation of the Mud Hens. They were based in Maumee, Ohio, at the converted Fort Miami Fairgrounds. The local ownership group led by Ned Skeldon signed with the New York Yankees to be its top farm team.\nIn 1967, the Detroit Tigers replaced the Yankees as its major league affiliate. That year, the team was third in the league but claimed the Governors' Cup via the four-team playoff. The next year, the team won a record 83 games and the league pennant, but failed to repeat as Cup winners. The team was affiliated with Detroit through 1973. In 1974 and 1975, the Philadelphia Phillies affiliated with the Mud Hens, followed by two years affiliated with Cleveland Indians. All four seasons were losing seasons.\nThe Minnesota Twins took over as the team's major league affiliate in 1978 and brought in Gene Cook as general manager, who was good at promoting the team, particularly as a family event. Cook also got Jamie Farr to incorporate the Mud Hens in Farr's \"M*A*S*H\" character's background. The Twins affiliation lasted through the 1986 season. The Mud Hens resumed their affiliation with the Tigers in 1987, and have remained in the Detroit organization since then.\nIn conjunction with Major League Baseball's restructuring of Minor League Baseball in 2021, the Mud Hens were organized into the Triple-A East. Toledo won the Midwestern Division title by ending the season in first place with a 69\u201351 record. No playoffs were held to determine a league champion; instead, the team with the best regular-season record was declared the winner. However, 10\u00a0games that had been postponed from the start of the season were reinserted into the schedule as a postseason tournament called the Triple-A Final Stretch in which all 30 Triple-A clubs competed for the highest winning percentage. Toledo finished the tournament tied for 13th place with a 5\u20135 record. In 2022, the Triple-A East became known as the International League, the name historically used by the regional circuit prior to the 2021 reorganization.\nSeason-by-season records.\nToledo Mud Hens seasons are listed below.\nRivalries.\nColumbus Clippers.\nThe Mud Hens' rivalry with the Columbus Clippers is a rivalry that dates back to 1977 when the Clippers joined the International League and were the second Ohio team in the league. The two teams play in the International League's West Division. The Clippers are an affiliate of the Cleveland Guardians, who compete against the Detroit Tigers in the American League Central, adding another layer to the rivalry.\nIndianapolis Indians.\nThe Mud Hens' rivalry with the Indianapolis Indians dates back to 1998 when the Indians joined the International League. They faced each other in the Governors' Cup Finals in 2005, which the Mud Hens won in a sweep. The following season, they faced each other in a play-in game\u2014the winner would win the IL West Division and clinch a spot in the 2006 Governor's Cup playoffs\u2014which the Mud Hens won, 4\u20130.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Mud Hens also won Interstate League playoffs in 1896, and 1897. While competing in the American Association, Toledo was the league champion in 1927, prior to the league having a postseason. Subsequently, Toledo reached the semifinals in 1937, 1943, and 1944. They reached the championship series in 1942. In 1967, Toledo played their first playoff game in Governors' Cup playoffs. In 1968, the Mud Hens finished first for the regular season but lost in the playoff semifinals.\nNotable players.\nMud Hens players who were later inducted to the National Baseball Hall of Fame include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMud Hens players who were selected as MLB All-Stars during their careers include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMud Hens players who later managed MLB teams include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther Mud Hens players of note:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30853", "revid": "49440083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30853", "title": "Transylvania", "text": "Historical region in Central Europe\nTransylvania ( or ; ; or ; Transylvanian Saxon: \"Siweberjen\") is a historical and cultural region in Central Europe, encompassing central Romania. To the east and south its natural border are the Carpathian Mountains and to the west the Apuseni Mountains. Broader definitions of Transylvania also include the western and northwestern Romanian regions of Cri\u0219ana and Maramure\u0219, and occasionally Banat. Historical Transylvania also includes small parts of neighbouring Western Moldavia and even a small part of south-western neighbouring Bukovina to its north east (represented by Suceava County).\nTransylvania is known for the scenery of its Carpathian landscape and its rich history, coupled with its multi-cultural character. It also contains Romania's second-largest city, Cluj-Napoca, and other very well preserved medieval iconic cities and towns such as Bra\u0219ov, Sibiu, T\u00e2rgu Mure\u0219, Bistri\u021ba, Alba Iulia, Media\u0219, and Sighi\u0219oara. It is also the home of some of Romania's UNESCO World Heritage Sites such as the Villages with fortified churches, the Historic Centre of Sighi\u0219oara, the Dacian Fortresses of the Or\u0103\u0219tie Mountains and the Ro\u0219ia Montan\u0103 Mining Cultural Landscape.\nIt was under the rule of the Agathyrsi, part of the Dacian Kingdom (168 BC \u2013 106 AD), Roman Dacia (106\u2013271), the Goths, the Hunnic Empire (4th\u20135th centuries), the Kingdom of the Gepids (5th\u20136th centuries), the Avar Khaganate (6th\u20139th centuries), the Slavs, and the 9th century First Bulgarian Empire. During the late 9th century, Transylvania was reached and conquered by the Hungarian tribes, and Gyula's family from the seven chieftains of the Hungarians ruled it in the 10th century. King Stephen I of Hungary asserted his claim to rule all lands dominated by Hungarian lords. He personally led his army against his maternal uncle Gyula III and Transylvania became part of the Kingdom of Hungary in 1002.\nAfter the Battle of Moh\u00e1cs in 1526 it belonged to the Eastern Hungarian Kingdom, from which the Principality of Transylvania emerged in 1570 by the Treaty of Speyer. During most of the 16th and 17th centuries, the principality was a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire; however, the principality had dual suzerainty (Ottoman and Habsburg).\nIn 1690, the Habsburg monarchy gained possession of Transylvania through the Hungarian crown. After the failure of R\u00e1k\u00f3czi's War of Independence in 1711, Habsburg control of Transylvania was consolidated, and Hungarian Transylvanian princes were replaced with Habsburg imperial governors. During the Hungarian Revolution of 1848, the Hungarian government proclaimed union with Transylvania in the April Laws of 1848. After the failure of the revolution, the March Constitution of Austria decreed that the Principality of Transylvania be a separate crown land entirely independent of Hungary. The separate status of Transylvania ended with the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867, and it was reincorporated into the Kingdom of Hungary (Transleithania) as part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. It was also during this period that Romanians experienced the awakening of self-consciousness as a nation, manifested in cultural and ideological movements such as Transylvanian School, and drafted political petitions such as \nSupplex Libellus Valachorum. After World War I, the National Assembly of Romanians from Transylvania proclaimed the Union of Transylvania with Romania on 1 December 1918, and Transylvania became part of the Kingdom of Romania by the Treaty of Trianon in 1920. In 1940, Northern Transylvania reverted to Hungary as a result of the Second Vienna Award, but it was returned to Romania after the end of World War II.\nIn popular culture, Transylvania is commonly associated with vampires because of the influence of Bram Stoker's 1897 novel \"Dracula\" and the many subsequent books and films that the story has inspired. Many Transylvanian Saxons were furious with Vlad the Impaler for strengthening the borders of Wallachia, which interfered with their control of trade routes, and his extreme sadism and barbarity, which by a collection of credible historical accounts of diverse origins, most of which were non-Saxon, dealt with his enemies (including Saxons, large Boyars and Ottoman soldiers) by impaling. The victims were often arranged in grotesque displays intended to terrorize various groups, including the Saxons. In retaliation, the Saxons distributed poems of cruelty and other propaganda characterising the sadistic Vlad III Dracula as a drinker of blood.\nEtymology.\nThe earliest known reference to Transylvania appears in a Medieval Latin document of the Kingdom of Hungary in 1078 as , meaning \"beyond the forest\" ( meaning \"beyond\" or \"on the far side of\" and the accusative case of () \"woods, forest\"). Transylvania, with an alternative Latin prepositional prefix, means \"on the other side of the woods\". The Medieval Latin form , later , was a direct translation from the Hungarian form , later , which has been adopted phonetically into Romanian as . That also was used as an alternative name in German (\"beyond the forest\") (13th\u201314th centuries) and Ukrainian ().\nHistorical names of Transylvania are:\nHistory.\nThe first known civilization to inhabit the territory was the Agathyrsi, of the Scythic cultures. From the 4th century BC, Celtic La T\u00e8ne culture came to domination. The indigenous Dacian tribes engaged in politics from the 1st century BC and united under King Burebista, forming their kingdom Dacia.\nThe Roman Empire made heavy efforts to seize the territory from King Decebalus, resulting in the formation of Roman Dacia in 106, after Trajan's costly and bloody wars. During Roman rule, the territory, depleted of its indigenous population, was repopulated with Latin colonists and its rich resource stock was systematically exploited. However, the growing threat of East Germanic and Carpic invasions made Emperor Aurelian withdraw his legions and evacuate the citizens south of the Lower Danube in 275, when the province became occupied by the Goths. In 376, a powerful nomadic people, the Huns, defeated and shattered the Goths, and settled in the area. After the death of Hun King Attila, their empire disintegrated and the Gepids conquered the region in 455, under King Ardaric. For two centuries, the Gepids controlled Transylvania. The Ostrogoths systematically pushed the Gepids out of Pannonia. King Elemund, on the other hand, successfully fought battles against the Eastern Roman Empire. They were defeated by the Lombards and Avars in 567. In the following years, the Avars took full control over Transylvania, heavily settling the area with Slavic tribes who accepted their suzerainty. The expansion of the Frankish Empire, however, imposed a growing threat on them and their khaganate was crushed in the Avar Wars. The Avars and Slavs, although substantially depleted in number, continued to inhabit the Carpathian Basin. The First Bulgarian Empire expanded into Southern Transylvania in the 9th century. Smaller Slavic polities were also present, nevertheless they could hardly keep their independence.\nIn the late 9th century, Transylvania was reached and conquered by the Hungarian conquerors. There is an ongoing scholarly debate over the demographics in Transylvania at the time. According to the theory of Daco-Roman continuity, Romanians continuously lived on the territory. Opponents of that hypothesis point to the lack of written, archaeological and linguistic evidence to support it. Hungarian medieval chronicles claimed that the Sz\u00e9kely people descended from the Huns, who remained in Transylvania, and later, in combination with the returning Hungarians, conquered the Carpathian Basin. According to the \"Gesta Hungarorum\", the Vlach (\"Blacorum, Blacus\") leader Gelou ruled part of Transylvania before the Hungarians arrived. Historians debate whether he was a historical person or an imaginary figure. The gyulas from the seven chieftains of the Hungarians governed Transylvania in the 10th century. King Stephen I of Hungary asserted his claim to rule all lands dominated by Hungarian lords. He personally led his army against his maternal uncle Gyula III and Transylvania became part of the Kingdom of Hungary in 1002. Place names derived from the Hungarian tribes evidence that major Hungarian groups settled in Transylvania from the 950s. In the 12th and 13th centuries, Southeast and Northeast Transylvania was settled by Saxon colonists. In Romanian historiography, Romanians constituted an important part of Transylvania's population even on the eve of the Mongol Invasions. Hungarian historiography claims that the Vlach population entered Transylvania from the Balkans only in the 12th century, and the devastating invasion of Mongols had also as consequence the large-scale immigration by Romanians, however the immigration of Romanians did not happen all at once, the process of settlement stretched over several centuries. After the Battle of Kosovo and Ottoman arrival at the Hungarian border, thousands of Vlach and Serbian refugees came to Transylvania.\nBetween 1002 and 1526, Transylvania was part of the Kingdom of Hungary, led by a voivode appointed by the King of Hungary. After the Battle of Moh\u00e1cs in 1526, Transylvania became part of the Eastern Hungarian Kingdom. Later, in 1570, the kingdom became the Principality of Transylvania by the Treaty of Speyer, which was ruled primarily by Calvinist Hungarian princes. The Eastern Hungarian king became the first prince of Transylvania, according to the treaty. The Principality of Transylvania continued to be part of the Kingdom of Hungary in the sense of public law, which stressed in a highly significant way that John Sigismund's possessions belonged to the Holy Crown of Hungary and he was not permitted to alienate them.\nThe Habsburgs acquired the territory shortly after the Battle of Vienna in 1683. In 1687, the rulers of Transylvania recognized the suzerainty of the Habsburg emperor Leopold I, and the region was officially attached to the Habsburg Empire. The Habsburgs acknowledged the Principality of Transylvania as one of the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen, but the territory of the principality was administratively separated from Habsburg Hungary, and subjected to the direct rule of the emperor's governors. In 1699 the Ottomans legally acknowledged their loss of Transylvania in the Treaty of Karlowitz; however, some anti-Habsburg elements within the principality submitted to the emperor only in the 1711 Peace of Szatm\u00e1r, when Habsburg control over Principality of Transylvania was consolidated. The Grand Principality of Transylvania was reintroduced 54 years later in 1765.\nThe Hungarian revolution against the Habsburgs started in 1848, and grew into a war for the total independence of the Kingdom of Hungary from the Habsburg dynasty. Julius Jacob von Haynau, the leader of the Austrian army, was appointed plenipotentiary to restore order in Hungary after the conflict. He ordered the execution of The 13 Hungarian Martyrs of Arad, and Prime Minister Batthy\u00e1ny was executed the same day in Pest. After a series of serious Austrian defeats in 1849, the empire came close to the brink of collapse. Thus, the new young emperor Franz Joseph I had to call for Russian help under the Holy Alliance. Czar Nicholas I answered, and sent an army of 200,000 men with 80,000 auxiliary forces. Finally, the joint army of Russian and Austrian forces defeated the Hungarian forces. After the restoration of Habsburg power, Hungary was placed under martial law. Following the Hungarian Army's surrender at Vil\u00e1gos (now \u0218iria, Romania) in 1849, their revolutionary banners were taken to Russia by the Tsarist troops and were kept there both under the Tsarist and Communist systems (in 1940 the Soviet Union offered the banners to the Horthy government).\nAfter the Ausgleich of 1867, the Principality of Transylvania was once again abolished. The territory then became part of Transleithania, an addition to the newly established Austro-Hungarian Empire. Romanian intellectuals issued the Blaj Pronouncement in protest.\nThe region was the site of an important battle during World War I, which caused the replacement of the German Chief of Staff, temporarily ceased German offensives on all the other fronts and created a unified Central Powers command under the German Kaiser. Following defeat in World War I, Austria-Hungary disintegrated. Elected representatives of the ethnic Romanians from Transylvania, Banat, Cri\u0219ana and Maramure\u0219 backed by the mobilization of Romanian troops, proclaimed Union with Romania on 1 December 1918. The \"Proclamation of Union\" of Alba Iulia was adopted by the Deputies of the Romanians from Transylvania and supported one month later by the vote of the Deputies of the Saxons from Transylvania.\nThe national holiday of Romania, the Great Union Day (also called \"Unification Day\",) occurring on December 1, celebrates this event. The holiday was established after the Romanian Revolution, and marks the unification not only of Transylvania but also of the provinces of Banat, Bessarabia and Bukovina with the Romanian Kingdom. These other provinces had all joined with the Kingdom of Romania a few months earlier. In 1920, the Treaty of Trianon established new borders and much of the proclaimed territories became part of Romania. Hungary protested against the new state borders, as they did not follow the real ethnic boundaries, for over 1.3 or 1.6 million Hungarian people, representing 25.5 or 31.6% of the Transylvanian population (depending on statistics used), were living on the Romanian side of the border, mainly in the Sz\u00e9kely Land of Eastern Transylvania, and along the newly created border.\nIn August 1940, with the arbitration of Germany and Italy under the Second Vienna Award, Hungary gained Northern Transylvania (including parts of Cri\u0219ana and Maramure\u0219), and over 40% of the territory lost in 1920. This award did not solve the nationality problem, as over 1.15\u20131.3 million Romanians (or 48% to more than 50% of the population of the ceded territory) remained in Northern Transylvania while 0.36\u20130.8 million Hungarians (or 11% to more than 20% of the population) continued to reside in Southern Transylvania. Following the Nazi invasion of Hungary in March 1944, Northern Transylvania came under German control. Over the next 3 months, the region's Jewish population was systematically concentrated in ghettos before being deported to the Auschwitz death camp, where the vast majority were murdered. The Second Vienna Award was voided on 12 September 1944 by the Allied Commission through the Armistice Agreement with Romania (Article 19), and the 1947 Treaty of Paris reaffirmed the borders between Romania and Hungary as originally defined in the Treaty of Trianon, 27 years earlier, thus confirming the return of Northern Transylvania to Romania.\nFrom 1947 to 1989, Transylvania, along with the rest of Romania, was under a communist regime. The ethnic clashes of T\u00e2rgu Mure\u0219 between ethnic Romanians and Hungarians in March 1990 took place after the fall of the communist regime and became the most notable inter-ethnic incident in the post-communist era, followed by the .\nGeography and ethnography.\nThe Transylvanian Plateau, high, is drained by the Mure\u0219, Some\u0219, Cri\u0219, and Olt rivers, as well as other tributaries of the Danube. This core of historical Transylvania roughly corresponds with nine counties of modern Romania. The plateau is almost entirely surrounded by the Eastern, Southern and Romanian Western branches of the Carpathian Mountains. The area includes the Transylvanian Plain. Other areas to the west and north are widely considered part of Transylvania; in common reference, the Western border of Transylvania has come to be identified with the present Romanian-Hungarian border, settled in the 1920 Treaty of Trianon, although geographically the two are not identical.\nEthnographic areas:\nAdministrative divisions.\nBihor \nArad \nTimi\u0219 \nCara\u0219-Severin \nHunedoara \nSatu Mare \nS\u0103laj \nAlba \nSibiu \nBra\u0219ov \nCovasna \nHarghita \nMure\u0219 \nCluj \nBistri\u021ba-N\u0103s\u0103ud \nMaramure\u0219 \nLight yellow \u2013 historical region of Transylvania\nDark yellow \u2013 historical regions of Banat, Cri\u0219ana and Maramure\u0219\nGrey \u2013 historical regions of Wallachia, Moldavia and Dobruja\nThe area of the historical Voivodeship is .\nThe regions granted to Romania in 1920 covered 23 counties including nearly (102,787\u2013103,093\u00a0km2 in Hungarian sources and 102,282\u00a0km2 in contemporary Romanian documents). Nowadays, several administrative reorganisations make the territory cover 16 counties (Romanian: \"jude\u021b\"), with an area of , in central and northwest Romania.\nThe 16 counties are: Alba, Arad, Bihor, Bistri\u021ba-N\u0103s\u0103ud, Bra\u0219ov, Cara\u0219-Severin, Cluj, Covasna, Harghita, Hunedoara, Maramure\u0219, Mure\u0219, S\u0103laj, Satu Mare, Sibiu, and Timi\u0219.\nTransylvania contains both largely urban counties, such as Bra\u0219ov and Hunedoara counties, as well as largely rural ones, such as Bistri\u021ba-N\u0103s\u0103ud and S\u0103laj counties.\nSince 1998, Romania has been divided into eight development regions, acting as divisions that coordinate and implement socio-economic development at regional level. Six counties (Alba, Bra\u0219ov, Covasna, Harghita, Mure\u0219 and Sibiu) form the Centru development region, another six (Bihor, Bistri\u021ba-N\u0103s\u0103ud, Cluj, Maramure\u0219, Satu Mare, S\u0103laj) form the Nord-Vest development region, while four (Arad, Cara\u0219-Severin, Hunedoara, Timi\u0219) form the Vest development region.\nCities and towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCluj-Napoca, commonly known as Cluj, is the second most populous city in Romania (as of the 2021 census), after the national capital Bucharest, and is the seat of Cluj County. From 1790 to 1848 and from 1861 to 1867, it was the official capital of the Grand Principality of Transylvania. Bra\u0219ov is an important tourist destination, being the largest city in a mountain resorts area, and a central location, suitable for exploring Romania, with the distances to several tourist destinations (including the Black Sea resorts, the monasteries in northern Moldavia, and the wooden churches of Maramure\u0219) being similar.\nSibiu is one of the most important cultural centres of Romania and was designated the European Capital of Culture for the year 2007, along with the city of Luxembourg. It was formerly the centre of the Transylvanian Saxon culture and between 1692 and 1791 and 1849\u201365 was the capital of the Principality of Transylvania.\nAlba Iulia, a city located on the Mure\u0219 River in Alba County, has since the High Middle Ages been the seat of Transylvania's Roman Catholic diocese. Between 1541 and 1690 it was the capital of the Eastern Hungarian Kingdom and the later Principality of Transylvania. Alba Iulia also has historical importance: after the end of World War I, representatives of the Romanian population of Transylvania gathered in Alba Iulia on 1 December 1918 to proclaim the union of Transylvania with the Kingdom of Romania. In Transylvania, there are many medieval smaller towns such as Sighi\u0219oara, Media\u0219, Sebe\u0219, and Bistri\u021ba.\nPopulation.\nHistorical population.\nOfficial censuses with information on Transylvania's population have been conducted since the 18th century. On 1 May 1784 the Emperor Joseph II called for the first official census of the Habsburg Empire, including Transylvania. The data was published in 1787, and this census showed only the overall population (1,440,986 inhabitants). , a 19th-century Hungarian statistician, estimated in 1842 that in the population of Transylvania for the years 1830\u20131840 the majority were 62.3% Romanians and 23.3% Hungarians.\nIn the last quarter of the 19th century, the Hungarian population of Transylvania increased from 24.9% in 1869 to 31.6%, as indicated in the 1910 Hungarian census (the majority of the Jewish population reported Hungarian as their primary language, so they were also counted as ethnically Hungarian in the 1910 census). At the same time, the percentage of the Romanian population decreased from 59.0% to 53.8% and the percentage of the German population decreased from 11.9% to 10.7%, for a total population of 5,262,495. Magyarization policies greatly contributed to this shift.\nThe percentage of the Romanian majority has significantly increased since the declaration of the union of Transylvania with Romania after World War I in 1918. The proportion of Hungarians in Transylvania was in steep decline as more of the region's inhabitants moved into urban areas, where the pressure to assimilate and Romanianize was greater. The expropriation of the estates of Magyar magnates, the distribution of the lands to the Romanian peasants, and the policy of cultural Romanianization that followed the Treaty of Trianon were major causes of friction between Hungary and Romania. Other factors include the emigration of non-Romanian peoples, assimilation and internal migration within Romania (estimates show that between 1945 and 1977, some 630,000 people moved from the Old Kingdom to Transylvania, and 280,000 from Transylvania to the Old Kingdom, most notably to Bucharest).\nCurrent population.\nAccording to the results of the 2011 census, the total population of Transylvania was 6,789,250 inhabitants and the ethnic groups were: Romanians \u2013 70.62%, Hungarians \u2013 17.92%, Roma \u2013 3.99%, Ukrainians \u2013 0.63%, Germans (mostly Transylvanian Saxons and Banat Swabians, but also Zipsers, Sathmar Swabians, or Landlers) \u2013 0.49%, other \u2013 0.77%. Some 378,298 inhabitants (5.58%) have not declared their ethnicity. The ethnic Hungarian population of Transylvania form a majority in the counties of Covasna (73.6%) and Harghita (84.8%). The Hungarians are also numerous in the following counties: Mure\u0219 (37.8%), Satu Mare (34.5%), Bihor (25.2%), and S\u0103laj (23.2%).\nEconomy.\nTransylvania is rich in mineral resources, notably lignite, iron, lead, manganese, gold, copper, natural gas, salt, and sulfur.\nTransylvania's GDP (nominal) is about $110 billion in 2023 according to Eurostat data and its GDP per capita measures about $17,057 in the same time period. Transylvania's Human Development Index is ranked 0.829, which makes Transylvania the 2nd most developed region in Romania after Bucharest-Ilfov.\nThere are large iron and steel, chemical, and textile industries. Stock raising, agriculture, wine production and fruit growing are important occupations. Agriculture is widespread in the Transylvanian Plateau, including growing cereals, vegetables, viticulture and breeding cattle, sheep, swine, and poultry. Timber is another valuable resource.\nIT, electronics and automotive industries are important in urban and university centres like Cluj-Napoca (Robert Bosch GmbH, Emerson Electric), Timi\u0219oara (Alcatel-Lucent, Flextronics and Continental AG), Bra\u0219ov, Sibiu, Oradea and Arad. The cities of Cluj Napoca and T\u00e2rgu Mure\u0219 are connected with a strong medical tradition, and according to the same classifications top performance hospitals exist there.\nNative brands include: Roman of Bra\u0219ov (trucks and buses), Azomure\u0219 of T\u00e2rgu Mure\u0219 (fertilizers), Terapia of Cluj-Napoca (pharmaceuticals), Banca Transilvania of Cluj-Napoca (finance), Romgaz and Transgaz of Media\u0219 (natural gas), Jidvei of Alba county (alcoholic beverages), Timi\u0219oreana of Timi\u0219oara (alcoholic beverages), the state owned Cugir Arms Factory, and others.\nThe Jiu Valley, located in the south of Hunedoara County, has been a major mining area throughout the second half of the 19th century and the 20th century, but many mines were closed down in the years following the collapse of the communist regime, forcing the region to diversify its economy.\nDuring the Second World War, Transylvania (the Southern/Romanian half, as the region was divided during the war) was crucial to the Romanian defense industry. Transylvanian factories built until 1945 over 1,000 warplanes and over 1,000 artillery pieces of all types, among others.\nCulture.\nThe culture of Transylvania is complex because of its varied history and longstanding multiculturalism, which has incorporated significant Hungarian (see Hungarians in Romania) and German (see Germans of Romania) influences.\nThe region was the birthplace of the Transylvanian School movement, its members, namely Samuil Micu-Klein, Petru Maior, and Gheorghe \u0218incai, being responsible for the early version of Romanian alphabet.\nWith regard to architecture, the Transylvanian Gothic style is preserved to this day in monuments such as the Black Church in Bra\u0219ov (14th and 15th centuries) and a number of other cathedrals, as well as the Bran Castle in Bra\u0219ov County (14th century), and the Hunyad Castle in Hunedoara (15th century).\nNotable writers such as Emil Cioran, Lucian Blaga, George Co\u0219buc, Ioan Slavici, Octavian Goga, Liviu Rebreanu, Endre Ady, Elie Wiesel, Elek Benedek and K\u00e1roly K\u00f3s were born in Transylvania. Liviu Rebreanu wrote the novel \"Ion\", which introduces the reader to a depiction of the life of Romanian peasants and intellectuals of Transylvania at the turn of the 20th century. K\u00e1roly K\u00f3s was one of the most important writers supporting the movement of Transylvanianism.\nReligion.\nTransylvania has a very rich and unique religious history. Since the Protestant Reformation, different Christian denominations have coexisted in this religious melting pot, including Romanian Orthodox, other Eastern Orthodox, Latin Catholic and Romanian Greek Catholic, Lutheran, Reformed, and Unitarian branches. Christianity is the largest religion, but other faiths also are present, including Jews and Muslims. Under the Habsburgs, Transylvania served as a place for \"religious undesirables\". People who arrived in Transylvania included those that did not conform to the Catholic Church and were sent here forcibly, as well as many religious refugees. Transylvania has a long history of religious tolerance, ensured by its religious pluralism.\nTransylvania has also been (and still is) a centre for Christian denominations other than Eastern Orthodoxy, the form of Christianity that most Romanians currently follow. As such, there are significant numbers of inhabitants of Transylvania that follow Latin Catholicism and Greek Catholicism, and Protestantism. Even though before 1948, the population of Transylvania split between Eastern Orthodox, Greek Catholic and other forms of Christianity, during the Communist Period the Orthodox Church was much more favoured by the state which has led to Eastern Orthodoxy being the religion of the majority of Transylvanians. However, among the Hungarian and German minorities only a small part are Eastern Orthodox. The main two religions of the Hungarian minority are Reformed (Calvinism) and Roman Catholicism; among Germans the main religions are Roman Catholicism (slightly over half of Germans in Romania), followed by Lutheranism and Eastern Orthodox. There are also Pentecostals and Baptists, particularly in Banat and Cri\u0219ana. Babe\u0219-Bolyai University, located in Cluj-Napoca is the only university in Europe that has four faculties of theology (Orthodox, Reformed, Roman Catholic, and Greek Catholic).\nThere are also small denominations like Adventism, Jehovah's Witnesses and more.\nOthers\n\"Data refers to extended Transylvania (with Banat, Cri\u0219ana and Maramure\u0219).\"\nHistorical coat of arms of Transylvania.\nThe first heraldic representations of Transylvania date from the 16th century. The Diet of 1659 codified the representation of the privileged nations (Unio Trium Nationum (Union of the Three Nations)) in Transylvania's coat of arms. It depicted a black eagle (Turul) on a blue background, representing the Hungarians, the Sun and the Moon representing the Sz\u00e9kelys, and seven red towers on a yellow background representing the seven fortified cities of the Transylvanian Saxons. The flag and coat of arms of Transylvania were granted by Queen Maria Theresa in 1765, when she established a Grand Principality within the Habsburg monarchy.\nIn 1596, Levinus Hulsius created a coat of arms for Transylvania, consisting of a shield with a rising eagle in the upper field and seven hills with towers on top in the lower field. He published it in his work \"Chronologia\", issued in Nuremberg the same year. The seal from 1597 of Sigismund B\u00e1thory, Prince of Transylvania, reproduced the new coat of arms with some slight changes: in the upper field the eagle was flanked by a sun and a moon and in the lower field the hills were replaced by simple towers. The coat of arms of Sigismund B\u00e1thory beside the coat of arms of the B\u00e1thory family, included the Transylvanian, Wallachia and Moldavian coat of arms, he used the title Prince of Transylvania, Wallachia and Moldavia. A short-lived heraldic representation of Transylvania is found on the seal of Michael the Brave. Besides the Wallachian eagle and the Moldavian aurochs, Transylvania is represented by two lions holding a sword standing on seven hills. Hungarian Transylvanian princes used the symbols of the Transylvanian coat of arms usually with the Hungarian coat of arms since the 16th century because Transylvanian princes maintained their claims to the throne of the Kingdom of Hungary.\nWhile neither symbol has official status in present-day Romania, the Transylvanian coat of arms is marshalled within the national Coat of arms of Romania, it was also a component of the Coat of arms of Hungary.\nIn popular culture.\nFollowing the publication of Emily Gerard's \"The Land Beyond the Forest\" (1888), Bram Stoker wrote his gothic horror novel \"Dracula\" in 1897, using Transylvania as a setting. With its success, Transylvania became associated, in the English- and Spanish-speaking world, with vampires. Among the first actors to portray Dracula in film was Bela Lugosi, who was born in Lugos (now Lugoj), in present-day Romania. In 1992 Francis Ford Coppola made a Hollywood movie about Dracula, based on the novel of Bram Stoker. The American animated movie franchise \"Hotel Transylvania\" also plays on the association of Transylvania with Dracula.\nTransylvania has also been represented in fiction and literature as a land of mystery and magic. For example, in Paulo Coelho's novel \"The Witch of Portobello\", the main character, Sherine Khalil, is described as a Transylvanian orphan with a Romani mother, in an effort to add to the character's exotic mystique. The so-called Transylvanian trilogy of historical novels by Mikl\u00f3s B\u00e1nffy, \"The Writing on the Wall\", is an extended treatment of the 19th- and early 20th-century social and political history of the country. The Principality of Transylvania is also a playable nation in \"Europa Universalis IV\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30854", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30854", "title": "Theodore Judah", "text": "American engineer and businessman (1826\u20131863)\nTheodore Dehone Judah (March 4, 1826 \u2013 November 2, 1863) was an American civil engineer who was a central figure in the original promotion, establishment, and design of the first transcontinental railroad. He found investors for what became the Central Pacific Railroad (CPRR). As chief engineer, he performed much of the route survey work to determine the best alignment for the railroad over the Sierra Nevada, which was completed six years after his death.\nEarly life and education.\nTheodore Judah was born in 1826 (perhaps 1825) in Bridgeport, Connecticut, the son of Mary (Reece) and The Rev. Henry Raymond Judah, an Episcopal clergyman. After his family moved to Troy, New York, Judah attended the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, then called the Rensselaer Institute in 1837 for a term and developed at a young age a passion for engineering and railroads.\nAt age 23, Judah married Anna Pierce on May 10, 1849. Theirs was the first wedding in the then-new St James Episcopal Church of Greenfield, Massachusetts.\nCareer.\nAfter studying briefly at Rensselaer, Judah went to work on a number of railroads in the Northeast, including engineering for the Lewiston Railroad down the Niagara Gorge. He was elected member of the American Society of Civil Engineers in May 1853; at that time there were fewer than 800 civil engineers in the United States. Judah was hired in 1854 at age 28, by Colonel Charles Lincoln Wilson, as the Chief Engineer for the Sacramento Valley Railroad in California. He and his wife Anna sailed to Nicaragua, crossed over to the Pacific, and caught a steamer to San Francisco. Under his charge, Sacramento Valley became in February 1856 the first common carrier railroad built west of the Mississippi River. Later, he was chief engineer of the California Central Railroad, incorporated 1857, and the San Francisco and Sacramento Railroad organized in 1856.\nPacific railroad surveys.\nIn January 1857 in Washington DC, Judah published \"A practical plan for building The Pacific Railroad\", in which he outlined the general plan and argued for the need to do a detailed survey of a specific selected route for the railroad, not a general reconnaissance of several possible routes that had been done earlier.\nNominated in the 1859 California Pacific Railroad Convention in San Francisco, Judah was sent to Washington DC to lobby in general for the Pacific Railroad. Congress was distracted by the trouble of pre-Civil War America and showed little interest. He returned noting that he had to find a specific practical route and some private financial backing to do a detailed engineering survey.\nIn the fall of 1860, Charles Marsh, surveyor, civil engineer and water company owner, met with Judah, who had recently built the Sacramento Valley Railroad from Sacramento to Folsom, California. Marsh, who had already surveyed a potential railroad route between Sacramento and Nevada City, California, a decade earlier, went with Judah into the Sierra Nevada Mountains. There they examined the Henness Pass Turnpike Company\u2019s route (Marsh was a founding director of that company). They measured elevations and distances, and discussed the possibility of a transcontinental railroad. Both were convinced that it could be done.\nIn November 1860, Judah published \"Central Pacific Railroad to California\", in which he declared \"the discovery of a practicable route from the city of Sacramento upon the divide between Bear River and the North Fork of the American, via Illinoistown (near Colfax), Dutch Flat, and Summit Valley (Donner Pass) to the Truckee River\". He advocated the chosen Dutch Flat-Donner Pass route as the most practical one with maximum grades of one hundred feet per mile and 150 miles shorter than the route recommended in the government's reports. Much of the Sierra Nevada where the practical routes were located was double-ridged, meaning two summits separated by a valley, Donner Pass was not and thus was more suitable for a railroad. From Dutch Flat, the Pacific road would climb steadily up the ridge between the North Fork American and Bear Rivers to the Pass before winding down steadily following the Truckee River out of the mountains into the Great Basin of Nevada. In December 1860 or early January 1861, Marsh met with Theodore Judah and Dr. Daniel Strong in Strong\u2019s drug store in Dutch Flat, California, to discuss the project, which they called the Central Pacific Railroad of California.\nJudah's youthful interest in the general subject of a Pacific Railroad developed during this period into almost an obsession, his wife observing that...\nEverything he did from the time he went to California to the day of his death was for the great continental Pacific railway. Time, money, brains, strength, body, and soul were absorbed. It was the burden of his thought day and night, largely of his conversation, till it used to be said 'Judah's Pacific Railroad crazy,' and I would say, 'Theodore, those people don't care,' or 'you give your thunder away.' He'd laugh and say, 'But we must keep the ball rolling.' \"Wheat, A Sketch of the Life of Theodore D. Judah (1925)\"\nCentral Pacific Railroad (CPRR).\nFailing to raise funds for the Central Pacific project in San Francisco, Judah succeeded in signing up five Sacramento merchants, : James Bailey, Leland Stanford, Collis P. Huntington, Mark Hopkins, and Charles Crocker. On June 28, 1861, the Central Pacific Rail Way of California (CPRR) was incorporated with Judah as the chief engineer. At this point in time, Judah had the CPRR backing to survey the route over the Sierra Nevada along which the railroad was to be built during the 1860s, as well as barometric reconnaissance of two other routes, which turned out to be inferior. In a report dated October 1, 1861, Judah discussed the results of the survey, the merits of the chosen Dutch Flat-Donner Pass route, and the estimated costs from Sacramento to points as far as Salt Lake City. On October 9, 1861, the CPRR directors authorized Judah to go back to Washington DC, this time as the agent of CPRR, to procure \"appropriations of land and U.S. Bonds from the Government to aid in the construction of this road\". The next day, Judah published a strip map (a.k.a. the Theodore Judah map), 30 inches tall by 66 feet long, of the proposed alignment of the Central Pacific Railroad. On October 11, 1861, Judah boarded a steamer in San Francisco headed for Panama.\nAt Washington DC, Judah began an active campaign for a Pacific Railroad bill. He was made the clerk of the House subcommittee on the bill and also obtained an appointment as secretary of the Senate subcommittee. On July 1, 1862, President Lincoln signed the Pacific Railroad Act into law, which authorized the issuance of land grants and U.S. bonds to CPRR and the newly chartered Union Pacific Railroad for the construction of a transcontinental railroad. Judah then went to New York to order supplies and sailed back to California on July 21, 1862, having accomplished his mission in less than a year.\nDeath.\nJudah died of yellow fever on November 2, 1863. He contracted the disease in Panama on a voyage with his wife to New York City, apparently becoming infected during their land passage across the Isthmus of Panama. He was traveling to New York to seek alternative financing to buy out the major investors. Anna took his body back to Greenfield, Massachusetts, where he was buried in the Pierce family plot in the Federal Street Cemetery. He died before his dream of a transcontinental railroad could be completed.\nLegacy and honors.\nWithin days of Judah's death, the CPRR's first locomotive, \"Gov. Stanford\", made a trial run over the new railroad's first 500 feet of track in Sacramento, California.\n\"In purely engineering retrospect, Judah\u2019s achievements would seem nothing short of providential, especially in comparison to modern route surveying efforts. With a minimal survey crew utilizing crude instruments and only draft animals for transportation, Judah was able to lay out a remarkably accurate alignment across the most difficult natural obstacles undertaken up until that time (1861).\" J. David Rogers and Charles R. Spinks, ASCE Golden Spike 150th Anniversary History Symposium, Sacramento, CA, May 6, 2019\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "30855", "revid": "157842", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30855", "title": "Towpath", "text": "Path allowing a boat to be towed beside a river\nA towpath is a road or trail on the bank of a river, canal, or other inland waterway. The purpose of a towpath is to allow a land vehicle, beasts of burden, or a team of human pullers to tow a boat, often a barge. This mode of transport was common where sailing was impractical because of tunnels and bridges, unfavorable winds, or the narrowness of the channel.\nAfter the Industrial Revolution, towing became obsolete when engines were fitted on boats and when railway transportation superseded the slow towing method. Since then, many of these towpaths have been converted to multi-use trails and footpaths. They are still named towpaths \u2014 although they are now only occasionally used for the purpose of towing boats.\nHistory.\nEarly inland waterway transport used the rivers, and while barges could use sails to assist their passage when winds were favourable or the river was wide enough to allow tacking, in many cases this was not possible, and gangs of men were used to bow-haul the boats. As river banks were often privately owned, such teams worked their way along the river banks as best they could, but this was far from satisfactory. On British rivers such as the River Severn, the situation was improved by the creation of towing path companies in the late 1700s. The companies built towing paths along the banks of the river, and four such companies improved a section of in this way between Bewdley and Coalbrookdale. They were not universally popular, however, as tolls were charged for their use, to recoup the capital cost, and this was resented on rivers where barge traffic had previously been free.\nWith the advent of artificial canals, most of them were constructed with towpaths suitable for horses. Many rivers were improved by artificial cuts, and this often gave an opportunity to construct a towing path at the same time. Even so, the River Don Navigation was improved from Tinsley to Rotherham in 1751, but the horse towing path was not completed on this section until 1822. On the River Avon between Stratford-upon-Avon and Tewkesbury, a towpath was never provided, and bow-hauling continued until the 1860s, when steam tugs were introduced.\nWhile towing paths were most convenient when they stayed on one side of a canal, there were occasions where it had to change sides, often because of opposition from landowners. Thus the towpath on the Chesterfield Canal changes to the south bank while it passes through the Osberton Estate, as the Foljambes, who lived in Osberton Hall, did not want boatmen passing too close to their residence. On canals, one solution to the problem of getting the horse to the other side was the roving bridge or turnover bridge, where the horse ascended the ramp on one side, crossed the bridge, descended a circular ramp on the other side of the river but the same side of the bridge, and then passed through the bridge hole to continue on its way. This had the benefit that the rope did not have to be detached while the transfer took place. Where the towpath reached a lock, which was spanned by a footbridge at its tail, the southern section of the Stratford-on-Avon Canal used split bridges so that the horse line did not have to be detached. The rope passed through a small gap at the centre of the bridge between its two halves.\nOne problem with the horse towing path where it passed under a bridge was abrasion of the rope on the bridge arch. This resulted in deep grooves being cut in the fabric of the bridge, and in many cases, the structure was protected by cast iron plates, attached to the faces of the arch. These too soon developed deep grooves, but could be more easily replaced than the stonework of the bridge. While bridges could be constructed over relatively narrow canals, they were more costly on wide navigable rivers, and in many cases horse ferries were provided, to enable the horse to reach the next stretch of towpath. In more recent times, this has provided difficulties for walkers, where an attractive river-side walk cannot be followed because the towpath changes sides and the ferry is no more.\nNot all haulage was by horses, and an experiment was carried out on the Middlewich Branch of the Shropshire Union Canal in 1888. Following suggestions by Francis W. Webb, the Mechanical Engineer for the London and North Western Railway at Crewe Works, rails were laid along a stretch of the towpath near Worleston, and a small steam locomotive borrowed from Crewe Works was used to tow boats. The locomotive ran on gauge tracks, and was similar to \"Pet\", which is preserved in the National Railway Museum at York. It pulled trains of two and four boats at , and experiments were also tried with eight boats. The canal's engineer, G. R. Webb, produced a report on the expected costs of laying rails along the towpaths, but nothing more was heard of the project, and the advent of steam and diesel powered boats offered a much simpler solution. The 'mules' which assist ships through the locks of the Panama Canal are a modern example of the concept.\nModern usage.\nTowpaths are popular with cyclists and walkers, and some are suitable for equestrians. In snowy winters they are popular in the US with cross-country skiers and snowmobile users.\nAlthough historically not designed or used as towpaths, acequia ditch banks also are popular recreational trails.\nBritain.\nIn Britain, most canals were built, owned and operated by private companies, and the towpaths were deemed to be private, for the benefit of legitimate users of the canal. The nationalisation of the canal system in 1948 did not result in the towpaths becoming public rights of way. Subsequent legislation, such as the Transport Act 1968, which defined the government's obligations to the maintenance of the inland waterways for which it was now responsible, did not include any commitment to maintain towpaths for use by anyone, however, some ten years later British Waterways started to relax the rule that a permit was required to give access to a towpath, and began to encourage leisure usage by walkers, anglers and in some areas, cyclists. The steady development of the leisure use of the canals and the decline of commercial traffic has resulted in a general acceptance that towpaths are open to everyone, and not just boat users.\nThe concept of free access to towpaths is now enshrined in the legislation which transferred responsibility for the English and Welsh canals from British Waterways to the Canal &amp; River Trust in 2012. Cycling permits are no longer required by the Canal &amp; River Trust. However, not all canal towpaths are suitable for use by cyclists, and conflicts can arise between the differing user groups, leading to campaigns such as Stay Kind, Slow Down. Parts of some towpaths have been incorporated into the National Cycle Network, and in most cases this has resulted in the surface being improved.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30857", "revid": "602857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30857", "title": "Texas Rangers (baseball)", "text": "Major League Baseball franchise in Arlington, Texas\nThe Texas Rangers are an American professional baseball team based in the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex. The Rangers compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the American League (AL) West Division. The team was founded as the Washington Senators in 1961, an expansion team awarded to Washington, D.C., after the previous Senators incarnation moved to Minneapolis to become the Minnesota Twins. The new Senators relocated to Arlington, Texas after the season and debuted as the Rangers the following spring. In 2020, the Rangers moved to the new Globe Life Field after having played at Globe Life Park (now Choctaw Stadium) from 1994 to 2019. The team's name is derived from a historic law enforcement agency.\nThe Rangers have made nine appearances in the MLB postseason, seven following division championships in 1996, 1998, 1999, 2010, 2011, 2015, and 2016 and as a wild card team in both 2012 and 2023. Prior to 2010, the Rangers were the only team in MLB to have never advanced past the first round of the playoffs. In 2010, the Rangers advanced past the Division Series for the first time, defeating the Tampa Bay Rays. The team then won their first American League pennant after beating the New York Yankees in six games; league MVP Josh Hamilton won their first ALCS MVP award for a Ranger player. In their first appearance in a World Series, the Rangers fell to the San Francisco Giants in five games. They repeated as American League champions the following year, but famously lost the 2011 World Series to the St. Louis Cardinals in seven games after twice being one strike away from winning the series in game six. The Rangers made it to the 2023 World Series and won their first-ever championship, defeating the Arizona Diamondbacks in five games, with Corey Seager being the first Ranger player to win the World Series Most Valuable Player Award.\nFrom 1961 through the end of 2025, the franchise's overall win\u2013loss record is 4,899\u20135,383\u20136 (). Since moving to Texas in 1972, the Rangers have an overall win\u2013loss record of 4,159\u20134,351\u20135 () through the end of 2025.\nHistory.\nWashington Senators (1961\u20131971).\nWhen the original Washington Senators announced their move to Minnesota to become the Twins in 1961, Major League Baseball decided to expand a year earlier than planned to stave off the twin threats of competition from the proposed Continental League and loss of its exemption from the Sherman Antitrust Act. As part of the expansion, the American League added two expansion teams for the season\u2013the Los Angeles Angels and a new Washington Senators team. The new Senators and Angels began to fill their rosters with American League players in an expansion draft. The team played their inaugural season at old Griffith Stadium, then moved to the new District of Columbia Stadium in 1962 under a ten-year lease.\nFor most of their existence, the new Senators epitomized futility, losing an average of 90 games a season. The team's struggles led to a twist on a joke about the old Senators: \"Washington: first in war, first in peace and \"still\" last in the American League.\" Frank Howard, an outfielder/first baseman from 1965 to 1972 known for his towering home runs, was the team's most accomplished player, winning two home run titles.\nThe concurrent rise of the nearby Baltimore Orioles to regular championship contenders (winning their first World Series in 1966) certainly did not help the Senators draw crowds. Further expansion and re-alignment in 1969 did not do much to help the Senators either, since (unlike the National League) the AL owners elected to align their new divisions strictly based on geography. This arrangement placed both expansion teams (the Seattle Pilots and the Kansas City Royals) in the AL West, while pitting last place Washington against the AL's five best teams in the AL East. Despite this, the Senators managed a winning season in 1969 (their only winning record in the nation's capital) when Hall of Famer Ted Williams managed the club to an 86\u201376 finish, good enough for fourth in the AL East. \nOwnership changed hands several times during the franchise's stay in Washington and was often plagued by poor decision-making and planning. Following their brief success in 1969, owner Bob Short was forced to make many questionable trades to lower the debt he had incurred to pay for the team in late 1968; the purchase price was reported at $9.4\u00a0million. By the end of the 1970 campaign, Short had issued an ultimatum: unless someone was willing to buy the Senators for $12\u00a0million (by comparison, the New York Yankees were sold in 1973 for $8.8\u00a0million), he would not renew the stadium lease and would move the team elsewhere.\nAt first, it looked like a move to Buffalo, New York, was in the works as at the time, a proposed multi-use stadium was in the cards in either downtown Buffalo where the current KeyBank Center is, or in suburban Lancaster to share with the Buffalo Bills; however, the project went over budget and the Senators started to look elsewhere while the Bills opened up Rich Stadium instead. Short was especially receptive to an offer brought up by Arlington, Texas, mayor Tom Vandergriff, who had been trying to obtain a major league sports team to play in the Metroplex for over a decade. Years earlier, Charles O. Finley, the owner of the Kansas City Athletics, sought to relocate his baseball team to Dallas, but the idea was rebuffed and ultimately declined by the other AL team owners (the A's ultimately moved to Oakland, California in 1968). Arlington's hole card was Turnpike Stadium, a 10,000-seat park built in 1965 to house the Double-A Dallas\u2013Fort Worth Spurs of the Texas League. However, it had been built to MLB specifications, and only minor excavations would be necessary to expand the park to accommodate major league crowds.\nVandergriff's offer of a multimillion-dollar down payment prompted Short to make the move to Arlington. On September 21, 1971, American League owners voted 10\u20132 to allow the move of the franchise to Arlington for the 1972 season. Senators fans were livid, and enmity came to a head at the club's last game in Washington on Thursday, September\u00a030. Thousands simply walked in without paying after the security guards left early, swelling the paid attendance of 14,460 to around 25,000, while fans unfurled a \"SHORT STINKS\" banner. With two outs in the top of the ninth inning and the Senators leading 7\u20135, several hundred youths stormed the field, raiding it for souvenirs. One man grabbed first base and ran off with it. With no security in sight and only three bases, umpire crew chief Jim Honochick forfeited the game to the New York Yankees.\nThe nation's capital went without Major League Baseball for 33\u00a0years, until the relocation of the National League's Montreal Expos, who became the Washington Nationals in\u00a02005.\nTexas Rangers (1972\u2013present).\nNaming of the Rangers.\nAfter moving from Washington, the Senators were renamed after the Texas Rangers, the state-wide investigative law-enforcement agency which was founded by Stephen F. Austin in 1823 when Texas was part of Mexico, and whose mythology led to fictional characters such as The Lone Ranger and Walker, Texas Ranger.\nFirst years in Texas (1972\u20131984).\nPrior to the 1972 season, improvements were made to Turnpike Stadium, which reopened as Arlington Stadium, in preparation for the inaugural season of the Texas Rangers. The team played its first game on April 15, 1972, a 1\u20130 loss at the hands of the California Angels, their 1961 expansion cousins. The next day, the Rangers defeated the Angels, 5\u20131, for the club's first victory.\nIn 1974, the Rangers experienced their first winning season after finishing last in both 1972 and 1973. Under the ownership of Brad Corbett, they finished second in the American League West with an 84\u201376 record, behind the eventual World Series champion Oakland Athletics. The 1974 Rangers are still the only MLB team to finish above .500 after two consecutive 100-loss seasons. Mike Hargrove was awarded American League Rookie of the Year, Billy Martin was named AL Manager of the Year, Jeff Burroughs won AL MVP, and Ferguson Jenkins was named the Comeback Player of the Year after winning 25 games, a club record to this day. The team posted winning records again from 1977 to 1979 but fell short of reaching the playoffs. The Rangers came very close to clinching a playoff spot in 1981, but wound up losing the first half of the AL West by one-and-a-half games to Oakland at the time of the players' strike. Texas went on to finish under .500 each season through 1985.\nThe Rangers faced an attendance problem for a few years in Texas, due in part to both the team's inconsistent performance and the oppressive heat and humidity that can encompass the area in the summer. Until the Florida Marlins arrived in 1993, Arlington Stadium was often the hottest stadium in the majors, with temperatures frequently topping throughout the summer. So the Rangers began playing most of their weekend games between May and September at night, a tradition that continued for years.\nValentine, Ryan, and Bush (1985\u20131994).\nManager Bobby Valentine became steward over an influx of talent in the late 1980s and early 1990s. A winning season in 1986 was a shock to pundits and fans alike as the Rangers remained in the race for the American League pennant for the entire season. With a team consisting of stellar young rookies such as Rub\u00e9n Sierra, Pete Incaviglia, Mitch Williams, Bobby Witt, and Edwin Correa, the Rangers finished the season in second place with an 87\u201375 record, just five games behind the division champion Angels. The season marked a dramatic 25-win improvement over the 1985 season, which resulted in yet another last place finish in the West.\nThe signing of 41-year-old star pitcher Nolan Ryan prior to the 1989 season allowed Ryan to reach his 5,000th strikeout, 300th win, and 6th and 7th no-hitters with the Rangers. Despite powerful lineups including Juan Gonz\u00e1lez, Rub\u00e9n Sierra, Julio Franco, and Rafael Palmeiro and a pitching staff that also included Charlie Hough, Bobby Witt, Kevin Brown, and Kenny Rogers, Valentine's Rangers never finished above second place and he was relieved of his duties during the 1992 season.\nIn April 1989, Rangers owner and oil tycoon Eddie Chiles, sold the team to an investment group headed by George W. Bush for $89\u00a0million. While his own equity in the team was a small one ($500,000), Bush was named managing general partner of the new ownership group. He increased his investment to $600,000 the following year. Bush left his position with the Rangers when he was elected Governor of Texas in 1994, and he sold his stake in the team in 1998. Bush went on to win the 2000 United States presidential election.\nDuring Bush's tenure, the Rangers and the City of Arlington decided to replace the aging Arlington Stadium with a new publicly funded stadium, at a cost of $193\u00a0million, financed by Arlington residents, through a sales tax increase. Ground was broken on October 30, 1991, on what would become The Ballpark in Arlington (now named Choctaw Stadium).\nIn 1993, Kevin Kennedy took over managerial duties, presiding over the team for two seasons, keeping the 1993 Rangers in the hunt for a playoff berth into mid-September; Nolan Ryan also retired after that season. Kennedy was let go in 1994, although the team led the AL West prior to the players' strike which prompted commissioner Bud Selig to cancel the remainder of the season and the playoffs. On July 28, Kenny Rogers pitched the 12th perfect game in major league history in Arlington against the California Angels.\nFirst division titles (1995\u20132000).\nJohnny Oates was hired as the Rangers' manager in 1995. Oates and company helped to bring home the 1996 AL Western Division Championship, the first division championship in franchise history. The first playoff series, 24 years after the franchise came to Texas, saw the Rangers lose to the New York Yankees, 3 games to 1. Oates was named AL Manager of the Year and Juan Gonz\u00e1lez was named AL MVP. The team featured a powerful lineup of hitters including Gonz\u00e1lez, Iv\u00e1n Rodr\u00edguez, and Rusty Greer, but continued to struggle with pitching despite having Rick Helling and Aaron Sele on their roster. Oates led the team to consecutive AL West championships in 1998 and 1999. Neither of Oates' last two playoff teams could win a single game, losing all six in back-to-back sweeps at the hands of the Yankees, a team that won three World Series in the 1990s after defeating Rangers teams in the first round. The 1999 team was to be the last playoff-bound team until 2010. En route to a second-straight last-place finish, Oates resigned his position 28\u00a0games into the 2001 season.\nIn 1998, venture capital billionaire Tom Hicks bought the team for $250\u00a0million.\nThe lean years and the A-Rod era (2001\u20132004).\nPrior to the 2001 season, star free agent shortstop Alex Rodriguez was signed by the Rangers in the most lucrative deal in baseball history: a 10-year, $252\u00a0million contract. The move was controversial and is frequently maligned by fans and writers who thought that owner Tom Hicks was placing too much emphasis on one player instead of utilizing team resources to acquire several players, especially for a team that lacked pitching talent. Club officials maintained that Rodriguez would be the cornerstone of future postseason success. Although Rodriguez's individual performance was outstanding, the Rangers continued to struggle, and manager Jerry Narron was fired following the 2002 season and was replaced by seasoned manager Buck Showalter. The 2003 season signified the Rangers' fourth-straight last-place finish, and after a postseason fallout between Rodriguez and club management, the reigning AL MVP and newly appointed Rangers captain was traded to the New York Yankees for second baseman Alfonso Soriano and infield prospect Joaquin Arias.\nThe Rangers battled with the Anaheim Angels and Oakland Athletics for first place in the AL West for much of the 2004 season. Mark Teixeira, Alfonso Soriano, Michael Young, and Hank Blalock became some of the best-hitting infielders in the league, with Young, Blalock, and Soriano being selected for the 2004 All-Star Game. Soriano was named the All-Star MVP after going 2 for 3 with a three-run home run. Despite a late-season push, the Rangers ended up losing six of their final ten games and finished in third place behind the Angels and A's, a mere three games out of first place.\nMaking changes (2005\u20132009).\nIn 2005, the Rangers again struggled to find consistency amid controversy and injuries. John Hart stepped down as general manager following the 2005 season. Jon Daniels was promoted from assistant general manager to replace him. Daniels, at 28 years and one month, became the youngest general manager in major league history.\nDaniels and the Rangers front office were very active in acquiring new players before and during the 2006 season. New acquisitions included Brad Wilkerson, Adam Eaton, Kevin Millwood, Carlos Lee, and Nelson Cruz. Despite bolstering their roster, the Rangers' 2006 season ended with a disappointing 80\u201382 record and a third-place finish in the AL West. Buck Showalter was dismissed as manager after the season. The team hired Oakland third base coach Ron Washington as their next manager. A change at manager was the first of several moves to strengthen the team in yet another busy offseason. The team lost Gary Matthews, Jr., Mark DeRosa, Carlos Lee, and Adam Eaton, but gained Kenny Lofton, Sammy Sosa, Frank Catalanotto, and pitchers \u00c9ric Gagn\u00e9 and Brandon McCarthy.\nThe Rangers struggled offensively early in the 2007 season, despite playing in a notoriously hitter-friendly park. A number of roster moves before the 2007 trade deadline were the beginnings of a rebuilding project headed by Jon Daniels with a focus on the acquisition and development of young players. In the coming years, more club resources would be dedicated to improving the quality of the farm system and scouting departments, most notably in Latin America and the Far East. Daniels' objective was to field a legitimately competitive team by the 2010 season.\nThe Rangers began the 2008 season exceptionally well, headlined by newcomer Josh Hamilton who looked to be a threat to win the Triple Crown, before fading off as the season wore on. During the All-Star festivities at Yankee Stadium, Hamilton crushed a first-round home run record in the 2008 Home Run Derby with 28. Hamilton hit another four in the second round and three during the final round, for a total of 35 home runs, but lost to the Twins' Justin Morneau. Four Rangers played in the All Star Game: Hamilton, Ian Kinsler, Milton Bradley, and Michael Young, who would repeat his 2006 All-Star Game feat by driving in the winning run via a sac fly.\nThe Rangers finished the season with yet another sub-.500 record (79\u201383), yet ended the season second in the AL West, the club's best finish since 1999. The 2009 season saw the Rangers soar into playoff contention for the first time since 2004. Despite injuries to Josh Hamilton and Ian Kinsler, the Rangers held first place in their division for long stretches of the summer before fading after September 1, losing the division to the Los Angeles Angels. The Rangers finished the season at 87\u201375, their first winning season since 2004 and good enough for second place in the AL West. Michael Young responded to his move to third base by posting one of his best offensive seasons ever while committing just nine errors and earning a sixth-straight All-Star appearance. Josh Hamilton and Nelson Cruz were also named 2009 AL All-Stars.\nRangers Baseball Express, LLC.\nFollowing financial problems, including defaulting on a $525\u00a0million loan, Tom Hicks and Hicks Sports Group reached an agreement to sell the Texas Rangers to group headed by Pittsburgh sports lawyer Chuck Greenberg and Rangers team president Nolan Ryan for approximately $570\u00a0million on January 22, 2010. Hicks also sold much of the land surrounding Rangers Ballpark to Greenberg and Ryan's group in a separate deal.\nHowever, one of HSG's principal lenders, Monarch Alternative Capital, opposed the sale on grounds that the proceeds would not fully repay the defaulted HSG notes. On April 21, Major League Baseball issued a statement declaring the Rangers' sale to be under the control of the Commissioner to expedite the process. As the stalemate between HSG and its creditors continued, the Texas Rangers filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy on May 24. As of that date, the Rangers and HSG had an estimated debt of $575\u00a0million. Much of the unsecured debt was owed in back salary. Yankees third baseman Alex Rodriguez topped the list of unsecured creditors with an estimated $24.9\u00a0million owed by the Rangers. The sale would repay all the team's creditors, including Rodriguez and other players owed back salary. Following a court-ordered public auction to be held on August 4 with the winning bid submitted by Greenberg/Ryan, the bankruptcy court closed the case. The sale to Greenberg/Ryan was approved by all 30 MLB owners at the owners meeting in Minneapolis on August 12. The new ownership group was called Rangers Baseball Express, LLC and had Chuck Greenberg serving as managing general partner and Nolan Ryan as club president. Oil magnates Ray Davis and Bob R. Simpson paid the bulk of the $539\u00a0million sale price, and became co-chairmen, with the largest stakes in the ownership group. However, they remained mostly in the background as senior consultants, leaving the team mostly in Greenberg and Ryan's hands.\nRise to contention and back-to-back American League Pennants (2010\u20132016).\nWith the influx of talent and success in 2009, the Rangers entered the 2010 season expecting to compete for the division and achieve the front office's 2007 goals. During the off-season, Nolan Ryan spoke about the Rangers' chances in the upcoming season saying, \"My expectations today are that we're going to be extremely competitive and if we don't win our division, I'll be disappointed.\"\nAfter stumbling out of the gates with a sub-.500 start in April 2010, the Rangers took the division lead with a franchise-best month of June, going 21\u20136. The Rangers never relinquished first place after an 11-game winning streak. The team made several mid-season moves to acquire players such as Cliff Lee, Bengie Molina, Jorge Cant\u00fa, and Jeff Francoeur. After the All-Star Game, in which six Rangers were present, came the debut of the claw and antler hand gestures, which gained much popularity, especially after the release of various apparel and souvenir options. Foam claws and helmets with deer antlers became quite commonplace in the ballpark as the Rangers played further into the fall. The Rangers won the AL West on September 25, advancing to the postseason for the first time since 1999 with a 90\u201372 record. The Rangers entered the playoffs against the Tampa Bay Rays in the first round, which ultimately resulted in a 3\u20132 series victory and marked the first postseason series victory in the 50-year history of the Rangers/Washington Senators franchise. Facing the Rangers in the American League Championship Series were the defending World Series champion New York Yankees, the team the Rangers failed against three separate times in the 1990s. In a six-game ALCS, Texas came out victorious, winning the first pennant in franchise history in front of an ecstatic home crowd. Josh Hamilton was awarded ALCS MVP. The Rangers faced the San Francisco Giants in the 2010 World Series, but their offense struggled against the Giants' young pitching and eventually lost the Series, 4\u20131.\nIn March 2011, Chuck Greenberg resigned as Chief Executive and Managing General Partner and sold his interest in the Rangers after a falling out with his partners. Following his resignation, Nolan Ryan was named CEO in addition to his continuing role as team president. Ryan was subsequently approved as the team's controlling owner by a unanimous vote of the 30 owners of Major League Baseball on May 12.\nThe Rangers successfully defended their AL West Division title in 2011, making the club's second-straight division title and postseason appearance. The Rangers set records for best win\u2013loss record (96\u201366, .592) and home attendance (2,946,949). On October 15, they went back to the 2011 World Series after beating the Detroit Tigers 15\u20135 in game six of the ALCS. The series featured Nelson Cruz hitting six home runs, the most home runs by one player in a playoff series in MLB history. In Game 2, Cruz also became the first player in postseason history to win a game with a walk-off grand slam as the Rangers defeated the Tigers 7\u20133 in 11 innings. However, they proceeded to lose to the St. Louis Cardinals in seven games, after twice being one strike away from the championship in Game 6.\nThe Rangers dominated the American League standings for much of the 2012 season, but floundered in September, culminating in a sweep by the Oakland Athletics in the final series. They did, however, qualify for the first American League wild-card playoff game. In the new Wild Card Game, the Rangers' woes continued, as they lost 5\u20131 to the Orioles. The Rangers figured in the 2013 wild card as well. They finished the season in second place in the American League West with a 91\u201372 record, tied with the Tampa Bay Rays for a wild card spot. A 163rd play-in tie-breaker game was held to determine the second participant in the 2013 American League Wild Card Game against the Cleveland Indians. The Rangers lost to the Rays, 5\u20132, in the tie-breaker and were eliminated from playoff contention after reaching the postseason in three consecutive seasons. Nolan Ryan stepped down as Rangers CEO effective October 31, 2013. After that, Daniels served as operating head of the franchise, with Davis and Simpson continuing to serve mostly as senior consultants.\nInjuries took a major toll on the Rangers in 2014. The lone bright spot was Adri\u00e1n Beltr\u00e9, who despite spending some time injured, was the most consistent offensive player on the team. On September 4, 2014, the Rangers became the first MLB team officially eliminated from 2014 postseason contention when a 10\u20132 loss at home to the Seattle Mariners dropped their record to 53\u201387. The following day, manager Ron Washington resigned, citing personal issues. With the acquisition of Cole Hamels in 2015, the Rangers overtook the Houston Astros to clinch the American League West title on the final day of the season with a record of 88\u201374. The Rangers went on to lose to the Toronto Blue Jays in five games in the Division Series after squandering a 2\u20130 series lead. Texas again clinched the AL West in 2016, but lost to Toronto, 3\u20130, in the ALDS.\nRebuilding (2017\u20132022).\nThe Rangers finished the 2017 campaign 23\u00a0games out of first place with a 78\u201384 record. In 2018, the Rangers partnered with the KBO League's LG Twins, in business and baseball operations. On September 21, 2018, holding on to a 64\u201388 record, the Rangers fired Jeff Banister who had led the team since 2015. He was replaced by bench coach Don Wakamatsu for the remainder of the season. The Rangers ended the season at 67\u201395. Chris Woodward was later selected to be the team's manager beginning with the 2019 season. He led the team to a 78\u201384 record in his first season. The 2019 season also marked the Rangers' final season of play at Globe Life Park. On September 29, 2019, the Rangers played their final game at Globe Life Park, a 6\u20131 win over the New York Yankees.\nFollowing a delayed start to the 2020 season due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Rangers played their first regular season game at the new Globe Life Field on July 24, 2020, a 1\u20130 win over the Colorado Rockies. They ended the contracted season in fifth place at 22\u201338.\nOn April 5, 2021, the Texas Rangers hosted the first full-capacity sporting event in the United States since the pandemic began with more than 38,000 fans in attendance. The decision for full capacity stemmed from Texas allowing all businesses to operate at 100% capacity without mask restrictions. The Rangers were criticized by United States health officials and President Joe Biden for hosting a full-capacity event, calling it \"a mistake\" and \"not responsible\". However, former White House medical staff member Dr. William Lang argued that lowering rates of COVID-19 infections and increasing rates of vaccination in Texas gave the decision to hold the game at full capacity more credibility. The Rangers did not enforce a mask policy at the home opener or any of their games. Although the seven-day average of COVID-19 cases in Tarrant County more than doubled following the home opener, there was no evidence of causation occurring as a result of the opening game.\nAfter a 60\u2013102 season in 2021, their worst since 1973, the Rangers signed several free agents, including Toronto Blue Jays second baseman Marcus Semien and Los Angeles Dodgers shortstop Corey Seager, and they brought back former starting pitcher Martin Perez after three seasons away from the team. However, the team finished 68\u201394, good enough for fourth place in the AL West; they were also a franchise- and league-worst 15\u201335 in one-run games. The Rangers fired Chris Woodward on August 15, 2022, with Tony Beasley taking his place as interim manager for the rest of the year. Two days after Woodward's firing, the Rangers fired President of Baseball Operations (and former Rangers general manager) Jon Daniels, after six consecutive losing seasons. Chris Young, who was named general manager in 2020 to take over the role from Daniels, was named the new club president. On October 21, 2022, the Rangers hired three-time World Series winning manager Bruce Bochy. During the offseason, the Rangers signed longtime New York Mets starting pitcher Jacob deGrom to a five-year, $185 million contract, and starting pitchers Nathan Eovaldi and Andrew Heaney.\nFirst World Series title (2023\u2013present).\nThe Rangers finished the 2023 season with a 90\u201372 record, losing the AL West title to the Houston Astros on a tiebreaker. The Rangers had six players (five starters) named to the All-Star game, a franchise record. Second baseman Marcus Semien was the only player who started in every game the Rangers played in 2023, and he also became the fifth player in MLB history with at least 100 RBI in the leadoff spot and won a Silver Slugger award. On September 30, the Rangers clinched a playoff berth for the first time since 2016 with a win against the Seattle Mariners.\nDespite leading the American League West for most of the season and finishing with the same record as the rival and defending champion Houston Astros, they finished second due to the Astros owning the tiebreaker as a result of taking the season series. The Rangers defeated the Tampa Bay Rays in the ALWCS in a two-game sweep and the Baltimore Orioles in a three-game sweep in the ALDS to advance to the ALCS for the first time since 2011, in which they beat their division and Lone Star Series rival, and defending World Series champions Astros in seven games to claim their first pennant since 2011. The Rangers went 13\u20134 in the postseason, going 2\u20134 at home and 11\u20130 on the road, the most road wins in a postseason in MLB history. The postseason was marked by performances by All-Star players Nathan Eovaldi, Corey Seager and Adolis Garc\u00eda, with Eovaldi matching the record number of wins by a pitcher in a single postseason with 5, Seager winning World Series MVP and Garcia winning ALCS MVP. On November 1, the Rangers won the 2023 World Series after defeating the Arizona Diamondbacks in five games, achieving their first World Series championship in franchise history.\nAs a result of many injuries throughout the 2024 season, the Rangers finished the season with a 78\u201384 record, failing to improve on their 90\u201372 record from 2023 and not making the playoffs. The Rangers became the first team since the 2020 Washington Nationals to win a title and fail to make the playoffs in the very next year. This made the Rangers the 12th team in the past 25 years to win the World Series, then fail to make it to the playoffs the following year.\nBallpark.\nGlobe Life Field, in Arlington, Texas, began serving as the home of the Texas Rangers in 2020. Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company, a subsidiary of McKinney-based Torchmark Corporation, owns the naming rights for the facility through 2048. The new ballpark is located across the street just south of Choctaw Stadium, the Rangers' previous home. Choctaw Stadium was previously named The Ballpark in Arlington, the original name of the facility which opened in 1994. Naming rights were sold to Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company in 2014 who changed the ballpark name to Globe Life Park in Arlington.\nUniforms.\n1972\u20131982.\nThe Rangers debuted in the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex wearing double-knit polyester buttoned uniforms. Both the home white and road gray uniforms feature \"RangerS\" in red serif rounded letters with blue drop shadows (with a white star at the bottom of the \"R\"), and the back of the uniform featured red block letters for the player names and red block numbers with blue trim. Red, white and blue stripes adorn the collar and sleeves. The original cap is blue with a red brim, and has a white \"T\" trimmed in red emblazoned on it.\nIn 1975, the Rangers went with a two-button pullover design and changed the road uniform color to powder blue. The home uniform design remained mostly the same save for the blue trim on the player's name. However, the front of the road uniform was changed to \"TEXAS\" in red letters with white and blue trim, which was also used on the numbers. Player names became dark royal blue. This style was used for one season before the blue trim disappeared and the middle three letters became lowercase in the word \"TexaS\". Also in 1976, a left sleeve patch was added containing the Texas map and red star on a red, white and blue shield with \"RANGERS\" in red letters on top. For 1976 only, the patch featured \"1776\" and \"1976\" in white in commemoration of the United States Bicentennial. Names would be dropped from the uniform in 1980, but returned the following season, during which the uniforms returned to a traditional buttoned style and a new circular sleeve patch featuring the \"TR\" in red letters in front of a baseball and blue Texas map was added.\n1983\u20131993.\nThis period saw the Rangers deemphasize red in favor of blue on their uniforms. The home white uniform now had \"RANGERS\" in uppercase letters, with the trim on the player names removed. The road uniform color was changed to a dark royal blue, and \"TEXAS\" was also featured in red-trimmed white uppercase letters. The \"TR\" patch minus the circle was moved to the left chest, and a road all-blue cap was unveiled featuring a red \"T\" trimmed in white. This design was used for one season. Then in 1984, the Rangers made slight tweaks to their uniforms, unveiling a red alternate uniform and going with a script \"Rangers\" in front. The sleeve patch, now featuring the script \"Rangers\" in red on a baseball and a blue Texas map, was added, and left chest numbers were also emblazoned.\nLate in 1985, the Rangers returned to wearing road gray uniforms. This design has \"TEXAS\" in blue block letters with white trim; the same color scheme was also used on the player's name and number. Both this uniform and the existing home uniform removed the collar and sleeve striping. In addition, the all-blue cap returned after a two-year absence, replacing the original red-brimmed blue cap. Both blue and red alternate uniforms were retired.\n1994\u20132000.\nThe Rangers changed its uniforms in anticipation of moving to The Ballpark in Arlington. Red became the primary color and blue was relegated to accent color, and silver was also added. The home white uniforms featured red piping and \"RANGERS\" in red serif rounded letters with blue trim. That same color scheme was used on the player's name and number. The road gray uniforms featured red sleeve piping and \"TEXAS\" in red serif rounded letters with white trim; the player's name and number also adopted this color scheme. A new red cap was also unveiled, featuring a white \"T\" with a blue drop-shadow. Blue trim was later added on the road uniform letters. Starting in 1996, the Rangers sported a new sleeve patch. This patch is a blue diamond with silver pinstripes, and contained a silver star surrounded by a red circle that featured two baseballs and the full team name in white letters.\nFor the 2000 season, the Rangers kept their home uniforms, but the road uniforms were changed anew. Blue again became the dominant color on the road uniform letters, and a new all-blue cap was released, essentially the inverse of the all-red cap. A new blue alternate uniform was also released, featuring white letters with red and blue trim. A Texas flag patch adorned the home and road uniforms.\n2001\u20132008.\nStarting in 2001, the Rangers again went with blue as a dominant color, while also adding black as an accent color. Black drop shadows were added on the home and road uniform letters, as were silver accents on the blue alternate uniform. The home uniform brought back the left chest numbers but removed the chest piping, while the Texas flag patch was added on the blue alternate uniform. The Rangers wore three different caps during this period. For both home and road games, the Rangers sported either an all-blue cap or a black-brimmed blue cap with the \"T\" in white and red drop shadows, while for road games only, the all-blue cap with a red \"T\" on a white drop shadow was used.\nIn 2004, the Rangers added a white alternate sleeveless uniform, containing the red \"T\" with white trim and blue drop shadows in front, along with blue piping and blue letters with red trim. The chest number was moved to the right. In 2006, the Rangers added a gray road alternate sleeveless uniform, similar to their primary road uniform but with the addition of chest numbers and blue piping, and the absence of black drop shadows. Both sleeveless uniforms were paired with blue undershirts. The red \"T\" all-blue cap which was not worn in 2004 and 2005 was brought back to be worn with the road gray alternates. However, the black-brimmed blue cap was retired permanently.\n2009\u20132019.\nIn 2009, the Rangers unveiled slight updates to their uniform design. The home uniform now featured \"TEXAS\" in blue letters with red and white trim along with black drop shadows. The chest numbers were also removed. In addition, the block letters and numbers added some pointed accents similar to the \"TEXAS\" wordmark. The Rangers also added a red home alternate uniform, which was essentially the inverse of their blue alternate uniform. This uniform also brought back the all-red cap which was last worn in 2000. Starting in 2014, the black drop shadows and silver accents were removed. While blue remained a primary color used on all road games and most home games, the Rangers would occasionally wear red accessories with the home white uniform.\n2020\u2013present.\nAs in 1994, the Rangers changed their uniforms upon moving to a new ballpark, this time in Globe Life Field. The home white uniforms now featured a script \"Rangers\" wordmark in blue with white and red trim, and letters were blue with white trim and red drop shadows. As with the previous white uniform, this set is worn with either blue or red accessories. The road gray, red alternate, and blue alternate uniform remained mostly the same except for the updated letters and the addition of drop shadows. On the red alternate uniform, a blue-brimmed red cap with \"TX\" in front of a red Texas map in front was added as an alternate to the all-red cap. Also new was a powder blue alternate, featuring the \"Rangers\" script in white with royal blue trim and red drop shadows, and is paired with a powder blue cap with royal blue brim emblazoned with a white \"T\" on a red drop shadow. Unlike the other uniforms, the powder blue alternate does not have a corresponding batting helmet; instead, the royal blue batting helmet was used.\nIn 2023, due to MLB and Nike's new four-uniform plus City Connect limit, the Rangers' red uniform was retired. However, the red equipment worn with the uniform were retained for select home games. The red \"TX\" cap, last worn on a regular basis in 2021, was also officially retired. Also that year, the Rangers unveiled their City Connect uniform. The cream and midnight blue uniform featured a mythical-like creature titled a Peagle, which represents the metro area's two minor league baseball teams before the arrival of the team, the Fort Worth Panthers and the Dallas Eagles. Along with the Peagle, the uniform also features a typographic \"TX\" on the hat and across the chest, as this is similar to the uniform of the Eagles. The City Connect uniform was met with mixed reception, with most criticism stemming from fans who disliked the uniform's design.\nMascot.\nRangers Captain is the mascot for the Texas Rangers. Introduced in 2002, he is a palomino-style horse, dressed in the team's uniform. He wears the uniform number 72 in honor of 1972, the year the Rangers relocated to Arlington. He has multiple uniforms to match each of the variants the team wears. Captain's outfits sometimes match a theme the team is promoting; on April 24, 2010, he was dressed up like Elvis Presley as part of an Elvis-themed night.\nAchievements.\nBaseball Hall of Famers.\nTexas Rangers Hall of Famers\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\nWashington Senators\nTexas Rangers\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChuck Hinton and Frank Howard, who played for the franchise in Washington (although Howard played for the Rangers in 1972), are listed on the Washington Hall of Stars display at Nationals Park in Washington. So are Gil Hodges and Mickey Vernon, who managed the \"New Senators\". Vernon also played for the \"Old Senators\", who became the Minnesota Twins.\nFord C. Frick Award recipients.\nTexas Rangers Ford C. Frick Award recipients\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTexas Rangers Hall of Fame.\nThe Texas Rangers Hall of Fame was created in 2003 to honor the careers of former Texas Rangers players, managers, executives, and broadcasters. There are currently 27 members. The Hall is located in Globe Life Park in Arlington, behind right field. The Hall's two levels cover and included a 235-seat theater and various plaques, photos, and memorabilia. It can accommodate up to 600 people.\nRetired numbers.\nAll of the Rangers' retired numbers are directly incorporated into the posted dimensions of Globe Life Field. The left-field foul line distance is 329 feet (Beltr\u00e9), the deepest point of the ballpark is 410 feet (Young), straightaway center field is 407 feet (Rodr\u00edguez), the right-field foul line is 326 feet (Oates), and the backstop distance, measured from the rear point of home plate via a line running through second base, is 42 feet (Robinson). A sign just inside the left-field foul line is marked as 334 feet to honor Ryan. The power alleys, at 372 feet in left and 374 feet in right, respectively pay homage to the Rangers' first season in Arlington (1972) and first winning season (1974).\nTeam records.\nThese are partial records of players with the best performance in distinct statistical categories during a single season.\nRadio and television.\nRadio.\nIn addition to the flagship stations listed above, Rangers games can be heard on affiliates throughout much of Texas, and also in parts of Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, and Kansas. Eric Nadel is the primary play-by-play announcer. He has called games for the club since 1979 beginning on television broadcasts, then moving exclusively to radio beginning in 1985. He became the primary announcer after the late Mark Holtz moved to television. Currently, Nadel provides play-by-play in the 1st, 2nd, 5th, 6th, 8th, and 9th innings, and color commentary for the other innings. On December 11, 2013, he was awarded the 2014 Ford C. Frick Award by the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum for excellence in broadcasting. Matt Hicks now shares the broadcast booth with Nadel. He joined the broadcast in 2012 after Steve Busby moved from radio to television to replace Dave Barnett. Hicks provides play-by-play in the 3rd, 4th, and 7th innings, and color commentary for the other innings. Jared Sandler hosts the pre-game and post-game shows, and also fills in whenever Nadel or Hicks have a day off. For the Spanish radio affiliates, Eleno Ornelas is the play-by-play announcer, and former Rangers pitcher Jos\u00e9 Guzm\u00e1n is the color analyst.\nTelevision.\nSince the late 1980s when it started as Home Sports Entertainment, Texas Rangers games were a mainstay of the regional sports network Bally Sports Southwest, and during the network's period under the ownership of Fox Corporation as Fox Sports Net Southwest, a package of games also aired over-the-air on then-sister broadcast station KDFI (channel 27). During the 2016 season, they had an average 3.96 rating and 105,000 viewers on primetime broadcasts. In the team's outdoor era at Arlington Stadium and Globe Life Park, the team played Sunday home games at night through most of the summer and the team frequently appeared on ESPN's \"Sunday Night Baseball\" as a consequence.\nSince 2017, Dave Raymond is the primary television play-by-play announcer and color commentary duties (as of 2024) are split between Mike Bacsik, Dave Valle and David Murphy. Raymond replaced Steve Busby, who since 1982 on both TV and radio has had various stints in various positions on Rangers broadcasts from play-by-play to color commentary to pre-game and post-game analysis. In June 2012, Busby moved back to television play-by-play after Dave Barnett left his position as game announcer following an episode in which he experienced speech difficulties. Beginning in 2016, Raymond substituted for Busby on select games. Previously the primary color commentator, Tom Grieve still broadcasts many games. A former Rangers player and general manager, Grieve has been in the TV booth since 1995, following the end of his tenure as GM. Another former Ranger, Mark McLemore, has substituted for Grieve in the past and often joins the booth for an inning during home games. In 2017, C. J. Nitkowski joined the broadcast team, performing mostly as either a secondary play-by-play announcer or primary color commentator until 2023. He and former Ranger Iv\u00e1n Rodr\u00edguez are among the pre-game and post-game analysts used on Fox Sports Southwest. FSSW pre-game and post-game shows are hosted by a rotation among Dana Larson, John Rhadigan, Ric Renner, Erin Hartigan, and David Murphy. In-game reporters include Rhadigan, Hartigan, Lesley McCaslin, and Rangers employee Emily Jones (formerly of FSSW).\nOn March 14, 2023, Diamond Sports Group, the owner of Bally Sports Southwest (BSSW), filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. Diamond missed a payment to the Rangers. On April 5, 2023, the Rangers filed an emergency motion asking the bankruptcy judge to order Diamond to pay the Rangers fully or give its media rights back to the MLB. A hearing on the matter was set for May 31, 2023. As an interim, on April 19, the bankruptcy judge ordered Diamond Sports to pay 50% of what the Rangers were owed. On June 1, 2023, after a two day long hearing, the bankruptcy judge ordered Diamond to pay the Rangers fully within five days.\nAs the Rangers' 2024 season came to an end, the team regained their broadcast rights from BSSW and began pursuing a new broadcast deal for the 2025 season. On January 15, 2025, the Rangers announced they had signed a multi-year deal with Victory+ to broadcast their games via streaming beginning with the 2025 season. Later that month, the team would announce the creation of the Rangers Sports Network, which will carry games on traditional cable and satellite providers including AT&amp;T, Charter, and DirecTV, in addition to 15 games to be aired over the air across the Rangers' local broadcast territory, including KDAF (channel 33) in the Metroplex.\nRivalries.\nLone Star Series: Houston Astros.\nThe Lone Star Series (also known as the Silver Boot Series) is a Major League Baseball rivalry featuring Texas' two major league franchises, the Rangers and Houston Astros. It is an outgrowth of the \"natural rivalry\" established by MLB as part of interleague play as the Rangers are a member of the American League and the Astros were a member of the National League until .\nDuring interleague play, the winner of the 6-game series was awarded the Silver Boot. A tall display of a size-15 cowboy boot cast in silver, complete with a custom, handmade spur. If the series was split (3\u20133), the winner was the club which scored the most runs over the course of the series.\nIn , the Astros joined the American League West with the Rangers and changed their rivalry from an interleague to an intra-division rivalry, the Astros played their first game in the American League against the Rangers on Sunday Night Baseball that season. In 2015, both teams made the playoffs and were in a tight division race during most of the season. In , they met in the postseason for the first time, as the Rangers defeated the Astros in seven games for the American League pennant, with the road team winning all seven games.\nLos Angeles Angels.\nThe Rangers' rivalry with the Angels has been said to have developed over a domination in the division between the two teams, and also in recent years more animosity between the two teams due to players who have played for both teams, including Nolan Ryan, Mike Napoli, Darren Oliver, Vladimir Guerrero, C. J. Wilson, and Josh Hamilton. In 2012, Wilson played a joke on Napoli, his former teammate, by tweeting his phone number, causing Napoli to exchange words with Wilson. The feuds go back to two incidents between Angels second baseman Adam Kennedy and Rangers catcher Gerald Laird which led to punches being thrown.\nThe Angels and Rangers have each pitched a perfect game against each other, making them the only pair of MLB teams to have done so. Mike Witt pitched a perfect game for the Angels against the Rangers in 1984 at Arlington Stadium and Kenny Rogers for the Rangers against the Angels in 1994.\nMinor league affiliations.\nThe Texas Rangers farm system consists of seven minor league affiliates.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30859", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30859", "title": "Tex-Mex", "text": "Cuisine in the Southwestern United States and Northern Mexico\nTex-Mex cuisine (derived from the words \"Texas\" and \"Mexico\") is a regional American cuisine that originates from the culinary creations of Tejano people. It has spread from border states such as Texas and others in the Southwestern United States to the rest of the country. It is a subtype of Southwestern cuisine found in the American Southwest.\nCommon dishes.\nSome ingredients in Tex-Mex cuisine are also common in Mexican cuisine, but others, not often used in Mexico, are often added, such as the use of cumin, introduced by Spanish immigrants to Texas from the Canary Islands, but used in only a few central Mexican recipes.\nTex-Mex cuisine is characterized by its heavy use of shredded cheese, beans, meat (particularly chicken, beef, and pork), chili peppers, and spices, in addition to flour tortillas.\nSometimes various Tex-Mex dishes are made without the use of a tortilla. A common example of this is the \"fajita bowl\", which is a fajita served without a soft tortilla.\nGenerally, cheese plays a much bigger role in Tex-Mex food than in mainstream Mexican cuisine, particularly in the popularity of queso, which is often eaten with tortilla chips (alongside or in place of guacamole and salsa), or may be served over enchiladas, tamales, or burritos.\nNachos, although invented in the US-Mexico border town of Piedras Negras, Coahuila, became extremely popular in Texas before spreading across the US. They were named after its inventor, Nacho Anaya.\nTex-Mex circa the 1950s relied on combination platters using American-style cheeses, did not often have margaritas, and involved pecans in desserts.\nHistory.\nThe cuisine that would come to be called Tex-Mex originated with \"Tejanos\" as a mix of native Mexican and Spanish foods when Texas was part of New Spain and later Mexico.\nFrom the South Texas region between San Antonio, the Rio Grande Valley and El Paso, this cuisine has had little variation, and from earliest times has always been influenced by the cooking in the neighboring northern states of Mexico.\nThe ranching culture of South Texas and Northern Mexico straddles both sides of the border, where beef, grilled food, and tortillas have been common and popular foods for more than a century.\nA taste for \"cabrito\" (kid goat), \"barbacoa de cabeza\" (barbecued beef heads), \"carne seca\" (dried beef), and other products of cattle culture is also common on both sides of the Rio Grande.\nIn the 20th century, as goods from the United States became cheap and readily available, Tex-Mex took on such Americanized elements as Cheddar, jack, and pimento cheeses.\nIn much of Texas, the cooking styles on both sides of the U.S.-Mexico border were the same until a period after the U.S. Civil War. With the railroads, American ingredients and cooking appliances became common on the U.S. side.\nAround the 1970s the composition of dishes popular in Tex Mex changed; Ninfa's popularized the fajita beginning in 1973.\nA 1968 \"Los Angeles Times\" feature wrote \"[i]f the dish is a combination of Old World cooking, hush-my-mouth Southern cuisine and Tex-Mex, it's from the Texas Hill Country.\"\nOutside the US.\nIn France, Paris's first Tex-Mex restaurant opened in March 1983. According to restaurateur Claude Benayoun, business had been slow, but after the 1986 release of the film \"Betty Blue\", which featured characters drinking tequila shots and eating \"chili con carne\", \"everything went crazy.\" According to Benayoun, \"\"Betty Blue\" was like our \"Easy Rider\"; it was unbelievably popular in France. And after the movie came out, everybody in Paris wanted a shot of tequila and a bowl of chili.\"\nTex-Mex became widely introduced in the Nordic countries and the United Kingdom in the early 1990s through brands like Old El Paso and \"Santa Maria\", and very quickly became a staple meal in the Nordics. Minor local variations on Tex-Mex in these areas are to use gouda cheese, or to substitute taco shells with stuffed pita breads. Previously, Tex-Mex had been sold on a limited scale in Stavanger, Norway since the late 1960s.\nTex-Mex has also spread to Canada, where it has become as naturalized as in the United States. The cuisine is also readily found in Argentina, India, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, Thailand, and many other countries.\nTerminology.\nThe word \"TexMex\" (unhyphenated) was first used to abbreviate the Texas Mexican Railway, chartered in southern Texas in 1875. In the 1920s, the hyphenated form was used in American newspapers to describe Texans of Mexican ancestry.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" supplies the first-known uses in print of \"Tex-Mex\" in reference to food, from a 1963 article in \"The New York Times Magazine\", and a 1966 item in the \"Great Bend\" (Kansas) \"Tribune\".\nHowever, the term was used in an article in the \"Binghamton\" (New York) \"Press\" in May 1960 and a syndicated article appearing in several American newspapers on October 6, 1960, uses the Tex-Mex label to describe a series of recipes, including chili and enchiladas.\nThe recipes included the suggestion of \"cornmeal pancakes\" in place of tortillas, which at the time were not reliably available to readers outside of the Southwest.\nDiana Kennedy, an influential food authority, explained the distinctions between Mexican cuisine and Americanized Mexican food in her 1972 book \"The Cuisines of Mexico\". Robb Walsh of the \"Houston Press\" said the book \"was a breakthrough cookbook, one that could have been written only by a non-Mexican. It unified Mexican cooking by transcending the nation's class divisions and treating the food of the poor with the same respect as the food of the upper classes.\"\nThe term \"Tex-Mex\" also saw increasing usage in the \"Los Angeles Times\" from the 1970s onward while the Tex-Mex label became a part of U.S. vernacular during the late 1960s, '70s, and '80s. Ad\u00e1n Medrano, a chef who grew up in San Antonio, prefers to call the food \"Texas Mexican,\" which he says was the indigenous cooking of South Texas long before the Rio Grande marked the border between Texas and Mexico.\nBorn in 1905, Tijerina began working as a busboy at the Original Mexican Restaurant after moving to Houston in 1922. He rose through the ranks and opened his restaurant, the Mexican Inn, in 1929.\nAfter serving in World War II, Tijerina opened a chain of restaurants named the Felix Mexican Restaurant.\nWith mildly-spiced dishes and reasonable prices, Tijerina's restaurants catered more towards an Anglo audience. His \"spaghetti con chile\" special exemplifies how Tijerina americanized traditional Mexican food to appeal to the local Texans.\nTijerina used his influence and economic profit from the restaurant business to become active in politics. In 1935, Tijerina joined the local council of LULAC (League of United Latin American Citizens), and eventually became the national president of the organization, holding the position from 1956 to 1960.\nTijerina died in 1965, but his chain of Felix Mexican Restaurants continued to promote Tex-Mex cuisine until operations stopped in 2008.\nIn 2011, Centeno opened his first restaurant, B\u00e4co Mercat which became an instant success due to the multicultural menu. \nCenteno subsequently opened Bar Am\u00e1, then Orsa &amp; Winston which received a Michelin star in June 2019. \nCenteno's most recent Tex-Mex restaurant, Am\u00e1cita, opened in July 2019.\nCenteno has also written two cookbooks: Baco: Vivid Recipes from the Heart of Los Angeles (2017) and Am\u00e1: a modern Tex-Mex kitchen (2019).\nCenteno has become a leading chef in Tex-Mex cuisine, receiving praise for both his restaurants and his cookbooks. While the New Yorker listed Centeno's Am\u00e1: a modern Tex-Mex kitchen as one of the best cookbooks in 2019, the LA Times named Orsa &amp; Winston as the \"Restaurant of the Year\" in 2020.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30861", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30861", "title": "Trick-or-treating", "text": "Halloween tradition\nTrick-or-treating is a traditional Halloween custom for children and adults in some countries. During the evening of Halloween, on October 31, people in costumes travel from house to house, asking for treats with the phrase \"trick or treat\". The \"treat\" is some form of confectionery, usually candy/sweets, although in some cultures money is given instead. The \"trick\" refers to a threat, usually idle, to perform mischief on the resident(s) or their property if no treat is given. Some people signal that they are willing to hand out treats by putting up Halloween decorations outside their doors; houses may also leave their porch lights on as a universal indicator that they have candy; some simply leave treats available on their porches for the children to take freely, on the honour system. \nThe history of trick-or-treating traces back to Scotland and Ireland, where the tradition of guising, going house to house at Halloween and putting on a small performance to be rewarded with food or treats, goes back at least as far as the 16th century, as does the tradition of people wearing costumes at Halloween. There are many accounts from 19th-century Scotland and Ireland of people going house to house in costume at Halloween, reciting verses in exchange for food, and sometimes warning of misfortune if they were not welcomed. In North America, the earliest known occurrence of guising is from 1898, when children were recorded as having done this in the province of British Columbia, Canada. The interjection \"trick or treat!\" was then first recorded in the Canadian province of Ontario in 1917. While going house to house in costume has long been popular among the Scots and Irish, it is only in the 2000s that saying \"trick or treat\" has become common in Scotland and Ireland. Prior to this, children in Ireland would commonly say \"help the Halloween party\" at the doors of homeowners.\nThe activity is prevalent in the Anglospheric countries of the United Kingdom, Ireland, the United States and Canada. It also has extended into Mexico. In northwestern and central Mexico, the practice is called \"calaverita\" (Spanish diminutive for \"calavera\", \"skull\" in English), and instead of \"trick or treat\", the children ask, \"\u00bfMe da mi calaverita?\" (\"[Can you] give me my little skull?\"), where a \"calaverita\" is a small skull made of sugar or chocolate.\nHistory.\nAncient precursors.\nTraditions similar to the modern custom of trick-or-treating extend all the way back to classical antiquity, although it is extremely unlikely that any of them are directly related to the modern custom. The ancient Greek writer Athenaeus of Naucratis records in his book \"The Deipnosophists\" that, in ancient times, the Greek island of Rhodes had a custom in which children would go from door-to-door dressed as swallows, singing a song, which demanded the owners of the house to give them food and threatened to cause mischief if the owners of the house refused. This tradition was claimed to have been started by the Rhodian lawgiver Cleobulus.\nMedieval Christian era.\nSouling.\nStarting as far back as the 15th century, among Christians, there had been a custom of sharing soul-cakes at Allhallowtide (October 31 through November 2). People would visit houses and take soul-cakes, either as representatives of the dead, or in return for praying for their souls. Later, people went \"from parish to parish at Halloween, begging soul-cakes by singing under the windows some such verse as this: 'Soul, souls, for a soul-cake; Pray you good mistress, a soul-cake!'\" They typically asked for \"mercy on all Christian souls for a soul-cake\". It was known as 'Souling' and was recorded in parts of Britain, Flanders, southern Germany, and Austria. Shakespeare mentions the practice in his comedy \"The Two Gentlemen of Verona\" (1593), when Speed accuses his master of \"puling [whimpering or whining] like a beggar at Hallowmas\". In western England, mostly in the counties bordering Wales, souling was common. According to one 19th century English writer \"parties of children, dressed up in fantastic costume [\u2026] went round to the farm houses and cottages, singing a song, and begging for cakes (spoken of as \"soal-cakes\"), apples, money, or anything that the goodwives would give them\". In England, souling remained an important part of Allhallowtide observances until the 19th century, in both Protestant and Catholic areas.\nThe practice of giving and eating soul cakes continues in some countries today, such as Portugal (where it is known as P\u00e3o-por-Deus and occurs on All Hallows' Day and All Souls' Day), as well as the Philippines (where it is known as Pangangaluwa and occurs on All Hallows' Eve). In other countries, souling is seen as the origin of the practice of trick-or-treating. In the United States, some churches, during Allhallowtide, have invited people to come receive sweets from them and have offered to \"pray for the souls of their friends, relatives or even pets\" as they do so.\nMumming.\nSince the Middle Ages, a tradition of mumming on a certain holiday has existed in parts of Britain and Ireland. It involved going door-to-door in costume, performing short scenes or parts of plays in exchange for food or drink. The custom of trick-or-treating on Halloween may come from the belief that supernatural beings, or the souls of the dead, roamed the earth at this time and needed to be appeased.\nSamhain.\nIt may otherwise have originated in a Celtic festival, \"Samhain\", held on 31 October\u20131 November, to mark the beginning of winter, in Ireland, Scotland and the Isle of Man, and \"Calan Gaeaf\" in Wales, Cornwall, and Brittany. The festival is believed to have pre-Christian roots. In the 9th century, the Catholic Church made 1 November All Saints' Day. Among Celtic-speaking peoples, it was seen as a liminal time, when the spirits or fairies (the \"Aos S\u00ed\"), and the souls of the dead, came into our world and were appeased with offerings of food and drink. Similar beliefs and customs were found in other parts of Europe. It is suggested that trick-or-treating evolved from a tradition whereby people impersonated the spirits, or the souls of the dead, and received offerings on their behalf. S. V. Peddle suggests they \"personify the old spirits of the winter, who demanded reward in exchange for good fortune\". Impersonating these spirits or souls was also believed to protect oneself from them.\nGuising.\nIn Scotland and Ireland, \"guising\"\u00a0\u2013 children going from door to door in disguise\u00a0\u2013 is secular, and a gift in the form of food, coins or \"apples or nuts for the Halloween party\" (and in more recent times, chocolate) is given out to the children. The tradition is called \"guising\" because of the disguises or costumes worn by the children. In the West Mid Scots dialect, guising is known as \"galoshans\". In Scotland, youths went house to house in white with masked, painted or blackened faces, reciting rhymes and often threatening to do mischief if they were not welcomed.\nGuising has been recorded in Scotland since the 16th century, often at New Year. The Kirk Session records of Elgin name men and women who danced at New Year 1623. Six men, described as guisers or \"gwysseris\" performed a sword dance wearing masks and visors covering their faces in the churchyard and in the courtyard of a house. They were each fined 40 shillings.\nA record of guising at Halloween in Scotland in 1895 describes masqueraders in disguise carrying lanterns made out of scooped out turnips, visiting homes to be rewarded with cakes, fruit, and money. In Ireland, children in costumes would commonly say \"Help the Halloween Party\" at the doors of homeowners. \nHalloween masks are referred to as \"false faces\" in Ireland and Scotland. A writer using Scots language recorded guisers in Ayr, Scotland in 1890: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Guising also involved going to wealthy homes, and in the 1920s, boys went guising at Halloween up to the affluent Thorntonhall, South Lanarkshire. An account of guising in the 1950s in Ardrossan, North Ayrshire, records a child receiving 12 shillings and sixpence, having knocked on doors throughout the neighbourhood and performed. Growing up in Derry, Northern Ireland in the 1960s, \"The Guardian\" journalist Michael Bradley recalls children asking, \u201cAny nuts or apples?\u201d. In Scotland and Ireland, the children are only supposed to receive treats if they perform a party trick for the households they go to. This normally takes the form of singing a song or reciting a joke or a funny poem which the child has memorised before setting out. While going from door to door in disguise has remained popular among Scots and Irish at Halloween, the North American saying \"trick-or-treat\" has become common in the 2000s.\nSpread to North America.\nAuthor Nicholas Rogers cites an early example of guising in North America in 1911, where a newspaper in Kingston, Ontario, Canada, reported children going \"guising\" around the neighborhood. The article itself details the practice as such:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Between six and seven o'clock, the children began to appear in the streets, disguised with all kinds of masks and costumes. The usual programme of visiting the corner groecery stores, hotels and private residences was carried out, the youngesters efforts as elecutionists and vocalists being rewarded with money, apples, nuts, etc.\nAmerican historian and author Ruth Edna Kelley of Massachusetts wrote the first book length history of the holiday in the United States; \"The Book of Hallowe'en\" (1919), and references souling in the chapter \"Hallowe'en in America\"; \"The taste in Hallowe'en festivities now is to study old traditions, and hold a Scotch party, using Burn's poem \"Hallowe'en\" as a guide; or to go a-souling as the English used. In short, no custom that was once honored at Hallowe'en is out of fashion now.\" Kelley lived in Lynn, Massachusetts, a town with 4,500 Irish immigrants, 1,900 English immigrants, and 700 Scottish immigrants in 1920. In her book, Kelley touches on customs that arrived from across the Atlantic; \"Americans have fostered them, and are making this an occasion something like what it must have been in its best days overseas. All Hallowe'en customs in the United States are borrowed directly or adapted from those of other countries\".\nWhile the first reference to \"guising\" in North America occurs in 1911, another reference to ritual begging on Halloween appears, place unknown, in 1915, with a third reference in Chicago in 1920.\nThe interjection \"Trick or treat!\".\nThe interjection \"Trick or treat!\" \u2014 a request for sweets or candy, originally and sometimes still with the implication that anyone who is asked and who does not provide sweets or other treats will be subjected to a prank or practical joke \u2014 seems to have arisen in central Canada, before spreading into the northern and western United States in the 1930s and across the rest of the United States through the 1940s and early 1950s. Initially it was often found in variant forms, such as \"tricks or treats,\" which was used in the earliest known case, a 1917 report in \"The Sault Daily Star\" in Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario:\nAlmost everywhere you went last night, particularly in the early part of the evening, you would meet gangs of youngsters out to celebrate. Some of them would have adopted various forms of \"camouflage\" such as masks, or would appear in long trousers and big hats or with long skirts. But others again didn't. . . . \"Tricks or treats\" you could hear the gangs call out, and if the householder passed out the \"coin\" for the \"treats\" his establishment would be immune from attack until another gang came along that knew not of or had no part in the agreement.\nAs shown by word sleuth Barry Popik, who also found the first use from 1917, variant forms continued, with \"trick or a treat\" found in Chatsworth, Ontario in 1921, \"treat up or tricks\" and \"treat or tricks\" found in Edmonton, Alberta in 1922, and \"treat or trick\" in Penhold, Alberta in 1924. The now canonical form of \"trick or treat\" was first seen in 1917 in Chatsworth, only one day after the Sault Ste. Marie use, but \"tricks or treats\" was still in use in the 1966 television special, \"It's the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown\".\nThe thousands of Halloween postcards produced between the start of the 20th century and the 1920s commonly show children but do not depict trick-or-treating. The editor of a collection of over 3,000 vintage Halloween postcards writes, \"There are cards which mention the custom [of trick-or-treating] or show children in costumes at the doors, but as far as we can tell they were printed later than the 1920s and more than likely even the 1930s. Tricksters of various sorts are shown on the early postcards, but not the means of appeasing them\".\nTrick-or-treating does not seem to have become a widespread practice until the 1930s, with the first appearance in the United States of the term in 1928, and the first known use in a national publication occurring in 1939.\nBehavior similar to trick-or-treating was more commonly associated with Thanksgiving from 1870 (shortly after that holiday's formalization) until the 1930s. In New York City, a Thanksgiving ritual known as Ragamuffin Day involved children dressing up as beggars and asking for treats, which later evolved into dressing up in more diverse costumes. Increasing hostility toward the practice in the 1930s eventually led to the begging aspects being dropped, and by the 1950s, the tradition as a whole had ceased.\nIncreased popularity.\nAlmost all pre-1940 uses of the term \"trick-or-treat\" are from the United States and Canada. Trick-or-treating spread throughout the United States, stalled only by World War II sugar rationing that began in April, 1942 and lasted until June, 1947.\nEarly national attention to trick-or-treating was given in October, 1947 issues of the children's magazines \"Jack and Jill\" and \"Children's Activities\", and by Halloween episodes of the network radio programs \"The Baby Snooks Show\" in 1946 and \"The Jack Benny Show\" and \"The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet\" in 1948. Trick-or-treating was depicted in the \"Peanuts\" comic strip in 1951. The custom had become firmly established in popular culture by 1952, when Walt Disney portrayed it in the cartoon \"Trick or Treat\", and Ozzie and Harriet were besieged by trick-or-treaters on an episode of their television show. In 1953 UNICEF first conducted a national campaign for children to raise funds for the charity while trick-or-treating.\nAlthough some popular histories of Halloween have characterized trick-or-treating as an adult invention to re-channel Halloween activities away from Mischief Night vandalism, there are very few records supporting this. Des Moines, Iowa is the only area known to have a record of trick-or-treating being used to deter crime. Elsewhere, adults, as reported in newspapers from the mid-1930s to the mid-1950s, typically saw it as a form of extortion, with reactions ranging from bemused indulgence to anger. Likewise, as portrayed on radio shows, children would have to explain what trick-or-treating was to puzzled adults, and not the other way around. Sometimes even the children protested: for Halloween 1948, members of the Madison Square Boys Club in New York City carried a parade banner that read \"American Boys Don't Beg.\" The National Confectioners Association reported in 2005 that 80 percent of adults in the United States planned to give out confectionery to trick-or-treaters, and that 93 percent of children, teenagers, and young adults planned to go trick-or-treating or participating in other Halloween activities.\nPhrase introduction to the United Kingdom and Ireland.\nDespite the concept of trick-or-treating originating in Britain and Ireland in the form of souling and guising, the use of the term \"trick or treat\" at the doors of homeowners was not common until the 1980s, with its popularisation in part through the release of the film \"E.T.\" Guising requires those going door-to-door to perform a song or poem without any jocular threat, and according to one BBC journalist, in the 1980s, \"trick or treat\" was still often viewed as an exotic and not particularly welcome import, with the BBC referring to it as \"the Japanese knotweed of festivals\" and \"making demands with menaces\". In Ireland before the phrase \"trick or treat\" became common in the 2000s, children would say \"Help the Halloween Party\". Very often, the phrase \"trick or treat\" is simply said and the revellers are given sweets, with the choice of a trick or a treat having been discarded.\nEtiquette.\nTrick-or-treating typically begins at dusk on October 31. Some municipalities choose other dates. Homeowners wishing to participate sometimes decorate their homes with artificial spider webs, plastic skeletons and jack-o-lanterns. Conversely, those who do not wish to participate may turn off outside lights for the evening or lock relevant gates and fences to keep people from coming onto their property.\nIn most areas where trick-or-treating is practiced, it is considered an activity for children. Some jurisdictions in the United States forbid the activity for anyone over the age of 12. Dressing up is common at all ages; adults will often dress up to accompany their children, and young adults may dress up to go out and ask for gifts for a charity.\nLocal variants.\nUnited States and Canada.\nChildren of both the St. Louis, Missouri, and Des Moines, Iowa, areas are expected to perform a joke, usually a simple Halloween-themed pun or riddle, before receiving any candy; this \"trick\" earns the \"treat\". In addition, trick-or-treating in the Des Moines area is arranged on a different night preceding Halloween, known as Beggar's night, with the expectation it will reduce mischief and keep children safer from adult parties and drunk driving that may occur on Halloween proper.\nIn some parts of Canada, children sometimes say \"Halloween apples\" instead of \"trick or treat\". This probably originated when the toffee apple was a popular type of candy. Apple-giving in much of Canada, however, has been taboo since the 1960s when stories (of almost certainly questionable authenticity) appeared of razors hidden inside Halloween apples; parents began to check over their children's fruit for safety before allowing them to eat it. In Quebec, children also go door to door on Halloween. However, in French-speaking neighbourhoods, instead of \"Trick or treat\", they will simply say \"Halloween\", though it traditionally used to be \"La charit\u00e9, s'il-vous-pla\u00eet\" (\"Charity, please\").\nTrunk-or-treat.\nSome organizations around the United States and Canada sponsor a \"trunk-or-treat\" on Halloween night (or, on occasion, a day immediately preceding Halloween, or a few days from it, on a weekend, depending on what is convenient). Trunk-or-treating is done from parked car to parked car in a local parking lot, often at a school or church. The activity makes use of the open trunks of the cars, which display candy, and often games and decorations. Some parents regard trunk-or-treating as a safer alternative to trick-or-treating, while other parents see it as an easier alternative to walking the neighborhood with their children.\nThis annual event began in the mid-1990s as a \"fall festival\" for an alternative to trick-or-treating, but became \"trunk-or-treat\" two decades later. This change was primarily due to \"discomfort with some of Halloween's themes.\" Some churches and church leaders have attempted to connect with the cultural phenomenon of Halloween, viewing it as an opportunity for cultural engagement with the Gospel. But some have called for more city or community group-sponsored trunk-or-treats, so they can be more inclusive. By 2006 these had become increasingly popular.\nPortugal and Iberian Peninsula.\nIn Portugal, children go from house to house on All Saints Day and All Souls Day, carrying pumpkin carved lanterns called coca, asking everyone they see for P\u00e3o-por-Deus singing rhymes where they remind people why they are begging, saying \"...It is for me and for you, and to give to the deceased who are dead and buried\" or \"It is to share with your deceased\" In the Azores the bread given to the children takes the shape of the top of a skull. The tradition of p\u00e3o-por-Deus was already recorded in the 15th century. In Galicia, particularly in the island of A Illa de Arousa, a similar tradition exists where children ask for alms (usually bread, sweets, fruits, chestnuts, money or small toys) with the phrase \"unha esmoli\u00f1a polos defunti\u00f1os que van al\u00e1\" (\"a little charity for the little deceased who are there\").\nScandinavia.\nIn Sweden, children dress up as witches and monsters when they go trick-or-treating on Maundy Thursday (the Thursday before Easter) while Danish and Faroese children dress up in various attires and go trick-or-treating on Fastelavn (or the next day, Shrove Monday). In Norway, the practice is quite common among children, who come dressed up to people's doors asking for, mainly, candy. The Easter witch tradition is done on Palm Sunday in Finland (virvonta).\nEurope.\nIn parts of Flanders, some parts of the Netherlands, and most areas of Germany, Switzerland, and Austria, children go to houses with home-made beet lanterns or with paper lanterns (which can hold a candle or electronic light), singing songs about St. Martin on St. Martin's Day (the 11th of November), in return for treats. Over the last decade, Halloween trick-or-treating has experienced a notable surge in popularity, particularly among children and teenagers in Germany. Austria and the Netherlands have also witnessed a similar trend. The equivalent of 'trick-or-treat' in the German language is 'S\u00fc\u00dfes oder Saures,' which translates to asking for sweets or threatening something less pleasant, with the direct translation being \"sweet or sour\".\nIn Northern Germany and Southern Denmark, children dress up in costumes and go trick-or-treating on New Year's Eve in a tradition called \"Rummelpott\". Rummelpott has experienced a massive decrease in popularity over recent decades, although some towns and communities are trying to revive it.\nTrick-or-treat for charity.\nUNICEF started a program in 1950 called Trick-or-Treat for UNICEF in which trick-or-treaters ask people to give money for the organization, usually instead of collecting candy. Participating trick-or-treaters say when they knock at doors \"Trick-or-treat for UNICEF!\" This program started as an alternative to candy. The organization has long produced disposable collection boxes that state on the back what the money can be used for in developing countries.\nIn Canada, students from the local high schools, colleges, and universities dress up to collect food donations for the local Food Banks as a form of trick-or-treating. This is sometimes called \"Trick-or-Eat\". \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30863", "revid": "51064735", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30863", "title": "Test cricket", "text": "Longest and original form of cricket\nTest cricket is a format of the sport of cricket, considered the game's most prestigious and traditional form. Often referred to as the \"ultimate test\" of a cricketer's skill, endurance and temperament, it is a first-class format of international cricket where two teams in whites, each representing their country, compete over a match that can last up to five days. It consists of up to four innings (up to two per team), with a minimum of ninety overs scheduled to be bowled in six hours per day, making it the sport with the longest playing time except for some multi-stage cycling races. A team wins the match by outscoring the opposition with the bat and bowling them out with the ball. Otherwise the match ends in a draw.\nIt is contested by 12 teams which are the full-members of the International Cricket Council (ICC). The term \"test match\" was originally coined in 1861\u201362 but in a different context\u2014that the English team was testing itself against all of the Australian colonies. Test cricket did not become an officially recognised format until the 1890s, but many international matches since 1877 have been retrospectively awarded Test status. The first such match took place at the Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG) in March 1877 between teams which were then known as a Combined Australian XI and James Lillywhite's XI, the latter a team of visiting English professionals. Matches between Australia and England were first called \"test matches\" in 1892. The first definitive list of retrospective Tests was written by South Australian journalist Clarence P. Moody two years later and, by the end of the century, had gained acceptance.\nTraditionally, Test matches had always been played with a red ball during daylight hours. However, amid growing concern over dwindling viewership in the late 2000s, numerous trials were held in the early 2010s which culminated in day/night Tests being permitted by the ICC in 2012, and the first day/night match was between Australia and New Zealand at the Adelaide Oval in November 2015. These matches start later in the day and continue into the evening, necessitating the use of a pink ball to aid in visibility.\nThe ICC World Test Championship is the international championship of Test cricket. It is a league competition run by the ICC, with its inaugural season starting in 2019. In line with the ICC's goal of having one pinnacle tournament for each of the three formats of international cricket, it is the premier championship for Test cricket.\nEarly history.\nGrowth of international cricket.\nTeams designated as \"England\" or \"All England\" began to play in the 18th century, but these teams were not truly representative. Early international cricket was disrupted by the French Revolution and the American Civil War. The earliest international cricket match was between the United States and Canada, on 24 and 26 September 1844 (bad weather prevented play on the 25th). Overseas tours by national English teams began in 1859 with visits to North America, Australia and New Zealand. The 1868 Australian Aboriginals were the first organised overseas team to tour England.\nTwo rival English tours of Australia were proposed in the early months of 1877, with James Lillywhite campaigning for a professional tour and Fred Grace for an amateur one. Grace's tour fell through and it was Lillywhite's team that toured New Zealand and Australia in 1876\u201377. Two matches against a combined Australian XI were later classified as the first official Test matches. The first match was won by Australia, by 45 runs and the second by England. After reciprocal tours established a pattern of international cricket, The Ashes was established as a competition during the Australian tour of England in 1882. A surprise victory for Australia inspired a mock obituary of English cricket to be published in the \"Sporting Times\" the following day: the phrase \"The body shall be cremated and the ashes taken to Australia\" prompted the subsequent creation of the Ashes urn.\nThe series of 1884\u201385 was the first to be held over five matches: England player Alfred Shaw, writing in 1901, considered the side to be \"the best ever to have left England\". South Africa became the third team to play Test cricket in 1888\u201389, when they hosted a tour by an under-strength England side. Australia, England and South Africa were the only countries playing Test cricket before World War I.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"test match\" was coined during the English tour of Australia in 1861\u201362 but in a different context. It meant that the English team was testing itself against each of the Australian colonies. Following Lillywhite's tour, Australian teams reciprocated, beginning with Dave Gregory's team in 1878. By the beginning of 1892, eight English teams had visited Australia and seven Australian teams had visited England. In its issue of 25 February 1892, \"\" revived the term \"test match\" and freely applied it to the three international matches which had just been played in Australia by Lord Sheffield's XI, starting with the match at the MCG which was billed as Lord Sheffield's Team v Combined Australia. The report began: \"There was no little appropriateness in fixing the first of the three great test matches for January 1\".\nClarence P. Moody.\nThe first list of matches considered to be \"Tests\" was conceived and published by South Australian journalist Clarence P. Moody in his 1894 book, \"Australian Cricket and Cricketers, 1856 to 1893\u201394\". Moody's proposal was well received by Charles W. Alcock, editor of \"Cricket\" in England and his list of 39 matches was reproduced in the 28 December 1894 issue as part of an article entitled \"The First Test Match\". The list begins with the MCG match played 15\u201317 March 1877 and ends with the recent match at the Association Ground, Sydney played 14\u201320 December 1894. All 39 were retrospectively recognised as Test matches, as was the unlisted 1890 Old Trafford match that was abandoned without a ball being bowled. No South African matches were included in Moody's list but three against England were also given retrospective Test status. Moody became a newspaper editor and founded the Adelaide \"Sunday Mail\" in 1912.\nTwentieth century.\nFurther growth and creation of the Imperial Cricket Conference (ICC).\nGrowth of Tests continued, with 48 being played from 1901 to 1910. The Imperial Cricket Conference (ICC) was founded on 15 July 1909, with England, Australia and South Africa as the founding members. The ICC included the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC), the Australian Board of Control for International Cricket, and the South African Cricket Association as its original associations. The ICC would oversee and regulate cricket between these three countries. The President and Secretary of the MCC subsequently became the President and Secretary of the ICC. Lord's, the home of the MCC, hence became the headquarters of the ICC. At their 1909 meeting, the ICC instigated a triangular tournament to be held between the three countries in 1912. The nine-match tournament was marred by rain, and combined with the three-day match length for Tests in England at the time meant six of the matches resulted in draws. The tournament was so unsuccessful that the idea was never attempted again. The Daily Telegraph noted: \"Nine Tests provide a surfeit of cricket, and contests between Australia and South Africa are not a great attraction to the British public.\"\nThere were only 24 Tests between 1911 and 1920, including the nine as part of the 1912 Triangular Tournament, owing to the disruption caused by World War I. When Test cricket resumed after the war, England was the first to tour Australia as part of the 1920\u201321 Ashes Series, who were whitewashed by Australia for the first time in a Test series. England were required to quarantine before the series due to an outbreak of typhus on their ship, and also had injuries to key players, which disrupted their preparation. After the conclusion of the series, England's captain Johnny Douglas congratulated the Australians \"who have whacked us, well.\"\nThe ICC held a second meeting in 1921 which focused on the use of eight-ball overs.\nAdmission of India, New Zealand and West Indies.\nIndia, New Zealand and West Indies were invited to attend the ICC's third meeting on 31 May 1926, and subsequently became full members on the same day. At the meeting, it was agreed that the membership of the ICC should comprise \"governing bodies of cricket in countries within the Empire to which cricket teams are sent, or which send teams to England.\" This definition regrettably excluded the United States, which had regularly received teams from England since 1859 and had also sent several teams to play in England. The meeting also discussed the \"farcical\" limit of three days for Tests, and it was unanimously agreed to establish an allotment of \"more than three days for tests [sic] in England, which should be played out if possible.\" The MCC representatives confirmed that the English counties would be consulted in regard to the Australian proposal that at least four days should be permitted for Test matches. The meeting further discussed the use of eight-ball overs, and heard that all the State Cricket Associations in Australia had been consulted by the Australian Board of Control, with a unanimous decision that the eight-ball over was in the best interests of the game.\nFrom this point onward, the ICC met \"on an almost annual basis\" except during war years, to set out future Test tours, checking that players were properly qualified, and encouraging the use of turf instead of matting pitches. Possible law changes were also discussed.\nWest Indies toured England for their Test debut on 23 June 1928 against England at Lord's as part of a three-Test series. England won each match batting only once, with the West Indies being largely outplayed. However they had shown their huge potential in a series of reciprocal tours in the previous decade. \nNew Zealand made their Test debut on 10 January 1930 at Lancaster Park as England toured New Zealand for a three-Test series. Due a quirk of scheduling the series between previously agreed tours (Australia in 1928\u201329 &amp; 1932\u201333 and South Africa in 1930\u201331), England was also playing a four-Test series against the West Indies at the same time. Due to the third Test of the England-New Zealand series being affected by rain, a fourth was arranged to start on 21 February, 1930 at Eden Park. The third Test of the England-West Indies series also began on the same day at Bourda. It was the only time one country has played in two Test matches on the same day. England won the New Zealand series 1\u20130, with three draws. \nThe fourth Test of the England-West Indies series was timeless. England made 849 from 259 overs in the first innings, with Andy Sandham scoring 325, then the world record score; it was also the first Test triple century. England bowled the West Indies out for 286 from 111.5 overs, establishing a first-innings lead of 563. England's captain, Calthorpe, was criticised for not enforcing the follow-on, but the age of his side was likely a major factor. England thus batted again, notching 272 from 79.1 overs before declaring 9 wickets down. With time seemingly unlimited, the West Indies were set 836 to win. At the close of play on the seventh day, they had scored 408 runs for the loss of five wickets, but two days of rain followed. As was the case with the infamous Durban match in 1939, England's ship was departing and the game had to finish a draw. \nIndia toured England for their debut in Tests on 25 June 1932. England won the only Test by 158 runs. \nChanges to the size of the wicket.\nIn 1931, provisions were added to Law 6 in the Laws of Cricket to alter the size of the wicket (stumps and bails). The text was changed from the 1927 version which was as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Each wicket shall be eight inches in width and consist of three stumps, with two bails upon the top. The stumps shall be of equal and sufficient size to prevent the ball from passing through, twenty-seven inches out of the ground.\nIn the 1931 revision, the relevant text was as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Each wicket shall be not less than eight inches and no more than nine inches in width and consist of three stumps, with two bails upon the top. The stumps shall be of equal and sufficient size to prevent the ball from passing through, not less than twenty-seven inches nor more than twenty-eight inches out of the ground.\nLater, Law 6, which became Law 8, was standardised in the 1947 revision to the larger size as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Each Wicket shall be 9 inches in width and consist of three stumps with two bails upon the top. The stumps shall be of equal and of sufficient size to prevent the ball from passing through, with their top 28 inches above the ground.\nThe genesis and outlawing of bodyline.\n1930 Ashes series.\nAfter Bradman scored 974 runs at an average of 139.14 (with four centuries \u2013 131, 254, 334 and 232) in the 1930 Ashes series in England, the most runs ever scored in a series\u2014a record that still stands to this day, the English sought to curtail his impact. In the timeless 5th Test where he made 232, a number of English players and commentators had noted Bradman's discomfort in playing the short, rising delivery. The observation was made too late to have an impact on the match, which Australia won by an innings and 39 runs, which also meant Australia won the series 2\u20131. Wisden made of a period of play:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the Wednesday morning the ball flew about a good deal, both batsmen frequently being hit on the body\u00a0... on more than one occasion each player cocked the ball up dangerously but always, as it happened, just wide of the fieldsmen.The revelation provided England with a possible tactic for the next Ashes series in Australia in 1932\u201333. England's new captain, Douglas Jardine, along with his bowlers, devised and practised a plan in the 1932 season called \"fast leg theory\" which later became known as bodyline. It involved bowling at leg stump or just outside, and pitching the ball short, so that once bounced it reared up threateningly at the body of a batsman standing in an orthodox batting position. Fielders positioned on the leg side would catch any defensive deflection off the bat. The batsman's options were limited as pull or hook shots could be caught on the boundary and defensive shots brought few runs and could carry far enough to the keeper or leg-side fielders. Other options included evading the ball through ducking or moving aside, or allowing the ball to strike the body.\n1932\u201333 Ashes series.\nEngland employed the tactic in the 1932\u201333 series, with the tactic causing huge controversy due to its unsportsmanlike nature and restriction of scoring options. In the third Test at Adelaide, a spell of bowling from Harold Larwood saw Bill Woodfull struck over the heart. He dropped his bat, and staggered away holding his chest, bent over in pain. Jardine called to Larwood: \"Well bowled, Harold!\". Although the comment was aimed at unsettling Bradman, who was also batting at the time, Woodfull was appalled. Play later resumed when Woodfull was fit to continue, and Allen bowled the next over. Play was again stopped for Larwood's next over when the players were moved into bodyline positions, as the crowd protested and called abuse at the England team. Many commentators condemned the field change as unsporting, and the furious spectators became extremely volatile.\nFollowing the fourth day's play at Adelaide, the Australian Board of Control sent a telegraph to the MCC, cricket's ruling body and the club that selected the England team. The Australian Board had claimed bodyline was unsportsmanlike and that the bowling was menacing the best interests of the game. Meanwhile, the match continued and saw England bowled out for 412 on day five, setting Australia a target of 532 to win. Australia only had significant contributions from Woodfull, 73 from 208 balls, Bradman, 66 from 71 balls, and Vic Richardson, 21 from 76 balls, as they were bowled out for 193 inside 70 overs on the sixth day. England were 2\u20131 up in the series.\nThe MCC replied to the first telegraph the following week, deeply resenting the accusation of unsportsmanlike bowling. Additionally, members of the MCC believed that the Australians had over-reacted to the English bowling. At this point, the remainder of the series was under threat. The Australian Board then sent another cable on 30 January, indicating that they wished the series to continue and offering to postpone consideration of the fairness of bodyline bowling until after the series. The MCC replied on 2 February, suggesting that continuing the series would be impossible unless the accusation of unsporting behaviour was withdrawn. The affair rose to the political level, and it was believed that it could have a significant trade impact between the two nations. The standoff was settled when the Australian prime minister, Joseph Lyons, met with members of the Australian Board and outlined to them the severe economic hardships that could be caused in Australia if the British public boycotted Australian trade. Following considerable discussion and debate in the English and Australian press, the Australian Board sent a cable to the MCC which, while maintaining its opposition to bodyline bowling, stated \"We do not regard the sportsmanship of your team as being in question\". Correspondence between the Australian Board and the MCC continued for almost a year.\nIn the final two Tests, England continued employing bodyline tactics but to a lesser extent than the first three. England won the remaining two matches of the series and thus won the series 4\u20131. Regarding Bradman, he had his leanest run tally in a series with 396 at an average of 56.57, with just one century and three half centuries.\nContinued use.\nBodyline continued to be bowled occasionally in the 1933 English season, most notably by Nottinghamshire, who had Carr, Voce and Larwood in their team. \nWhen the West Indies toured England in 1933, their captain Jackie Grant decided to use bodyline against the English for the first time. The match was drawn, but played a significant part in turning English opinion against bodyline. \"The Times\" used the word bodyline, without using inverted commas or using the qualification \"so-called\", for the first time. \"Wisden\" wrote that \"most of those watching it for the first time must have come to the conclusion that, while strictly within the law, it was not nice.\"\nIn 1934, Bill Woodfull led Australia back to England in a tour that had been under a cloud since the previous Ashes series. Jardine had retired from International cricket in early 1934 after captaining a fraught tour of India and under England's new captain, Bob Wyatt, agreements were put in place so that bodyline would not be used. However, there were occasions when the Australians felt that their hosts had crossed the mark with tactics resembling bodyline. In a match between the Australians and Nottinghamshire, Voce, one of the bodyline bowlers in 1932\u201333 again used the tactics. Woodfull told the Nottinghamshire administrators that, if Voce's leg-side bowling was repeated, his men would leave the field and return to London. He further said that Australia would not return to the country in the future.\nOutlawing.\nOriginally, the MCC hoped that captains would ensure that the game was played in the correct spirit, and passed a resolution that bodyline bowling would breach this spirit. When this proved to be insufficient, the MCC passed a law for the 1935 English cricket season, that \"direct attack\" bowling was unfair and became the responsibility of the umpires to identify and stop. Later, in 1957, the Laws were altered to prevent more than two fielders standing behind square on the leg side; the intention was to prevent negative bowling tactics whereby off spinners and slow inswing bowlers aimed at the leg stump of batsmen with fielders concentrated on the leg side. However, an indirect effect was to make bodyline fields impossible to implement.\nLater law changes, under the heading of \"Intimidatory Short Pitched Bowling\", also restricted the number of \"bouncers\" which could be bowled in an over.\nEnd of timeless Tests.\nThere were 99 timeless Tests between 1877 and 1939. Of these, five were held in England, two in South Africa, one in the West Indies, with the remaining ninety-one being held in Australia. All Tests in Australia were timeless prior to World War II. The Australian climate combined with groundskeepers leaving the pitch uncovered and watering the pitch well meant pitches would dry out and crack as the match progressed, often making batting difficult by days four or five. Only two timeless Tests in Australia were drawn, both against England in 1882, when the matches had to be left unfinished due to shipping schedules. \nTimeless Tests were sometimes used outside Australia if the series result depended on the outcome of the match. This happened in Kingston in 1930 when the Fourth (and final) Test between West Indies and England lasted for seven playing days and had to be abandoned owing to shipping schedules. The fifth and final Test at The Oval in 1938 was also timeless, as England batted for the first two and a half days and made 903 for 7, before declaring and dismissing Australia twice by the end of the fourth day.\nThe fifth and final Test at Durban in 1938\u201339 between South Africa and England was also timeless. The infamous match was spread over twelve days with nine days of actual play \u2013 including two rest days and one day with no play. The match started on Friday 3 March 1939. South Africa batted first and were bowled out for 530 on Monday 6th March, with the Sunday having been a rest day. In reply England were bowled out on Wednesday, 8th March for 316. South Africa extended their lead with 481 in their second innings, as they batted for another two days, setting England a target of 696 to win. England were 0/0 at stumps on Thursday 9 March. At stumps on Friday 10 March, England had reached 253 for the loss of just one wicket. There was no play on Saturday, and Sunday was a rest day. They resumed on Monday, reaching 496 for the loss of three wickets. By 14 March 1939, they had reached 654 for the loss of five wickets in the fourth innings (the highest ever first-class fourth innings score) but the match had to remain unfinished as England's had to catch a train to Cape Town where their boat home was due to depart. The match had not been expected to take more than five days, but rain and rolling rejuvenated the pitch three times during the match, and it was still in good condition for batting when the match was abandoned. \nThe South Africans suggested that England could make alternative travel arrangements, to allow the match to be finished the next day. Hammond had had enough and disagreed. And so the match was called off. He remarked in his final speech: \u201cI don\u2019t think timeless Test matches are in the best interests of the game, and I sincerely hope that the last one has been played.\u201d Wisden noted: \"the limitless match we now believe to be dead.\" \nTimeless Tests were never scheduled after World War II, owing to the scheduling difficulties of matches that could continue indefinitely, and the comparative dullness of the play.\nAdmission of Pakistan.\nOn 28 July 1952, Pakistan were admitted to the ICC, and in October that year played their first Test match. Almost 30 years passed until the next member (Sri Lanka) joined.\nFive Day Tests in England.\nIn 1948, matches in England were scheduled over five days for the first time. Most matches from 1880 to 1949 were three days, and from 1950 all matches were scheduled for five days except for the 2019 Test between England and Ireland (which was four days) and final matches of series in 1953, 1972 and 1975, which were six days. The World Test Championship final in 2021 was scheduled for five days with a reserve day, which was used after the first day was lost to rain.\nOn 8 March 1955, the ICC made the following decision at their meeting:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In future all members of the Imperial Cricket Conference visiting England will play five five-day Test Matches. This will bring India, West Indies, New Zealand and Pakistan into line for the first time with Australia and South Africa.\nAdvent of covered pitches.\nVarious levels of \"covering\" existed through the history of cricket, from the Laws in 1884\u2014\"The ground shall not be rolled, watered, covered, mown, or beaten during a match, except before the commencement of each innings and of each day\u2019s play.\" This phrasing remained until the 1947 Laws, which stated the pitch should not be covered \"unless special regulations so provide\". These Laws also permitted covering the run-ups to the pitch. The next edition of the Laws, in 1980, allowed for \"complete covering of the pitch\" before a match, but not during \"unless prior arrangement or regulations so provide.\"\nThe main issue with uncovered pitches was that it produced \"sticky wickets\", which occurred after rain, while the pitch was drying, especially when this happened quickly. On a genuine sticky wicket, players could expect the ball to turn sharply with just a small amount of spin on the ball. Some balls might deviate a significant amount, while others would skid through. There was also often extremely uneven bounce.\nLeaving pitches uncovered also meant rain would cause huge delays while the ground dried out enough to permit play. The loss of time and gate money was of huge concern to administrators, especially those with precarious finances.\nDue to several wet summers, after much discussion, from the beginning of the 1959 season, full covering was made compulsory for County cricket and Test matches. The entire pitch had to be covered every evening and on Sundays, it also had to be covered whenever play was abandoned due to rain. The only instance where pitches were not covered was when players came off due to rain but play was not abandoned.\nFrom the 1960s and 70s, uncovered pitches across the world began to be phased out. In 1960, the first full covering during a Test was used in England. However, regulations were sometimes vague and even contradictory. The final changes came in the 1970s. In 1979, Test matches in England had total pitch covering during rain. The end of sticky wickets came in 1981 when the same full covering was enforced in all English first-class matches.\nAfter these changes, pitches became more standardised across the world, although differences still remained between countries and even between venues, due to the type of soil used and the local climate.\nImperial Cricket Conference renamed International Cricket Conference.\nOn 15 July 1965, the Imperial Cricket Conference renamed itself the International Cricket Conference and countries from all over the world could be admitted, instead of only commonwealth countries. Despite this, it was still run as an exclusive club by English cricket\u2013the MCC president was the ICC president and the MCC secretary was the ICC secretary.\nSuspension of South Africa (1970\u20131991).\nApartheid.\nGlobally, tensions were rising throughout the 1960s against the apartheid regime of the South African government. Sporting boycotts due to the regime were enacted in the 1960s as countries across the world showed their condemnation of racial segregation. South Africa left the Commonwealth of Nations in 1961, and per the rules of the time, therefore had to leave the ICC.\nD'Oliveira affair.\nIn 1968, Basil d'Oliveira, a mixed-race South African player who had represented England since 1966, was prohibited from playing by the South African government, in a development known as the D'Oliveira affair. The British prime minister at the time, Harold Wilson remarked: \"Once the South Africans had said that they were not taking a player [d'Oliveira] we wanted to send, I would have rather thought that put them beyond the pale of civilized cricket.\" Due to the affair, the English tour of South Africa was cancelled.\nCancelled 1970 tour.\nEighteen months later, South Africa was due to tour England as part of the 1970 season, and the public was growing discontent with the prospect of the tour, meanwhile the game's administrators remained steadfast in its determination that the tour should go ahead. Minutes of several meetings of the ICC and MCC showed they were much more concerned with the upcoming metrication in the UK and subsequent changing of the pitch length from 22 yards to 20.12 metres, and the weight of the ball from 5.5 ounces to 155.8 grams. On December 12 1969, the Test and County Cricket Board (the precursor to the ECB) confirmed the tour would proceed, adding it was \"averse to racial discrimination of any kind ... and respected the right of those who wish to demonstrate peacefully.\" However, at that stage protests had escalated from being peaceful. By the end of January 1970, twelve county grounds had been vandalised. \nOn 30 January, the International Cavaliers, a touring charity-based multi-racial cricket team, had been refused entry to South Africa. A letter from the South African Cricket Association ended with \"you must be aware any tour ... including non-white personnel would not be allowed.\" The MCC tried to distance itself from the situation, claiming that the Cavaliers were a private organisation; this only served to make itself appear woefully out of touch with the world.\nBy mid-February, the MCC had cut the schedule from 28 to 11 matches, as they removed grounds seen as impossible to protect. They even permitted laying of artificial pitches on grounds hosting games, in order to allow play to continue if they were vandalised during play. Both pro and anti-tour letters were sent to newspapers as the tour grew closer, with players and officials taking stances for or against. Some journalists refused to commentate on any of the games; one, John Arlott, said that while he was not sure protests at games were the answer, he felt that by allowing the tour to go ahead the ICC had put cricket in a position where it would be \"the ultimate and inevitable sufferer\" and that the Tests \"would offer comfort and confirmation to a completely evil regime.\"\nBan.\nIn April, Harold Wilson told the BBC that the MCC had made \"a big mistake\" in allowing the tour to happen. \"Everyone should be free to demonstrate against apartheid ... I hope people will feel free to do so.\" In early May, the annual meeting of the MCC backed the tour without requiring a vote. Later, Warwickshire said they wouldn't pick any of their three coloured players for the match against the South Africans. The following day the gates at Edgbaston were vandalised. On 20 May, 12 days before the first match, the ICC voted almost unanimously for the tour to go ahead. \"It was agreed in the long term this policy was in the best interests of cricket, and of cricketers of all races in South Africa,\" proclaimed secretary Billy Griffith. Despite this, the ICC stated there would be no further series involving South Africa \"until SA cricket is played and teams selected on a multi-racial basis.\" An editorial in the Daily Mirror wrote: \"The rulers of cricket stonewall on ... if this is their last word, they are assuming a terrible responsibility.\" On 22 May, the ICC called the tour off \"with great regret\", following a strongly worded official request from James Callaghan, the British home secretary. Griffith said he \"regretted the discourtesy\" to the South African board and further said he \"deplored the activities of those who intimidate.\"\nInside the British government, there were fears the tour would cause racial unrest within the country, and allowing the tour to carry on could only harm Wilson's chances of re-election. John Vorster, South Africa's prime minister was furious. \"For a government to submit so easily and so willingly to open blackmail is to me unbelievable.\" Ali Bacher, South Africa's captain was more reserved: \"I regret the manner in which politics have become involved in cricket ... [but] unless we broaden our outlook we will remain forever in isolation.\" That isolation lasted longer than anyone feared as the ICC's members voted to suspend South Africa indefinitely from international cricket at their meeting. \nRebel tours.\nFollowing the ban from the ICC, rebel tours took place in the 1980s, in spite of the express disapproval of the national cricket boards and governments, the ICC, and international organisations such as the United Nations They were the subject of enormous controversy and remain a sensitive topic in the cricket world. Many players from various countries were banned for some years for their involvement in the rebel tours. The English cricket side that toured South Africa in 1981\u201382 became known as \"The Dirty Dozen\". \nRe-admission.\nIn 1991, the ICC re-admitted South Africa at the personal request of Nelson Mandela, ending the 22 year ban.\n6-ball over standardised globally.\nDuring the first 100 years of Test cricket, the number of balls per over ranged between 4 and 8. While matches in England had used 6-ball overs since 1946, and in South Africa since 1961\u201362, Pakistan, New Zealand and Australia had used 8-ball overs for several years. In 1978\u201379, Pakistan switched to 6-ball overs, and Australia and New Zealand switched the following season from 1979\u201380, standardising over length globally.\nThere is no recorded reason for the switching between four, five, six, and eight ball overs in the formative years of cricket, however it is understood that the shortness of four and five-ball overs meant there were too many over changes during the course of the day, and also made it difficult for bowlers to get into a rhythm to plot a dismissal. Eight-ball overs were used in Australia in an attempt to get more balls bowled in a day's play due to the reduction in change-overs. However, a downside was that bowlers would slow down in self preservation. The ICC permitted both 6-ball and 8-ball overs in the Laws, depending on the conditions of play in the host country. From the 2000 Laws, only 6-ball overs were permitted.\nIt is widely believed that with the commercialisation of cricket and the Packer revolution, there was no room left for the 8-ball over and the 6-ball over provided a happy balance between over changes and rhythm for the bowlers.\nAdmission of Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe, and further changes to the ICC.\nOn 21 July 1981, Sri Lanka was admitted by the ICC as a full member, becoming the eighth Test playing nation. They played their first Test match against England at P. Sara Oval, Colombo on 17 February 1982.\nIn July 1989, the International Cricket Conference renamed itself to the International Cricket Council. In the same year, the practice of the MCC President automatically assuming the chairmanship of the ICC came to an end, though with the election of Colin Cowdrey, was still led by an Englishman. The renamed organisation had more teeth; it was no longer confined to just making recommendations to national governing bodies, but could impose binding decisions on members.\nIn July 1992, Zimbabwe was admitted by the ICC as a full member, becoming the ninth Test playing nation. They played their first Test match in October that year, against India at Harare Sports Club.\n1993 saw the creation of the Chief Executive of ICC, to which David Richards of the Australian Cricket Board was appointed. With his appointment, the practice of the MCC's secretary performing the same function for the ICC came to an end.\nTelevision replays, return of South Africa and neutral umpires.\nThe Indian tour of South Africa in 1992\u201393 marked the first use of television replays in Test cricket, and was also the first Test series played by South Africa after their ban by the ICC 23 years previous. The tour was also known for the trialling of independent umpires. Television replays were used to settle \"awkward line decisions\" which morphed into the third umpire provision. Sachin Tendulkar was the first player to be given out, run out, by the third umpire.\nBy 1995, it had been agreed that television replays should be available in Tests \"wherever possible\" and that the third umpire should signal out with a red light, and not out with a green light (Tendulkar was given out with a green light in the first Test at Durban in November 1992.) \nIn 1996, cameras were also permitted to check whether a ball had crossed the boundary, and in 1997, umpires could call on the third umpire to check if a catch was clean or not.\nTest Match Playing Conditions in 1998\u201399 contained the following rules:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The third Umpire will officiate in regard to TV replays only when the Umpires on the field have referred a decision to him in regard to hit wicket, run out, caught or stumping appeals.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Either the on field or third umpire shall be entitled to call for a TV replay to assist him in making a decision about whether the fieldsman had any part of his person in contact with the ball when he touched or crossed the boundary line or whether a four or six had been scored (refer to Regulation of ICC Full Members, Clause 2).Michael Atherton, opening batsman for England, said after he was given out (caught) by the third umpire in the third Test in Adelaide in 1998: \"In my opinion the third umpire should be restricted to line decisions [run outs, stumpings and boundaries]. What people are looking for from a third umpire is 100 per cent correct decision-making, but that's a Utopia that cannot exist. There's often doubt about non-line decisions made by the third umpire. There is no substitute at the end of the day for the player's word out in the middle and the two umpire's control of the decision making process.\"\nTest status.\nTest matches are the highest level of cricket, played between national representative teams with \"Test status\", as determined by the International Cricket Council. As of June 2017[ [update]], twelve national teams have Test status, the most recently promoted being Afghanistan and Ireland on 22 June 2017.\nTeams with Test status.\nTest status is conferred upon a country or group of countries by the ICC. There are currently twelve men's teams that have been granted this status: international teams that do not have Test status can play first-class cricket in the ICC Intercontinental Cup, under conditions which are similar to Tests.\nThe teams with Test status (with the date of each team's Test debut) are:\nNine of these teams represent independent sovereign nations: the England cricket team represents the constituent countries of England and Wales, the West Indies is a combined team from fifteen Caribbean nations and territories, and Ireland represents both the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland.\nFollowing the D'Oliveira affair in 1969, South Africa was suspended from all forms of cricket from 1970 until the end of the apartheid regime in 1991.\nZimbabwe's Test status was voluntarily suspended in 2006 because of very poor performances, but its Test status was reinstated in August 2011.\nThe ICC has made several proposals to reform the system of granting Test status, including having two tiers with promotion and relegation, or a play-off between the winners of the ICC Intercontinental Cup and the team with the lowest Test ranking. These proposals have not been successful as of 2024.\nStatistics.\nFor statistical purposes, Tests are considered to be a subset of first-class cricket. Performances in first-class matches count towards only the first-class statistical record, but performances in Test matches count towards both the Test statistics and the first-class statistics.\nStatisticians have developed criteria to determine which matches count as Tests if they were played before the formal definition of Test status. There have been exceptional circumstances including the simultaneous England touring sides of 1891\u201392 (in Australia and South Africa) and 1929\u201330 (in the West Indies and New Zealand), all of whose international matches are deemed to have Test status.\nIn 1970, a series of five \"Test matches\" was played in England between England and a Rest of the World XI: these matches, originally scheduled between England and South Africa, were amended after South Africa was suspended from international cricket due to their government's apartheid policies. Although initially given Test status and included as Test matches in some record books, including \"Wisden Cricketers' Almanack\", this was later withdrawn, and a principle was established that official Test matches can only be between nations (the geographically and demographically small countries of the West Indies have, since 1928, fielded a coalition side).\nDespite this principle, in 2005, the ICC ruled that the six-day Super Series match that took place that October between Australia and a World XI was an official Test match: some cricket writers and statisticians, including Bill Frindall, have ignored the ICC's ruling and exclude this match from their records.\nThe series of \"Test matches\" played in Australia between Australia and a World XI in 1971\u201372, and the commercial \"Supertests\" organised by Kerry Packer as part of his World Series Cricket enterprise played between \"WSC Australia\", \"WSC World XI\" and \"WSC West Indies\" from 1977 to 1979, have never been regarded as official Test matches as of 2021.\nConduct of the game.\nPlaying time.\nA standard day of Test cricket consists of three sessions of two hours each, the break between sessions being 40 minutes for lunch and 20 minutes for tea. However, the times of sessions and intervals may be altered in certain circumstances: if bad weather or a change of innings occurs close to a scheduled break, the break may be taken immediately; if there has been a loss of playing time, for example because of bad weather, the session times may be adjusted to make up the lost time; if the batting side is nine wickets down at the scheduled tea break, then the interval may be delayed until either 30 minutes has elapsed or the team is \"all out\"; the final session may be extended by up to 30 minutes if 90 or more overs have not been bowled in that day's play (subject to any reduction for adverse weather); the final session may be extended by 30 minutes (except on the 5th day) if the umpires believe the result can be decided within that time.\nToday, Test matches are scheduled to be played across five consecutive days. However, in the early days of Test cricket, matches were played for three or four days. England hosted Ireland at Lord's on 1 June 2023 for a four-day test. There were also frequent six-day tests until the 1970s.\nFour-day Test matches were last played in 1973, between New Zealand and Pakistan. Until the 1980s, it was usual to include a 'rest day,' often a Sunday. There have also been 'Timeless Tests', which have no predetermined maximum time. In 2005, Australia played a match scheduled for six days against a World XI, which the ICC sanctioned as an official Test match, though the match reached a conclusion on the fourth day. In October 2017, the ICC approved a request for a four-day Test match, between South Africa and Zimbabwe, which started on 26 December 2017 and ended on the second day, 27 December. The ICC trialed the four-day Test format until the 2019 Cricket World Cup. In December 2019, Cricket Australia were considering playing four-day Tests, subject to consensus with other Test nations. Later the same month, the ICC considered the possibility of making four-day Test matches mandatory for the ICC World Test Championship from 2023.\nThere have been attempts by the ICC, the sport's governing body, to introduce day-night Test matches. In 2012, the International Cricket Council passed playing conditions that allowed for the staging of day-night Test matches. The first day-night Test took place during New Zealand's tour to Australia in November 2015.\nPlay.\nTest cricket is played in \"innings\" (the word denotes both the singular and the plural). In each innings, one team bats and the other bowls (or fields). Ordinarily four innings are played in a Test match, and each team bats twice and bowls twice. Before the start of play on the first day, the two team captains and the match referee toss a coin; the captain who wins the toss decides whether his team will bat or bowl first.\nIn the following scenarios, the team that bats first is referred to as \"Team A\" and their opponents as \"Team B\".\nUsually the teams will alternate at the completion of each innings. Thus, Team A will bat (and Team B will bowl) until its innings ends, and then Team B will bat and Team A will bowl. When Team B's innings ends, Team A begin their second innings, and this is followed by Team B's second innings. The winning team is the one that scores more runs in their two innings.\nA team's innings ends in one of the following ways:\nIf, at the completion of Team B's first innings, Team A leads by at least 200 runs, the captain of Team A may (but is not required to) order Team B to have \"their\" second innings next. This is called enforcing the follow-on. In this case, the usual order of the third and fourth innings is reversed: Team A will bat in the fourth innings. It is rare for a team forced to follow-on to win the match. In Test cricket it has only happened four times, although 344 follow-ons have been enforced. Australia was the losing team on three occasions, losing twice to England, in 1894 and in 1981, and once to India in 2001. Most recently, on February 24, 2023, England lost to New Zealand by one run after enforcing the follow-on.\nIf the whole of the first day's play of a Test match has been lost because of bad weather or other reasons like bad light, then Team A may enforce the follow-on if Team B's first innings total is 150 or more fewer than Team A's. During the 2nd Test between England and New Zealand at Headingley in 2013, England batted first after the first day was lost because of rain. New Zealand, batting second, scored 180 runs fewer than England, meaning England could have enforced the follow-on, though chose not to. This is similar to four-day first-class cricket, where the follow-on can be enforced if the difference is 150 runs or more. If the Test is two days or fewer then the \"follow-on\" value is 100 runs.\nAfter 80 overs, the captain of the bowling side may take a new ball, although this is not required. The captain will usually take the new ball: being harder and smoother than an old ball, a new ball generally favours faster bowlers who can make it bounce more variably. The roughened, softer surface of an old ball can be more conducive to spin bowlers, or those using reverse swing. The captain may delay the decision to take the new ball if he wishes to continue with his spinners (because the pitch favours spin). After a new ball has been taken, should an innings last a further 80 overs, then the captain will have the option to take another new ball.\nA Test match will produce a result by means of one of six scenarios:\nClothing and equipment.\nTraditionally cricketers play in all-white kit. Unlike in limited overs cricket, this remains the case in Test cricket, as mandated by the ICC Clothing and Equipment Regulations.\nCompetitions.\nTours.\nTest cricket is almost always played as a series of matches between two countries, with all matches in the series taking place in the same country (the host). Often there is a perpetual trophy that is awarded to the winner, the most famous of which is the Ashes contested between England and Australia. There have been two exceptions to the bilateral nature of Test cricket: the 1912 Triangular Tournament, a three-way competition between England, Australia and South Africa (hosted by England), and the Asian Test Championship, an event held in 1998\u201399 and 2001\u201302.\nThe number of matches in Test series has varied from one to seven. Up until the early 1990s, Test series between international teams were organised between the two national cricket organisations with umpires provided by the home team. With the entry of more countries into Test cricket, and a wish by the ICC to maintain public interest in Tests in the face of the popularity of One Day International cricket, a rotation system was introduced that sees all ten Test teams playing each other over a six-year cycle, and an official ranking system (with a trophy held by the highest-ranked team). In this system, umpires are provided by the ICC. An elite panel of umpires was maintained since 2002, and the panel is supplemented by an additional International Panel that includes three umpires named by each Test-playing country. The elite umpires officiate almost all Test matches, though usually not Tests involving their home country.\nPerpetual trophies.\nSeveral pairs of Test teams have established perpetual trophies which are competed for whenever teams play each other in Test series. The current ones are:\nInternational Test rankings.\nThe twelve Test-playing nations are currently ranked as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nWorld Test Championship.\nAfter years of delays since proposals began in 2009, a league competition for Test cricket was held in 2019\u20132021. Arranged as a bilateral series in various countries with one team as host and another team as visitor. The length of each series varies between 2 and 5 matches. Ireland, Zimbabwe and Afghanistan are not taking part in this competition, but instead play a program of Test matches with each other and other teams during the same period.\nWTC league games are organized by the host nation's cricket board, whereas the final is organized directly by the ICC. The winners of the tournament are awarded the Test Mace, which was previously held by the leader of the test team rankings. \nPopularity.\nSupporters of Test cricket, including Adam Gilchrist, argue that it is \"the ultimate test of a player's and team's ability\". However, it has been suggested that Test cricket may be losing popularity, particularly in the face of competition from short form cricket. Day/night Test matches have been suggested as one way to address this problem. The suggested fall in popularity has been disputed, with a 2019 Marylebone Cricket Club poll showing that 86% of all cricket fans support Test cricket, more than any other format. In 2025, after leading Royal Challengers Bangalore to their maiden Indian Premier League title, Virat Kohli stated that \u201cThe IPL marks five levels under Test cricket,\u201d highlighting his belief in Test cricket as the superior format in a nation where the sport holds deep cultural importance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30864", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30864", "title": "Thucydides", "text": "5th-century BC Athenian historian and general\nThucydides ( ; ; c.\u2009460\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009400 BC) was an Athenian historian and general. His \"History of the Peloponnesian War\" recounts the fifth-century BC war between Sparta and Athens until the year 411 BC. Thucydides has been dubbed the father of \"scientific history\" by those who accept his claims to have applied strict standards of impartiality and evidence-gathering and analysis of cause and effect, without reference to intervention by the gods, as outlined in his introduction to his work.\nThucydides has been called the father of the school of political realism, which views the political behavior of individuals and the subsequent outcomes of relations between states as ultimately mediated by, and constructed upon, fear and self-interest. His text is still studied at universities and military colleges worldwide. The Melian dialogue is regarded as a seminal text of international relations theory, while his version of Pericles's Funeral Oration is widely studied by political theorists, historians, and students of the classics. More generally, Thucydides developed an understanding of human nature to explain behavior in such crises as plagues, massacres, and wars.\nLife.\nIn spite of his stature as a historian, modern historians know relatively little about Thucydides's life. The most reliable information comes from his own \"History of the Peloponnesian War\", in which he mentions his nationality, paternity, and birthplace. Thucydides says that he fought in the war, contracted the plague, and was exiled by the democracy. He may have also been involved in quelling the Samian Revolt.\nEvidence from the classical period.\nThucydides identifies himself as an Athenian, telling us that his father's name was Olorus and that he was from the Athenian deme of Halimous. A disputed anecdote from his early life says that when Thucydides was 10\u201312 years old, he and his father were supposed to have gone to the agora of Athens where the young Thucydides heard a lecture by the historian Herodotus. According to some accounts, the young Thucydides wept with joy after hearing the lecture, deciding that writing history would be his life's calling. The same account also claims that after the lecture, Herodotus spoke with the youth and his father, stating: \"Oloros your son yearns for knowledge.\" In all essence, the episode is most likely from a later Greek or Roman account of his life. He survived the Plague of Athens, which killed Pericles and many other Athenians. There is a first observation of acquired immunity. He also records that he owned gold mines at Scapte Hyle (literally \"Dug Woodland\"), a coastal area in Thrace, opposite the island of Thasos.\nBecause of his influence in the Thracian region, Thucydides wrote, he was sent as a strategos (general) to Thasos in 424 BC. During the winter of 424\u2013423 BC, the Spartan general Brasidas attacked Amphipolis, a half-day's sail west from Thasos on the Thracian coast, sparking the Battle of Amphipolis. Eucles, the Athenian commander at Amphipolis, sent to Thucydides for help. Brasidas, aware of the presence of Thucydides on Thasos and his influence with the people of Amphipolis, and afraid of help arriving by sea, acted quickly to offer moderate terms to the Amphipolitans for their surrender, which they accepted. Thus, when Thucydides arrived, Amphipolis was already under Spartan control.\nAmphipolis was of considerable strategic importance, and news of its fall caused great consternation in Athens. It was blamed on Thucydides, although he claimed that it was not his fault and that he had simply been unable to reach it in time. Because of his failure to save Amphipolis, he was exiled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I lived through the whole of it, being of an age to comprehend events, and giving my attention to them in order to know the exact truth about them. It was also my fate to be an exile from my country for twenty years after my command at Amphipolis; and being present with both parties, and more especially with the Peloponnesians by reason of my exile, I had leisure to observe affairs somewhat particularly.\nUsing his status as an exile from Athens to travel freely among the Peloponnesian allies, he was able to view the war from the perspective of both sides. Thucydides claimed that he began writing his history as soon as the war broke out, because he thought it would be one of the greatest wars waged among the Greeks in terms of scale:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thucydides, an Athenian, wrote the history of the war between the Peloponnesians and the Athenians, beginning at the moment that it broke out, and believing that it would be a great war, and more worthy of relation than any that had preceded it.\nThis is all that Thucydides wrote about his own life, but a few other facts are available from reliable contemporary sources. Herodotus wrote that the name Olorus, Thucydides's father's name, was connected with Thrace and Thracian royalty. Thucydides was probably connected through family to the Athenian statesman and general Miltiades and his son Cimon, leaders of the old aristocracy supplanted by the Radical Democrats. Cimon's maternal grandfather's name also was Olorus, making the connection quite likely. Another Thucydides lived before the historian and was also linked with Thrace, making a family connection between them very likely as well.\nCombining all the fragmentary evidence available, it seems that his family had owned a large estate in Thrace, one that even contained gold mines, and which allowed the family considerable and lasting affluence. The security and continued prosperity of the wealthy estate must have necessitated formal ties with local kings or chieftains, which explains the adoption of the distinctly Thracian royal name \"\u00d3loros\" into the family. Once exiled, Thucydides is commonly said to have taken up permanent residence in the estate and, given his ample income from the gold mines, he was able to dedicate himself to full-time history writing and research. In essence, he was a well-connected gentleman of considerable resources who, after involuntarily retiring from the political and military spheres, decided to fund his own historical investigations.\nLater sources.\nThe remaining evidence for Thucydides's life comes from later and rather less reliable ancient sources; Marcellinus wrote Thucydides's biography about a thousand years after his death. According to Pausanias, someone named Oenobius had a law passed allowing Thucydides to return to Athens, presumably shortly after the city's surrender and the end of the war in 404 BC. Pausanias goes on to say that Thucydides was murdered on his way back to Athens, placing his tomb near the Melite gate. Many doubt this account, seeing evidence to suggest he lived as late as 397 BC, or perhaps slightly later. Plutarch preserves a tradition that he was murdered in \"Skapt\u0113 Hul\u0113\" and that his remains were returned to Athens, where a monument to him was erected in Cimon's family plot. There are problems with this, since this was outside Thucydides's deme and the tradition goes back to Polemon, who asserted he had discovered just such a memorial. Didymus mentions another tomb in Thrace.\nThucydides's narrative breaks off in the middle of the year 411 BC, and this abrupt end has traditionally been explained as due to his death while writing the book, although other explanations have been put forward.\nDuring his description of the Athenian plague, he remarks that old Athenians seemed to remember a verse predicting a Dorian War that would bring about a \"plague\" (\"loimos\") . A dispute later arose, when some claimed that the saying referred to the advent in such a war of \"famine\" or \"starvation\" (\"limos\") . Thucydides draws the conclusion that people adapt their recollections to their present state of suffering. Were the same situation to recur, but with people experiencing famine rather than a pestilence, the verse would be remembered differently, in terms of starvation (\"limos\"), thereby cancelling the received adage about a plague (\"loimos\").\nThucydides admired Pericles, approving of his power over the people and showing a marked distaste for the demagogues who followed him. He did not approve of the democratic commoners nor of the radical democracy that Pericles ushered in, but considered democracy acceptable when guided by a good leader. Thucydides's presentation of events is generally even-handed; for example, he does not minimize the negative effect of his own failure at Amphipolis. Occasionally, however, strong passions break through, as in his scathing appraisals of the democratic leaders Cleon and Hyperbolus. Sometimes, Cleon has been connected with Thucydides's exile.\nIt has been argued that Thucydides was moved by the suffering inherent in war and concerned about the excesses to which human nature is prone in such circumstances, as in his analysis of the atrocities committed during the civil conflict on Corcyra, which includes the phrase \"war is a violent teacher\" ().\nThe \"History of the Peloponnesian War\".\nThucydides believed that the Peloponnesian War represented an event of unmatched importance. As such, he began to write the \"History\" at the onset of the war in 431 BC. He declared his intention was to write an account which would serve as \"a possession for all time\". The \"History\" breaks off near the end of the twenty-first year of the war (411 BC), in the wake of the Athenian defeat at Syracuse, and so does not elaborate on the final seven years of the conflict.\nThe \"History of the Peloponnesian War\" continued to be modified well beyond the end of the war in 404 BC, as exemplified by a reference at to the conclusion of the war. After his death, Thucydides's \"History\" was subdivided into eight books: its modern title is the \"History of the Peloponnesian War\". This subdivision was most likely made by librarians and archivists, themselves being historians and scholars, most likely working in the Library of Alexandria.\nThucydides is generally regarded as one of the first true historians. Like his predecessor Herodotus, known as \"the father of history\", Thucydides places a high value on eyewitness testimony and writes about events in which he probably took part. He also assiduously consulted written documents and interviewed participants about the events that he recorded. Unlike Herodotus, whose stories often teach that a hubris invites the wrath of the deities, Thucydides does not acknowledge divine intervention in human affairs.\nThucydides exerted wide historiographical influence on subsequent Hellenistic and Roman historians, although the exact description of his style in relation to many successive historians remains unclear. Readers in antiquity often placed the continuation of the stylistic legacy of the \"History\" in the writings of Thucydides's putative intellectual successor Xenophon. Such readings often described Xenophon's treatises as attempts to \"finish\" Thucydides's \"History\". Many of these interpretations, however, have garnered significant scepticism among modern scholars, such as Dillery, who spurn the view of interpreting Xenophon \"qua\" Thucydides, arguing that the latter's \"modern\" history (defined as constructed based on literary and historical themes) is antithetical to the former's account in the \"Hellenica\", which diverges from the Hellenic historiographical tradition in its absence of a preface or introduction to the text and the associated lack of an \"overarching concept\" unifying the history.\nA noteworthy difference between Thucydides's method of writing history and that of modern historians is Thucydides's inclusion of lengthy formal speeches that, as he states, were literary reconstructions rather than quotations of what was said\u2014or, perhaps, what he believed \"ought\" to have been said. Arguably, had he not done this, the gist of what was said would not otherwise be known at all\u2014whereas today there is a plethora of documentation\u2014written records, archives, and recording technology for historians to consult. Therefore, Thucydides's method served to \"rescue\" his mostly oral sources from oblivion. We do not know how these historical figures spoke. Thucydides's recreation uses a heroic stylistic register. A celebrated example is Pericles' funeral oration, which heaps honour on the dead and includes a defence of democracy:\nThe whole earth is the sepulchre of famous men; they are honoured not only by columns and inscriptions in their own land, but in foreign nations on memorials graven not on stone but in the hearts and minds of men. ()\nStylistically, the placement of this passage also serves to heighten the contrast with the description of the plague in Athens immediately following it, which graphically emphasizes the horror of human mortality, thereby conveying a powerful sense of verisimilitude:\nThough many lay unburied, birds and beasts would not touch them, or died after tasting them [...]. The bodies of dying men lay one upon another, and half-dead creatures reeled about the streets and gathered round all the fountains in their longing for water. The sacred places also in which they had quartered themselves were full of corpses of persons who had died there, just as they were; for, as the disaster passed all bounds, men, not knowing what was to become of them, became equally contemptuous of the property of and the dues to the deities. All the burial rites before in use were entirely upset, and they buried the bodies as best they could. Many from want of the proper appliances, through so many of their friends having died already, had recourse to the most shameless sepultures: sometimes getting the start of those who had raised a pile, they threw their own dead body upon the stranger's pyre and ignited it; sometimes they tossed the corpse which they were carrying on the top of another that was burning, and so went off. ()\nThucydides omits discussion of the arts, literature, or the social milieu in which the events in his book take place and in which he grew up. He saw himself as recording an event, not a period, and went to considerable lengths to exclude what he deemed frivolous or extraneous.\nPhilosophical outlook and influences.\nPaul Shorey calls Thucydides \"a cynic devoid of moral sensibility\". In addition, he notes that Thucydides conceived of human nature as strictly determined by one's physical and social environments, alongside basic desires. Francis Cornford was more nuanced: Thucydides's political vision was informed by a tragic ethical vision, in which:\nMan, isolated from, and opposed to, Nature, moves along a narrow path, unrelated to what lies beyond and lighted only by a few dim rays of human 'foresight'(\u03b3\u03bd\u03ce\u03bc\u03b7/\"gnome\"), or by the false, wandering fires of Hope. He bears within him, self-contained, his destiny in his own character: and this, with the purposes which arise out of it, shapes his course. That is all, in Thucydides' view, that we can say: except that, now and again, out of the surrounding darkness comes the blinding strokes of Fortune, unaccountable and unforeseen.'\nThucydides's work indicates an influence from the teachings of the Sophists that contributes substantially to the thinking and character of his \"History\". Possible evidence includes his skeptical ideas concerning justice and morality. There are also elements within the \"History\"\u2014such as his views on nature revolving around the factual, empirical, and the non-anthropomorphic\u2014which suggest that he was at least aware of the views of philosophers such as Anaxagoras and Democritus. There is also evidence of his knowledge concerning some of the corpus of Hippocratic medical writings.\nThucydides was especially interested in the relationship between human intelligence and judgment, fortune and necessity, and the idea that history is too irrational and incalculable to predict.\nCritical interpretation.\nScholars traditionally viewed Thucydides as recognizing and teaching the lesson that democracies need leadership but that leadership can be dangerous to democracy. Leo Strauss (in \"The City and Man\") locates the problem in the nature of Athenian democracy, about which, he argued, Thucydides was ambivalent. Thucydides's \"wisdom was made possible\" by the Periclean democracy, which had the effect of liberating individual daring, enterprise and questioning spirit; this liberation, by permitting the growth of limitless political ambition, led to imperialism and eventually, to civic strife.\nFor Canadian historian Charles Norris Cochrane (1889\u20131945), Thucydides's fastidious devotion to observable phenomena, focus on cause and effect and strict exclusion of other factors anticipates twentieth-century scientific positivism. Cochrane, the son of a physician, speculated that Thucydides generally (and especially in describing the plague in Athens) was influenced by the methods and thinking of early medical writers such as Hippocrates of Kos.\nAfter World War II, classical scholar Jacqueline de Romilly pointed out that the problem of Athenian imperialism was one of Thucydides's preoccupations and situated his history in the context of Greek thinking about international politics. Since the appearance of her study, other scholars further examined Thucydides's treatment of \"realpolitik\".\nOther scholars have brought to the fore the literary qualities of the \"History\", which they see in the narrative tradition of Homer and Hesiod and as concerned with the concepts of justice and suffering found in Plato and Aristotle and questioned in Aeschylus and Sophocles. Richard Ned Lebow terms Thucydides \"the last of the tragedians\", stating that \"Thucydides drew heavily on epic poetry and tragedy to construct his history, which not surprisingly is also constructed as a narrative\". In this view, the blind and immoderate behaviour of the Athenians (and indeed of all the other actors)\u2014although perhaps intrinsic to human nature\u2014leads to their downfall. Thus his \"History\" could serve as a warning to leaders to be more prudent, by putting them on notice that someone would be scrutinizing their actions with a historian's objectivity rather than a chronicler's flattery.\nThe historian J. B. Bury writes that the work of Thucydides \"marks the longest and most decisive step that has ever been taken by a single man towards making history what it is today\".\nHistorian H. D. Kitto feels that Thucydides wrote about the Peloponnesian War, not because it was the most significant war in antiquity but because it caused the most suffering. Several passages of Thucydides's book are written \"with an intensity of feeling hardly exceeded by Sappho herself\".\nIn his book \"The Open Society and Its Enemies\", Karl Popper writes that Thucydides was the \"greatest historian, perhaps, who ever lived\". Thucydides's work, Popper goes on to say, represents \"an interpretation, a point of view; and in this we need not agree with him\". In the war between Athenian democracy and the \"arrested oligarchic tribalism of Sparta\", we must never forget Thucydides's \"involuntary bias\", and that \"his heart was not with Athens, his native city.\"\nAlthough he apparently did not belong to the extreme wing of the Athenian oligarchic clubs who conspired throughout the war with the enemy, he was certainly a member of the oligarchic party, and a friend neither of the Athenian people, the demos, who had exiled him, nor of its imperialist policy.\nComparison with Herodotus.\nThucydides and his immediate predecessor, Herodotus, both exerted a significant influence on Western historiography. Thucydides does not mention his counterpart by name, but his famous introductory statement is thought to refer to him:To hear this history rehearsed, for that there be inserted in it no fables, shall be perhaps not delightful. But he that desires to look into the truth of things done, and which (according to the condition of humanity) may be done again, or at least their like, shall find enough herein to make him think it profitable. And it is compiled rather for an everlasting possession than to be rehearsed for a prize. ()\nHerodotus records in his \"Histories\" not only the events of the Persian Wars, but also geographical and ethnographical information, as well as the fables related to him during his extensive travels. Typically, he passes no definitive judgment on what he has heard. In the case of conflicting or unlikely accounts, he presents both sides, says what he believes and then invites readers to decide for themselves. Of course, modern historians would generally leave out their personal beliefs, which is a form of passing judgment upon the events and people about which the historian is reporting. The work of Herodotus is reported to have been recited at festivals, where prizes were awarded, as for example, during the games at Olympia.\nHerodotus views history as a source of moral lessons, with conflicts and wars as misfortunes flowing from initial acts of injustice perpetuated through cycles of revenge. In contrast, Thucydides claims to confine himself to factual reports of contemporary political and military events, based on unambiguous, first-hand, eye-witness accounts, although, unlike Herodotus, he does not reveal his sources. Thucydides views life exclusively as \"political\" life, and history in terms of \"political\" history. Conventional moral considerations play no role in his analysis of political events while geographic and ethnographic aspects are omitted or, at best, of secondary importance. Subsequent Greek historians\u2014such as Ctesias, Diodorus, Strabo, Polybius and Plutarch\u2014held up Thucydides's writings as a model of truthful history. Lucian refers to Thucydides as having given Greek historians their \"law\", requiring them to say \"what had been done\" (). Greek historians of the fourth century BC accepted that history was political and that contemporary history was the proper domain of a historian. Cicero calls Herodotus the \"father of history\"; yet the Greek writer Plutarch, in his \"Moralia\" (\"Ethics\") denigrated Herodotus, notably calling him a \"philobarbaros\", a \"barbarian lover\", to the detriment of the Greeks. Unlike Thucydides, however, these authors all continued to view history as a source of moral lessons, thereby infusing their works with personal biases generally missing from Thucydides's clear-eyed, non-judgmental writings focused on reporting events in a non-biased manner.\nDue to the loss of the ability to read Greek, Thucydides and Herodotus were largely forgotten during the Middle Ages in Western Europe, although their influence continued in the Byzantine world. In Europe, Herodotus become known and highly respected only in the late-sixteenth and early-seventeenth century as an ethnographer, in part due to the discovery of America, where customs and animals were encountered that were even more surprising than what he had related. During the Reformation, moreover, information about Middle Eastern countries in the \"Histories\" provided a basis for establishing Biblical chronology as advocated by Isaac Newton.\nThe first European translation of Thucydides (into Latin) was made by the humanist Lorenzo Valla between 1448 and 1452, and the first Greek edition was published by Aldo Manuzio in 1502. During the Renaissance, however, Thucydides attracted less interest among Western European historians as a political philosopher than his successor, Polybius, although Poggio Bracciolini claimed to have been influenced by him. There is not much evidence of Thucydides's influence in Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli's \"The Prince\" (1513), which held that the chief aim of a new prince must be to \"maintain his state\" [i.e., his power] and that in so doing he is often compelled to act against faith, humanity, and religion. Later historians, such as J. B. Bury, however, have noted parallels between them:\nIf, instead of a history, Thucydides had written an analytical treatise on politics, with particular reference to the Athenian empire, it is probable that\u00a0... he could have forestalled Machiavelli\u00a0... [since] the whole innuendo of the Thucydidean treatment of history agrees with the fundamental postulate of Machiavelli, the supremacy of reason of state. To maintain a state, said the Florentine thinker, \"a statesman is often compelled to act against faith, humanity and religion\".\u00a0... But\u00a0... the true Machiavelli, not the Machiavelli of fable\u00a0... entertained an ideal: Italy for the Italians, Italy freed from the stranger: and in the service of this ideal he desired to see his speculative science of politics applied. Thucydides has no political aim in view: he was purely a historian. But it was part of the method of both alike to eliminate conventional sentiment and morality.\nIn the seventeenth century, the English political philosopher Thomas Hobbes, whose \"Leviathan\" advocated absolute monarchy, admired Thucydides and in 1628 was the first to translate his writings into English directly from Greek. Thucydides, Hobbes, and Machiavelli are together considered the founding fathers of western political realism, according to which, state policy must primarily or solely focus on the need to maintain military and economic power rather than on ideals or ethics.\nNineteenth-century positivist historians stressed what they saw as Thucydides's seriousness, his scientific objectivity and his advanced handling of evidence. A virtual cult following developed among such German philosophers as Friedrich Schelling, Friedrich Schlegel, and Friedrich Nietzsche, who claimed that, \"[in Thucydides], the portrayer of Man, that culture of the most impartial knowledge of the world finds its last glorious flower.\" The late-eighteenth-century Swiss historian Johannes von M\u00fcller described Thucydides as \"the favourite author of the greatest and noblest men, and one of the best teachers of the wisdom of human life\". For Eduard Meyer, Thomas Babington Macaulay and Leopold von Ranke, who initiated modern source-based history writing, Thucydides was again the model historian.\nGenerals and statesmen loved him: the world he drew was theirs, an exclusive power-brokers' club. It is no accident that even today Thucydides turns up as a guiding spirit in military academies, neocon think tanks and the writings of men like Henry Kissinger; whereas Herodotus has been the choice of imaginative novelists (Michael Ondaatje's novel \"The English Patient\" and the film based on it boosted the sale of the \"Histories\" to a wholly unforeseen degree) and\u2014as food for a starved soul\u2014of an equally imaginative foreign correspondent from Iron Curtain Poland, Ryszard Kapuscinski.\nThese historians also admired Herodotus, however, as social and ethnographic history increasingly came to be recognized as complementary to political history. In the twentieth century, this trend gave rise to the works of Johan Huizinga, Marc Bloch, and Fernand Braudel, who pioneered the study of long-term cultural and economic developments and the patterns of everyday life. The Annales School, which exemplifies this direction, has been viewed as extending the tradition of Herodotus.\nAt the same time, Thucydides's influence was increasingly important in the area of international relations during the Cold War, through the work of Hans Morgenthau, Leo Strauss, and Edward Carr.\nThe tension between the Thucydidean and Herodotean traditions extends beyond historical research. According to Irving Kristol, self-described founder of American neoconservatism, Thucydides wrote \"the favorite neoconservative text on foreign affairs\"; and Thucydides is a required text at the Naval War College, an American institution located in Rhode Island. On the other hand, Daniel Mendelsohn, in a review of a recent edition of Herodotus, suggests that, at least in his graduate school days during the Cold War, professing admiration of Thucydides served as a form of self-presentation:\nTo be an admirer of Thucydides' \"History\", with its deep cynicism about political, rhetorical and ideological hypocrisy, with its all too recognizable protagonists\u2014a liberal yet imperialistic democracy and an authoritarian oligarchy, engaged in a war of attrition fought by proxy at the remote fringes of empire\u2014was to advertise yourself as a hardheaded connoisseur of global Realpolitik.\nAnother contemporary historian believes that, while it is true that critical history \"began with Thucydides, one may also argue that Herodotus' looking at the past as a reason why the present is the way it is, and to search for causality for events beyond the realms of Tyche and the Gods, was a much larger step.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30865", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30865", "title": "Truth and Reconciliation Commission (South Africa)", "text": "Restorative justice tribunal in post-apartheid South Africa\nThe Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) was a court-like restorative justice body assembled in South Africa in 1996 after the end of apartheid. Authorised by Nelson Mandela and chaired by Desmond Tutu, the commission invited witnesses who were identified as victims of gross human rights violations to give statements about their experiences, and selected some for public hearings. Perpetrators of violence could also give testimony and request amnesty from both civil and criminal prosecution.\nThe Institute for Justice and Reconciliation was established in 2000 as the successor organisation of the TRC.\nCreation and mandate.\nThe TRC was set up in terms of the \"Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act\", No. 34 of 1995, and was based in Cape Town. The hearings started in 1996. The mandate of the commission was to bear witness to, record, and in some cases grant amnesty to the perpetrators of crimes relating to human rights violations, as well as offering reparation and rehabilitation to the victims. A register of reconciliation was also established so that ordinary South Africans who wished to express regret for past failures could also express their remorse.\nThe TRC had a number of high-profile members, including Archbishop Desmond Tutu (chairman), Alex Boraine (deputy chairman), Sisi Khampepe, Wynand Malan, and Emma Mashinini.\nThe TRC's mandate was enriched by Tutu with the spirit of the indigenous African concept Ubuntu, which tends to translate across cultures as a spiritual awareness of our interconnectedness as a human family; and more specifically in Xhosa, that together, we \"make\" one another human. \nCommittees.\nThe work of the TRC was accomplished through three committees:\nProcess.\nPublic hearings of the Human Rights Violations Committee and the Amnesty Committee were held at many venues around South Africa, including Cape Town (at the University of the Western Cape), Johannesburg (at the Central Methodist Mission), and Randburg (at the Rhema Bible Church).\nThe commission was empowered to grant amnesty to those who committed abuses during the apartheid era, as long as the crimes were politically motivated, proportionate, and there was full disclosure by the person seeking amnesty. To avoid victor's justice, no side was exempt from appearing before the commission. The commission heard reports of human rights violations and considered amnesty applications from all sides, from the apartheid state to the liberation forces, including the African National Congress.\nNumbers.\nThe Commission found that there were 7,000 political deaths under Apartheid between 1948 and 1989. 73 of these deaths were in detention while in the hands of the security police. More than 19,050 people had been victims of gross human rights violations. An additional 2,975 victims were identified through the applications for amnesty. In reporting these numbers, the Commission voiced its regret that there was very little overlap of victims between those seeking restitution and those seeking amnesty.\nA total of 5,392 amnesty applications were refused, granting only 849 out of the 7,111 (which includes the number of additional categories, such as \"withdrawn\").\nSignificance and impact.\nThe TRC's emphasis on reconciliation was in sharp contrast to the approach taken by the Nuremberg trials and other de-Nazification measures. South Africa's first coalition government chose to pursue forgiveness over prosecution, and reparation over retaliation. \nOpinions differ about the efficacy of the restorative justice method (as employed by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission) as compared to the retributive justice method, of which the Nuremberg trials are an example. In one survey study, the effectiveness of the TRC was measured on a variety of levels: \nIn the study by Orlando Lentini, the opinions of three ethnic groups were measured in this study: English-speaking White South Africans, the Afrikaners, and the Xhosa. According to the researchers, all of the participants perceived the TRC to be effective in bringing out the truth, but to varying degrees, depending on the group in question.\nThe differences in opinions about the effectiveness can be attributed to how each group viewed the proceedings. Some viewed them as not entirely accurate, as many people would lie in order to keep themselves out of trouble while receiving amnesty for their crimes. (The commission would grant amnesty to some with consideration given to the weight of the crimes committed.) Some said that the proceedings only helped to remind them of the horrors that had taken place in the past when they had been working to forget such things. Thus, the TRC's effectiveness in terms of achieving those very things within its title is still debatable.\nWomen in the TRC.\nSome analyses of the TRC have examined how gender shaped participation in the Commission\u2019s processes. Seven of the seventeen TRC commissioners were women, and the Reparations and Rehabilitation Committee was chaired and co-chaired by Hlengiwe Mkhize and Wendy Orr. As witnesses, many women gave testimony about violations experienced by relatives. Relatives or dependents of those who suffered physical/mental injury and other violations were classified as victims under the TRC mandate. Scholars note that some women were reluctant to speak about abuses they personally experienced, especially sexual violence, due to social stigma. \nIn 1996, the University of Witwatersrand Center for Applied Legal Studies (CALS) made a submission, co-authored by Beth Goldblatt and Sheila Meintjies, urging the Commission to encourage women to share their own experiences. The TRC subsequently held three special hearings on women in Cape Town, Johannesburg and Durban. In the end, women accounted for more than half of the statements taken throughout the TRC, but less than half of those who reported on their own experience of direct human rights violations. Women were prominent in victim support groups. For example, 70% of the members of the large Khulumani Support Group were women. \nMedia coverage.\nThe hearings were initially set to be heard \"in camera\", but the intervention of 23 non-governmental organisations eventually succeeded in gaining media access to the hearings. On 15 April 1996, the South African National Broadcaster televised the first two hours of the first human rights violation committee hearing live. With funding from the Norwegian government, radio continued to broadcast live throughout. Additional high-profile hearings, such as Winnie Mandela's testimony, were also televised live.\nThe rest of the hearings were presented on television each Sunday, from April 1996 to June 1998, in hour-long episodes of the \"Truth Commission Special Report\". The programme was presented by progressive Afrikaner journalist Max du Preez, former editor of the \"Vrye Weekblad\". The producers of the programme included Anneliese Burgess, Jann Turner, Benedict Motau, Gael Reagon, Rene Schiebe and Bronwyn Nicholson, a production assistant.\nIn the arts and popular culture.\nFilm.\nVarious films have been made about the commission:\nTheatre.\nSeveral plays have been produced about the TRC:\nCriticism.\nJustice and reconciliation.\nA 1998 study by South Africa's Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation &amp; the Khulumani Support Group, which surveyed several hundred victims of human rights abuse during the Apartheid era, found that most felt that the TRC had failed to achieve reconciliation between the black and white communities. Most believed that justice was a prerequisite for reconciliation rather than an alternative to it, and that the TRC had been weighted in favour of the perpetrators of abuse. The TRC\u2019s mandate was limited to gross violations of human rights, defined in terms of physical or mental harm to an individual. The likes of Madeleine Fullard, Mamphela Ramphele and Beth Goldblatt have argued that this definition excludes systemic crimes such as forced removals, closing down schools and pass arrests. As a result of the TRC's shortcomings and the unaddressed injuries of many victims, victims' groups, together with NGOs and lawyers, took various TRC-related matters to South African and US courts in the early 2000s.\nAmnesty.\nMany black South Africans were angered at amnesty being granted for human rights abuses committed by the apartheid government. The BBC described criticisms of the amnesty system as stemming from a \"basic misunderstanding\" about the TRC's mandate, which was to \"uncover the truth\" about past abuse, using amnesty as a mechanism, rather than to \"punish past crimes\". Critics of the TRC dispute this, saying that their position is not a misunderstanding but a rejection of the TRC's mandate.\nAmong the highest-profile criticisms came from the family of prominent anti-apartheid activist Steve Biko, who was killed by the security police, and whose story was featured in the film \"Cry Freedom\". Biko's family described the TRC as a \"vehicle for political expediency\", which \"robbed\" them of their right to justice. The family opposed amnesty for his killers on these grounds and brought a legal action in South Africa's highest court, arguing that the TRC was unconstitutional.\nAccountability for high-profile perpetrators.\nFormer apartheid State President P.W. Botha defied a subpoena to appear before the commission, calling it a \"circus\". His defiance resulted in a fine and suspended sentence, but these were overturned on appeal. While former president F. W. de Klerk appeared before the commission and reiterated his apology for the suffering caused by apartheid, local reports at the time noted that he failed to accept that the former NP government's policies had given security forces a \"licence to kill\", although this was evidenced to him personally in different ways. de Klerk's appearance drove the chairman Archbishop Desmond Tutu almost to tears.\nReparations.\nThe Reparations and Rehabilitations Committee recommended policy for how to assist victims (including family members and dependents) based on findings of other two committees. Several forms of reparations were recommended: urgent interim payments, individual reparation grants, symbolic reparation and legal administrative measures, community rehabilitation and institutional reforms. Wendy Orr, a co-chair of the Reparations and Rehabilitations Committee, has stated that delayed payments to victims in the reparations program are the most damaging aspect of the TRC\u2019s work: Urgent Interim Reparations were made available in 2003, five years after the Commission recommended them to the government. Reparation grants were similarly delayed, and below the sum recommended by the TRC.\nUnequal influence.\nPlaywright Jane Taylor, responsible for the acclaimed \"Ubu and the Truth Commission\", found fault with the commission's lopsided influence:\nThe TRC is unquestionably a monumental process, the consequences of which will take years to unravel. For all its pervasive weight, however, it infiltrates our culture asymmetrically, unevenly across multiple sectors. Its place in small rural communities, for example, when it establishes itself in a local church hall, and absorbs substantial numbers of the population, is very different from its situation in large urban centres, where its presence is marginalised by other social and economic activities.\nTestimony translation.\nAnother dilemma facing the TRC was how to do justice to the testimonials of those witnesses for whom translation was necessary. It was believed that, with the great discrepancy between the emotions of the witnesses and those translating them, much of the impact was lost in interlingual rendition. A briefly tried solution was to have the translators mimic the witnesses' emotions, but this proved disastrous and was quickly scrapped.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30866", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30866", "title": "Trekkers", "text": ""}
{"id": "30867", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30867", "title": "Tatting", "text": "Craft of making lace with loops and knots using a small shuttle\nTatting is a technique for handcrafting a particularly durable lace from a series of knots and loops. Tatting can be used to make lace edging as well as doilies, collars, accessories such as earrings, necklaces, waist beads, and other decorative pieces. The lace is formed by a pattern of rings and chains formed from a series of cow hitch or half-hitch knots, called double stitches, over a core thread. Contemporary tatting methods arose in the 19th century, influenced by the numerous publications of Mlle El\u00e9onore Riego de la Branchardi\u00e8re who developed the concepts and terms for picots and chains.\nGaps can be left between the stitches to form picots, which are used for practical construction as well as decorative effect.\nIn German, tatting is usually known by the Italian-derived word \"Occhi\" or as \"Schiffchenarbeit\", which means \"work of the little boat\", referring to the boat-shaped shuttle; in Italian, tatting is called \"chiacchierino\", which means \"chatty\".\nTechnique and materials.\nShuttle tatting.\nTatting with a shuttle is the earliest method of creating tatted lace. A tatting \"shuttle\" facilitates tatting by holding a length of wound thread and guiding it through loops to make the requisite knots. Historically, it was a metal or ivory pointed-oval shape less than long, but shuttles come in a variety of shapes and materials. Shuttles often have a point or hook on one end to aid in the construction of the lace. Antique shuttles and unique shuttles have become sought after by collectors \u2014 even those who do not tat.\nTo make the lace, the tatter wraps the thread around one hand and manipulates the shuttle with the other hand. No tools other than the thread, the hands and the shuttle are used, though a crochet hook may be necessary if the shuttle does not have a point or hook.\nNeedle tatting.\nTraditional shuttle tatting may be simulated using a tatting needle or doll needle instead of a shuttle. There are two basic techniques for needle tatting. With the more widely disseminated technique, a double thread passes through the stitches. The result is similar to shuttle tatting but is slightly thicker and looser. The second technique more closely approximates shuttle tatting because a single thread passes through the stitches.\nThe earliest evidence for needle tatting dates from April 1917, in an article by M.E. Rozella, published in \"The Modern Priscilla.\" A tatting needle is a long, blunt needle that does not change thickness at the eye of the needle. The needle used must match the thickness of the thread chosen for the project. Rather than winding the shuttle, the needle is threaded with a length of thread. To work with a second color, a second needle is used. Although needle tatting looks similar to shuttle tatting, it differs in structure and is slightly thicker and looser because both the needle and the thread must pass through the stitches. However, it may be seen that the Victorian tatting pin would function as a tatting needle. As well, Florence Hartley refers in \"The Ladies' Hand Book of Fancy and Ornamental Work\" (1859) to the use of the tatting needle, so it must have originated prior to the mid-1800s.\nIn the late 20th century, tatting needles became commercially available in a variety of sizes, from fingering yarn down to size 80 tatting thread. Few patterns are written specifically for needle tatting; some shuttle tatting patterns may be used without modification.\nCro-tatting.\nCro-tatting combines needle tatting with crochet. The cro-tatting tool is a tatting needle with a crochet hook at the end. One can also cro-tat with a bullion crochet hook or a very straight crochet hook. In the 19th century, \"crochet tatting\" patterns were published which simply called for a crochet hook. One of the earliest patterns is for a crocheted afghan with tatted rings forming a raised design. Patterns are available in English and are equally divided between yarn and thread. In its most basic form, the rings are tatted with a length of plain thread between them, as in single-shuttle tatting. In modern patterns, beginning in the early 20th century, the rings are tatted and the arches or chains are crocheted. Many people consider cro-tatting more difficult than crochet or needle tatting. Some tatting instructors recommend using a tatting needle and a crochet hook to work cro-tatting patterns. Stitches of cro-tatting (and needle tatting before a ring is closed) unravel easily, unlike tatting made with a shuttle.\nA form of tatting called Takashima Tatting, invented by Toshiko Takashima, exists in Japan. Takashima Tatting uses a custom needle with a hook on one end. It is not that widespread however (in Japan the primary form of tatting is shuttle tatting, and needle tatting is virtually unknown.).\nMaterials.\nOlder designs, especially through the early 1900s, tend to use fine white or ivory thread (50 to 100 widths to the inch) and intricate designs. Often they were constructed of small pieces 10\u00a0cm or less in diameter, which were then tied to each other to form a larger piece \u2014 a shawl, veil or umbrella, for example. This thread was either made of silk or a silk blend, to allow for improper stitches to be easily removed. The mercerization process strengthened cotton threads and spread their use in tatting. Newer designs from the 1920s and onward often use thicker thread in one or more colors, as well as newer joining methods, to reduce the number of thread ends to be hidden. The best thread for tatting is a \"hard\" thread that does not untwist readily. Cordonnet thread is a common tatting thread; Perl cotton is an example of a beautiful cord that is nonetheless a bit loose for tatting purposes. Some tatting designs incorporate ribbons and beads.\nPatterns.\nOlder patterns use a longhand notation to describe the stitches needed, while newer patterns tend to make extensive use of abbreviations such as \"ds\" to mean \"double stitch\", and an almost mathematical-looking notation. The following examples describe the same small piece of tatting (the first ring in the \"Hen and Chicks\" pattern)\nRing five ds, three picots separated by five ds, five ds, close, turn, space\nR 5ds, 3 p sep by 5ds, 5ds, cl, turn, sp\nR 5-5-5-5 cl rw sp\nSome tatters prefer a visual pattern where the design is drawn schematically with annotations indicating the number of double stitches and order of construction. This can either be used on its own or alongside a written pattern.\nBooks with tatting patterns are widely available. Anne Orr, a notable needlework editor, quilt designer, and textile artist, was recognized for the quality of her work and her work has been reprinted for contemporary tatters.\nModern tatting patterns can be produced with diagrams, and Inkscape software permits useful diagram structures.\nModern tatting pattern books sometimes include jewelry items that can be adorned with beads.\nHistory.\nTatting may have developed from netting and decorative ropework as sailors and fishermen would put together motifs for girlfriends and wives at home. Decorative ropework employed on ships includes techniques (esp. coxcombing) that show striking similarity with tatting. A good description of this can be found in \"Knots, Splices and Fancywork\".\nSome believe tatting originated over 200 years ago, often citing shuttles seen in 18th-century paintings of women such as Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, Princess Marie Ad\u00e9la\u00efde of France, and Anne, Countess of Albemarle. A close inspection of those paintings, however, shows that the shuttles in question are too large to be tatting shuttles, and that they are actually knotting shuttles. There is no documentation of or examples of tatted lace that dates prior to 1800. All available evidence shows that tatting originated in the early 19th century. However, recent research by Cary Karp demonstrates some potential connections between the two fiber arts. According to Karp, \"Knotting and tatting did appear sequentially in the historical record and can reasonably be regarded separately...the demarcation between the structures that characterise knotting, and the central elements of tatting, was not as clear cut as is often maintained.\"\nTatting has been used in occupational therapy to keep convalescent patients' hands and minds active during recovery, as documented, for example, in Betty MacDonald's \"The Plague &amp; I\".\nWorkshops and competitions in tatting continue to be available from lace guilds and organizations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30868", "revid": "39818230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30868", "title": "Treaty of Lausanne", "text": "1923 treaty between Turkey and the Allies\nThe Treaty of Lausanne (, ) is a peace treaty negotiated during the Lausanne Conference of 1922\u20131923 and signed in the Palais de Rumine in Lausanne, Switzerland, on 24 July 1923. The treaty officially resolved the conflict that had initially arisen between the Ottoman Empire and the Allied French Republic, British Empire, Kingdom of Italy, Empire of Japan, Kingdom of Greece, Kingdom of Serbia, and the Kingdom of Romania since the outset of World War I. The original text of the treaty is in English and French. It emerged as a second attempt at peace after the failed and unratified Treaty of S\u00e8vres, which had sought to partition Ottoman territories. The earlier treaty, signed in 1920, was later rejected by the Turkish National Movement which actively opposed its terms. As a result of Greek defeat in the Greco-Turkish War, Turkish forces recaptured \u0130zmir, and the Armistice of Mudanya was signed in October 1922. This armistice provided for the exchange of Greek-Turkish populations and allowed unrestricted civilian, non-military passage through the Turkish Straits.\nTurkey ratified the treaty on 23 August 1923, and all other signatories did so by 16 July 1924. The Treaty of Lausanne became effective on 6 August 1924.\nAdditionally, a declaration of amnesty was issued, granting immunity for crimes committed between 1914 and 1922, including the Armenian genocide and Greek genocide. Historian Hans-Lukas Kieser asserts that \"Lausanne tacitly endorsed comprehensive policies of expulsion and extermination of hetero-ethnic and hetero-religious groups\".\nBackground.\nAfter the withdrawal of the Greek forces in Asia Minor and the expulsion of the Ottoman Sultan by the Turkish army under the command of Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk, the Ankara-based Kemalist government of the Turkish National Movement rejected the territorial losses imposed by the 1920 Treaty of S\u00e8vres, previously signed by the Ottoman Empire but remaining unratified. Britain had sought to undermine Turkish influence in Mesopotamia and Kirkuk by seeking the creation of a Kurdish state in Eastern Anatolia. Secular Kemalist rhetoric relieved some of the international concerns about the future of Armenians who had survived the 1915 Armenian genocide, and support for Kurdish self determination similarly declined. Under the Treaty of Lausanne, signed in 1923, Eastern Anatolia became part of modern-day Turkey, in exchange for Turkey's relinquishing Ottoman-era claims to the oil-rich Arab lands.\nNegotiations were undertaken during the Conference of Lausanne. \u0130smet \u0130n\u00f6n\u00fc was the chief negotiator for Turkey. Lord Curzon, the British Foreign Secretary of that time, was the chief negotiator for the Allies, while Eleftherios Venizelos negotiated on behalf of Greece. The negotiations took many months. On 20 November 1922, the peace conference was opened; the treaty was signed on 24 July 1923 after eight months of arduous negotiation, punctuated by several Turkish withdrawals. The Allied delegation included U.S. Admiral Mark L. Bristol, who served as the United States High Commissioner and supported Turkish efforts.\nStipulations.\nThe treaty was composed of 143 articles with major sections including:\nThe treaty provided for the independence of the Republic of Turkey but also for the protection of the Greek Orthodox Christian minority in Turkey and the Muslim minority in Greece. However, most of the Christian population of Turkey and the Muslim population of Greece had already been deported under the earlier Convention Concerning the Exchange of Greek and Turkish Populations signed by Greece and Turkey. Only the Greek Orthodox of Constantinople, Imbros and Tenedos (about 270,000 at that time), and the Muslim population of Western Thrace (about 129,120 in 1923) were excluded. Article 14 of the treaty granted the islands of Imbros (G\u00f6k\u00e7eada) and Tenedos (Bozcaada) \"special administrative organisation\", a right that was revoked by the Turkish government on 17 February 1926. Turkey also formally accepted the loss of Cyprus (which had been leased to the British Empire following the Congress of Berlin in 1878, but \"de jure\" remained an Ottoman territory until World War I). The fate of the province of Mosul was left to be determined through the League of Nations. Turkey also explicitly renounced all claims to the Dodecanese Islands, which Italy had been obliged to return to Turkey according to Article 2 of the Treaty of Ouchy in 1912 following the Italo-Turkish War (1911\u20131912).\nBorders.\nThe treaty delimited the boundaries of Greece, Bulgaria, and Turkey. Specifically, the treaty provisioned that all the islands, islets and other territories in the Aegean Sea (Eastern Mediterranean in the original text) beyond three miles from the Turkish shores were ceded to Greece, with the exception of Imbros, Tenedos and Rabbit islands (). There is a special notation in both articles, that, unless it is explicitly stated otherwise, the Turkish sovereignty extends three miles from Asia Minor shores. The Greek population of Imbros and Tenedos was not included in the population exchange and would be protected under the stipulations of the protection of the minorities in Turkey ().\nThe major issue of the war reparations, demanded from Greece by Turkey, was abandoned after Greece agreed to cede Karaa\u011fa\u00e7 to Turkey.\nTurkey also formally ceded all claims on the Dodecanese Islands (Article 15); Cyprus (Article 20); Egypt and Sudan (Article 17); Syria and Iraq (Article 3); and (along with the Treaty of Ankara) settled the boundaries of the latter two nations.\nThe territories to the south of Syria and Iraq on the Arabian Peninsula, which still remained under Turkish control when the Armistice of Mudros was signed on 30 October 1918, were not explicitly identified in the text of the treaty. However, the definition of Turkey's southern border in Article 3 also meant that Turkey officially ceded them. These territories included the Mutawakkilite Kingdom of Yemen, Asir and parts of Hejaz like the city of Medina. They were held by Turkish forces until 23 January 1919.\nBy Articles 25 and 26 of the Treaty of Lausanne, Turkey officially ceded Adakale Island in the Danube River to Romania by formally recognizing the related provisions in the Treaty of Trianon of 1920. Due to a diplomatic irregularity at the 1878 Congress of Berlin, the island had technically remained part of the Ottoman Empire.\nTurkey also renounced its privileges in Libya which were defined by Article 10 of the Treaty of Ouchy in 1912 (per Article 22 of the Treaty of Lausanne in 1923.)\nAgreements.\nAmong many agreements, there was a separate agreement with the United States, the Chester concession. In the United States, the treaty was opposed by several groups, including the Committee Opposed to the Lausanne Treaty (COLT), and on 18 January 1927, the United States Senate refused to ratify the treaty by a vote of 50\u201334, six votes short of the two-thirds required by the Constitution. Consequently, Turkey annulled the concession.\nBesides, Turkey was obliged to instate four European advisors on juridical matters for five years. The advisors were to observe a juridical reform in Turkey. The advisors contract could be renewed if the suggested reforms would not have taken place. Subsequently, Turkey worked on and announced a new Turkish constitution and reformed the Turkish justice system by including the Swiss Civil code, the Italian criminal law and the German Commercial law before completion of the five years in question.\nDeclaration of Amnesty.\nAnnex VIII to the treaty, called \"Declaration of Amnesty\", granted immunity to the perpetrators of any crimes \"connected to political events\" committed between 1914 and 1922. The treaty thus put an end to the effort to prosecute Ottoman war criminals for crimes such as the Armenian genocide, the Sayfo, the Greek genocide, and codified impunity for these crimes.\nLegacy.\nThe Treaty of Lausanne led to the international recognition of the sovereignty of the new Republic of Turkey as the successor state of the Ottoman Empire. As result of the Treaty, the Ottoman public debt was divided between Turkey and the countries which emerged from the former Ottoman Empire. The convention on the Straits lasted for thirteen years and was replaced with the Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Straits in 1936. The customs limitations in the treaty were shortly after reworked.\nFor Greece, the treaty brought to an end the impetus behind the Megali Idea, the notion that modern Greece should encompass those territories in Asia Minor which had been populated with Greek speakers for up to 3000 years and which also formed the core of the Eastern Roman Empire.\nHatay Province remained a part of the French Mandate of Syria according to the Treaty of Lausanne, but in 1938 gained its independence as the Hatay State, which later joined Turkey after a referendum in 1939. Political amnesty was given to opponents of the new Turkish regime but the government reserved the right to make 150 exceptions. The 150 personae non gratae of Turkey (mostly descendants of the Ottoman dynasty) slowly acquired citizenship \u2013 the last one in 1974.\nLloyd George declared the treaty an \"abject, cowardly and infamous surrender\".\nHistorian Norman Naimark states, \"The Lausanne Treaty served as a pivotal international precedent for transferring populations against their will throughout the twentieth century.\"\nHistorian Ronald Grigor Suny states that the treaty \"essentially confirmed the effectiveness of deportations or even murderous ethnic cleansing as a potential solution to population problems\".\nHistorian Hans-Lukas Kieser states, \"Lausanne tacitly endorsed comprehensive policies of expulsion and extermination of hetero-ethnic and hetero-religious groups, with fatal attraction for German revisionists and many other nationalists\".\nConspiracy theories.\nThe Treaty of Lausanne has given rise to a number of Islamist conspiracy theories in Turkey to defame the post-war Turkish secular nationalist rule of the country. For example, it has been claimed that the treaty was signed to be effective for a century and there are \"secret articles\" in the treaty regarding Turkey's mining of natural resources. One conspiracy theory that had following in the 2010s held that the treaty would expire in 2023 and Turkey would be allowed to mine boron and petroleum. This appears not to have happened.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30869", "revid": "140154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30869", "title": "Tesla turbine", "text": "Bladeless centripetal flow turbine\nThe Tesla turbine is a bladeless centripetal-flow turbine invented by Nikola Tesla in 1913. It functions as nozzles apply a moving fluid to the edges of a set of discs. The engine uses smooth discs rotating in a chamber to generate rotational movement due to the momentum exchange between the fluid and the discs. The discs are arranged in an orientation similar to a stack of CDs on an axle.\nThe Tesla turbine uses the boundary-layer effect, instead of the method employed by more conventional turbines, wherein a fluid acts on blades. The Tesla turbine is also referred to as the \"bladeless turbine\", \"boundary-layer turbine\", \"cohesion-type turbine\", and \"Prandtl-layer turbine.\" The latter is named for Ludwig Prandtl. Bioengineering researchers have additionally referred to the Tesla turbine as a multiple-disk centrifugal pump.\nOne of Tesla's intended implementations for this turbine was for the generation of geothermal power, which he described in his work \"Our Future Motive Power\".\nTheory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the pump, the radial or static pressure, due to centrifugal force, is added to the tangential or dynamic, thus increasing the effective head and assisting in the expulsion of the fluid. In the motor, on the contrary, the first named pressure, being opposed to that of supply, reduces the effective head and the velocity of radial flow toward the center. Again, in the propelled machine, a great torque is always desirable, calling for an increased number of disks and a smaller distance of separation, while in the propelling machine, for numerous economic reasons, the rotary effort should be the smallest and the speed the greatest practicable.\u2014\u200a\nIn standard steam turbines, the steam must press on the blades for the rotor to extract energy from the steam; the blades must be carefully oriented to minimize the angle of attack to the blade surface area. In other words, in the optimal regime, the orientation of the blades minimizes the angle (blade pitch) with which the steam is hitting their surface area, to create smooth steam flow and to minimize turbulence. This turbulence reduces the amount of useful energy that can be extracted from the incoming steam flow.\nIn the Tesla turbine, considering that there are no blades to be impacted, the mechanics of the reaction forces are different. The reaction force to the steam head pressure builds relatively quickly, in the form of a steam pressure \"belt\" along the periphery of the turbine. That belt is most dense and pressurized in the periphery as its pressure, when the rotor is not under load, will not be much less than the (incoming) steam pressure. In a normal operational mode, that peripheral pressure limits the flow of the incoming stream, and in this way, the Tesla turbine can be said to be self-governing. When the rotor is not under load, the relative speeds between the \"steam compressed spirals\" (SCS, the steam spirally rotating between the disks) and the disks are minimal.\nWhen a load is applied to the Tesla turbine, the shaft slows down; that is, the speed of the discs relative to the (moving) fluid increases as the fluid, at least initially, preserves its angular momentum. For example, in a radius, where at 9000 RPM the peripheral disk speeds are when there is no load on the rotor, the disks move at approximately the same speed as the fluid, but when the rotor is loaded, the relative velocity differential (between the SCS and the metal disks) increases and, at a rotor speed of , the rotor has a relative speed of 45 m/s to the SCS. This is a dynamic environment, and these speeds reach these values over a time interval and not instantly. Here, we have to note that fluids start to behave like solid bodies at high relative velocities, and in the case of the Tesla turbine, we also have to take into consideration the additional pressure. With this pressure and relative velocity toward the faces of the discs, the steam should start behaving like a solid body (SCS) dragging on the disks' surfaces. The created \"friction\" can only lead to the generation of additional heat directly on the disk and in SCS and will be most pronounced in the peripheral layer, where the relative velocity between the metal discs and SCS discs is the highest. This increase in the temperature, due to the friction between the SCS disks and the turbine disks, will be translated to an increase in the SCS temperature, and that will lead to SCS steam expansion and pressure increase perpendicular to the metal discs as well as radially on the axis of rotation, and so this fluid-dynamic model appears to be positive feedback for transmitting a stronger \"dragging\" on the metal disks and consequently increasing the torque at the axis of rotation.\nDesign.\nThe guiding principle for developing the Tesla turbine is the idea that, to obtain the highest efficiency, the changes in the velocity and direction of movement of fluid should be as gradual as possible. Therefore, the propelling fluid of the Tesla turbine moves in natural paths, or streamlines, of least resistance.\nA Tesla turbine consists of a set of smooth disks, with nozzles applying a moving fluid to the edge of the disk. The fluid drags on the disk through viscosity and the adhesion of the surface layer of the fluid. As the fluid slows and adds energy to the disks, it spirals into the center exhaust. Since the rotor is a simple disk, it is more robust and easier to manufacture, compared to a traditional bladed turbine.\nTesla wrote: \nThis turbine is an efficient self-starting prime mover which may be operated as a steam or mixed fluid turbine at will, without changes in construction and is on this account, very convenient. Minor departures from the turbine, as may be dictated by the circumstances in each case, will suggest themselves but if it is carried out on these general lines, it will be found highly profitable to the owners of the steam plant while permitting the use of their old installation. However, the best economic results in the development of power from steam by the Tesla turbine will be obtained in plants especially adapted for the purpose.\nSmooth rotor disks were originally proposed, but these gave poor starting torque. Tesla subsequently discovered that smooth rotor disks with small washers bridging the disks in about 12 to 24 places around the perimeter of a 10\u2033 disk and a second ring of 6\u201312 washers at a sub-diameter made for a significant improvement in starting torque without compromising efficiency.\nEfficiency and calculations.\nIn Tesla's time, the efficiency of conventional turbines was low because turbines used a direct-drive system that severely limited the potential usable output speed of a turbine. At the time of introduction, ship turbines were massive, and included dozens, or even hundreds, of stages of turbines, yet produced extremely low efficiency due to their low speed. For example, the turbine on both the \"Olympic\" and \"Titanic\" weighed over 400 tons, ran at only 165 rpm, and used steam at a pressure of only 6 psi. This limited it to harvesting waste steam from the main power plants, a pair of reciprocating steam engines. The Tesla turbine could run on higher-temperature gases than bladed turbines of the time, which contributed to its greater efficiency. Eventually, axial turbines were given gearing to allow them to operate at higher speeds, but the efficiency of axial turbines remained very low in comparison to the Tesla turbine.\nContinued improvements resulted in dramatically more efficient and powerful axial turbines, and a second stage of reduction gears was introduced in most cutting-edge U.S. naval ships of the 1930s. The improvement in steam technology gave the U.S. Navy aircraft carriers a clear advantage in speed over both Allied and enemy aircraft carriers, and so the proven axial steam turbines became the preferred form of propulsion until the 1973 oil crisis, which drove the majority of new civilian vessels to turn to diesel engines. Axial steam turbines still had not exceeded 50% efficiency by that time, and so civilian ships chose to use diesel engines due to their superior efficiency. By this time, the comparably-efficient Tesla turbine was over 60 years old.\nTesla's design attempted to sidestep the key drawbacks of the bladed axial turbines, and even the lowest estimates for efficiency still dramatically outperformed the efficiency of axial steam turbines of the day. However, in testing against more modern engines, the Tesla turbine had expansion efficiencies far below contemporary steam turbines and far below contemporary reciprocating steam engines. It also suffers from other problems, such as shear losses and flow restrictions, but this is partially offset by the relatively massive reduction in weight and volume. Some of the Tesla turbine's advantages lie in relatively-low-flow-rate applications or when small sizes are needed. The disks need to be as thin as possible at the edges in order to not introduce turbulence as the fluid leaves the disks. This translates to needing to increase the number of disks as the flow rate increases. Maximum efficiency comes in this system when the inter-disk spacing approximates the thickness of the boundary layer, and since boundary layer thickness is dependent on viscosity and pressure, the claim that a single design can be used efficiently for a variety of fuels and fluids is incorrect. A Tesla turbine differs from a conventional turbine only in the mechanism used for transferring energy to the shaft. Various analyses demonstrate that the flow rate between the disks must be kept relatively low to maintain efficiency. Reportedly, the efficiency of the Tesla turbine decreases with increased load. Under light load, the spiral taken by the fluid moving from the intake to the exhaust is tight, undergoing many rotations. Under load, the number of rotations drops, and the spiral becomes progressively shorter. This will increase the shear losses and also reduce the efficiency because the gas is in contact with the discs for less distance.\nThe turbine efficiency (defined as the ratio of the ideal change in enthalpy to the real enthalpy for the same change in pressure) of the gas Tesla turbine is estimated to be above 60%. The turbine efficiency is different from the cycle efficiency of the engine using the turbine. Axial turbines that operate today in steam plants or jet engines have efficiencies of over 90%. This is different from the cycle efficiencies of the plant or engine, which are between approximately 25% and 42%, and are limited by any irreversibility to be below the Carnot cycle efficiency. Tesla claimed that a steam version of his device would achieve around 95% efficiency. The thermodynamic efficiency is a measure of how well it performs compared to an isentropic case. It is the ratio of the ideal to the actual work input/output.\nIn the 1950s, Warren Rice attempted to recreate Tesla's experiments, but he did not perform these early tests on a pump built strictly in line with Tesla's patented design (it, among other things, was not a Tesla multiple staged turbine nor did it possess Tesla's nozzle). Rice's experimental single-stage system's working fluid was air. Rice's test turbines, as published in early reports, produced an overall measured efficiency of 36\u201341% for a \"single stage\". Higher efficiency would be expected if designed as originally proposed by Tesla.\nIn his final work with the Tesla turbine published just before his retirement, Rice conducted a bulk-parameter analysis of model laminar flow in multiple disk turbines. A very high claim for rotor efficiency (as opposed to overall device efficiency) for this design was published in 1991 titled \"Tesla Turbomachinery\". This paper states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;With proper use of the analytical results, the rotor efficiency using laminar flow can be very high, even above 95%. However, to attain high rotor efficiency, the flowrate number must be made small, which means high rotor efficiency is achieved at the expense of using a large number of disks and hence a physically larger rotor. For each value of the flow rate number, there is an optimum value of the Reynolds number for maximum efficiency. With common fluids, the required disk spacing is dismally small causing [rotors using] laminar flow to tend to be large and heavy for a prescribed throughflow rate.\nExtensive investigations have been made of Tesla-type liquid pumps using laminar-flow rotors. It was found that overall pump efficiency was low even when rotor efficiency was high because of the losses occurring at the rotor entrance and exit earlier mentioned.\nModern multiple-stage bladed turbines typically reach 60\u201370% efficiency, while large steam turbines often show turbine efficiency of over 90% in practice. Volute rotor-matched Tesla-type machines of reasonable size with common fluids (steam, gas, and water) would also be expected to show efficiencies in the vicinity of 60\u201370% and possibly higher.\nApplications.\nTesla's patents state that the device was intended for the use of fluids as motive agents, as distinguished from the propulsion or compression of fluids (though it can also be used for those purposes). As of 2016, the Tesla turbine has not seen widespread commercial use. The Tesla pump, however, has been commercially available since 1982 and is used to pump fluids that are abrasive, viscous, shear-sensitive, loaded with solids, or are otherwise difficult to handle with other pumps. Tesla himself did not procure a large contract for production. The main disadvantage was poor knowledge of material characteristics and behaviors at high temperatures. The best metallurgy of the day could not prevent the turbine disks from moving and warping unacceptably during operation.\nMany amateur experiments have been conducted using Tesla turbines with compressed air or steam as the power source. Disc warping has been ameliorated by using new materials such as carbon fiber.\nOne proposed application for the device is a waste pump, in factories and mills where normal vane-type turbine pumps typically become fouled.\nApplications of the Tesla turbine as a multiple-disk centrifugal blood pump have yielded promising results due to the low peak shear force. Biomedical engineering research on such applications has continued into the 21st century.\nThe device functions as a pump if a similar set of disks and a housing with an involute shape (versus circular for the turbine) are used. In this configuration, a motor is attached to the shaft. The fluid enters near the center, is energized by the disks, and exits at the periphery. The Tesla turbine does not use friction in the conventional sense, rather using adhesion (the Coand\u0103 effect) and viscosity instead. It uses the boundary-layer effect on the disc blades.\nHistory.\nThe turbine was patented by Nikola Tesla on October 21, 1913, which was his 100th patent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30870", "revid": "46932537", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30870", "title": "Transport in Afghanistan", "text": " \nTransport in Afghanistan is done mostly by road, rail, and air. Much of the nation's road network was built in the mid-20th century but left to ruin during the last two decades of that century due to war and political turmoil. Officials of the current Islamic Emirate have continued to improve the national highways, roads, and bridges. In 2008, there were about 700,000 vehicles registered in Kabul.\nLandlocked Afghanistan has no seaports, but the Amu River, which forms part of the nation's border with Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, does have substantial traffic. Rebuilding and expanding its airports, roads, rail network, and land ports has led to rapid economic growth in recent years. There are 68 airports in Afghanistan as of 2025.\nRoad.\nMost major highways were paved around the mid-20th century with technical assistance from the United States and the Soviet Union. Engineers from the Soviet Union built a highway and tunnel through the Salang pass in the 1960s, connecting northern and eastern Afghanistan. A highway connecting the principal cities of Herat, Mazar-i-Sharif, Lashkar Gah, Kandahar, Ghazni, Kabul and Jalalabad, with links to highways in neighboring Pakistan originally formed the primary road system of Afghanistan.\nAs of 2017, Afghanistan had of paved roads and of unpaved roads, for an approximate total road system of . Traffic in Afghanistan is right hand. In 2008, about 731,607 vehicles were registered in Kabul. At least 1,314 traffic collisions were reported in December 2022. Many vehicles in certain parts of the country are driven without registration plates. The Afghan government passed a law banning the import of cars older than 10 years. Toyota Corolla has been the most widely used vehicle in the country since the mid-1990s. Afghanistan recently began manufacturing its own microcars for domestic consumers. Long distant road journeys are made in private cars, vans, trucks and buses. Many of the national roads are currently being repaired and modernized.\nHighways.\nAfghanistan's highway system is going through a reconstruction phase, with major terminals and rest areas being added. Most of the regional roads are also being repaired and modernized.\nThe following is a partial list of the major highways in Afghanistan:\nOfficial border crossing points.\nThere are over a dozen official border crossing points all around Afghanistan. They include Abu Nasar Port in Farah Province, Angur Ada in Paktika Province, Aqina in Faryab Province, Dand-aw-Patan in Paktia Province, Ghulam Khan in Khost Province, Hairatan in Balkh Province, Islam Qala in Herat Province, Ishkashim in Badakhshan Province, Sher Khan Bandar in Kunduz Province, Spin Boldak in Kandahar Province, Torghundi in Herat Province, Torkham in Nangarhar Province, and Zaranj in Nimruz Province. The Afghanistan-China border crossing at Wakhjir Pass in the Wakhan District is under development since 2021.\nThe Afghanistan-Tajikistan bridge at Sher Khan Bandar-Panji Poyon connects by road Afghanistan and Tajikistan. It was built by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) in 2007. The two countries are also connected by the smaller Tajik\u2013Afghan bridge at Tem-Demogan. The Afghanistan\u2013Uzbekistan Friendship Bridge connects Afghanistan by road with Uzbekistan. The Delaram-Zaranj Highway was constructed with Indian assistance and was inaugurated in January 2009.\nTaxis, auto rickshaws and urban public transport.\nDue to the lack of a modern public urban transport systems, private buses, vans, taxis and auto rickshaws are popular in the major cities, the latter especially in Jalalabad, Herat, Kandahar, and Kunduz. In recent years electric rickshaws and scooters have been introduced in Afghanistan. Kabul demanded a much needed public transport system in the 21st century with a rapid increase in traffic and population, but many projects were put on hold. The Kabul Municipality recently launched a bus system accompanied by bus stops, the city's first in decades. Many urban dwellers ride motorcycles, scooters and bicycles. Some people living in rural areas still use donkeys, mules and other animals for transportation purposes, especially in the mountainous terrain.\nRail.\nAfghanistan has a total of four railway connections with three neighboring countries.\nAfghanistan-Iran rail connections.\nA rail line from Khaf in Iran to the city of Herat in Afghanistan has been under construction since 2006. The Iranian line is a standard gauge. In December 2020 the line had reached the Ghoryan District in Herat Province of Afghanistan. Shipment from China can now make its way to as far as Rozanak rail station, which is located about west of Herat. This railway line is being extended from the Rozanak station in Ghoryan District to the Khwaja Abdullah Ansari International Airport in the Guzara District. From there it will be extended all the way to Kandahar Province in the southeast and Balkh Province in the west. \nAfghanistan-Turkmenistan rail connections.\nA 10-kilometer-long broad gauge line extends from Serhetabat in Turkmenistan to the town of Torghundi in Afghanistan, which is about to the north of Herat. An upgrade of this Soviet-built line, to renovate and connect the line from Torghundi to Herat, began in 2017.\nA second rail connection between the two countries extends from Aqina dry port in Faryab Province of Afghanistan, via Imamnazar to Atamyrat (a.k.a. Kerki), where it connects with the Turkmen rail network. The line extends from Aqina south to Andkhoy in Afghanistan, which is approximately long. It will be extended from Andkhoy in the future to other parts of Afghanistan.\nAfghanistan-Uzbekistan rail connections.\nThere is a 75-kilometer-long rail line between Uzbekistan and the northern Afghan city of Mazar-i-Sharif, all of which is built to broad gauge. The line begins from Termez and crosses the Amu River on the Afghanistan\u2013Uzbekistan Friendship Bridge, finally reaching a site next to the Mawlana Jalaluddin Mohammad Balkhi International Airport. Agreements have been signed for extending the line to Kabul and then to Peshawar.\nOther borders.\nThere are currently no rail links with neighboring China, Pakistan, and Tajikistan.\nAir.\nCivil aviation.\nAir transport in Afghanistan is provided by the state-owned flag carrier Ariana Afghan Airlines (AAA), as well as the privately owned Kam Air. Domestic flights are available at a number of airports, with international flights taking place to and from Kabul International Airport. Ariana Afghan Airlines operates international flights from Kabul to Delhi, Dubai, Islamabad, Riyadh, and Urumqi, while Kam Air operates international flights to Almaty, Ankara, Delhi, Dushanbe, Islamabad, Istanbul, Jeddah, Kuwait, Sharjah, and Tashkent.\nFollowing the 2021 fall of Kabul and the reestablishment of the Islamic Emirate, most international flights were suspended. Domestic flights officially resumed in January 2022. Prior to the change in government, airlines such as Air India, Emirates, Gulf Air, Iran Aseman Airlines, Pakistan International Airlines and Turkish Airlines operated international flights from airports throughout the country. A number of foreign airlines are currently operating in Afghanistan. They include Air Arabia, Etihad Airways, Flydubai, Iran Air, Iran Airtour, Kish Air, Mahan Air, Meraj Airlines, and Turkish Airlines.\nMajor airports in Afghanistan include:\nInternational\nDomestic\nMilitary aviation.\nMilitary aviation in Afghanistan had its origins in the 1920s with assistance provided by the Soviet Union. Changing political influence in the country resulted in aircraft orders and military assistant changing between the world superpowers after the Second World War, principally between NATO and the Soviet Union. The current aerial warfare service of Afghanistan is the Afghan Air Force.\nBagram Air Base was originally constructed during the 1950s. It then saw significant expansion during Soviet and later NATO military operations in the region. Its facilities are capable of landing large aircraft such as Boeing 747, Lockheed C-5 Galaxy and Antonov An-124. As a legacy of Soviet and NATO military operations, a large number of military airfields and heliports can be found throughout the country. However, not all of these are in use, and in varying states of repair.\nWater.\nThe chief inland waterway of land-locked Afghanistan is the Amu River, which forms part of Afghanistan's northern boundary. The river handles barge traffic up to about 500 metric tons. The main river ports are located at Hairatan in Balkh Province and Sher Khan Bandar in Kunduz Province.\nPipelines.\nThere are petroleum pipelines from Bagram into Uzbekistan and Shindand into Turkmenistan. These pipelines have been in disrepair and disuse for years. There are of natural gas pipelines. The Turkmenistan\u2013Afghanistan\u2013Pakistan\u2013India Pipeline (TAPI) for delivering natural gas from Turkmenistan to India (via Afghanistan and Pakistan) is still under development. Only Turkmenistan has completed its section of the TAPI infrastructure as of 2025. The development of TAPI is projected to foster greater economic cooperation and mutual resource utilization between the 4 countries, giving Turkmenistan alternative routes of natural gas exports and reducing the dependence of South Asian countries on conventional exporters like Russia, Saudi Arabia, Iran and Brunei.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30872", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30872", "title": "The Cramps", "text": "American rock band (1976\u20132009)\nThe Cramps were an American rock band formed in 1976 and active until 2009. Their lineup rotated frequently during their existence, with the husband-and-wife duo of singer Lux Interior and guitarist Poison Ivy the only ever-present members. The band is credited as progenitors of the psychobilly subgenre, fusing elements of punk rock with rockabilly. The addition of guitarist Bryan Gregory and drummer Pam Balam resulted in the first complete lineup in April 1976. They released their debut album \"Songs the Lord Taught Us\" in 1980. The band split after the death of lead singer Interior in 2009.\nHistory.\n1970s.\nLux Interior (born Erick Lee Purkhiser) and Poison Ivy (born Kristy Marlana Wallace) met in Sacramento, California, in 1972. In light of their common artistic interests and shared devotion to record collecting, they decided to form the Cramps. Lux took his stage name from a car ad, and Ivy claimed to have received hers in a dream (she was first Poison Ivy Rorschach, taking her last name from that of the inventor of the Rorschach test). In 1973, they moved to Akron, Ohio, and then to New York in 1975, soon entering into CBGB's early punk scene with other emerging acts like Suicide, the Ramones, Patti Smith, Television, Blondie, Talking Heads, Mink DeVille, and fellow Ohio transplants Dead Boys. The lineup in 1976 was Poison Ivy Rorschach, Lux Interior, Bryan Gregory (guitar), and his sister Pam \"Balam\" (drums).\nIn a short period of time, the Cramps changed drummers twice; Miriam Linna (later of Nervus Rex, the Zantees, and the A-Bones and co-owner of Norton Records) replaced Pam Balam, and Nick Knox (formerly with the Electric Eels) replaced Linna in September 1977. In the late 1970s, the Cramps briefly shared a rehearsal space with the Fleshtones, and performed regularly in New York at clubs such as CBGB and Max's Kansas City, releasing two independent singles produced by Alex Chilton at Ardent Studios in Memphis in 1977 before being signed by Miles Copeland III to the young I.R.S. Records label. Their first tour of Great Britain was as supporting act to the Police on that band's first UK tour promoting \"Outlandos d'Amour\".\nIn June 1978, they gave a landmark free concert for patients at the California State Mental Hospital in Napa, recorded on a Sony Portapak video camera by the San Francisco collective Target Video and later released as \"Live at Napa State Mental Hospital\". Once back to the east coast, they played the revamped 1940s swing club \"The Meadowbrook\" in New Jersey, which had a huge stage and dance floor. Next they recorded two singles in New York City, which were later re-released on their 1979 \"Gravest Hits\" EP, before Chilton brought them back that year to Memphis to record their first full-length album, \"Songs the Lord Taught Us\", at Phillips Recording, operated by former Sun Records label owner Sam Phillips.\n1980s.\nThe Cramps relocated to Los Angeles in 1980 and hired guitarist Kid Congo Powers of the Gun Club. While recording their second LP, \"Psychedelic Jungle\", the band and Miles Copeland began to dispute royalties and creative rights. The ensuing court case prevented them from releasing anything until 1983, when they recorded \"Smell of Female\" live at New York's Peppermint Lounge; Kid Congo Powers subsequently departed. Mike Metoff of the Pagans (cousin of Nick Knox) was the final second guitarist \u2013 albeit only live \u2013 of the Cramps' pre-bass era. He accompanied them on an extensive European tour in 1984 (that had been canceled twice because they could not find a suitable guitarist) which included four sold out nights at the Hammersmith Palais. They also recorded performances of \"Thee Most Exalted Potentate of Love\" and \"You Got Good Taste\" which were broadcast on \"A Midsummer Night's Tube\" (1984). \"Smell of Female\" peaked at No. 74 in the UK Albums Chart.\nThe band appears in the 1982 film \"Urgh! A Music War\".\nIn 1985 the Cramps recorded a one-off track for the horror movie \"The Return of the Living Dead\" called \"Surfin' Dead\", on which Ivy played bass as well as guitar. With the release of 1986's \"A Date With Elvis\", the Cramps permanently added a bass guitar to the mix, but had trouble finding a suitable player, so Ivy temporarily filled in as the band's bassist. Jennifer \"Fur\" Dixon joined them on the world tour to promote the album. Their popularity in the UK was at its peak as evidenced by the six nights at Hammersmith in London, three at the Odeon (as well as many other sell out dates throughout the UK) and then three at the Palais when they returned from the continent. Each night of the tour opened with the band coming on one at a time each: Knox, Fur, Ivy and then Lux before launching into their take on Elvis Presley's \"Heartbreak Hotel\". The album featured what was to become a predominating theme of their work from here on: a move away from the B-movie horror focus to an increased emphasis on sexual double entendre. The album met with differing fates on either side of the Atlantic: in Europe, it sold over 250,000 copies, while in the U.S. the band had difficulty finding a record company prepared to release it until 1990. It also included their first UK Singles Chart hit: \"Can Your Pussy Do the Dog?\"\nIt was not until 1986 that the Cramps found a suitable permanent bass player: Candy del Mar (of Satan's Cheerleaders), who made her recorded debut on the raw live album \"RockinnReelininAucklandNewZealandxxx\". This was followed by the studio album \"Stay Sick!\" in 1990, which spent one week at No. 62 in the UK Albums Chart in February of that year.\n1990s.\nCandy del Mar and Knox left the band in 1991. The Cramps hit the Top 40 in the UK for the first and only time with \"Bikini Girls with Machine Guns\"; Ivy posed as such both on the cover of the single and in the promotional video for the song. The Cramps went on to record more albums and singles through the 1990s and 2000s, for various labels. When the band signed to The Medicine Label, a Warner Brothers imprint, in 1994 \u2013 the label made the announcement via a limited edition (500 copies) 12\" live album of the Cramps' first two Max's Kansas City shows, given away to all ticket holders as they exited a secret CBGB show in early January of that year.\nIn 1994, the Cramps made their national US television debut on \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\" performing \"Ultra Twist\".\nIn 1995 the Cramps appeared on the TV-series \"Beverly Hills, 90210\" in the Halloween episode \"Gypsies, Cramps and Fleas\". They played two songs in the episode: \"Mean Machine\" and \"Strange Love\". Lux Interior started the song by saying \"Hey boys and ghouls, are you ready to raise the dead?\".\nIn honor of the success of the Cramps, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame has on display a shattered bass drum head that Lux's head went through during a live show.\n2000s.\nOn January 10, 2001, Bryan Gregory died at Anaheim Memorial Medical Center of complications following a heart attack. He was 49.\nIn 2002, the Cramps released their final album, \"Fiends of Dope Island\", on their own label, Vengeance Records. That same year, Lux Interior did a voiceover for the lead singer character of the band The Bird Brains on the animated TV show SpongeBob SquarePants singing 'Underwater Sun.' The song was written and composed by Stephen Hillenburg and Peter Strauss.\nThe Cramps played their final shows in Europe in the summer of 2006 and their last live show was on November 4, 2006, at the Marquee Theater in Tempe, Arizona.\nOn February 4, 2009, Lux Interior died at the Glendale Memorial Hospital after suffering an aortic dissection which, contrary to initial reports about a pre-existing condition, was \"sudden, shocking and unexpected\".\nStyle and influences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Cramps weren't thinking of this weird subgenre when we coined the term \"psychobilly\" in 1976 to describe what we were doing. To us all the '50s rockabillies were psycho to begin with; it just came with the turf as a given, like a crazed, sped-up hillbilly boogie version of country.\nWe hadn't meant playing everything superloud at superheavy hardcore punk tempos with a whole style and look, which is what \"psychobilly\" came to mean later in the '80s. We also used the term \"rockabilly voodoo\" on our early flyers. \n\u2014Poison Ivy Rorschach\nThe Cramps' music is played at varying tempos, with a minimal drumkit. An integral part of the early Cramps sound was dual guitars, without a bassist. The focus of their songs' lyrical content and their image was camp humor, sexual double-entendre, and retro horror/sci-fi b-movie iconography. Their sound was heavily influenced by early rockabilly, such as Jerry Lott AKA The Phantom, whose 1958 single 'Love Me' they covered, rhythm and blues, and rock and roll like Link Wray and Hasil Adkins, 1960s surf music acts such as the Ventures and Dick Dale, 1960s garage rock artists like the Standells, the Trashmen, the Green Fuz and the Sonics, as well as the post-glam/early punk scene from which they emerged, as well as citing Ricky Nelson as being an influence during numerous interviews. They also were influenced by the Ramones and Screamin' Jay Hawkins. Poison Ivy stated, \"The failure of outsiders to acknowledge the influence of blues and R&amp;B on The Cramps is an omission bordering on racism. Rockabilly is rooted in the blues and we consider ourselves a blues band.\"\nThe band used the phrases gothabilly, psychobilly and \"rockabilly voodoo\" to market their music. The term \"psychobilly\" was first used in the lyrics to the country song \"One Piece at a Time\", written by Wayne Kemp for Johnny Cash, which was a Top 10 hit in the United States in 1976. The lyrics describe the construction of a \"psychobilly Cadillac using stolen auto parts.\" The Cramps have since rejected the idea of being a part of a psychobilly subculture, noting that \"We weren't even describing the music when we put 'psychobilly' on our old fliers; we were just using carny terms to drum up business. It wasn't meant as a style of music.\" Nevertheless, The Cramps, along with artists such as Screamin' Jay Hawkins, are considered important precursors to psychobilly. Critics and journalists classified the Cramps' sound as psychobilly, gothabilly, garage punk, rockabilly, horror punk, garage rock, punk rock and surf.\nThe Cramps have been cited as an influence by musicians including 45 Grave, the Nomads, Zombina and the Skeletones, Inca Babies, Creeper, the Black Keys, the White Stripes, the Sisters of Mercy, My Bloody Valentine, Faith No More and Southern Culture on the Skids.\nMembers.\nFinal lineup\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30873", "revid": "698799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30873", "title": "The Stems", "text": "Australian garage punk band from Perth, Western Australia\nThe Stems are a garage punk band founded by Dom Mariani in Perth, Western Australia in late 1983. The group is heavily influenced by 1960s garage rock and 1970s power pop. They broke up in August 1987 and reformed in 2003, releasing a new album in 2007. Although the group disbanded in October 2009, as of 2013 The Stems are an ongoing live concern.\nHistory.\n1983: Formation.\nThe Stems formed in late 1983 when vocalist/guitarist Dom Mariani, formerly in The Go-Starts, was introduced to Richard Lane. Lane had seen Mariani in the final few gigs of The Go-Starts and had asked him for guitar lessons which developed into the decision was made to form The Stems. A friend, Gary Chambers, was recruited to join on drums, and bass guitarist John Shuttleworth was poached from the Pink Armadillos. In March 1984, the band had their debut gig at the Old Civic Theatre in Perth, which was in support of The Saints and The Triffids. Their sound was influenced by 1960s garage acts ranging from the Electric Prunes, The Standells, and The Chocolate Watch Band to The Easybeats. A local Saturday night residency at the Wizbah venue saw throwback covers with a growing list of original songs which developed a cult following for the band. Shuttleworth decided to leave, so a final gig for the band was arranged which drew a large crowd. The success of this gig and freshly written songs caused the band to recruit a new bass player, school friend Julian Matthews.\nThe Stems played at local venues such as The Wizbah, The Old Melbourne and The Shenton Park Hotel on a regular basis, the group built up a substantial following in Perth, at a time otherwise dominated by cover bands.\n1984\u20131985: \"Love Will Grow \u2013 Rosebud Volume 1\".\nLate in 1984, they recorded three songs at Shelter Studios in Perth: \"She's a Monster\", \"Make You Mine\" and \"Tears Me in Two.\" The original plan was for this to be a self-released single with one track as the A-side and the other two as B-sides. A friend of the band who wanted to help manage them told them he would take the tapes to the east coast and shop them around to the independent labels there. The Stems chose Citadel Records because of the high quality of their releases at the time. In mid-1985, the band went to Sydney to meet up with their new label and promote their first single using two of the songs they had recorded, \"Make You Mine\"/\"She's A Monster.\" The Stems' first Sydney appearance was a sold-out show with the Painters and Dockers at the Trade Union Club. The tour was perfectly timed with the Sydney inner city scene rediscovering 1960s music and fashion. The group met with an enthusiastic response, culminating in a full house at the legendary Trade Union Club for their final Sydney show. The single reached the top of the independent charts, and also sold 500 copies in England. It was the second highest selling independent single for Australia in 1985, behind Hoodoo Gurus' \"Like Wow \u2013 Wipeout!.\" During this period, they rerecorded \"Tears Me in Two\" and the \"Love Will Grow \u2013 Rosebud Volume 1\" EP, both produced by Rob Younger of the Radio Birdman. The EP reached No.\u00a072 in the national charts, and the band played triumphant shows on their return to Perth.\n1986\u20131987: \"At First Sight, Violets Are Blue\" and break-up.\nThe Stems, with new drummer David Shaw, spent most of 1986 touring to promote their EP. This included national tours supporting Flamin' Groovies and the Hoodoo Gurus. They also sought a major label deal. Mushroom Records signed the band, and The Stems booked into Platinum Studios with producer Alan Thorne at the end of 1986. The recording process didn't go smoothly, and stretched from the planned one month to three, with a new producer brought in to complete the record. \"At First Sight, Violets Are Blue\" was released in 1987, their first recording for Mushroom's White Label subsidiary. The album debuted at No. 1 on the Australian alternative charts and 34 on the mainstream charts. It also received national and international critical acclaim and would be one of the best selling Australian albums of that year, despite the lack of commercial airplay in the corporate FM dominated 1980s. Leaning toward a stronger pop sensibility, the album highlighted the talents of Dom Mariani and Richard Lane as skilled tunesmiths of the guitar pop genre. The album was nominated in the top 100 Australian albums of all time by \"Rolling Stone\" magazine. In 1987, the band embarked on another national tour and made appearances on national television, including playing the final episode of \"Countdown\". In the same year, the lead single \"At First Sight\" was also included on the \"Young Einstein\" soundtrack. By October 1987, on the eve of a six-week European tour, The Stems disbanded. Mariani's explanation was:\n\"I was not very happy with the way things were going towards the end of The Stems. We got quite big, and there are the usual problems that happen with that. People tend to drift apart, there are internal conflicts, egos going wild, and bad management was probably the major factor that contributed to The Stems' breakup.\"\nMatthews offered a similar explanation: \n\"In the end it was total burnout. By the time the band broke up, all of us had had enough. Any of us could have quit at any time. There was also this pull to do other stuff away from the band.\"\nThe Stems performed their last live show in their original incarnation on 31 August 1987, but the breakup was not officially announced until November that year. By that time The Stems had released a total of five singles, one EP, and one studio album.\n2003\u20132009: Reformation, \"Heads Up\" and second break-up.\nIn March 2003, The Stems reunited for a national tour of the local and international music scene. Following the re-release of their album \"At First Sight, Violets Are Blue\" and the release of the \"\" in 2003, The Stems found themselves playing to packed houses across the country, touring Europe, playing the prestigious \"Little Stevens Underground Garage Festival\" in August 2005, and then at the \"Come Together Festival\" at Sydney's Luna Park with the cream of Australia's newest bands in September 2005.\n2006 saw the release of another anthology titled \"Terminal Cool\" in the United States by the garage rock and punk label Get Hip Records. The new anthology includes three previously unreleased tracks including the track, \"Think Cool\" from their early live sets. Two of the band's tracks were included in the recent Rhino Nuggets Box set \"Children of Nuggets\" which compiles and documents the Paisley Underground and garage rock of the 1980s.\nIn 2007 The Stems undertook a national tour alongside Hoodoo Gurus and Radio Birdman and released their second album, \"Heads Up\" on Shock Records. The album contained ten original garage rock tracks. It was recorded in Perth early in 2007 at the analogue and vintage recording compound Kingdom Studios and later mixed at Ultrasuede in Cincinnati by producer John Curley (White Stripes, Afghan Wigs, Greenhornes and Ronnie Spector). The Stems then toured nationally to promote the new album and played their first shows outside Australia, including European dates and a U.S. visit that included the South by Southwest festival in Austin, Texas.\nIn July 2009 The Stems announced that they would be disbanding later that year, with an eight-date national farewell tour in October.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is our first farewell. We did break up once but we weren't in good enough shape to say goodbye. This time we'll end it off on a good note. The band's going really well but you just know when it's time to go.\u2014\u200a\nRichard Lane opened the music school Penny Lane's Musical Workshop in Fremantle in 2009. He played in the Chevelles, the Rosebuds, and the On and Ons. He also launched the independent label Idaho Records. He did not participate in later Stems activities and died in 2020. The following year the City of Fremantle gave a previously unnamed laneway, where Lane had operated Penny Lane's for two years, the title Richard Lane.\n2013\u2013present: Second reformation.\nIn April 2013 The Stems performed at Dig It Up! festival shows in Sydney and Melbourne. The line-up was Mariani, Matthews, Shaw and new guitarist Ashley Naylor in place of Richard Lane. The same line-up played gigs on the east coast in March 2014, including supports for the reunited Sunnyboys in Brisbane and Sydney. Guitarist Davey Lane (The Pictures, no relation to Richard) was also in the band's line-up for some time. On 31 May 2014, The Stems was one the headline acts at Perth's annual 'State of the Art' festival at the Perth Cultural Centre.\nAwards.\nWest Australian Music Industry Awards.\nThe West Australian Music Industry Awards are annual awards celebrating achievements for Western Australian music. They commenced in 1985.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30875", "revid": "10759180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30875", "title": "Theocracy", "text": "Form of government with religious leaders\nTheocracy or ethiocracy is a form of autocracy or oligarchy in which one or more deities are recognized as supreme ruling authorities, giving divine guidance to human intermediaries, with executive, legislative, and/or judicial power, who manage the government's daily affairs.\nEtymology.\nThe word theocracy originates from the () meaning \"the rule of God\". This, in turn, derives from \u03b8\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2 (theos), meaning \"god\", and \u03ba\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03ad\u03c9 (\"krateo\"), meaning \"to rule\". Thus the meaning of the word in Greek was \"rule by god(s)\" or human incarnation(s) of god(s).\nThe term was initially coined by Flavius Josephus in the first century AD to describe the characteristic government of the Jews. Josephus argued that while mankind had developed many forms of rule, most could be subsumed under the following three types: monarchy, oligarchy, and democracy. However, according to Josephus, the government of the Jews was unique. Josephus offered the term \"theocracy\" to describe this polity in which a god was sovereign and the god's word was law.\nJosephus' definition was widely accepted until the Enlightenment era, when the term took on negative connotations and was barely salvaged by Hegel's commentary. The first recorded English use was in 1622, with the meaning \"sacerdotal government under divine inspiration\" (as in ancient Israel and Judah); the meaning \"priestly or religious body wielding political and civil power\" was first recorded in 1825.\nDefinition.\nThe term \"theocracy\" derives from the Koine Greek , \"rule of God\", a term used by Josephus for the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, reflecting the view that \"God himself is recognized as the head\" of the state. The common, generic use of the term, as defined above in terms of rule by a church or analogous religious leadership, may be more accurately described as an ecclesiocracy.\nIn an \"hierocracy\", a specific type of theocracy, the governing body is composed of a hierarchical structure of religious officials or clergy. \nIn an \"ecclesiocracy\", the religious leaders assume a leading role in the state, but do not claim that they are instruments of divine revelation.\nIn a \"church-state\", a state where religious and political power are intertwined, often with the church having significant influence over the government\nA related phenomenon is a secular government co-existing with a state religion or delegating some aspects of civil law to religious communities. For example, in Israel (which is sometimes referred to as a theocracy), marriage is governed by officially recognized religious bodies who each provide marriage services for their respected adherents, yet no form of civil marriage (free of religion) exists, nor marriage by non-recognized minority religions.\nAccording to Merriam-Webster's Dictionary, there are two meanings for the word \"theocracy\": (1) government of a state by immediate divine guidance or by officials who are regarded as divinely guided; and (2) a state governed by a theocracy.\nCurrent theocracies.\nChristian theocracies.\nHoly See.\nFollowing the Capture of Rome on 20 September 1870, the Papal States including Rome with the Vatican were annexed by the Kingdom of Italy. In 1929, through the Lateran Treaty signed with the Italian government, the new state of Vatican City was formally created and recognised as an independent state from Fascist Italy. The head of state of the Vatican is the pope, elected by the College of Cardinals, an assembly of high-ranking clergy. The pope is elected for life, and either dies in office, or in extremely rare situations may resign. Cardinals themselves are appointed by popes, who thereby choose the electors of their successors.\nVoting since 1970 has been limited to cardinals under 80 years of age. A Secretary for Relations with States, directly responsible for international relations, is appointed by the pope. The Vatican legal system is rooted in canon law. The Bishop of Rome, as Supreme Pontiff, \"has the fullness of legislative, executive and judicial powers.\" Although the laws of Vatican City come from the secular laws of Italy, under article 3 of the Law of the Sources of the Law, a provision is made for the application of the \"laws promulgated by the Kingdom of Italy\".\nMount Athos.\nMount Athos is a mountain peninsula in Greece which is an Eastern Orthodox autonomous area consisting of 20 monasteries under the direct jurisdiction of the Primate of Constantinople. There have been almost 1,800 years of a continuous Christian presence on Mount Athos, and it has a long history of monasteries, which dates back to at least 800 AD. The origin of self-rule at Mount Athos can be traced back to a royal edict issued by the Byzantine Emperor John Tzimisces in 972, and reaffirmed by Emperor Alexios I Komnenos in 1095. Greece wrestled control of the area from the Ottoman Empire during the First Balkan War in 1912. However, it was formally recognized as part of Greece only after a diplomatic dispute with the Russian Empire was no longer an obstacle, after the latter's collapse during World War I.\nMount Athos is specifically exempt from the free movement of people and goods required by Greece's membership of the European Union, and entrance is allowed only with express permission from the monks. The number of daily visitors to Mount Athos is restricted, with all visitors required to obtain an entrance permit. Only men are permitted to visit, and Eastern Orthodox Christians take precedence in the issuing of permits. Residents of Mount Athos must be men aged 18 and over who are members of the Eastern Orthodox Church and also either monks or workers.\nAthos is governed jointly by a community consisting of members of the 20 monasteries and a Civil Administrator, appointed by the Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The monastic community is led by the \"Protos\".\nIslamic theocracies.\nAn Islamic republic is the name given to several states that are officially ruled by Islamic laws, including the Islamic Republics of Iran, Pakistan, and Mauritania. Pakistan first adopted the title under the constitution of 1956. Mauritania adopted it on 28 November 1958. Iran adopted it after the 1979 Iranian Revolution that overthrew the Pahlavi dynasty.\nThe term \"Islamic republic\" has come to mean several different things, at times contradictory. To some Muslim religious leaders in the Middle East and Africa who advocate it, an Islamic republic is a state under a particular Islamic form of government. They see it as a compromise between a purely Islamic caliphate and secular nationalism and republicanism. In their conception of the Islamic republic, the penal code of the state is required to be compatible with some or all laws of Sharia, and the state does not necessarily have to be a monarchy, as many Middle Eastern states presently are.\nAfghanistan.\nAfghanistan was an Islamic theocracy when the Taliban first ruled it from 1996 to 2001, and again since their reinstatement of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan in 2021.\nSpreading from Kandahar, the Taliban eventually captured Kabul in 1996. By the end of 2000, the Taliban controlled 90% of the country, aside from the opposition (Northern Alliance) strongholds which were primarily found in the northeast corner of Badakhshan Province. Areas under the Taliban's direct control were mainly Afghanistan's major cities and highways. Tribal khans and warlords had \"de facto\" direct control over various small towns, villages, and rural areas. The Taliban sought to establish law and order and to impose a strict interpretation of Islamic \"Sharia law\", along with the religious edicts of Mullah Mohammed Omar, upon the entire country of Afghanistan.\nDuring the five-year history of the Islamic Emirate, the Taliban regime interpreted the \"Sharia\" in accordance with the Hanafi school of Islamic jurisprudence and the religious edicts of Mullah Omar. The Taliban forbade pork and alcohol, many types of consumer technology such as music, television, and film, as well as most forms of art such as paintings or photography, male and female participation in sport, including football and chess; recreational activities such as kite-flying and keeping pigeons or other pets were also forbidden, and the birds were killed according to the Taliban's ruling. Movie theaters were closed and repurposed as mosques. Celebration of the Western and Iranian New Year was forbidden. Taking photographs and displaying pictures or portraits was forbidden, as it was considered by the Taliban as a form of idolatry. Women were banned from working, girls were forbidden to attend schools or universities, were requested to observe purdah and to be accompanied outside their households by male relatives; those who violated these restrictions were punished. Men were forbidden to shave their beards and required to let them grow and keep them long according to the Taliban's liking, and to wear turbans outside their households. Communists were systematically executed. Prayer was made compulsory and those who did not respect the religious obligation after the \"azaan\" were arrested. Gambling was banned. Thieves were punished by amputating their hands or feet. In 2000, the Taliban leader Mullah Omar officially banned opium cultivation and drug trafficking in Afghanistan; the Taliban succeeded in nearly eradicating opium production (99%) by 2001. Under the Taliban governance of Afghanistan, both drug users and dealers were severely prosecuted.\nCabinet ministers and deputies were mullahs with a \"madrasah education.\" Several of them, such as the Minister of Health and Governor of the State bank, were primarily military commanders who were ready to leave their administrative posts to fight when needed. Military reverses that trapped them behind lines or led to their deaths increased the chaos in the national administration. At the national level, \"all senior Tajik, Uzbek and Hazara bureaucrats\" were replaced \"with Pashtuns, whether qualified or not.\" Consequently, the ministries \"by and large ceased to function.\"\nJournalist Ahmed Rashid described the Taliban government as \"a secret society run by Kandaharis ... mysterious, secretive, and dictatorial.\" They did not hold elections, as their spokesman explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The \"Sharia\" does not allow politics or political parties. That is why we give no salaries to officials or soldiers, just food, clothes, shoes, and weapons. We want to live a life like the Prophet lived 1400 years ago, and jihad is our right. We want to recreate the time of the Prophet, and we are only carrying out what the Afghan people have wanted for the past 14 years.\nThey modeled their decision-making process on the Pashtun tribal council (\"jirga\"), together with what they believed to be the early Islamic model. Discussion was followed by a building of a consensus by the \"believers\". Before capturing Kabul, there was talk of stepping aside once a government of \"good Muslims\" took power, and law and order were restored.\nAs the Taliban's power grew, decisions were made by Mullah Omar without consulting the \"jirga\" and without consulting other parts of the country. One such instance is the rejection of Loya Jirga decision about expulsion of Osama bin Laden. Mullah Omar visited the capital, Kabul, only twice while in power. Instead of an election, their leader's legitimacy came from an oath of allegiance (\"Bay'ah\"), in imitation of the Prophet and the first four Caliphs. On 4 April 1996, Mullah Omar had \"the Cloak of Muhammad\" taken from its shrine, Kirka Sharif, for the first time in 60 years. Wrapping himself in the relic, he appeared on the roof of a building in the center of Kandahar while hundreds of Pashtun mullahs below shouted \"Amir al-Mu'minin!\" (Commander of the Faithful), in a pledge of support. Taliban spokesman Mullah Wakil explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Decisions are based on the advice of the Amir-ul Momineen. For us, consultation is not necessary. We believe that this is in line with the \"Sharia\". We abide by the Amir's view even if he alone takes this view. There will not be a head of state. Instead, there will be an Amir al-Mu'minin. Mullah Omar will be the highest authority, and the government will not be able to implement any decision to which he does not agree. General elections are incompatible with \"Sharia\" and therefore we reject them.\nThe Taliban were reluctant to share power, and since their ranks were overwhelmingly Pashtun they ruled as overlords over the 60% of Afghans from other ethnic groups. In local government, such as the Kabul city council or Herat, Taliban loyalists, not locals, dominated, even when the Pashto-speaking Taliban could not communicate with roughly half of the population who spoke Dari or other non-Pashtun tongues. Critics complained that this \"lack of local representation in urban administration made the Taliban appear as an occupying force.\" After the collapse of the government following the fall of Kabul in August 2021, the Taliban returned to power and reestablished an authoritarian theocracy. They declared the restoration of the Second Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, with their governance rooted in their strict interpretation of Sharia law.\nIran.\nIran has been described as a \"theocratic republic\" by various sources, including the CIA World Factbook. Its constitution has been described as a \"hybrid\" of \"theocratic and democratic elements\" by Francis Fukuyama. Like other Islamic states, it maintains religious laws and has religious courts to interpret all aspects of law. According to Iran's constitution, \"all civil, penal, financial, economic, administrative, cultural, military, political, and other laws and regulations must be based on Islamic criteria.\"\nIn addition, Iran has a religious ruler and many religious officials in powerful governmental positions. The head of state, or \"Supreme Leader\", is a \"faqih\" (scholar of Islamic law) and has more power than the president of Iran. Iran's current Supreme Leader is Ali Khamenei, a role he has held since 1989. The Leader appoints the heads of many powerful governmental positions: the commanders of the armed forces, the director of the national radio and television network, the heads of powerful major religious and economic foundations, the chief justice of Iran, the attorney general (indirectly through the chief justice), special tribunals, and members of the supreme national security council who are dealing with defense and foreign affairs. He also co-appoints the 12 jurists of the Guardian Council.\nThe Leader is elected by the Assembly of Experts which is made up of mujtahids, who are Islamic scholars competent in interpreting \"Sharia\". The Guardian Council, has the power to reject bills passed by the Parliament. It can also approve or reject candidates who want to run for the Presidency, Parliament, and the Assembly of Experts. The council supervises elections, and can allow or ban investigations into elections. Six of the twelve council members are faqih and have the power to approve or reject all bills passed by the Parliament, whether the faqih believes that the bill is in accordance with Islamic laws and customs (\"Sharia\") or not. The other six members are lawyers appointed by the chief justice, who is a cleric and appointed by the Leader.\nSaudi Arabia.\nIn the Basic Law of Saudi Arabia, Saudi Arabia defines itself as a sovereign Arab Islamic state with Islam as its official religion. However, some critiques describe Saudi Arabia as an Islamic theocracy. Religious minorities do not have the right to practice their religion openly. Conversion from Islam to another religion is punishable by death as apostasy. Muhammad Al-Atawneh describes the current Saudi regime as a 'theo-monarchy, that draws power from long-standing religio-cultural norms.'\nCentral Tibetan Administration.\nThe Central Tibetan Administration, colloquially known as the Tibetan government in exile, is a Tibetan exile organization with a state-like internal structure. According to its charter, the position of head of state of the Central Tibetan Administration belongs \"ex officio\" to the Dalai Lama, a religious hierarch. In this respect, it continues the traditions of the former government of Tibet, which was ruled by the Dalai Lamas and their ministers, with a specific role reserved for a class of monk officials.\nOn 14 March 2011, at the 14th Dalai Lama's suggestion, the parliament of the Central Tibetan Administration began considering a proposal to remove the Dalai Lama's role as head of state in favor of an elected leader.\nThe first directly elected Kal\u00f6n Tripa was Samdhong Rinpoche, who was elected on 20 August 2001.\nBefore 2011, the Kal\u00f6n Tripa position was subordinate to the 14th Dalai Lama who presided over the government in exile from its founding. In August of that year, Lobsang Sangay received 55 percent of 49,189 votes, defeating his nearest rival Tethong Tenzin Namgyal by 8,646 votes, becoming the second popularly elected Kal\u00f6n Tripa. The Dalai Lama announced that his political authority would be transferred to Sangay.\nChange to Sikyong.\nOn 20 September 2012, the 15th Tibetan Parliament-in-Exile unanimously voted to change the title of Kal\u00f6n Tripa to \"Sikyong\" in Article 19 of the Charter of the Tibetans in exile and relevant articles. The Dalai Lama had previously referred to the Kal\u00f6n Tripa as Sikyong, and this usage was cited as the primary justification for the name change. According to \"Tibetan Review\", \"Sikyong\" translates to \"political leader\", as distinct from \"spiritual leader\". Foreign affairs Kal\u00f6n Dicki Chhoyang stated that the term \"Sikyong\" has had a precedent dating back to the 7th Dalai Lama, and that the name change \"ensures historical continuity and legitimacy of the traditional leadership from the Fifth Dalai Lama\". The online Dharma Dictionary translates sikyong (\"srid skyong\") as \"secular ruler; regime, regent\". The title \"sikyong\" had previously been used by regents who ruled Tibet during the Dalai Lama's minority.\nStates with official state religions.\nHaving a state religion is not sufficient to mean that a state is a theocracy in the narrow sense of the term. Many countries have a state religion without the government directly deriving its powers from a divine authority or a religious authority which is directly exercising governmental powers. Since few theocracies exist in the modern world, the word \"theocracy\" is now used as a descriptive term for a government which enforces a state religion.\nHistoric societies with theocratic aspects.\nSumer.\nSumerian cities were probably theocratic and were most likely headed by a priest-king (\"ensi\"), assisted by a council of elders including both men and women.\nAncient Egypt.\nAncient Egyptian society regarded its pharaohs as divine and associated them with Horus, and after death, with Osiris. While not considered equal to other members of the Egyptian pantheon, the pharaoh had the responsibility of mediating between the gods and the people.\nJapan.\nThe Japanese people have historically venerated their emperor as the descendant of the Shinto sun-goddess Amaterasu. Through this line of descent, the emperor was seen as a living god who was the supreme leader of the Japanese people. This status only changed with the Occupation of Japan following the end of the Second World War in 1945: on 1 January 1946 Emperor Hirohito, at the request of Douglas MacArthur, declared that he was not a living god in order for Japan to reorganize into a democratic nation.\nAncient Israel.\nIn biblical times, Early Israel was a kritarchy, ruled by Judges before the institution of a monarchy under Saul. The Israelites regarded the Judges as representatives of God to dispense His judgement, and were often themselves prophets.\nAncient Rome.\nFrom c.\u200927 BCE the Imperial cult of ancient Rome identified Roman emperors and some members of their families with the divinely sanctioned authority (\"auctoritas\") of the Roman State. The official offer of \"cultus\" to a living emperor acknowledged his office and rule as divinely approved and constitutional: his Principate should therefore demonstrate pious respect for traditional republican deities and mores.\nTibet.\nUnified religious rule in Buddhist Tibet began in 1642, when the Fifth Dalai Lama allied with the military power of the Mongol Gushri Khan to consolidate political power and to center control around his office as head of the Gelug school. This form of government is known as the dual system of government. Prior to 1642, particular monasteries and monks had held considerable power throughout Tibet but had not achieved anything approaching complete control, and their power continued in a diffuse, feudal system after the ascension of the Fifth Dalai Lama. Power in Tibet was held by a number of traditional \u00e9lites, including members of the nobility, the heads of the major Buddhist sects (including their various tulkus), and various large and influential monastic communities.\nMongolia.\nThe Bogd Khanate period of Mongolia (1911\u201319) featured a Buddhist theocratic khanate.\nChina.\nSimilar to the Roman Emperor, the Chinese sovereign was historically held to be the Son of Heaven. However, from the first historical Emperor on, this was largely ceremonial and tradition quickly established it as a posthumous dignity, like the Roman institution. The situation before Qin Shi Huang Di (r.\u2009221\u00a0\u2013\u00a0210 BCE) is less clear.\nThe Shang dynasty (c.\u20091600 BCE to c.\u20091045 BCE) essentially functioned as a theocracy, declaring the ruling family the sons of heaven and calling the chief sky god Shangdi after a word for their deceased ancestors. After their overthrow by the Zhou, the royal clan of Shang were not eliminated but instead moved to a ceremonial capital where they were charged to continue the performance of their rituals.\nThe titles combined by Shi Huangdi to form his new title of emperor were originally applied to god-like beings who ordered the heavens and earth and to culture heroes credited with the invention of agriculture, clothing, music, astrology, etc. Even after the fall of Qin in 206 BCE, an emperor's words were considered sacred edicts () and his written proclamations \"directives from above\" ().\nAs a result, some Sinologists translate the title \"huangdi\" (usually rendered \"emperor\") as \"thearch\". The term properly refers to the head of a thearchy (a kingdom of gods), but the more specific \"theocrat\" carries associations of a strong priesthood that would be generally inaccurate in describing imperial China. Others reserve the use of the word \"thearch\" to describe the legendary figures of Chinese prehistory while continuing to use \"emperor\" to describe historical rulers.\nThe Heavenly Kingdom of Great Peace (1851 to 1864) in Qing China was a heterodox Christian theocracy led by Hong Xiuquan, who portrayed himself as the younger brother of Jesus Christ. His theocratic state fought one of the most destructive wars in history, the Taiping Rebellion, against the Qing dynasty for fifteen years before being crushed following the 1864 fall of the rebel capital Nanjing.\nCaliphates.\nThe Sunni Islam stipulates that, as a head of state, a Caliph should be selected or elected by Muslims or by their representatives. Followers of Shia Islam, however, believe a Caliph should be an Imam chosen by God from the Ahl al-Bayt (the \"Family of the House\", Muhammad's direct descendants). In both cases, caliphs theoretically combine religious and secular powers.\nTimurid and Mughal Empires.\nThe Emperors of the Timurid and Mughal dynasty were regarded as intermediaries of their subordinates and God by virtue of the blessings of the Hazrat Ishaans, who were the spiritual guides of the Timurid and Mughal Emperors. The Emperors believed the Hazrat Ishaans to be the rightful spiritual successors of Muhammad and by this virtue to be the intermediaries between God and man.\nByzantine Empire.\nThe Byzantine Empire (a.d. 324\u20131453) operated under Symphonia, meaning that the emperor was both the head of civil society and the ultimate authority over the ecclesiastical authorities, the patriarchates. The emperor, regarded as God's representative on earth, ruled as an absolute autocrat.\nJennifer Fretland VanVoorst argues that \"the Byzantine Empire became a theocracy in the sense that Christian values and ideals were the foundation of the empire's political ideals and heavily entwined with its political goals\". Steven Runciman writes in his book \"The Byzantine Theocracy\" (2004):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The constitution of the Byzantine Empire was based on the conviction that it was the earthly copy of the Kingdom of Heaven. Just as God ruled in Heaven, so the Emperor, made in His image, should rule on earth and carry out his commandments. ...It saw itself as a universal empire. Ideally, it should embrace all the peoples of the Earth who, ideally, should all be members of the one true Christian Church, its own Orthodox Church. Just as man was made in God's image, so man's kingdom on Earth was made in the image of the Kingdom of Heaven.\nM\u00fcnster (16th century).\nBetween 1533 and 1535 the Protestant leaders Jan Mattys and John of Leiden erected a short-lived theocratic kingdom in the city of M\u00fcnster in Westphalia. They established an Anabaptist r\u00e9gime of \"New Jerusalem\" with chiliastic and millenarian expectations. Money was abolished and any violations of the Ten Commandments were punished by death. Despite the pietistic ideology, polygamy was allowed, and von Leiden had 17 wives. In 1535, the Prince-Bishop of M\u00fcnster, Franz von Waldeck, recaptured the city, ending the existence of the kingdom.\nGeneva and Z\u00fcrich (16th century).\nHistorians debate the extent to which Geneva, Switzerland, in the days of John Calvin (1509\u201364) was a theocracy. On the one hand, Calvin's theology clearly called for separation between church and state. Other historians have stressed the enormous political power wielded on a daily basis by the clerics.\nIn nearby Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland, Protestant reformer Huldrych Zwingli (1484\u20131531) built a political system that many scholars have called a theocracy, while others have denied it.\nDeseret (LDS Church, USA).\nThe question of theocracy has been debated extensively by historians regarding the Latter-Day Saint communities in Illinois and (especially) in Utah.\nJoseph Smith, mayor of Nauvoo, Illinois and founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, ran as an independent for U.S. president in 1844. He proposed the redemption of slaves by selling public lands, reducing the size and salary of Congress, the closure of prisons, the annexation of Texas, Oregon, and parts of Canada, the securing of international rights on the high seas, free trade, and the re-establishment of a national bank. Smith's top aide, Brigham Young, campaigned for Smith, saying, \"He it is that God of Heaven designs to save this nation from destruction and preserve the Constitution.\" The campaign ended when Smith was killed by a mob while in the Carthage, Illinois, jail on June 27, 1844.\nAfter severe persecution, the Mormons left the United States and resettled in a remote part of what is now Utah, (then part of Mexico). However the United States took control in 1848 and would not accept polygamy. The Mormon State of Deseret was short-lived. Its original borders stretched from western Colorado to the southern California coast. When the Mormons arrived in the valley of the Great Salt Lake in 1847, the Great Basin was still a part of Mexico and had no secular government. As a result, Brigham Young administered the region both spiritually and temporally through the highly organized and centralized Melchizedek Priesthood. This original organization, based upon Joseph Smith's concept of theodemocracy, instituted a governmental system combining biblical theocracy with mid-19th-century American political ideals.\nIn 1849 the Saints organized a secular government in Utah, although many ecclesiastical leaders maintained their positions of secular power. The Mormons also petitioned Congress to have Deseret admitted into the Union as a state. However, the Compromise of 1850 established Utah Territory, and U.S. President Millard Fillmore appointed Brigham Young as governor (in office 1851 to 1858)). In this situation, Young still stood as head of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) as well as of Utah's secular government.\nAfter the abortive Utah War of 1857\u20131858, the replacement of Young by an outside Federal Territorial Governor, intense federal prosecution of LDS Church leaders, the eventual resolution of controversies regarding plural marriage, and accession by Utah to statehood, the apparent temporal aspects of LDS theodemocracy receded markedly.\nMassachusetts Colony.\nFrom 1620 until the American Revolution (but with many lingering traces extending into the modern era), Massachusetts colonies operated as strict theocracies, in which every white resident was required to belong to the Congregational (Puritan) Church. The leaders of the communities generally believed that they were carrying out the will of God, and they were often ministers. No religious deviation was tolerated. Any members of other sects were (initially) dispatched to Rhode Island. Later other forms of religious discrimination were uniformly practiced with governmental approval. (Today's Massachusetts and Maine formed one single colony/state until 1820.)\nPersia/Iran.\nDuring the Achaemenid Empire (550 to 330 BCE), Zoroastrianism functioned as the state religion, with formalized worship. The Persian kings were known to be pious Zoroastrians and they ruled with a Zoroastrian form of law called \"asha\". Cyrus the Great, who founded the empire, avoided imposing the Zoroastrian faith on the inhabitants of conquered territory. Cyrus's kindness towards Jews has been cited as sparking Zoroastrian influence on Judaism.\nUnder the Seleucids (312 to 63 BCE), Zoroastrianism became autonomous. During the Sassanid period (224 to 651 CE), the Zoroastrian calendar was reformed, image-use in worship was banned, Fire Temples were increasingly built, and intolerance towards other faiths prevailed.\nFlorence under Savonarola.\nThe short rule (1494\u20131498) of Girolamo Savonarola, a Dominican priest, over the city of Florence had features of a theocracy. During his rule, \"unchristian\" books, statues, poetry, and other items were burned (in the Bonfire of the Vanities), sodomy was made a capital offense, and other Christian practices became law.\nQuebec.\nQuebec under the premiership of Maurice Duplessis (1936\u20131939 and 1944\u20131959) had attributes of a Roman Catholic theocracy. The church controlled education and healthcare, books and films were censored, drive-in movie theatres were illegal, religion had strong influence over civil law (for example, only churches could conduct marriages, and divorce was banned), and Jehovah's Witnesses were persecuted. This theocracy ended in 1960 with the beginning of the Quiet Revolution (1960\u20131966).\nPrince-Bishopric of Montenegro.\nThe Prince-Bishopric of Montenegro existed as a Serbian Orthodox ecclesiastical principality from 1516 until 1852. The principality was located around modern-day Montenegro. It emerged from the Eparchy of Cetinje, later known as the Metropolitanate of Montenegro and the Littoral, whose bishops defied the Ottoman Empire overlordship and transformed the parish of Cetinje into a \"de facto\" theocracy, ruling it as Metropolitans (\"Vladike\", also known as \"prince-bishops\"). The first prince-bishop was Vavila. The system was transformed into a hereditary one by Danilo \u0160\u0107ep\u010devi\u0107, bishop of Cetinje from 1697 to 1735. He united the several tribes of Montenegro into fighting the Ottoman Empire that had occupied all of Montenegro (as the Sanjak of Montenegro and Montenegro Vilayet) and most of southeastern Europe at the time.\nPolynesia.\nPitirim Sorokin identified theocratic r\u00e9gimes in traditional Polynesia.\nIndia.\nThe state of Travancore adopted a form of theocracy in the 18th century under the King Marthanda Varma by donating the country to the Hindu deity Vishnu, and thereafter rule as the vice-regent of the deity. It is known as Thrippadidanam. The holding of the ritual might be a tactics move by the king on the model of the strategies of countries in Europe.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30876", "revid": "724216226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30876", "title": "Triathlon bars", "text": ""}
{"id": "30877", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30877", "title": "T\u00e9kumel", "text": "Campaign setting and fictional universe\nT\u00e9kumel is a fantasy world created by American linguist and writer M. A. R. Barker over the course of several decades from around 1940. In this imaginary world, huge, tradition-bound empires with medieval levels of technology vie for control using magic, large standing armies, and ancient technological devices. In time, Barker created the tabletop role-playing game \"Empire of the Petal Throne\", set in the T\u00e9kumel universe, initially self publishing it in 1974. Later, Barker wrote a series of five novels set in T\u00e9kumel, beginning with \"The Man of Gold\", first published by DAW Books in 1984.\nSources.\nThe setting provided a context for Barker's constructed languages which were developed in parallel from the mid-to-late 1940s, long before the mass-market publication of his works as the roleplaying game and book forms.\nThe most developed language created by Barker for his setting is Tsoly\u00e1ni, which resembles Urdu, Pashto and Nahuatl. Tsoly\u00e1ni has had grammatical guides, dictionaries, pronunciation recordings, and even a complete language course developed for it. In order for his imaginary languages to have this type of depth, Barker developed entire cultures, histories, dress fashions, architectural styles, weapons, armor, tactical styles, legal codes, demographics and more. They were inspired by Indian, Middle Eastern, Egyptian and Central American mythology in contrast to the majority of such fantasy settings, which draw primarily on European mythologies.\nSetting.\nThe world of T\u00e9kumel, a fictional planet around star Nu Ophiuchi (a.k.a. Sinistra), was first settled by humans exploring the galaxy about 60,000 years in the future, along with several other alien species. Their extensive terraforming of the inhospitable environment, including changing the planet's orbit and rotation rate to create a 365-day year, disrupted local ecologies and banished most of the local flora and fauna (including some intelligent species) to small reservations in the corners of their own world, resulting in a golden age of technology and prosperity for Mankind and its allies. T\u00e9kumel became a resort world, where the wealthy from a thousand other stars could while away their time next to its warm seas.\nLayout.\nSuddenly, in the 1120th century (according to Shawn Bond) and for reasons unknown, T\u00e9kumel and its star system (T\u00e9kumel's two moons, Gay\u00e9l and K\u00e1shi, its sun, Tul\u00e9ng, and four other planets, \u00dcl\u00e9tl, Riruch\u00e9l, Sh\u00edchel, and Zir\u00fana) were cast out of our reality into a \"pocket dimension\" (known as a \"b\u00e9thorm\" in Tsoly\u00e1ni), in which there were no other star systems. One hypothesis is that this isolation happened through hostile action on the part of an unknown party or group. Another is that the cosmic cataclysm was due to over-use of a faster than light drive which warped the fabric of space. No one knows, but the inhabitants of T\u00e9kumel, both human, native, and representatives of the other star-faring races, were now isolated and alone. The novels contain vague clues as to what might have happened.\nSevered from vital interplanetary trade routes (T\u00e9kumel is a world very poor in heavy metals) and in the midst of a massive gravitic upheaval due to the lines of gravitational force between the stars being suddenly cut, civilization was thrown into chaos. The intelligent native species, the Hl\u01d8ss and the Ss\u00fa, broke free from their reservations and wars as destructive as the massive geographic changes ravaged the planet. Several other significant changes took place due to the crisis: mankind discovered it could now tap into ultraplanar energies that were seen as magical forces, the stars were gone from the sky, and dimensional nexuses were uncovered. Pacts with \"demons\" (inhabitants of dimensions near in n-dimensional space to T\u00e9kumel's pocket dimension) were made and a complex pantheon of \"gods\" (powerful extra-dimensional or multi-dimensional alien beings) discovered. Science began to stagnate until ultimately knowledge became grounded in traditions handed down from generations long ago. The belief that the universe was ultimately understandable slowly faded and a Time of Darkness descended over the planet.\nMuch of Barker's writing concerns a time approximately 50,000 years after T\u00e9kumel has entered its pocket dimension. Five vast tradition-oriented civilizations occupy a large portion of the northern continent. These five human empires (Livy\u00e1nu, Mu\u2032ugalavy\u00e1, Salarvy\u00e1, Tsoly\u00e1nu, Y\u00e1n K\u00f3r), along with various non-human allies (Ahoggy\u00e1, Ch\u00edma, Hegl\u00e9th, Hl\u00e1ka, Hlutrg\u00fa, Nin\u00edn, P\u00e1chi L\u00e9i, P\u00e9 Ch\u00f3i, Sh\u00e9n, Tinal\u00edya) who are descended from other star faring races, vie to control resources, including other planar \"magical powers\" and ancient technology, as they vie for survival and supremacy among themselves as well as hostile and other non-human races (Hl\u01d8ss, Ss\u00fa, Hok\u00fan, Mih\u00e1lli, Nyagg\u00e1, Urun\u00e9n, Vl\u00e9shga).\nMuch of the gaming materials and other writings focus particularly on these Five Empires (Tsoly\u00e1nu in particular) which control much of the world's northern continent (only about an eighth of the planet's surface has published maps).\nLanguages.\n\"Tsoly\u00e1ni\" is one of several languages spoken on the world of T\u00e9kumel, and was the first conlang published as part of a role-playing game. Barker put great effort into the languages of T\u00e9kumel. Although Tsoly\u00e1ni is the only Tekumel\u00e1ni language that has had a full grammar book, dictionary, pronunciation tapes (on CD) and a primer, publicly released, it is not the only language for this world that Barker developed.\nAlso available are grammar guides for the Y\u00e1n Kory\u00e1ni and Livy\u00e1ni languages which are spoken in two other of the \"Five Empires\" of the known parts of T\u00e9kumel, as well as grammar books for Engsvany\u00e1li and Sun\u00faz. These two languages are now extinct, dead languages. Engsvany\u00e1li is of use as it is the root language for Tsoly\u00e1ni and many of the other currently spoken languages of the known parts of T\u00e9kumel. Sun\u00faz is of interest because, although it is obscure, it is quite useful for sorcerous purposes. For instance, Sun\u00faz contains terms to describe movement in a six-dimensional multi-planar space, something of use to beings who visit the other planar realms where \"demons\" live.\nBarker also published extensively on scripts for other languages of T\u00e9kumel.\nPublished works.\nBoard games.\nBarker designed \"War of Wizards\", a combat-oriented board game, based on his world of T\u00e9kumel, published by TSR in 1975.\nRoleplaying.\nBarker was a Professor of Urdu and South Asian Studies at the University of Minnesota during the period when David Arneson, Gary Gygax and a handful of others were developing the first tabletop role-playing games in the Twin Cities and Lake Geneva, Wisconsin. Barker tapped into this tradition and the setting he had developed from his childhood fantasies (much as H. G. Wells had done for his \"Floor Games\" leading into the better-known follow-up, \"Little Wars\") to further explore and develop T\u00e9kumel. His \"Thursday Night Groups\" were amongst the first roleplaying sessions anywhere and provided what was, at the time, an unusually detailed week-by-week development of the setting. In 1975, TSR, Inc., the publishers of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", published Barker's roleplaying game and setting as a standalone game under the title of \"The Empire of the Petal Throne\" (a synonym for the Tsoly\u00e1ni Empire), rather than as a \"supplement\" to the original D&amp;D rules.\nT\u00e9kumel has spawned five professionally published roleplaying games over the course of the years:\nThere have been a wide variety of materials of all sorts published over the years to further detail this world. As well as the language materials, these include \"Deeds of the Ever-Glorious \u2014 a History of the Tsolyani Legions\", \"The T\u00e9kumel Bestiary\", and \"The Book of Ebon Bindings\", a guide to the demonic beings that are known to the Tsoly\u00e1ni, and a six volume series of booklets that details the armies of each of the Five Empires as well as surrounding states and the vast lands of the reptilian Sh\u00e9n. There have also been various wargames rules as well as small scale metal miniatures to represent the various races and legions. Miniatures for the world were formerly produced in 28mm scale under license by Eureka Miniatures of Australia, but are now being made by a smaller, fan-driven company in Canada called The T\u00e9kumel Project.\nOther materials involving the setting include \"The Tomb Complex of Neresh\u00e1nbo\", \"A Jak\u00e1llan Intrigue\", \"The Tsoly\u00e1ni Language\", \"Qadardalikoi\", \"The Armies of T\u00e9kumel\", \"The Art of Tactical Sorcery\", \"Gazetteer for the Northwest Frontier Map Set\", \"The Northwest Frontier\", and \"EPT Miniatures\".\nAs interest in the game is driven to a large extent by a highly devoted, small number of enthusiasts, there have also been several non-commercially published rules as well as systems to adapt the T\u00e9kumel setting to other pre-existing, commercially available role playing rules including \"RuneQuest\", \"GURPS\", and third edition \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". Many of these are available on the internet.\nNovels.\nIn 1984, DAW Books published Barker's T\u00e9kumel novel \"The Man of Gold\". This was followed by \"Flamesong\" in 1985. In 2003, Zottola Publishing published three additional novels: \"Prince of Skulls\", \"Lords of Ts\u00e1mra\", and \"A Death of Kings\". In 2004, Zottola Publishing produced the two-volume set \"Mitlany\u00e1l\", which deals with the Tsoly\u00e1ni pantheon and provides much background regarding the Tsoly\u00e1ni culture.\nThe chronological order of the novels (as opposed to their order of publication) is as follows:\nThe T\u00e9kumel Journal.\nThe \"Journal of T\u00e9kumel Affairs\" (later known as \"The T\u00e9kumel Journal\") was a magazine published by T\u00e9kumel Games that began publication in 1977, devoted to the \"Empire of the Petal Throne\" and \"Swords &amp; Glory\" role-playing systems.\nFrederick Paul Kiesche III reviewed \"The Journal of T\u00e9kumel Affairs\" in \"Space Gamer\" No. 71. Kiesche commented that \"In sum, a useful item, especially if the company can overcome production and transition problems and start putting out an item of higher production quality. Well worth looking at.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30878", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30878", "title": "Chicken or the egg", "text": "Philosophical paradox\nThe chicken or the egg causality dilemma is commonly stated as the question, \"which came first: the chicken or the egg?\" The dilemma stems from the observation that all chickens hatch from eggs and all chicken eggs are laid by chickens. \"Chicken-and-egg\" is a metaphoric adjective describing situations where it is not clear which of two events should be considered the \"cause\" and which should be considered the \"effect\", to express a scenario of infinite regress, or to express the difficulty of sequencing actions where each seems to depend on others being done first. Plutarch posed the question as a philosophical matter in his essay \"The Symposiacs\", written in the 1st century CE.\nAncient legacy.\nThe question represents an ancient folk paradox addressing the problem of origins and first cause. Aristotle, writing in the fourth century BCE, concluded that this was an infinite sequence, with no true origin. Plutarch, writing four centuries later, specifically highlighted this question as bearing on a \"great and weighty problem (whether the world had a beginning)\". In the fifth century CE, Macrobius wrote that while the question seemed trivial, it \"should be regarded as one of importance\".\nBy the end of the 16th century, the well-known question seemed to have been regarded as settled in the Christian world, based on the origin story of the Bible. In describing the creation of animals, it allows for a first chicken that did not come from an egg. However, later Enlightenment philosophers began to question this solution. Carlo Dati in the mid 17th-century published an erudite satire on the subject.\nScientific resolutions.\nAlthough the question is typically used metaphorically, evolutionary biology provides literal answers, made possible by the Darwinian principle that species evolve over time, and thus that chickens had ancestors that were not chickens, similar to a view expressed by the Greek philosopher Anaximander when addressing the paradox. \nIf the question refers to eggs in general, the egg came first. The first amniote egg \u2013 that is, a hard-shelled egg that could be laid on land, rather than remaining in water like the eggs of fish or amphibians \u2013 appeared around 312 million years ago. In contrast, chickens are domesticated descendants of red junglefowl and probably arose little more than eight thousand years ago, at most.\nIf the question refers to \"chicken\" eggs specifically, the answer is still the egg, but the explanation is more complicated. The process by which the chicken arose through the interbreeding and domestication of multiple species of wild jungle fowl is poorly understood, and the point at which this evolving organism became a chicken is a somewhat arbitrary distinction. Whatever criteria one chooses, an animal nearly identical to the modern chicken (i.e., a proto-chicken) laid a fertilized egg that had DNA making it a modern chicken due to mutations in the mother's ovum, the father's sperm, or the fertilised zygote.\nIt has been suggested that the actions of a protein found in modern chicken eggs may make the answer different. In the uterus, chickens produce ovocleidin-17 (OC-17), which causes the formation of the thickened calcium carbonate shell around their eggs. Because OC-17 is expressed by the hen and not the egg, the bird in which the protein first arose, though having hatched from a non-reinforced egg, would then have laid the first egg having such a reinforced shell: the chicken would have preceded this first 'modern' chicken egg. However, the presence of OC-17 or a homolog in other species, such as turkeys and finches suggests that such eggshell-reinforcing proteins are common to all birds, and thus long predate the first chickens.\nDisputations.\nOn 24 July 2024, two men began a chicken-or-egg debate at a party with alcohol in Indonesia. One man became so emotionally enraged he left and returned with a knife, stabbing the other 15 times and killing him. It is uncertain what side of the argument\u00a0\u2013 chicken or egg\u00a0\u2013 the killer took.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30880", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30880", "title": "Thermoplasticity", "text": ""}
{"id": "30881", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30881", "title": "Tuscarora people", "text": "Indigenous Peoples of the Northeastern Woodlands\nThe Tuscarora () are an indigenous people of the Northeastern Woodlands in Canada and the United States. They are an Iroquoian Native American and First Nations people. The Tuscarora Nation, a federally recognized tribe, is based in New York, and the Tuscarora First Nation is one of the Six Nations of the Grand River in Ontario. Prior to European contact, the Tuscarora lived in the Carolinas along the Roanoke, Neuse, Tar, and Pamlico Rivers. They emigrated from the North Carolina frontier following conflicts with British colonists.\nFollowing their defeat in the 1711 to 1713 Tuscarora War at the hands of British colonists and their Indian allies, most surviving Tuscarora left North Carolina and migrated north to Pennsylvania and New York, over a 90-year period. They aligned with the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) in New York, because of their ancestral linguistic and cultural connections. In 1722, sponsored by the Oneida, the Tuscarora were accepted as the sixth nation of the Iroquois Confederacy. \nAfter the American Revolution, those Tuscarora who allied with the colonists shared reservation land with the Oneida before gaining their own. Today, the Tuscarora Nation of New York is a federally recognized tribe. Tuscarora who allied with the British during the American Revolutionary War resettled with other Haudenosaunee people to Ontario, where they became part of the Six Nations of the Grand River First Nation. \nOnly the tribes in New York and Ontario have been recognized on a government-to-government basis by the respective national governments. After the migration was completed in the early 19th century, the Tuscarora in New York no longer considered those remaining in North Carolina as members of the tribal nation. Since the late 20th century, some North Carolina individuals claiming Tuscarora ancestry formed organizations self-identifying as tribes.\nName.\nThe Tuscaroras' autonym, , may translate to \"hemp gatherers\" or \"shirt-wearing people\".\nHistory.\nPrecontact to 17th century.\nThe Tuscarora people were a confederacy of three tribes, when first encountered by Europeans in North Carolina. These were the:\nThe members of these three tribes belonged to about seven matrilineal clans: Bear, Beaver, Deer, Eel, Snipe, Turtle, and Wolf; however, clans may have had different subclans throughout time.\nThese affiliations continued to be active as independent groups after the tribe migrated to New York, and later Ontario. F. W. Hodge, an early 19th-century historian, wrote that the Tuscarora in North Carolina traditionally were said to occupy the \"country lying between the sea shores and the mountains, which divide the Atlantic states,\" in which they had 24 large towns and could muster about 6,000 warriors, probably meaning persons.\n18th century.\nIn early 18th-century North Carolina, British colonists reported two primary branches of the Tuscarora: A northern group led by Chief Tom Blunt, and a southern group led by Chief Hancock. Varying accounts around 1708\u20131710 estimated the number of Tuscarora warriors as from 1200 to 2000. Historians estimate their total population may have been three to four times that number. Chief Blunt occupied the area around what is present-day Bertie County, North Carolina, on the Roanoke River. Chief Hancock lived closer to present-day New Bern, occupying the area south of the Pamlico River. Chief Blunt became close friends with the colonial Blount family of the Bertie region and lived peacefully.\nBy contrast, Chief Hancock had to deal with far more colonists encroaching on his community. They raided his villages and kidnapped people to sell into slavery. Colonists transported some Tuscarora to Pennsylvania to sell into slavery. Both groups of Tuscarora suffered substantial population losses after exposure to Eurasian infectious diseases endemic to Europeans. Both also suffered territorial encroachment. By 1711, Chief Hancock believed he had to fight against the colonists to fight back. Chief Tom Blunt did not join him in the war.\nThe southern Tuscarora collaborated with the Pamlico, Cothechney, Coree, Mattamuskeet, and Matchepungoe nations to attack nearby British colonists in a wide range of locations within a short time. Their principal targets were against the colonists on the Roanoke, Neuse, and Trent Rivers, as well as the city of Bath. They attacked on September 22, 1711, beginning the Tuscarora War. The allied Indian tribes killed hundreds of settlers, including several key political figures among the colonists.\nGovernor Edward Hyde called out the North Carolina Militia and secured the assistance of Province of South Carolina, which provided 600 militiamen and 360 British-allied Indians commanded by Colonel John Barnwell. In 1712, this force attacked the southern Tuscarora and other nations in Craven County at Fort Narhontes, on the banks of the Neuse River. The Tuscarora were \"defeated with great slaughter; more than 300 were killed, and 100 made prisoners.\"\nThe governor offered Chief Blunt leadership of the entire Tuscarora Nation if he would assist in defeating Chief Hancock. Blunt succeeded in capturing Hancock, who was tried and executed by North Carolina officials. In 1713, the southern Tuscarora were defeated at their Fort Neoheroka (formerly spelled Neherooka), with 900 killed or captured in the battle.\nFollowing their defeat in the conflict in 1713, about 1,500 Tuscarora fled north to New York to join the Iroquois Confederacy, while as many as 1500 additional Tuscarora sought refuge in the British colony of Virginia. Although some accepted tributary status in Virginia, most of the surviving Tuscarora are believed to have returned to North Carolina. In 1715, about 70 warriors of the southern Tuscarora went to South Carolina to assist colonists against the Yamasee. Those 70 warriors later asked permission to have their wives and children join them, and settled near Port Royal, South Carolina.\nUnder the leadership of Tom Blunt, the Tuscarora who remained in North Carolina signed a treaty with the colony in June 1718. It granted them a tract of land on the Roanoke River in what is now Bertie County. This was the area occupied by Chief Blunt and his people. The colonial governments of Virginia and North Carolina both recognized Tom Blunt, who had taken the last name Blount, as \"King Tom Blount\" of the Tuscarora. Both colonies agreed to consider as friendly only those Tuscarora who accepted Blount's leadership. The remaining southern Tuscarora were forced to remove from their villages on the Pamlico River and relocate to the villages of Ooneroy and Resootskeh in Bertie County. In 1722, the Bertie County Reservation, which would officially become known as Indian Woods, was chartered by the colony.\nAs colonial settlement surrounded Indian Woods, the Tuscarora suffered discrimination and other acts; they were overcharged or denied use of ferries, restricted in hunting, and cheated in trade; their timber was illegally logged, and their lands were continuously encroached upon by herders and squatters. Over the next several decades, the colonial government continually reduced the Tuscarora tract, forcing cessions of land to the encroaching settlers. They sold off portions of the land in deals often designed to take advantage of the Tuscarora.\nMany Tuscarora were not satisfied with the leadership of Tom Blount, and decided to leave the reservation. In 1722, about 300 fighting men, along with their wives, children, and the elderly, resided at Indian Woods. By 1731, the population fell to 200 warriors, and by 1755, only 100 warriors remained, with a total population at Indian Woods of 301. When Moravian missionaries visited the reservation in 1752, they had noted \"many had gone north to live on the Susquehanna\" and that \"others are scattered as the wind scatters smoke.\" This refers to the Tuscarora migrating to central-western New York to live with the Oneida and other Iroquois nations.\nIn 1763 and 1766, additional Tuscarora migrated north to settle with other Iroquoian peoples in northern and western Pennsylvania and in New York. By 1767, only 104 persons were residing on the reservation in Bertie County. In 1804, the last band to leave North Carolina went to New York. By then, only \"10 to 20 old families\" remained at Indian Woods.\n19th century.\nIn 1802, the last Indian Woods Tuscarora negotiated a treaty with the United States, by which land would be held for them that they could lease. As the government never ratified the treaty, the North Carolina Tuscarora viewed the treaty as null and void. In 1831, the Indian Woods Tuscarora sold the remaining rights to their lands. By this point, their area had been reduced to .\nAlthough without a reservation, some Tuscarora descendants remained in the southern regions of the state, intermarrying with European settlers. In 1971, the Tuscarora in Robeson County sought to get an accounting of their lands and rents due them under the unratified treaty of 1803. At least three bands have organized in Robeson County. In 2010, they united as one group.\nMigration north.\nThe Iroquois Five Nations of New York had penetrated as far as the Tuscarora homeland in North Carolina by 1701, and nominally controlled the entire frontier territory lying in between. Following their discovery of a linguistically related tribe living beyond Virginia, they were more than happy to accommodate their distant cousins within the Iroquois Constitution as the \"Sixth Nation\", and to resettle them in safer grounds to the north (The Iroquois had driven tribes of rival Indians out of western New York to South Carolina during the Beaver Wars several decades earlier, not far from where the Tuscarora resided).\nBeginning about 1713 after the war, contingents of Tuscarora began leaving North Carolina for the north. They established a main village at present-day Martinsburg, West Virginia, on what is still known as Tuscarora Creek. After White settlers began to pour into the area from around 1730, the Tuscarora continued northward to join those in western New York. Another group stopped in 1719\u20131721 in present-day Maryland along the Monocacy River, on the way to join the Oneida nation in western New York. Other Tuscarora bands sojourned in the Juniata River valley of Pennsylvania, before reaching New York.\nThe present area from Martinsburg, West Virginia, west to Berkeley Springs, has roads, creeks, and land still named after the Tuscarora people, including a development in Hedgesville called \"The Woods\", where the street names contain reference to the Tuscarora people, and which contains a burial mound adopted by the West Virginia Division of Culture as an archaeological site in 1998. A record \"circa\" 1763 indicates that some Tuscarora had not migrated to the Iroquois, and remained in the Panhandle, instead, and stayed and fought under Shawnee Chief Cornstalk.\nDuring the American Revolutionary War, part of the Tuscarora and Oneida nations in New York allied with the rebel colonists. Most of the warriors of the other four Iroquois nations supported Great Britain, and many participated in battles throughout New York. They were the main forces that attacked frontier settlements of the central Mohawk and Cherry Valleys. Late in the war, the pro-British Tuscarora followed Chief Joseph Brant of the Mohawk, other British-allied tribes, and Loyalists north to Ontario, then called Upper Canada by the British. They took part in establishing the reserve of the Six Nations of the Grand River First Nation in what became Ontario, Canada.\nIn 1803, a final contingent of southern Tuscarora migrated to New York to join the reservation of their tribe in Niagara County. After that, the Tuscarora in New York no longer considered southern remnants as part of their nation. Some descendants of the southern remnants have continued to identify as Tuscarora and have organized some bands. Through the generations they had intermarried with neighbors, but identify culturally as Tuscarora.\nDuring the War of 1812, British forces attacked Lewiston, New York on December 19, 1813. A band of Tuscarora living in a village on an escarpment just above the town assisted the town's residents as they fled the attacking force. The British force was accompanied by Mohawk warrior and some white colonists disguised as Mohawks. The American militia fled, leaving only the Tuscarora\u2014outnumbered 30 to one\u2014to fight a delaying action that allowed some townspeople to escape. The Tuscarora sent a party of warriors to blow horns along the escarpment and suggest a larger force, while another party attacked downhill with war whoops, to give an exaggerated impression of their numbers. The attacking force burned Lewiston, as well as the Tuscarora village, both of which undefended.\nThe Tuscarora Nation has continued to struggle to protect its land in New York. In the mid-20th century, New York City commissioner Robert Moses generated controversy by negotiating with the Tuscarora Sachem council and purchasing of the Tuscarora reservation for the reservoir of the new hydroelectric project along the Niagara River, downriver from Niagara Falls. (At the time of first power generation in February 1962, it was the largest project in the world.) The plant continues to generate electricity for households located from the Niagara area to as far away as New York City.\nLanguage.\nSkarure, the Tuscarora language, belongs to the northern branch of the Iroquoian languages. Linguists and historians have both tried to determine when the Iroquoian-speaking Meherrin and Nottoway tribes separated from the Tuscarora. Before initial contact (1650), English colonists, based on reports from Algonquian natives, thought the three tribes were one people, as the Algonquian speakers referred to them by the exonym \"Mangoag.\" Following encounters between the English with the Tuscarora and other tribes, the former noted they used the same interpreters to translate with each of the peoples, which meant their languages were closely related.\nAlthough the Nottoway language went extinct in the early 1900s, linguists have been able to determine that it was distinct, although closely related to Tuscarora. In addition, the Cheroenhaka (Nottoway) Tribe has been working to revitalize the Nottoway Language in recent times. In historic times, the three tribes always identified as distinct and independent peoples.\nTuscarora descendants in Oklahoma.\nSome Tuscarora descendants are part of the Seneca\u2013Cayuga Nation headquartered in Oklahoma. They are primarily descendants of Tuscarora groups absorbed in the early decades of the 19th century in Ohio by relocated Iroquois, Seneca, and Cayuga bands from New York. They became known as Mingo, while in the Midwest, coalescing as a group in Ohio. The Mingo were later forced in Indian removals to Indian Territory in present-day Kansas, and lastly, in Oklahoma. In 1937, descendants reorganized and were federally recognized as the Seneca-Cayuga Tribe of Oklahoma. The nation occupies territory in the northeast corner of the former Indian Territory.\nUnrecognized groups in North Carolina.\nNumerous unrecognized tribes in North Carolina claim Tuscarora descent. Beginning in the late 20th century, they have organized and reformed in various configurations. None have state recognition or federal recognition.\nThey have included:\nTuscarora Nation officials in New York dispute claims that anyone in North Carolina has continuity as a tribe with the Tuscarora. In the spring of 1973 students from NC State and members of the local Tuscarora people staged a protest seeking \"federal and state recognition of the autonomous bands of the Tuscarora Nation of North Carolina, the right to run their own school systems, and better job opportunities for Native American communities.\" The protest involved a walk from Pembroke, North Carolina to the State Capitol in Raleigh. \nThe Tuscarora Nation of New York says that the great majority of the tribe moved north to New York. New York leaders consider any individuals remaining in North Carolina as no longer having tribal status, although they might possibly have some Tuscarora ancestry.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30882", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30882", "title": "The Forms", "text": ""}
{"id": "30883", "revid": "10896994", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30883", "title": "The Center", "text": "Skyscraper in Hong Kong\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Center () is the fifth tallest skyscraper in Hong Kong, after International Commerce Centre, Two International Finance Centre (88 storeys), Central Plaza and Bank of China Tower. With a height of , it comprises 73 storeys. The Center is one of the few skyscrapers in Hong Kong that is entirely steel-structured with no reinforced concrete core and is one of the tallest steel buildings in the world. It is located on 99 Queen's Road Central in the Central, roughly halfway between the MTR Island line's Sheung Wan and Central stations.\nNaming.\nThe English name of the building uses the American spelling \"The Center\", despite the vast majority of similarly named buildings in Hong Kong using the spelling \"Centre\" as a result of Hong Kong English's British origins. The direct translation of the Chinese name of the building is \"Central Centre\" or the \"centre of Central\", though the building is situated near the boundary of Central and Sheung Wan (Wing Kut Street).\nBackground.\nThe Center was designed by Dennis Lau &amp; Ng Chun Man Architects &amp; Engineers.\nThe footprint of The Center is irregular because surrounding lots in Queen's Road Central, Jubilee Street, Des Voeux Road Central and Gilman's Bazaar were already redeveloped. The construction of the building involved the Land Development Corporation since it required demolishing many old buildings and lanes. Various lanes and streets including Gilman Street, Wing On Street, Tung Man Street, Hing Lung Street, and Tit Hong Lane were shortened. Many cloth shops located on Wing On Street, also known as \"Cloth Alley\", were moved to the Western Market while Eu Yan Sang, a traditional Chinese medicine shop, was moved near the Stag Building. Several historical structures were demolished for the project. \nThe Center is notable for its arrangement of hundreds of neon lights arranged as bars in increasing frequency towards the top of the building, which slowly scroll through the colours of the spectrum at night. During the Christmas season, the building's neon arrangement follows a festive motif and resembles a Christmas tree.\nThe building uses a sky lobby system, where users wishing to reach the upper floors of the building must make several lifts changes. One set of lifts leads from the ground floor to the 6th floor; a second set of lifts provides access from the 6th floor to the 42nd floor, and a final set provides access to the floors above.\nIn November 2017, it was announced that The center was sold for HK$40.2 billion, making it the world's most-expensive real estate transaction for a single building. It was reported that Li Ka-shing's CK Asset Holdings sold the building to a BVI company called CHMT Peaceful Development Asia Limited, which is thought to be led by state-owned China National Petroleum Corporation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30886", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30886", "title": "Turbocharger", "text": "Exhaust-powered forced-induction device for engines\nIn an internal combustion engine, a turbocharger (also known as a turbo or a turbosupercharger) is a forced induction device that compresses the intake air, forcing more air into the engine in order to produce more power for a given displacement.\nTurbochargers are distinguished from superchargers in that a turbocharger is powered by the kinetic energy of the exhaust gases, whereas a supercharger is mechanically powered, usually by a belt from the engine's crankshaft. However, up until the mid-20th century, a turbocharger was called a \"turbosupercharger\" and was considered a type of supercharger.\nHistory.\nPrior to the invention of the turbocharger, forced induction was only possible using mechanically-powered superchargers. Use of superchargers began in 1878, when several supercharged two-stroke gas engines were built using a design by Scottish engineer Dugald Clerk. Then in 1885, Gottlieb Daimler patented the technique of using a gear-driven pump to force air into an internal combustion engine.\nThe 1905 patent by Alfred B\u00fcchi, a Swiss engineer working at Sulzer is often considered the birth of the turbocharger. This patent was for a compound radial engine with an exhaust-driven axial flow turbine and compressor mounted on a common shaft. The first prototype was finished in 1915 with the aim of overcoming the power loss experienced by aircraft engines due to the decreased density of air at high altitudes. However, the prototype was not reliable and did not reach production. Another early patent for turbochargers was applied for in 1916 by French steam turbine inventor Auguste Rateau, for their intended use on the Renault engines used by French fighter planes. Separately, testing in 1917 by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) and Sanford Alexander Moss showed that a turbocharger could enable an engine to avoid any power loss (compared with the power produced at sea level) at an altitude of up to above sea level. The testing was conducted at Pikes Peak in the United States using the Liberty L-12 aircraft engine.\nThe first commercial application of a turbocharger was in June 1924 when the first heavy duty turbocharger, model VT402, was delivered from the Baden works of Brown, Boveri &amp; Cie, under the supervision of Alfred B\u00fcchi, to SLM, Swiss Locomotive and Machine Works in Winterthur. This was followed very closely in 1925, when Alfred B\u00fcchi successfully installed turbochargers on ten-cylinder diesel engines, increasing the power output from . This engine was used by the German Ministry of Transport for two large passenger ships called the \"Preussen\" and . The design was licensed to several manufacturers and turbochargers began to be used in marine, railcar and large stationary applications.\nTurbochargers were used on several aircraft engines during World War II, beginning with the Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress in 1938, which used turbochargers produced by General Electric. Other early turbocharged airplanes included the Consolidated B-24 Liberator, Lockheed P-38 Lightning, Republic P-47 Thunderbolt and experimental variants of the Focke-Wulf Fw 190.\nThe first practical application for trucks was realized by Swiss truck manufacturing company Saurer in the 1930s. BXD and BZD engines were manufactured with optional turbocharging from 1931 onwards. The Swiss industry played a pioneering role with turbocharging engines as witnessed by Sulzer, Saurer and Brown, Boveri &amp; Cie. \nAutomobile manufacturers began research into turbocharged engines during the 1950s; however, the problems of \"turbo lag\" and the bulky size of the turbocharger were not able to be solved at the time. The first turbocharged cars were the short-lived Chevrolet Corvair Monza and the Oldsmobile Jetfire, both introduced in 1962. \nThe turbo succeeded in motorsport, but took its time. The 1968 Indianapolis 500 was the first to be won with a turbocharged engine; turbos have won on the fast oval track ever since. Porsche pioneered turbos in engines derived from the 1963 Porsche 911, which had an air-cooled flat six engine just like the Chevrolet Corvair, but got turbocharged ten years later. Porsche 935 and Porsche 936 won both kinds of Sportcars World Championships in 1976, as well as the Le Mans 24h, proving that they could be reliable and fast. In Formula One, capacity was limited to only 1.5 litre, with the first race victories coming in the late 1970s, and the first F1 World Championship in 1983, with a BMW M10-based 4-cylinder engine that dates back to 1961.\nTurbodiesel passenger cars appeared in the 1970s, with the Mercedes 300 D. Greater adoption of turbocharging in passenger cars began in the 1980s, as a way to increase the performance of smaller displacement engines.\nDesign.\nLike other forced induction devices, a compressor in the turbocharger pressurises the intake air before it enters the inlet manifold. In the case of a turbocharger, the compressor is powered by the kinetic energy of the engine's exhaust gases, which is extracted by the turbocharger's turbine.\nThe main components of the turbocharger are:\nTurbine.\nThe turbine section (also called the \"hot side\" or \"exhaust side\" of the turbo) is where the rotational force is produced, in order to power the compressor (via a rotating shaft through the center of a turbo). After the exhaust has spun the turbine, it continues into the exhaust piping and out of the vehicle. \nThe turbine uses a series of blades to convert kinetic energy from the flow of exhaust gases to mechanical energy of a rotating shaft (which is used to power the compressor section). The turbine housings direct the gas flow through the turbine section, and the turbine itself can spin at speeds of up to 250,000 rpm. Some turbocharger designs are available with multiple turbine housing options, allowing a housing to be selected to best suit the engine's characteristics and the performance requirements.\nA turbocharger's performance is closely tied to its size, and the relative sizes of the turbine wheel and the compressor wheel. Large turbines typically require higher exhaust gas flow rates, therefore increasing turbo lag and increasing the boost threshold. Small turbines can produce boost quickly and at lower flow rates, since it has lower rotational inertia, but can be a limiting factor in the peak power produced by the engine. Various technologies, as described in the following sections, are often aimed at combining the benefits of both small turbines and large turbines.\nLarge diesel engines often use a single-stage axial inflow turbine instead of a radial turbine.\nTwin-scroll.\nA twin-scroll turbocharger uses two separate exhaust gas inlets, to make use of the pulses in the flow of the exhaust gasses from each cylinder. In a standard (single-scroll) turbocharger, the exhaust gas from all cylinders is combined and enters the turbocharger via a single intake, which causes the gas pulses from each cylinder to interfere with each other. For a twin-scroll turbocharger, the cylinders are split into two groups in order to maximize the pulses. The exhaust manifold keeps the gases from these two groups of cylinders separated, then they travel through two separate spiral chambers (\"scrolls\") before entering the turbine housing via two separate nozzles. The scavenging effect of these gas pulses recovers more energy from the exhaust gases, minimizes parasitic back losses and improves responsiveness at low engine speeds.\nAnother common feature of twin-scroll turbochargers is that the two nozzles are different sizes: the smaller nozzle is installed at a steeper angle and is used for low-rpm response, while the larger nozzle is less angled and optimised for times when high outputs are required.\nVariable-geometry.\nVariable-geometry turbochargers (also known as \"variable-nozzle turbochargers\") are used to alter the effective aspect ratio of the turbocharger as operating conditions change. This is done with the use of adjustable vanes located inside the turbine housing between the inlet and turbine, which affect flow of gases towards the turbine. Some variable-geometry turbochargers use a rotary electric actuator to open and close the vanes, while others use a pneumatic actuator.\nIf the turbine's aspect ratio is too large, the turbo will fail to create boost at low speeds; if the aspect ratio is too small, the turbo will choke the engine at high speeds, leading to high exhaust manifold pressures, high pumping losses, and ultimately lower power output. By altering the geometry of the turbine housing as the engine accelerates, the turbo's aspect ratio can be maintained at its optimum. Because of this, variable-geometry turbochargers often have reduced lag, a lower boost threshold, and greater efficiency at higher engine speeds. The benefit of variable-geometry turbochargers is that the optimum aspect ratio at low engine speeds is very different from that at high engine speeds.\nElectrically-assisted turbochargers.\nAn electrically-assisted turbocharger combines a traditional exhaust-powered turbine with an electric motor, in order to reduce turbo lag. Recent advancements in electric turbocharger technology, such as mild hybrid integration, have enabled turbochargers to start spooling before exhaust gases provide adequate pressure. This can further reduce turbo lag and improve engine efficiency, especially during low-speed driving and frequent stop-and-go conditions seen in urban areas. This differs from an electric supercharger, which solely uses an electric motor to power the compressor.\nCompressor.\nThe compressor draws in outside air through the engine's intake system, pressurises it, then feeds it into the combustion chambers (via the inlet manifold). The compressor section of the turbocharger consists of an impeller, a diffuser, and a volute housing. The operating characteristics of a compressor are described by the compressor map.\nPorted shroud.\nSome turbochargers use a \"ported shroud\", whereby a ring of holes or circular grooves allows air to bleed around the compressor blades. Ported shroud designs can have greater resistance to compressor surge and can improve the efficiency of the compressor wheel.\nCenter hub rotating assembly.\nThe center housing rotating assembly (CHRA) houses the shaft that connects the turbine to the compressor. A lighter shaft can help reduce turbo lag. The CHRA also contains a bearing to allow this shaft to rotate at high speeds with minimal friction. \nSome CHRAs are water-cooled and have pipes for the engine's coolant to flow through. One reason for water cooling is to protect the turbocharger's lubricating oil from overheating.\nSupporting components.\nThe simplest type of turbocharger is the \"free floating\" turbocharger. This system would be able to achieve maximum boost at maximum engine revs and full throttle, however additional components are needed to produce an engine that is driveable in a range of load and rpm conditions.\nAdditional components that are commonly used in conjunction with turbochargers are:\nTurbo lag and boost threshold.\nTurbo lag refers to delay\u00a0\u2013 when the engine rpm is within the turbocharger's operating range\u00a0\u2013 that occurs between pressing the throttle and the turbocharger spooling up to provide boost pressure. This delay is due to the increasing exhaust gas flow (after the throttle is suddenly opened) taking time to spin up the turbine to speeds where boost is produced. The effect of turbo lag is reduced throttle response, in the form of a delay in the power delivery. Superchargers do not suffer from turbo lag because the compressor mechanism is driven directly by the engine.\nMethods to reduce turbo lag include:\nA similar phenomenon that is often mistaken for turbo lag is the boost threshold. This is where the engine speed (rpm) is currently below the operating range of the turbocharger system, therefore the engine is unable to produce significant boost. At low rpm, the exhaust gas flow rate is unable to spin the turbine sufficiently.\nThe boost threshold causes delays in the power delivery at low rpm (since the unboosted engine must accelerate the vehicle to increase the rpm above the boost threshold), while turbo lag causes delay in the power delivery at higher rpm.\nUse of several turbochargers.\nSome engines use several turbochargers, usually to reduce turbo lag, increase the range of rpm where boost is produced, or simplify the layout of the intake/exhaust system. The most common arrangement is twin turbochargers, however triple-turbo or quad-turbo arrangements have been occasionally used in production cars.\nTurbocharging versus supercharging.\nThe key difference between a turbocharger and a supercharger is that a supercharger is mechanically driven by the engine (often through a belt connected to the crankshaft) whereas a turbocharger is powered by the kinetic energy of the engine's exhaust gas. A turbocharger does not place a direct mechanical load on the engine, although turbochargers place exhaust back pressure on engines, increasing pumping losses.\nSupercharged engines are common in applications where throttle response is a key concern, and supercharged engines are less likely to heat soak the intake air.\nTwincharging.\nA combination of an exhaust-driven turbocharger and an engine-driven supercharger can mitigate the weaknesses of both. This technique is called \"twincharging\".\nApplications.\nTurbochargers have been used in the following applications:\nIn 2017, 27% of vehicles sold in the US were turbocharged. In Europe 67% of all vehicles were turbocharged in 2014. Historically, more than 90% of turbochargers were diesel, however, adoption in petrol engines is increasing. The companies which manufacture the most turbochargers in Europe and the U.S. are Garrett Motion (formerly Honeywell), BorgWarner and Mitsubishi Turbocharger.\nSafety.\nTurbocharger failures and resultant high exhaust temperatures are among the causes of car fires.\nFailure of the seals will cause oil to leak into the exhaust system causing blue-gray smoke or a runaway diesel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30887", "revid": "29495429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30887", "title": "Turbo", "text": ""}
{"id": "30888", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30888", "title": "Turki bin Faisal", "text": ""}
{"id": "30889", "revid": "1317978344", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30889", "title": "Thomas Hare (political reformer)", "text": "British political reformer (1806\u20131891)\nThomas Hare (28 March 1806 in England \u2013 6 May 1891) was a British lawyer and supporter of electoral reform. He is credited with inventing the single transferable vote system of proportional representation which he was a proponent and defender, now used in national elections in Ireland and Malta, in Australian Senate and state elections, and in city elections in Northern Ireland, the U.S., New Zealand and Scotland.\nLife.\nHe was born on 28 March 1806, the illegitimate son of Anne Hare of Leigh, Dorset. (\"Alumni Cantabrigienses\" considers that a 19th-century identification was incorrect. It identified Anne Hare's son with the Thomas Hare who matriculated at Queens' College, Cambridge in 1823, graduating B.A. in 1827, and M.A. in 1846.) \nBrought up on a Dorset farm, Hare had a scanty education. He went to London and found work as a solicitor's clerk. On 14 November 1828 he was admitted a student of the Inner Temple, and he was called to the bar on 22 November 1833. He practiced law in the chancery courts. In 1853 Hare became an Inspector of Charities for the Charity Commission.\nHare was a member of the London-based Athenaeum Club and Political Economy Club. In 1859, he met John Stuart Mill. He was also a member of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, and from 1867 was on the committee of the Society for Promoting the Employment of Women. He worked with Lydia Becker on suffrage petitions. He attended the 1867 funeral of the Manchester suffragist Max Kyllmann, to support his wife Philippine Kyllmann; who two years later fell out with Becker. Under Mill's influence, Hare became involved in the co-operative movement from 1869, and joined the Land Tenure Reform Association (1869 to 1873) for \"free trade in land\", following the ideas of Mill and William Thomas Thornton.\nWorks.\nHare's major work \"The Machinery of Representation\" appeared in 1857 (two editions) and editions of his \"Treatise on the Election of Representatives: Parliamentary and Municipal\" appeared between 1859 and 1873. John Stuart Mill in 1873 described Hare's system as \nthe greatest improvement of which the system of representative government is susceptible; an improvement which\u2026exactly meets and cures the grand, and what before seemed inherent, defect of the representative system.\nIn 1859 Mill wrote a review for \"Fraser's Magazine\" under the title \"Recent Writers on Reform\", calling Hare's \"Treatise\" remarkable, and noting also \"Mr. Hare passes an unqualified and most just condemnation on the exclusion of women from the suffrage\".\nA system along lines described by Hare was publicised by Henry Fawcett in \"Mr. Hare's Reform Bill Simplified and Explained\" (1860). Mill then shifted his ideas from 1859 slightly, emphasizing the role of bullet voting in a voting context, as a safeguard for minority groups.\nAn article \"The Machinery of Politics and Proportional Representation\" from 1872 by William Robert Ware, in the \"American Law Review\", was reprinted in London by the Representative Reform Association, a group of allies of Hare set up with support from Walter Morrison who funded George Howell as its secretary from 1868 to 1874, also involving Edmond Beales. Ware's ideas were close to Hare's. Charles Lutwidge Dodgson (Lewis Carroll) built on the classification used by Ware of voting systems, in his 1884 pamphlet \"The Principles of Parliamentary Representation\", to give a general formulation and to emphasize larger district magnitude in multi-member districts and each voter casting one vote only.\nLaw reports.\nHare was also known in the field of law reporting. At a period without official case reports, the published reports of key court decisions allowed them to be used as precedents. From 1841 he reported on the Court of Chancery, on James Wigram's decisions as Vice-Chancellor of England. The series of 11 volumes of \"Reports of Cases Adjudged in the High Court of Chancery\" culminated in 1858 with one on cases of William Wood.\nWigram's decrees were considered lucid. Two leading judicial decisions that are still relevant are covered only in Hare's \"Reports in Chancery\":\nHare was a co-author, with Henry Iltid Nicholl and John Monson Carrow, of the initial 1840 and 1843 volumes of \"Cases Relating to Railways and Canals\" 1835\u20131840, resp. 1840\u20131842.\nViews.\nInitially a Conservative Party supporter, Hare was a free trader opposed to the Corn Laws. He left the Conservatives in 1846, the year of their repeal, and became a Peelite. He never joined the Liberal Party, preferring to maintain his independence. He was a devout Anglican, influenced by the Tractarians. Hare differed from Mill in relying heavily on Edmund Burke as a political authority, in particular the \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\".\nThe \"Dictionary of National Biography\" article by William Prideaux Courtney on Hare states:\nHare's energies were concentrated in an attempt to devise a system which would secure proportional representation of all classes in the United Kingdom, including minorities in the House of Commons and other electoral assemblies.\nIn the British context, the \"transferable vote\" concept had already been introduced by Thomas Wright Hill, but was not published by him. His son Rowland Hill, for the South Australian Colonization Commission, took an interest during the 1830s in a reformed electoral system for the colony, and drew on his father's ideas. \nHare's interest in the issue dated from his appointment as Inspector of Charities. Danish thinker Carl Christoffer Georg Andr\u00e6 developed a similar system independently in 1855. Hare's ideas intended to make political representation more closely reflect the ideals of participatory democracy, where all constituents could be heard. He argued that \"personal representation\" could displace the dominant \"monolithic bloc\" political party. Hare's original electoral system concept included each voter casting a single preferential vote in an at-large district covering the entire United Kingdom.\nIn the preface to the fourth edition of \"Treatise on the Election of Representatives\", Hare stated his belief that proportional representation would \"end the evils of corruption, violent discontent and restricted power of selection or voter choice\". A great deal of writing on that theory developed and several societies were formed in the world for its adoption although Hare pointed out that his scheme was not meant to bear the title \"representation for minorities\". In the preface to his third edition of that work, Hare had asked:\nCan it be supposed that the moment the electors are allowed a freedom of choice they will immediately be seized with a desire to vote for some distant candidate with whom they are unacquainted, rather than for those whom they know \u2013 who are near to them, whose speeches they have heard and who have personal recommendations to the favour and respect of the town and neighbourhood?\nLegacy.\nHare lends his name to the following:\nHare's death in May 1891 occurred six years before the first use of proportional representation in Tasmania in 1897. The recognition of Hare's name in the Hare-Clark electoral system (i.e. Tasmanian system) honours his work. \nThe Single Transferable Vote method has been widely used for multiple-winner elections. While continuing to be the main method of elections in the Republic of Ireland and for some elections in Australia, it has been widely used in numerous corporations and organizations, and has been employed in local elections in a few jurisdictions of the United States. 2007 saw the reintroduction of STV in public elections on the British mainland in elections to Scottish local authorities. STV had been used for elections to Parliament for some University Seats from 1918 to 1945 and from 1918 to 1929 for Scottish boards.\nHare and his wife gave a font and stained glass window to St Paul's Church, Hook, London.\nFamily.\nHare was twice married.\nThere was one child, Mary Eleanor (1874\u20131883), of the second marriage. Hare was survived by seven children, and his will divided his estate equally between them, in a trust: they were three sons (Sherlock, Alfred, Lancelot) and four daughters (Marian, Alice, Katharine, Lydia Mary).\nThe family home was Gosbury Hill in Surrey where Hare had a farmhouse built to his own design. The place is now a street in a built-up area, in north Chessington.\nOf the sons:\nHerbert Thomas Hare, the second son, a civil engineer, died at Hong Kong in 1874 aged 27.\nOf the daughters:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nAttribution\n incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "30890", "revid": "3159626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30890", "title": "Time zone", "text": "Area that observes a uniform standard time\nA time zone is an area which observes a uniform standard time for legal, commercial and social purposes. Time zones tend to follow the boundaries between countries and their subdivisions instead of strictly following longitude, because it is convenient for areas in frequent communication to keep the same time.\nEach time zone is defined by a standard offset from Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). The offsets range from to , and are usually a whole number of hours, but a few zones are offset by an additional 30 or 45 minutes, such as in India and Nepal. Some areas in a time zone may use a different offset for part of the year, typically one hour ahead during spring and summer, a practice known as daylight saving time (DST).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nList of UTC offsets.\nIn the table below, the locations that use daylight saving time (DST) are listed in their UTC offset when DST is \"not\" in effect. When DST is in effect, approximately during spring and summer, their UTC offset is increased by one hour (except for Lord Howe Island, where it is increased by 30 minutes). For example, during the DST period California observes and the United Kingdom observes .\nHistory.\nThe apparent position of the Sun in the sky, and thus solar time, varies by location due to the spherical shape of the Earth. This variation corresponds to four minutes of time for every degree of longitude, so for example when it is solar noon in London, it is about 10 minutes before solar noon in Bristol, which is about 2.5 degrees to the west. Local solar time has been associated with civil timekeeping since the development of sundials; c. 1500 BC, an ancient Egyptian sundial was used to measure laborers' work hours. In the 2nd century BC, Hipparchus developed a method to measure longitudinal distances by comparing local solar times when a lunar eclipse was simultaneously observed at two locations. The work of Hipparchus is lost, but is known from citations in Strabo's Geographica, c. 7 AD.\nThe Royal Observatory, Greenwich, founded in 1675, established Greenwich Mean Time (GMT), the mean solar time at that location, as an aid to mariners to determine longitude at sea, providing a standard reference time while each location in England kept a different time.\nRailway time.\nIn the 19th century, as transportation and telecommunications improved, it became increasingly inconvenient for each location to observe its own solar time. In November 1840, the British Great Western Railway started using GMT kept by portable chronometers. This practice was soon followed by other railway companies in Great Britain and became known as railway time.\nAround August 23, 1852, time signals were first transmitted by telegraph from the Royal Observatory. By 1855, 98% of Great Britain's public clocks were using GMT, but it was not made the island's legal time until August 2, 1880. Some British clocks from this period have two minute hands, one for the local time and one for GMT.\nOn November 2, 1868, the British Colony of New Zealand officially adopted a standard time to be observed throughout the colony. It was based on longitude 172\u00b030\u2032 east of Greenwich, that is 11 hours 30 minutes ahead of GMT. This standard was known as New Zealand Mean Time.\nTimekeeping on North American railroads in the 19th century was complex. Each railroad used its own standard time, usually based on the local time of its headquarters or most important terminus, and the railroad's train schedules were published using its own time. Some junctions served by several railroads had a clock for each railroad, each showing a different time. Because of this a number of accidents occurred when trains from different companies using the same tracks mistimed their passings.\nAround 1863, Charles F. Dowd proposed a system of hourly standard time zones for North American railroads, although he published nothing on the matter at that time and did not consult railroad officials until 1869. In 1870 he proposed four ideal time zones having north\u2013south borders, the first centered on Washington, D.C., but by 1872 the first was centered on meridian 75\u00b0 west of Greenwich, with natural borders such as sections of the Appalachian Mountains. Dowd's system was never accepted by North American railroads. \nChief meteorologist at the United States Weather Bureau Cleveland Abbe divided the United States into four standard time zones for consistency among the weather stations. In 1879, he published a paper titled \"Report on Standard Time\". In 1883, he convinced North American railroad companies to adopt his time-zone system. In 1884, Britain, which had already adopted its own standard time system for England, Scotland, and Wales, helped gather international consent for global time. In time, the American government, influenced in part by Abbe's 1879 paper, adopted the time-zone system.\nIt was a version proposed by William F. Allen, the editor of the \"Traveler's Official Railway Guide\". The borders of its time zones ran through railroad stations, often in major cities. For example, the border between its Eastern and Central time zones ran through Detroit, Buffalo, Pittsburgh, Atlanta, and Charleston. It was inaugurated on Sunday, November 18, 1883, also called \"The Day of Two Noons\", when each railroad station clock was reset as standard-time noon was reached within each time zone.\nThe North American zones were named Intercolonial, Eastern, Central, Mountain, and Pacific. Within a year 85% of all cities with populations over 10,000 (about 200 cities) were using standard time. A notable exception was Detroit (located about halfway between the meridians of Eastern and Central time), which kept local time until 1900, then tried Central Standard Time, local mean time, and Eastern Standard Time (EST) before a May 1915 ordinance settled on EST and was ratified by popular vote in August 1916. The confusion of times came to an end when standard time zones were formally adopted by the U.S. Congress in the Standard Time Act of March 19, 1918.\nWorldwide time zones.\nItalian mathematician Quirico Filopanti introduced the idea of a worldwide system of time zones in his book \"Miranda!\", published in 1858. He proposed 24 hourly time zones, which he called \"longitudinal days\", the first centred on the meridian of Rome. He also proposed a universal time to be used in astronomy and telegraphy. However, his book attracted no attention until long after his death.\nScottish-born Canadian Sir Sandford Fleming proposed a worldwide system of time zones in 1876 - see . The proposal divided the world into twenty-four time zones labeled A-Y (skipping J), each one covering 15 degrees of longitude. All clocks within each zone would be set to the same time as the others, but differed by one hour from those in the neighboring zones. He advocated his system at several international conferences, including the International Meridian Conference, where it received some consideration. The system has not been directly adopted, but some maps divide the world into 24 time zones and assign letters to them, similarly to Fleming's system.\nBy about 1900, almost all inhabited places on Earth had adopted a standard time zone, but only some of them used an hourly offset from GMT. Many applied the time at a local astronomical observatory to an entire country, without any reference to GMT. It took many decades before all time zones were based on some standard offset from GMT or Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). By 1929, the majority of countries had adopted hourly time zones, though some countries such as Iran, India, Myanmar and parts of Australia had time zones with a 30-minute offset. Nepal was the last country to adopt a standard offset, shifting slightly to UTC+05:45 in 1986.\nAll nations currently use standard time zones for secular purposes, but not all of them apply the concept as originally conceived. Several countries and subdivisions use half-hour or quarter-hour deviations from standard time. Some countries, such as China and India, use a single time zone even though the extent of their territory far exceeds the ideal 15\u00b0 of longitude for one hour; other countries, such as Spain and Argentina, use standard hour-based offsets, but not necessarily those that would be determined by their geographical location. The consequences, in some areas, can affect the lives of local citizens, and in extreme cases contribute to larger political issues, such as in the western reaches of China. In Russia, which has 11 time zones, two time zones were removed in 2010 (one year before the daylight saving time would be observed all year round on March 27 of the following year) and reinstated in 2014 (when the country transferred from daylight saving time or summer time back to standard time or winter time permanently).\nNotation.\nISO 8601.\nISO 8601 is a standard established by the International Organization for Standardization defining methods of representing dates and times in textual form, including specifications for representing time zones.\nIf a time is in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), a \"Z\" is added directly after the time without a separating space. \"Z\" is the zone designator for the zero UTC offset. \"09:30\u00a0UTC\" is therefore represented as \"09:30Z\" or \"0930Z\". Likewise, \"14:45:15\u00a0UTC\" is written as \"14:45:15Z\" or \"144515Z\". UTC time is also known as \"Zulu\" time, since \"Zulu\" is a phonetic alphabet code word for the letter \"Z\".\nOffsets from UTC are written in the format \u00b1hh:mm, \u00b1hhmm, or \u00b1hh (either hours ahead or behind UTC). For example, if the time being described is one hour ahead of UTC (such as the time in Germany during the winter), the zone designator would be \"\", \"+0100\", or simply \"+01\". This numeric representation of time zones is appended to local times in the same way that alphabetic time zone abbreviations (or \"Z\", as above) are appended. The offset from UTC changes with daylight saving time, e.g. a time offset in Chicago, which is in the North American Central Time Zone, is \" for the winter (Central Standard Time) and \" for the summer (Central Daylight Time).\nAbbreviations.\nTime zones are often represented by alphabetic abbreviations such as \"EST\", \"WST\", and \"CST\", but these are not part of the international time and date standard ISO 8601. Such designations can be ambiguous; for example, \"CST\" can mean (North American) Central Standard Time (UTC\u221206:00), Cuba Standard Time (UTC\u221205:00) and China Standard Time (UTC+08:00), and it is also a widely used variant of ACST (Australian Central Standard Time, UTC+09:30).\nConversions.\nConversion between time zones obeys the relationship\n \"time in zone A\" \u2212 \"UTC offset for zone A\" = \"time in zone B\" \u2212 \"UTC offset for zone B\",\nin which each side of the equation is equivalent to UTC.\nThe conversion equation can be rearranged to\n \"time in zone B\" = \"time in zone A\" \u2212 \"UTC offset for zone A\" + \"UTC offset for zone B\".\nFor example, the New York Stock Exchange opens at 09:30 (EST, UTC offset= \u221205:00). In California (PST, UTC offset= \u221208:00) and India (IST, UTC offset= +05:30), the New York Stock Exchange opens at\n time in California = 09:30 \u2212 (\u221205:00) + (\u221208:00) = 06:30;\n time in India = 09:30 \u2212 (\u221205:00) + (+05:30) = 20:00.\nThese calculations become more complicated near the time switch to or from daylight saving time, as the UTC offset for the area becomes a function of UTC time.\nThe time differences may also result in different dates. For example, when it is 22:00 on Monday in Egypt (UTC+02:00), it is 01:00 on Tuesday in Pakistan (UTC+05:00).\nThe table \"Time of day by zone\" gives an overview on the time relations between different zones.\nNautical time zones.\nSince the 1920s, a nautical standard time system has been in operation for ships on the high seas. As an ideal form of the terrestrial time zone system, nautical time zones consist of gores of 15\u00b0 offset from GMT by a whole number of hours. A nautical date line follows the 180th meridian, bisecting one 15\u00b0 gore into two 7.5\u00b0 gores that differ from GMT by \u00b112 hours.\nHowever, in practice each ship may choose what time to observe at each location. Ships may decide to adjust their clocks at a convenient time, usually at night, not exactly when they cross a certain longitude. Some ships simply remain on the time of the departing port during the whole trip.\nSkewing of time zones.\nIdeal time zones, such as nautical time zones, are based on the mean solar time of a particular meridian in the middle of that zone with boundaries located 7.5 degrees east and west of the meridian. In practice, however, many time zone boundaries are drawn much farther to the west, and some countries are located entirely outside their ideal time zones.\nFor example, even though the Prime Meridian (0\u00b0) passes through Spain and France, they use the mean solar time of 15 degrees east (Central European Time) rather than 0 degrees (Greenwich Mean Time). France previously used GMT, but was switched to CET (Central European Time) during the German occupation of the country during World War II and did not switch back after the war. Similarly, prior to World War II, the Netherlands observed \"Amsterdam Time\", which was twenty minutes ahead of Greenwich Mean Time. They were obliged to follow German time during the war, and kept it thereafter. In the mid-1970s the Netherlands, as other European states, began observing daylight saving (summer) time.\nOne reason to draw time zone boundaries far to the west of their ideal meridians is to allow the more efficient use of afternoon sunlight. Some of these locations also use daylight saving time (DST), further increasing the difference to local solar time. As a result, in summer, solar noon in the Spanish city of Vigo occurs at 14:41 clock time. This westernmost area of continental Spain never experiences sunset before 18:00 clock time, even in winter, despite lying 42 degrees north of the equator. Near the summer solstice, Vigo has sunset times after 22:00, similar to those of Stockholm, which is in the same time zone and 17 degrees farther north. Stockholm has much earlier sunrises, though.\nIn the United States, the reasons were more historical and business-related. In Midwestern states, like Indiana and Michigan, those living in Indianapolis and Detroit wanted to be on the same time zone as New York to simplify communications and transactions.\nA more extreme example is Nome, Alaska, which is at 165\u00b024\u2032W longitude\u00a0\u2013 just west of center of the idealized Samoa Time Zone (165\u00b0W). Nevertheless, Nome observes Alaska Time (135\u00b0W) with DST so it is slightly more than two hours ahead of the sun in winter and over three in summer.\nKotzebue, Alaska, also near the same meridian but north of the Arctic Circle, has \"two\" sunsets on the same day in early August, one shortly after midnight at the start of the day, and the other shortly before midnight at the end of the day. Consequently, in early May, in Kotzebue one day does not have sunset.\nChina extends as far west as 73\u00b0E, but all parts of it use (120\u00b0E), so solar \"noon\" can occur as late as 15:00 in western portions of China such as Xinjiang. The Afghanistan-China border marks the greatest terrestrial time zone difference on Earth, with a 3.5 hour difference between Afghanistan's UTC+4:30 and China's UTC+08:00.\nDaylight saving time.\nMany countries, and sometimes just certain regions of countries, adopt daylight saving time (DST), also known as summer time, during part of the year. This typically involves advancing clocks by an hour near the start of spring and adjusting back in autumn (\"spring forward\", \"fall back\"). Modern DST was first proposed in 1907 and was in widespread use in 1916 as a wartime measure aimed at conserving coal. Despite controversy, many countries have used it off and on since then; details vary by location and change occasionally. Countries around the equator usually do not observe daylight saving time, since the seasonal difference in sunlight there is minimal.\nComputer systems.\nMany computer operating systems include the necessary support for working with all (or almost all) possible local times based on the various time zones. Internally, operating systems typically use UTC as their basic time-keeping standard, while providing services for converting local times to and from UTC, and also the ability to automatically change local time conversions at the start and end of daylight saving time in the various time zones. (See the article on daylight saving time for more details on this aspect.)\nWeb servers presenting web pages primarily for an audience in a single time zone or a limited range of time zones typically show times as a local time, perhaps with UTC time in brackets. More internationally oriented websites may show times in UTC only or using an arbitrary time zone. For example, the international English-language version of CNN includes GMT and Hong Kong Time, whereas the US version shows Eastern Time. US Eastern Time and Pacific Time are also used fairly commonly on many US-based English-language websites with global readership. The format is typically based in the W3C Note \"datetime\".\nEmail systems and other messaging systems (IRC chat, etc.) time-stamp messages using UTC, or else include the sender's time zone as part of the message, allowing the receiving program to display the message's date and time of sending in the recipient's local time.\nDatabase records that include a time stamp typically use UTC, especially when the database is part of a system that spans multiple time zones. The use of local time for time-stamping records is not recommended for time zones that implement daylight saving time because once a year there is a one-hour period when local times are ambiguous.\nCalendar systems nowadays usually tie their time stamps to UTC, and show them differently on computers that are in different time zones. That works when having telephone or internet meetings. It works less well when travelling, because the calendar events are assumed to take place in the time zone the computer or smartphone was on when creating the event. The event can be shown at the wrong time. For example, if a New Yorker plans to meet someone in Los Angeles at 9 am, and makes a calendar entry at 9 am (which the computer assumes is New York time), the calendar entry will be at 6 am if taking the computer's time zone. Calendaring software must also deal with daylight saving time (DST). If, for political reasons, the begin and end dates of daylight saving time are changed, calendar entries should stay the same in local time, even though they may shift in UTC time. \nOperating systems.\nUnix.\nUnix-like systems, including Linux and macOS, keep system time in Unix time format, representing the number of seconds that have elapsed since 00:00:00 Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) on Thursday, January 1, 1970, excluding leap seconds. Unix time is usually converted to local time when displayed to the user, and times specified by the user in local time are converted to Unix time. The conversion takes into account the time zone and daylight saving time rules; by default the time zone and daylight saving time rules are set up when the system is configured, though individual processes can specify time zones and daylight saving time rules using the \"TZ\" environment variable. This allows users in multiple time zones, or in the same time zone but with different daylight saving time rules, to use the same computer, with their respective local times displayed correctly to each user. Information about time zones and daylight saving time rules most commonly comes from the IANA time zone database. Many systems, including anything using the GNU C Library, a C library based on the BSD C library, or the System V Release 4 C library, can make use of the IANA time zone database.\nMicrosoft Windows.\nWindows-based computer systems prior to Windows 95 and Windows NT used local time, but Windows 95 and later, and Windows NT, base system time on UTC. They allow a program to fetch the system time as UTC, represented as a year, month, day, hour, minute, second, and millisecond; Windows 95 and later, and Windows NT 3.5 and later, also allow the system time to be fetched as a count of 100 ns units since 1601-01-01 00:00:00 UTC. The system registry contains time zone information that includes the offset from UTC and rules that indicate the start and end dates for daylight saving in each zone. Interaction with the user normally uses local time, and application software is able to calculate the time in various zones. Terminal Servers allow remote computers to redirect their time zone settings to the Terminal Server so that users see the correct time for their time zone in their desktop/application sessions. Terminal Services uses the server base time on the Terminal Server and the client time zone information to calculate the time in the session.\nProgramming languages.\nJava.\nWhile most application software will use the underlying operating system for time zone and daylight saving time rule information, the Java Platform, from version 1.3.1, has maintained its own database of time zone and daylight saving time rule information, based on the IANA time zone database. This database is updated whenever time zone or daylight saving time rules change. Oracle provides an updater tool for this purpose.\nAs an alternative to the information bundled with the Java Platform, programmers may choose to use the Joda-Time library. This library includes its own data based on the IANA time zone database.\nAs of Java 8 there is a new date and time API that can help with converting times.\nJavaScript.\nTraditionally, there was very little in the way of time zone support for JavaScript. Essentially the programmer had to extract the UTC offset by instantiating a time object, getting a GMT time from it, and differencing the two. This does not provide a solution for more complex daylight saving variations, such as divergent DST directions between northern and southern hemispheres.\nECMA-402, the standard on Internationalization API for JavaScript, provides ways of formatting Time Zones. However, due to size constraint, some implementations or distributions do not include it.\nPerl.\nThe DateTime object in Perl supports all entries in the IANA time zone database and includes the ability to get, set and convert between time zones.\nPHP.\nThe DateTime objects and related functions have been compiled into the PHP core since 5.2. This includes the ability to get and set the default script time zone, and DateTime is aware of its own time zone internally. PHP.net provides extensive documentation on this. As noted there, the most current time zone database can be implemented via the PECL timezonedb.\nPython.\nThe standard module datetime included with Python stores and operates on the time zone information class tzinfo. The third party pytz module provides access to the full IANA time zone database. Negated time zone offset in seconds is stored time.timezone and time.altzone attributes. From Python 3.9, the zoneinfo module introduces timezone management without need for third party module.\nSmalltalk.\nEach Smalltalk dialect comes with its own built-in classes for dates, times and timestamps, only a few of which implement the DateAndTime and Duration classes as specified by the ANSI Smalltalk Standard. VisualWorks provides a TimeZone class that supports up to two annually recurring offset transitions, which are assumed to apply to all years (same behavior as Windows time zones). Squeak provides a Timezone class that does not support any offset transitions. Dolphin Smalltalk does not support time zones at all.\nFor full support of the tz database (zoneinfo) in a Smalltalk application (including support for any number of annually recurring offset transitions, and support for different intra-year offset transition rules in different years) the third-party, open-source, ANSI-Smalltalk-compliant Chronos Date/Time Library is available for use with any of the following Smalltalk dialects: VisualWorks, Squeak, Gemstone, or Dolphin.\nTime in outer space.\nOrbiting spacecraft may experience many sunrises and sunsets, or none, in a 24-hour period. Therefore, it is not possible to calibrate the time with respect to the Sun and still respect a 24-hour sleep/wake cycle. A common practice for space exploration is to use the Earth-based time of the launch site or mission control, synchronizing the sleeping cycles of the crew and controllers. The International Space Station normally uses Greenwich Mean Time (GMT).\nTimekeeping on Mars can be more complex, since the planet has a solar day of approximately 24 hours and 40 minutes, known as a sol. Earth controllers for some Mars missions have synchronized their sleep/wake cycles with the Martian day, when specifically solar-powered rover activity occurs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30892", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30892", "title": "Truro", "text": "Cathedral city in Cornwall, England\nTruro (; ) is a cathedral city and civil parish in Cornwall, England. It is the southernmost city in the United Kingdom, and lies west-south-west of London. It is Cornwall's county town, only city, and a centre for administration, leisure and shopping. At the 2021 census the population of the parish was 21,046 and the population of the built up area as defined by the Office for National Statistics (which included the Gloweth and Treliske areas in the neighbouring parish of Kenwyn) was 23,060.\nTruro grew as a trade centre through its port and as a stannary town for tin mining. It was awarded city status in 1877 following the creation of the Diocese of Truro the previous year. Truro Cathedral was built between 1880 and 1910. Truro is home to Cornwall Council, the Royal Cornwall Museum, the Hall for Cornwall and Cornwall's Courts of Justice. People from Truro are called Truronians.\nToponymy.\nTruro's name may derive from the Cornish \"tri-veru\" meaning \"three rivers\", but authorities such as the \"Oxford Dictionary of English Place Names\" have doubts about the \"tru\" meaning \"three\". An expert on Cornish place-names, Oliver Padel, in \"A Popular Dictionary of Cornish Place-names\", called the \"three rivers\" meaning \"possible\". Alternatively the name may come from \"tre-rhw\u00efereu\" \"the town on the rivers\", \"tre-vur\" \"the town on the (Roman) road\", \"tri-ru\" \"three streets\", or \"tre-uro\" or similar, i.e. settlement on the river \"Uro\".\nHistory.\nA castle was built in the 12th century by Richard de Luci, Chief Justice of England in the reign of Henry II, who for court services was granted land in Cornwall, including the area round the confluence of the two rivers. The town grew below the castle and gained borough status from further economic activity. The castle has long disappeared.\nRichard de Lucy fought in Cornwall under Count Alan of Brittany after leaving Falaise late in 1138. The small adulterine castle at Truro, Cornwall, originally the parish of Kenwyn, later known as \"Castellum de Guelon\", was probably built by him in 1139\u20131140. He styled himself \"Richard de Lucy, de Trivereu\". The castle passed to Reginald FitzRoy, an illegitimate son of Henry I, when he was invested by King Stephen as the first Earl of Cornwall. Reginald married Mabel FitzRichard, daughter of William FitzRichard, a major landholder in Cornwall. The -diameter castle was in ruins by 1270 and the motte was levelled in 1840. Today Truro Crown Court stands on the site. In a charter of about 1170, Reginald FitzRoy confirmed to Truro's burgesses the privileges granted by Richard de Lucy. Richard held ten knights' fees in Cornwall before 1135. At his death the county still accounted for a third of his considerable total holding.\nBy the early 14th century Truro was a major port, due to an inland location away from invaders, to prosperity from the fishing industry, and to a role as a stannary town for assaying and stamping tin and copper from Cornish mines. The Black Death brought a trade recession and an exodus that left the town in a very neglected state. Trade and prosperity gradually returned in the Tudor period. Local government came in 1589 with a new charter of Elizabeth I giving it an elected mayor and control over the port of Falmouth.\nDuring the Civil War in the 17th century, Truro raised a sizeable force to fight for the king and a royalist mint was set up. Defeat by Parliamentary troops came after the Battle of Naseby in 1646, when the victorious General Fairfax led his army south-west to relieve Taunton and capture the Royalist-held West Country. The Royalist forces surrendered at Truro while leading Royalist commanders, including Lord Hopton, the Prince of Wales, Sir Edward Hyde, and Lord Capell, fled to Jersey from Falmouth.\nLater in the century, Falmouth gained its own charter, giving rights to its harbour and starting a long rivalry with Truro. The dispute was settled in 1709 with control of the River Fal divided between them. The arms of Truro city are \"Gules the base wavy of six Argent and Azure, thereon an ancient ship of three masts under sail, on each topmast a banner of St George, on the waves in base two fishes of the second.\"\nTruro prospered in the 18th and 19th centuries through improved mining methods and higher prices for tin, and its consequent attraction to wealthy mine-owners. Elegant Georgian and Victorian townhouses of the period can be seen today in Lemon Street, named after the mining magnate and local Member of Parliament Sir William Lemon. Truro became the centre for county society, even dubbed \"the London of Cornwall\".\nThrough those prosperous times Truro remained a social centre. Among the many notables were Richard Lander, the first European explorer to reach the mouth of the River Niger in Africa and was awarded the first gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society, and Henry Martyn, who read mathematics at Cambridge, was ordained and became a missionary, translating the New Testament into Urdu and Persian. Others include Humphry Davy, educated in Truro and the inventor of the miner's safety lamp, and Samuel Foote, an actor and playwright from Boscawen Street.\nTruro's importance increased later in the 19th century with an iron-smelting works, potteries, and tanneries. From the 1860s, the Great Western Railway provided a direct link to London Paddington. The Bishopric of Truro Act 1876 gave the town a bishop and later a cathedral. In 1877 it gained city status. The New Bridge Street drill hall was completed in the late 19th century.\nTruro was connected to the electric telegraph network in 1863 when the Electric and International Telegraph Company opened stations at Truro, Redruth, Penzance, Camborne, Liskard and St Austell.\nGeography.\nTruro lies in the centre of western Cornwall, about from the south coast, at the confluence of the rivers Kenwyn and Allen, which combine as the Truro River \u2013 one of a series of waterways and drowned valleys leading into the River Fal and then the large natural harbour of Carrick Roads. The valleys form a steep bowl surrounding the city on the north, east and west, open to the Truro River in the south. This shape, along with high precipitation that swells the rivers and a spring tide in the River Fal, were major factors in the 1988 floods that seriously damaged the city centre. Since then, flood defences have been constructed, including an emergency dam at New Mill on the River Kenwyn and a tidal barrier on the Truro River.\nThe city is amidst several protected natural areas such as the historic parklands at Pencalenick and areas of ornamental landscape such as Trelissick Garden and Tregothnan down the Truro River. An area south-east of the city, including Calenick Creek, has been included in the Cornwall Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. Other protected zones include an Area of Great Landscape Value comprising farmland and wooded valleys to the north east, and Daubuz Moors, a local nature reserve by the River Allen, close to the city centre.\nTruro has mainly grown and developed round the historic city centre in a nuclear fashion along the slopes of the bowl valley, except for fast linear development along the A390 to the west, towards Threemilestone. As Truro grew, it encompassed other settlements as suburbs or districts, including Kenwyn and Moresk to the north, Trelander to the east, Newham to the south, and Highertown, Treliske and Gloweth to the west.\nClimate.\nThe Truro area, like the rest of Cornwall, has an oceanic climate. This means fewer extremes in temperature than elsewhere in England, marked by high rainfall, cool summers and mild winters with infrequent frosts.\nDemography and economy.\nThe Truro urban area, including parts of surrounding parishes, had a 2001 census population of 18,051. By 2011 the population, including Threemilestone, was 20,044. As of 2021, there are 23,047 residents. Its status as the county's prime destination for retail and leisure and administration is unusual in that it is only its fourth most populous settlement. Indeed, population growth at 10.5% between 1971 and 1998 was slow compared with other Cornish towns and Cornwall.[] This trend changed significantly in the 21st century as Truro became one of the fastest growing cities in Cornwall, Truro experienced a year-on-year growth rate of 1.31% (Compared to 0.68% for Cornwall).\nTruro is notable for having one of the youngest average residents in Cornwall (77.7% under 65). 2,773 people (13.4% of the residents) specified a Cornish only identity and 335 (1.6%) Cornish in combination with British - which is consistent the rest of Cornwall (14% and 1.6% respectively). 3,168 households (33.6% of residents) are experiencing deprivation, and 4,744 (20.5%) are retirees.\nMajor employers include the Royal Cornwall Hospital, Cornwall Council and Truro College. There are about 22,000 jobs available in Truro, but only 9,500 economically active people living there, which make commuting a major factor in its traffic congestion. Average earnings are higher than elsewhere in Cornwall.\nCulture.\nAttractions.\nTruro's dominant feature is its Gothic-revival cathedral, designed by architect John Loughborough Pearson, rising above the city at its highest spire. It was built in 1880\u20131910 on the site of St Mary's Church, consecrated over 600 years earlier. Georgian architecture is well represented, with terraces and townhouses along Walsingham Place and Lemon Street often said to be \"the finest examples of Georgian architecture west of the city of Bath.\"\nThe main attraction to the region is a wide variety of shopping facilities. Truro has various chain stores, speciality shops and markets that reflect its history as a market town. The indoor Pannier Market is open all year, with many stalls and small businesses. The city is also popular for catering and night life, with bars, clubs and restaurants. It houses the Hall for Cornwall, a performing arts and entertainment venue.\nThe Royal Cornwall Museum is the oldest and premier museum of Cornish history and culture. Its collections cover fields such as archaeology, art and geology. Among the exhibits is the so-called Arthur's inscribed stone. Its parks and open spaces include Victoria Gardens, Boscawen Park and Daubuz Moors.\nEvents.\nLemon Quay is the year-round centre of most festivities in Truro.\nIn April, Truro prepares to partake in the Britain in Bloom competition, with floral displays and hanging baskets dotted around the city throughout the summer. A continental market comes to Truro in the holiday-making season, featuring food and craft stalls from France, Spain, Italy, Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, Greece and elsewhere.\nThe Truro City Carnival, held every September over a weekend, includes various arts and music performances, children's activities, a fireworks display, food and drinks fairs, a circus and a parade. A half-marathon, organised by Truro Running Club, also occurs in September; it runs from the city centre into the countryside towards Kea, returning to finish at Lemon Quay.\nTruro's Christmas includes a Winter Festival with a \"City of Lights\" paper lantern parade. Local schools, colleges, and community and youth groups join in.\nSport.\nTruro temporarily hosted the Cornish Pirates rugby union club in the 2005\u20132006 season, but it moved again for 2006\u20132007 to share the ground of Camborne RFC. In April 2018, the construction of a Stadium for Cornwall was discussed with Cornwall Council, which had pledged \u00a33 million for the \u00a314.3 million project. It is planned for a site in Threemilestone. The town's remaining rugby union side, Truro RFC, founded in 1885. It belongs to Tribute Western Counties West and plays home games at St Clements Hill. It has hosted the CRFU Cornwall Cup several times.\nTruro City F.C., a football team in the National League, is the only Cornish club ever to reach this tier of the English football league system. It achieved national recognition by winning the FA Vase in 2007 against A.F.C. Totton, in only the second final at the new Wembley Stadium; it became the first Cornish side ever to win the trophy. Its home ground is the Truro City Stadium in Threemilestone.\nCornwall County Cricket Club plays some home fixtures at Boscawen Park, which is also the home ground of Truro Cricket Club.\nTruro Fencing Club is a national flagship, having won numerous national championships and supplied three fencers for Team GB at the London 2012 Olympics.\nOther sports amenities include a leisure centre, golf course and tennis courts.\nCornish wrestling.\nTruro has been a centre for Cornish wrestling for centuries. Before the formation of the Cornish Wrestling Association, the tournaments in Truro were often described as the \"Great County Wrestling Matches\" and, with winners getting money prizes or silver medals, silver cups and silver belts. A large number of venues have been used throughout Truro, including various inns which put on tournaments such as the White Hart Inn, Western Inn, Ship Inn and Victoria Inn.\nIn the 1970s, Truro Cathedral School taught Cornish wrestling as part of its physical education programme and was at this time the only school in Cornwall to do so.\nJohn Lander was a noted wrestler during the late 1700s and early 1800s. He was landlord of the Fighting Cocks Inn in Truro and was the father of the famous explorers John Lander and Richard Lander.\nMedia.\nTruro is the centre of Cornwall's local media. The county weeklies, the \"Cornish Guardian\" and \"The West Briton\", are based there; the latter provides a Truro and Mid-Cornwall edition. The city also holds the studios of BBC Radio Cornwall. Regional television is provided by BBC South West and ITV West Country.\nCustoms.\nA mummers play text ascribed until recently to Mylor, Cornwall (quoted in studies of folk plays such as \"The Mummers Play\" by R. J. E. Tiddy \u2013 published posthumously in 1923 \u2013 and \"The English Folk-Play\" (1933) by E. K. Chambers), has now been shown by genealogical and other research to have originated in Truro about 1780.\nThe traditional Nine Lessons and Carols at Christmas originated in Truro in 1880, when its bishop, Edward White Benson, began to provide chances for evening singing of carols before Christmas Day, often on Christmas Eve.\nGovernance.\nThere are two tiers of local government covering Truro, at parish (city) and unitary authority level: Truro City Council and Cornwall Council. The city council is based at the Municipal Buildings on Boscawen Street, also known as City Hall. The Municipal Buildings form part of the Hall for Cornwall building (built 1846), which also houses a theatre. Cornwall Council is also based in Truro, having its headquarters at Lys Kernow on Treyew Road.\nAdministrative history.\nTruro was an ancient borough. It is unclear when it first became a borough; its earliest known charter was issued around 1166 by Reginald de Dunstanville, Earl of Cornwall. From 1295 the town also formed the Truro parliamentary borough (constituency). The borough was formally incorporated under a subsequent charter from Elizabeth I in 1589, establishing a governing body led by a mayor.\nThe borough boundary initially covered the parish of Truro St Mary and parts of the neighbouring parishes of St Clement and Kenwyn, including Kenwyn village. In 1832 the constituency was enlarged to take in additional areas from both St Clement and Kenwyn parishes. The borough was reformed to become a municipal borough in 1836 under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, which standardised how most boroughs operated across the country. The municipal boundaries were enlarged to match the constituency as part of the same reforms. The 1836 reforms also gave Truro responsibility for policing in the borough, leading to the creation of the Truro Borough Police, renamed Truro City Police in 1877. The force was merged into Cornwall County Constabulary in 1921.\nThe Diocese of Truro was established in 1876. The borough council then petitioned Queen Victoria to grant city status to Truro, which was granted by letters patent dated 28 August 1877. The borough boundaries were enlarged again in 1934, taking in areas east and west of the city.\nThe borough of Truro was abolished in 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, when the area became part of the Carrick district. A successor parish called Truro was created at the same time, covering the area of the abolished borough. The city status previously held by the borough was transferred to the new parish of Truro, allowing the parish council to take the name Truro City Council.\nCarrick district was abolished in 2009. Cornwall County Council then took on district-level functions, making it a unitary authority, and was renamed Cornwall Council.\nCounty town.\nThe primary function of counties until the 19th century was the administration of justice. Cornwall's senior courts, the assizes, were generally held at Launceston until 1838. A new courthouse, Shire Hall, opened in Bodmin in 1838 for hosting the assizes and other courts. Bodmin was thereafter described as the county town rather than Launceston.\nWhen county councils were established in 1889, Cornwall County Council chose to base itself in Truro rather than Bodmin. Since the separation of administrative and judicial functions in 1889, there has been no single official definition of 'county town'. Truro has been the seat of local government since 1889, but the county's assizes continued to be held at Shire Hall in Bodmin until assizes were abolished in 1972; since 1972 courts have not been organised on a county basis. Shire Hall in Bodmin closed as a courthouse in 1988, when its remaining courts transferred to the new Truro Crown Court on Edward Street.\nTruro therefore now serves as the administrative centre of Cornwall, has the county's main courthouse, and is also the seat of the Anglican diocese which covers the county. It is commonly described as Cornwall's county town, although some sources maintain that Bodmin remains the county town, despite having lost the functions traditionally associated with the role.\nTwinning.\nTruro is twinned with \nNamesakes.\nSeveral towns outside Britain have taken Truro as their name:\nTransport.\nRoads.\nTruro is from the A30 trunk road, to which it is linked by the A39 from Falmouth and Penryn. Also passing through is the A390 between Redruth to the west and Liskeard to the east, where it joins the A38 for Plymouth, Exeter and the M5 motorway.\nBuses.\nThe city and surroundings have extensive bus services, provided mainly by First Kernow and Transport for Cornwall. Most routes terminate at Truro bus station, near Lemon Quay. A permanent Park and Ride scheme, known as \"Park for Truro\", opened in August 2008. Buses based at Langarth Park in Threemilestone carry commuters into the city via Truro College, the Royal Cornwall Hospital Treliske, County Hall, the railway station, the Royal Cornwall Museum and Victoria Square, through to a second car park on the east side of the city.\nTruro is served by long-distance coach services, operated by National Express; there are daily departures to London, Birmingham and Penzance.\nRailway.\nTruro railway station is located about from the city centre. It is a stop on the Cornish Main Line between Penzance and Plymouth. The station is served by two train operating companies:\nHistory.\nTo the north-east of the station is a stone viaduct with views over the city, cathedral and Truro river in the distance. The longest viaduct on the line, it replaced Isambard Kingdom Brunel's wooden Carvedras Viaduct in 1904. Connecting to the main line at Truro is the Maritime Line to Falmouth in the south.\nTruro's first railway station, at Highertown, was opened in 1852 by the West Cornwall Railway (WCR) for trains to Redruth and Penzance; it was known as \"Truro Road\" station. It was extended to the Truro river at Newham in 1855, but closed so that Newham served as the terminus. When the Cornwall Railway connected the line to Plymouth, its trains ran to the present station above the city centre. The WCR diverted most passenger trains to the new station, leaving Newham mainly as a goods station until it closed in 1971; it became part of the Great Western Railway. The route from Highertown to Newham is now the \"https://\", which is a shared-use path on a countryside loop around the south side of the city.\nAir.\nNewquay, Cornwall's main airport, is north of Truro. In 2017, it was thought to be the \"fastest growing airport\" in the UK. It has regular flights to London Heathrow and other airports including Isles of Scilly, Dublin and D\u00fcsseldorf, Germany.\nRiver.\nThere is a boat link to Falmouth along the Truro and Fal four times a day, tide permitting. The fleet run by \"Enterprise Boats\", as part of the Fal River Links; it calls on the way at Malpas, Trelissick, Tolverne and St Mawes.\nChurches.\nThe old parish church of Truro was St Mary's, which was incorporated into the cathedral in the later 19th century. The building dates from 1518, with a later tower and spire dating from 1769.\nParts of the town were in the parishes of Kenwyn and St Clement (Moresk) until the mid 19th century, when other parishes were created. The lofty St George's church in Truro, designed by Rev. William Haslam, vicar of Baldhu, was built of Cornish granite in 1855. The parish of St George's Truro was formed from part of Kenwyn in 1846. In 1865 two more parishes were created: St John's from part of Kenwyn and St Paul's from part of St Clement. St George's contains a large wall painting behind the high altar, the work of Stephany Cooper in the 1920s. Her father, Canon Cooper, had been a missionary in Zanzibar and elsewhere. The theme of the mural is \"Three Heavens\": the first heaven has views of Zanzibar and its cathedral (a happy period in the life of the artist), the second views of the city of Truro including the cathedral, the railway viaduct and St George's Church (another happy period), and the third, above the others, separated from them by the River of Life (Christ is seen bridging the river and 17 saints including St Piran and St Kenwyn are depicted).\nCharles William Hempel was organist of St Mary's Church for 40 years from 1804 and also taught music. In 1805 he composed and printed \"Psalms from the New Version for the use of the Congregation of St. Mary's\", and in 1812 \"Sacred Melodies\" for the same congregation. These melodies gained popularity.\nThe oldest church in Truro is at Kenwyn, on the northern side. It dates from the 14th and 15th centuries, but was almost wholly rebuilt in 1820, having deteriorated to the point where it was deemed unsafe.\nSt John's Church (dedicated to St John the Evangelist) was built in 1828 (architect P. Sambell) in the Classical style on a rectangular plan and with a gallery. Alterations were carried out in the 1890s.\nSt Paul's Church was built in 1848. The chancel was replaced in 1882\u20131884, the new chancel being the work of J. D. Sedding. The tower is \"broad and strong\" (Pevsner) and the exterior of the aisles are ornamented in Sedding's version of the Perpendicular style. In the parish of St Paul is the former Convent of the Epiphany (Anglican) at Alverton House, Tregolls Road, an early 19th-century house extended for the convent of the Community of the Epiphany and the chapel was built in 1910 by Edmund H. Sedding. The sisterhood was founded by the Bishop of Truro, George Howard Wilkinson in 1883 and closed in 2001 when two surviving nuns moved into care homes. The sisters had been involved in pastoral and educational work and care of the cathedral and St Paul's Church. St Paul's Church, built with a tower on a river bed with poor foundations, has fallen into disrepair and is no longer used. Services are now held at the churches of St Clement, St George, and St John. St Paul and St Clement form a united benefice, as do St George and St John.\nOther denominations.\nOne Methodist place of worship remains in use, in Union Place \u2013 Truro Methodist Church \u2013 which has a broad granite front (1830, but since enlarged). There is a Quaker Meeting House in granite (c.\u20091830) and numerous other churches, some meeting in their own modern buildings, e. g. St Piran's Roman Catholic church and All Saints, Highertown, and some in schools or halls. St Piran's, dedicated to Our Lady of the Portal and St Piran, was built on the site of a medieval chapel by Margaret Steuart Pollard in 1973, for which she received the Benemerenti Medal from the Pope. The Baptist church building occupies the site of the former Lake's pottery, one of the oldest in Cornwall.\nEducation.\nA free grammar school associated with St Mary's Church was endowed in the 16th century. Its distinguished pupils have included the scientist Sir Humphry Davy, General Sir Hussey Vivian and the clergyman, Henry Martyn.\nThe former Truro Girls Grammar School was converted into a Sainsbury's supermarket.\nEducational institutions in Truro today include:\nDevelopment.\nTruro has many proposed urban development schemes, most of which are intended to counter the main problems, notably traffic congestion and lack of housing.\nMajor proposals include construction of a distributor road to carry traffic away from the busy Threemilestone-Treliske corridor, reconnecting at Penventinnie Lane. This will serve the new housing planned for that area.\nChanges proposed for the city centre include traffic restrictions in some of the main shopping streets and the encouragement of conversion of appropriate commercial properties back to residential use.\nRe-development of the former Carrick District Council site at the top of Pydar Street will provide much needed homes, and facilitate the relocation to Truro of a faculty of the University of Falmouth, as well as creating space for a hotel, restaurants, leisure facilities, open spaces and public amenities. Langarth Garden Village, a major development aiming to provide homes for 8000-10000 residents, has begun construction. This includes a new access road for the development, which is being delivered alongside the A30 improvements scheme.\nAlong with redevelopment of the waterfront, a tidal barrier is planned to dam water into the Truro River, which is currently blighted by mud banks that appear at low tide.\nMore controversial plans include the construction of an urban extension at Langarth, to the west of the city, including a new stadium for Truro City F.C. and the Cornish Pirates, and perhaps eventually the relocation of the city's golf course to make way for more housing. A smaller project is the addition of two large sculptures in the Piazza.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30893", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30893", "title": "Traditional Chinese Medicine", "text": ""}
{"id": "30894", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30894", "title": "Technical theatre", "text": ""}
{"id": "30895", "revid": "51026864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30895", "title": "Tom Burnett (Flight 93 passenger)", "text": "American executive and 9/11 victim (1963\u20132001)\nThomas Edward Burnett Jr. (May 29, 1963 \u2013 September 11, 2001) was an American who was the vice-president and chief operating officer of Thoratec Corporation, a medical devices company based in Pleasanton, California; he resided in nearby San Ramon, California. On September 11, 2001, Burnett was a passenger on board United Airlines Flight 93, which was hijacked as part of the September 11 attacks. He, along with other passengers, formed the plan to retake the plane from the hijackers, and led the effort that resulted in the crash of the plane into a field in Stonycreek Township near Shanksville, Pennsylvania, thwarting the plan of the hijackers to crash the plane into a building in Washington, D.C., most likely either the U.S. Capitol Building or the White House.\nEarly life.\nThomas Edward Burnett Jr. was born on May 29, 1963, the son of Thomas Burnett Sr. and Beverly Burnett. Burnett and his sisters grew up in Bloomington, Minnesota. He attended Ridgeview Elementary School, then Olson Middle School. At Thomas Jefferson Senior High School, where he wore jersey No. 11 and then No. 10, he led the \"Jaguars\" to the state finals as their starting quarterback in 1980. He graduated in 1981.\nBurnett studied Economics at Saint John's University in Minnesota, where he was a quarterback on the football team. After two years, an injury shortened his football career and he transferred to the Carlson School of Management at the University of Minnesota. He was named president of the Alpha Kappa Psi fraternity, then later graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in Finance. He went on to earn a Master of Business Administration degree at Pepperdine University.\nCareer.\nIn 1996, Burnett joined Thoratec Corporation, a medical devices company, as vice president of sales and marketing. In November 1999, he was promoted to senior vice president and chief operating officer.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1985, Burnett and a female classmate became the biological parents to a daughter who was given up for adoption. Her name is Mariah Mills Jacobsen. In July 1989, Burnett met his future wife, Deena, in Atlanta, where she had just completed flight attendant training for Delta Air Lines. They married in April 1992 and had three daughters. The family lived in San Ramon, California, where Deena worked as a stay-at-home mother, beginning when she first became pregnant in 1995. Thomas Burnett had attended mass daily in the year prior to the September 11 attacks, attempting to address a sense of foreboding which he had expressed to his wife. Burnett had busts of Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, Theodore Roosevelt, and Winston Churchill in his office. In January 2004, Jacobsen obtained a copy of her birth certificate, and learned that Burnett was her father. She met Burnett's family, becoming close to his sisters, his widow Deena, and her three half-sisters.\nUnited Airlines Flight 93.\nOn September 11, 2001, Burnett boarded United Airlines Flight 93, returning home to San Ramon, after a business trip. Burnett sat next to passenger Mark Bingham. Burnett called his wife, Deena, after hijackers took control of the plane. He made several phone calls to her beginning at 09:30:32 from rows\u00a024 and 25, though he was assigned a seat in row\u00a0four. Burnett explained that the plane had been hijacked by men claiming to have a bomb, and also said that a passenger had been stabbed with a knife and that he believed the bomb threat was a ruse to control the passengers. During his second call to her, she told him about the attacks on the World Trade Center and he replied that the hijackers were \"talking about crashing this plane...Oh my God. It's a suicide mission.\" He began pumping her for information about the attacks, interrupting her from time to time to tell the others nearby what she was saying. Then he hung up. Upon learning of the situation, Deena, a former flight attendant, recalled her training and urged Burnett to sit quietly and not draw attention to himself. However, Burnett instead informed her that he, Mark Bingham, Todd Beamer, and Jeremy Glick were forming a plan to take the plane from the hijackers, and leading other passengers in this effort. He ended his last call by saying, \"Don't worry, we're going to do something.\" Burnett and several other passengers stormed the cockpit, foiling the hijackers' plan to crash the plane into the White House or the U.S. Capitol Building. To prevent the passengers from gaining control of the plane, the hijackers crashed it in a Pennsylvania field, killing all 44 people on board.\nLegacy.\nBurnett is buried at Fort Snelling National Cemetery in Minnesota. Funeral and burial services were held on May 24, 2002.\nOn September 14, 2001, the Jefferson High School football team wore on their helmets the number 10, in honor of Burnett, who wore that number when he played at Jefferson High.\nIn March 2002, Bradley Street, a small street in Pleasanton, California, that runs outside the headquarters of Thoratec Corp. where Burnett worked, was renamed Tom Burnett Lane.\nOn September 11, 2002, the Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota, dedicated the Tom Burnett 9/11 Memorial near the Nordstrom Court, with the loved ones of Burnett in attendance.\nIn 2002, Burnett, along with Beamer, Bingham and Glick, were posthumously awarded the Arthur Ashe Courage Award.\nA post office in his hometown of Bloomington, Minnesota, was renamed the Thomas E. Burnett Jr. Post Office.\nEvery May, Oak Grove Middle School students volunteer for a Thomas Burnett Day of Service. At Jefferson High School, Burnett's former teammates created a memorial to honor him situated between two football practice fields. The school's hallways display photos of Burnett and his jersey, which was retired on September 5, 2002, at Bloomington Arena during the game between Bloomington Jefferson and their rival, Bloomington Kennedy. A memorial scholarship was started in his honor, and a collection of his favorite books was placed in the school's media center. A white oak tree was planted in front of Saint Edward's Catholic Church in Bloomington, where Burnett was confirmed, and where his funeral was held. A large fieldstone in front of the tree is inscribed with the passage from the Book of John 15:13: \"There is no greater love than to lay down one's life for one's friends\".\nIn 2004, Burnett's biological daughter Mariah Mills turned 19 and became legally entitled to access information about her birth parents. She learned that Burnett was her father, and she eventually formed a relationship with Deena Burnett and with her half-sisters. Deena gave Mills an unfinished letter that Burnett had written for her in 1987.\nThe University of Minnesota founded the Tom Burnett Advanced Leadership Program in 2006. Each year a group of final-year students work as a group on skills relating to courageous leadership and active citizenship. Over 200 students have matriculated through the program.\nIn 2008, Thoratec Europe Limited (Thoratec Corporation's European distribution arm based in Great Britain) gave its new UK headquarters in Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire, the name Burnett House.\nIn mid-2002, Deena Burnett and her daughters moved from San Ramon back to Little Rock, Arkansas, near where she grew up and where her family still lives. In 2006, Deena married Rodney Bailey, a divorced Little Rock insurance agent with a teenage son, that she met in early 2004. She co-authored a book with Anthony Giombetti entitled \"Fighting Back: Living Life Beyond Ourselves\". The book is published by Advantage Inspirational and was released in July 2006. \"Fighting Back\" recounts the difficulties in getting the FBI to release cockpit voice recorder tapes from United 93 to the public, and includes Deena's thoughts on the nature of heroism.\nIn February 2003, the California State Assembly renamed the Fostoria Way overcrossing over Interstate 680 in San Ramon the Thomas E. Burnett Jr. Memorial Bridge in his honor.\nAt the National 9/11 Memorial at the World Trade Center, Burnett is memorialized at the South Pool, on Panel S-68, along with other passengers from Flight 93.\nOn September 1, 2011, his widow Deena Burnett was interviewed on the death of Osama bin Laden where she said that his death had given her closure. She learned of the news while in bed and told her daughters the next morning. His mother, Beverly Burnett thanked and praised the Navy SEALs and echoed Deena's words of having more closure after bin Laden's killing.\nOn September 11, 2011, the tenth anniversary of the attacks, the Bloomington Crime Prevention Association sponsored the first annual Tom Burnett Jr. Hometown Heroes Celebration at the Hilton Mall of America. The event featured a keynote address given by Senator Amy Klobuchar, and the presentation of the Tom Burnett Jr. Remember Award would be given to citizens who demonstrate leadership, selflessness, and a commitment to others. James Caauwe, President of the Association, explained the event thus: \"We wanted to remember Tom Burnett Jr. and the sacrifices he made, but not only the sacrifices that he made on 9/11 but who he was as a person. We looked at those qualities that he had of leadership and of community service and recognized people that are doing that today.\" The occasion was also marked with the dedication of Hero's Garden, a memorial that stands in Burnett's honor at Pepperdine University's Graziadio School of Business and Management, where Burnett received his MBA.\nIn popular culture.\nBurnett is portrayed by American actors Greg Benson in the documentary \"The Flight That Fought Back\", by Jeffrey Nordling in the 2006 TV film \"Flight 93\", and by Christian Clemenson in the 2006 feature film \"United 93\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30896", "revid": "48616026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30896", "title": "Tommy Franks", "text": "American general (born 1945)\nTommy Ray Franks (born 17 June 1945) is a retired United States Army general. His last army post was as the Commander of the United States Central Command, overseeing United States military operations in a 25-country region, including the Middle East. Franks succeeded General Anthony Zinni to this position on 6 July 2000 and served until his retirement on 7 July 2003.\nFranks was the United States general leading the attack on the Taliban in Afghanistan in response to the September 11 attacks on the United States in 2001. He also oversaw the 2003 invasion of Iraq and the overthrow of Saddam Hussein.\nEarly life and education.\nFranks was born Tommy Ray Bentley in Wynnewood, Oklahoma, and was adopted by Ray and Lorene \"Pete\" Parker Franks. Franks attended Midland High School and graduated from Robert E. Lee High School in Midland, Texas one year ahead of First Lady Laura Bush. He attended the University of Texas at Austin, where he was a brother of Delta Upsilon International Fraternity. He dropped out of college after two years due to subpar grades and lack of motivation. Franks decided to give himself a \"jolt\" and joined the United States Army.\nLater, through the military, Franks was able to enroll at the University of Texas at Arlington, where he graduated with a Bachelor of Business Administration degree in 1971. He also holds a Master of Science in Public Administration from the Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania and is a graduate of the Armed Forces Staff College and the Army War College.\nMilitary career.\nFranks enlisted in the United States Army in 1965 and attended Basic Training at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri and received his Advanced Individual Training as a cryptologic analyst at Fort Devens, Massachusetts. Standing out among his peers in outstanding marksmanship and leadership qualities, Private First Class Franks was selected to attend the Artillery and Missile Officer Candidate School, Fort Sill, Oklahoma and was commissioned a second lieutenant in February 1967. After an initial tour as a battery Assistant Executive Officer at Fort Sill, he was assigned to the 9th Infantry Division in Vietnam, where he served as forward observer, aerial observer, and Assistant S-3 with 2nd Battalion, 4th Field Artillery. He also served as Fire Direction Officer and Fire Support Officer with 5th Battalion (mechanized), 60th Infantry during this tour.\nIn 1968, Franks returned to Fort Sill, where he commanded a cannon battery in the Artillery Training Center. In 1969, he was selected to participate in the Army's \"Boot Strap Degree Completion Program\", and subsequently attended the University of Texas at Arlington, where he finished his bachelor's degree in 1971. Following attendance at the Artillery Officer Advanced Course, he was assigned to the 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment in West Germany in 1973, where he commanded the 1st Squadron Howitzer Battery and served as Squadron S-3. He also commanded the 84th Armored Engineer Company, and served as Regimental Assistant S-3 during this tour.\nFranks, after graduating from the Armed Forces Staff College, was posted to The Pentagon in 1976, where he served as an Army Inspector General in the Investigations Division. In 1977 he was assigned to the Office of the Chief of Staff, Army where he served on the Congressional Activities Team, and subsequently as an Executive Assistant.\nIn 1981, Franks returned to West Germany where he commanded the 2nd Battalion, 78th Field Artillery (1st Armored Division) for three years. He returned to the United States in 1984 to attend the Army War College at Carlisle, Pennsylvania, where he also completed graduate studies at the Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania. He was next assigned to Fort Hood, Texas, as III Corps Deputy Assistant G3, a position he held until 1987 when he assumed command of 1st Cavalry Division Artillery. He also served as Chief of Staff, 1st Cavalry Division during this tour.\nFranks's initial general officer assignment was Assistant Division Commander (Maneuver), 1st Cavalry Division during Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm. During 1991\u20131992, he was assigned as Assistant Commandant of the Field Artillery School at Fort Sill. In 1992, he was assigned to Fort Monroe, Virginia as the first Director, Louisiana Maneuvers Task Force, Office of Chief of Staff of the Army, a position held until 1994 when he was reassigned to South Korea as the CJG3 of Combined Forces Command and United States Forces Korea.\nFrom 1995 to 1997, Franks commanded the 2nd Infantry Division, Korea. He assumed command of Third United States Army/Army Forces Central Command in Atlanta, Georgia in May 1997, a post he held until June 2000 when he was selected for promotion to general and assignment as Commander in Chief, United States Central Command. Franks was the United States general leading the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan and the overthrow of the Taliban in government in response to the September 11 attacks. He also led the 2003 invasion of Iraq and the overthrow of Saddam Hussein.\nCritics of Franks's tenure as commander of United States forces in Afghanistan cite his failure to deploy 800 United States Army Rangers to the Battle of Tora Bora as a key factor in allowing Osama bin Laden to escape into Pakistan. Peter Bergen, a prominent journalist and expert on Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda, described Franks's decision as \"one of the greatest military blunders in recent US history,\" which allowed al-Qaeda to recover and begin to mount an insurgency. Franks defended his decision with the support of other prominent US military leaders, citing a lack of conclusive evidence that bin-Laden was at Tora Bora, but Bergen and other critics, including the Delta Force commander at Tora Bora, Dalton Fury, claimed that the evidence that bin-Laden was present at the battle was very robust; Fury claimed that his team came within 2,000 meters of bin Laden's suspected position, but withdrew because of uncertainty over the number of al-Qaeda fighters guarding bin Laden and a lack of support from allied Afghan troops.\nFranks's retirement was announced on 22 May 2003. Secretary Donald Rumsfeld reportedly offered him the position of Chief of Staff of the United States Army, but he declined. On 7 July 2003 Franks's retirement took effect.\nFranks's awards include the Defense Distinguished Service Medal; Army Distinguished Service Medal (two awards); Legion of Merit (four awards); Bronze Star Medal with Valor device and four oak leaf clusters; Purple Heart (two oak leaf clusters); Air Medal with Valor Device; Army Commendation Medal with Valor Device; and a number of U.S. and foreign service awards. He wears the Army Staff Identification Badge and the Aircraft Crewmember's Badge. He is an Honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire. In 2004, President George W. Bush awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom\nIraq War.\nAuthors suggest that Franks was worn down by repeated pressure from U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld to reduce the number of U.S. troops in war plans and cancel the deployment of the 1st Cavalry Division, a scheduled follow-on unit that was slated for deployment in April 2003. More generally, they argue Franks's command was somewhat understandably focused on the immediate task in front of it\u00a0\u2013 defeating Saddam Hussein and taking Baghdad\u00a0\u2013 and few were willing to divert resources away from that effort and toward the long-term post-war needs.\nThe writers also question his decision during the war to keep sealift ships carrying the equipment for the 4th Infantry Division (Mechanized) at sea instead of bringing the equipment ashore in Kuwait sooner so the division could have entered Iraq earlier than it did to add to the force levels in post-war Iraq. Franks argues that by keeping the ships at sea the Iraqis were deceived into believing a U.S. attack was yet to come from the north through Turkey, though Colin Powell and others have questioned his view.\nFranks wanted to retire after the major combat phase of the war, tired from planning and prosecuting two major wars and leading the overall war on terrorism since September 2001. As a result, Gordon and Trainor argue he was slow to act during the crucial months following the fall of Baghdad. They suggest there was a leadership void at U.S. Central Command because his two deputies, Michael Delong and John Abizaid, were at odds with each other until Abizaid succeeded Franks in the middle of the summer of 2003. Delong retired with a bitter taste in his mouth and wrote his own book regarding the leadership failures in the headquarters. They also note that there was a command transition in Iraq as V Corps and General Ricardo Sanchez took command of U.S. forces in Iraq without being fully resourced and trained for the mission in advance.\nIn \"\", veteran defense and Pentagon reporter Thomas E. Ricks echoes criticism from officers who had served under Franks who put forth that, while tactically sound, he lacked the strategic mindset and overall intellect necessary for the task. Some close to him argued he was more thoughtful than he seemed, was aware that Secretary Rumsfeld and his staff were unable to discuss the Iraq War in military terms and had an obligation to put forth stronger objections to the civilian control of military planning. While demanding and goal oriented he was also criticized for being unwilling to countenance alternate viewpoints and for detaching himself from day-to-day affairs when the ground war ceased and he prepared for retirement.\nWeapons of mass destruction.\nAccording to \"Time\" magazine, on 21 November 2003, Franks said that in the event of another terrorist attack, American constitutional liberties might be discarded by popular demand in favor of a military state. Discussing the hypothetical dangers posed to the US in the wake of the 9/11 attacks, Franks said that \"the worst thing that could happen\" is if terrorists acquire and then use a biological, chemical or nuclear weapon that inflicts heavy casualties. If that happens, Franks said, \"... the Western world, the free world, loses what it cherishes most, and that is freedom and liberty we've seen for a couple of hundred years in this grand experiment that we call democracy.\" Franks then offered \"in a practical sense\" what he thinks would happen in the aftermath of such an attack.\n\"It means the potential of a weapon of mass destruction and a terrorist, massive, casualty-producing event somewhere in the Western world\u00a0\u2013 it may be in the United States of America\u00a0\u2013 that causes our population to question our own Constitution and to begin to militarize our country in order to avoid a repeat of another mass, casualty-producing event. Which in fact, then begins to unravel the fabric of our Constitution.\"\n\"[No] one in this country probably was more surprised than I when weapons of mass destruction were not used against our troops as they moved toward Baghdad,\" said Franks on 2 December 2005.\nService summary.\nDates of rank\nAwards and decorations\nLeft breast\nRight breast\nPersonal life.\nSince 2003, Franks has operated Franks &amp; Associates LLC, a private consulting firm, active in the disaster recovery industry. In June 2006, General Franks formed a partnership with Innovative Decon Solutions.\nFollowing his retirement, Franks published his memoirs in \"American Soldier\", which debuted as #1 on the \"New York Times\" Best Seller list in August 2004, displacing President Bill Clinton's memoir from the top spot. One reviewer praised General Franks's recollections of his Vietnam service but opined that the book, like the plan for and execution of the Iraq war itself, he said, \"begins better than it ends.\" The reviewer expressed the wish that Franks had \"relied less on the official record and more on his own experience and memories\" in recalling the later war, as he had in recalling the earlier one.\nSpeaking at the Republican Convention in New York on 31 August 2004, Franks endorsed President George W. Bush for re-election. President Bush awarded Franks the country's highest civilian award, the Presidential Medal of Freedom on 14 December 2004. In the same month, Franks became a spokesman for Teen Arrive Alive, which is a company that uses GPS in cellular phones to tell parents how fast their teenage children are driving.\nIn December 2005, Franks was appointed to the Bank of America board of directors, a position he held until resigning on 11 June 2009 for unspecified reasons but as part of an \"exodus\" of ten directors from April to August 2009.\nFranks also sits on OSI Restaurant Partners's board of directors. On 26 March 2008, he was elected to the board of directors of Chuck E. Cheese's.\nFranks sits on the board of directors of the National Park Foundation. He is an advisor to the Central Command Memorial Foundation and the Military Child Education Coalition, and is a spokesman for the Southeastern Guide Dogs Organization.\nAdditionally he sits in the board of trustees for William Penn University, a university founded and supported by the Society of Friends (Quakers).\nA museum dedicated to him lies in Hobart, Oklahoma.\nFranks currently resides in Roosevelt, Oklahoma.\nCharity controversy.\nIn January 2008, ABC News and the \"Army Times\" reported on Franks's involvement with the charitable Coalition to Salute America's Heroes, which he charged $100,000 to use his name to raise money for wounded soldiers. Following Congressional investigators and watchdog groups' criticism because only 25% of the money found its way to wounded veterans, compared to the industry standard of 85%, Franks ended his support for the group in late 2005. Roger Chapin, president of the charity, and his wife had apparently been living a lavish lifestyle on the charity's money. Bob Schieffer, host of CBS's \"Face the Nation\", criticized Franks, saying, \"What kind of \"person\" would insist, or even \"allow\" himself, to be paid to raise money for those who were wounded while serving under him?\" Franks said he severed his connection to the fundraiser when he realized most of the money he helped raise went to the fundraiser, not the troops\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30898", "revid": "1305150758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30898", "title": "Treaty of Verdun", "text": "843 treaty dividing the Frankish Empire between the grandsons of Charlemagne\nThe Treaty of Verdun (; ), agreed to on 10 August 843, ended the Carolingian civil war and divided the Carolingian Empire between Lothair I, Louis II and Charles II, the surviving sons of the emperor Louis I. The treaty was the culmination of negotiations lasting more than a year. It was the first in a series of partitions contributing to the dissolution of the empire created by Charlemagne and has been seen as foreshadowing the formation of many of the modern countries of western Europe.\nThe treaty was the first of the four partition treaties of the Carolingian Empire, followed by the Treaties of Pr\u00fcm (855), Meerssen (870), and Ribemont (880).\nBackground.\nFollowing Charlemagne's death, Louis was made ruler of the Frankish Empire. Agobard, archbishop of Lyon, opposed the division of the empire, as he claimed that it would divide the church. During his reign, Louis the Pious divided the empire so that each of his sons could rule over their own kingdom under the greater rule of their father. Louis\u2019 eldest son, Lothair I, was given the title of emperor but because of several re-divisions by his father and the resulting revolts, he became much less powerful. When Louis died in 840, Lothair I claimed overlordship over the entirety of his father's kingdom in an attempt to reclaim the power he had at the beginning of his reign as emperor. He also supported his nephew Pepin II's claim to Aquitaine, a large province in the west of the Frankish realm. Lothair's brother, Louis II, and his half-brother Charles II refused to acknowledge Lothair's suzerainty and declared war against him. After a bloody civil war, they defeated Lothair at the Battle of Fontenoy in 841 and sealed their alliance in 842 with the Oaths of Strasbourg which declared Lothair unfit for the imperial throne, after which he became willing to negotiate a settlement. The meeting happened shortly before August 10, as confirmed by a contemporary letter.\nProvisions.\nEach of the three brothers was already established in one kingdom: Lothair in the Kingdom of Italy; Louis the German in the Kingdom of Bavaria; and Charles II in the Kingdom of Aquitaine. \nIn the settlement, Lothair (who had been named co-emperor in 817) retained his title as emperor, but it conferred only nominal overlordship of his brothers' lands. His domain later became the Low Countries, the Rhineland west of the Rhine, Lorraine, Alsace, Burgundy, Provence, and the Kingdom of Italy (which covered the northern half of the Italian Peninsula). He also received the two imperial cities, Aachen and Rome.\nHe was guaranteed the kingship of all lands to the east of the Rhine (although not the Netherlands to the north of the Rhine) and to the north and east of Italy, altogether called East Francia. It eventually became the High Medieval Kingdom of Germany, the largest component of the Holy Roman Empire.\nPepin II was granted the Kingdom of Aquitaine, but only under the authority of Charles. Charles received all lands west of the Rh\u00f4ne, called West Francia. It eventually became the Kingdom of France.\nAfter Lothair's death in 855, his eldest son, Louis II, inherited Italy and his father's claim to the Imperial throne. Upper Burgundy and Lower Burgundy (Arles and Provence) passed to Lothair's third son, Charles of Provence. The remaining territory north of the Alps, which did not previously have a name, was inherited by Lothair's second son, Lothair II, and was then named Lotharingia (present day Lorraine) after him.\nLegacy.\nThe division reflected an adherence to the old Frankish custom of partible or divisible inheritance amongst a ruler's sons, rather than primogeniture (i.e., inheritance by the eldest son) which would soon be adopted by both Frankish kingdoms. Since Lotharingia combined lengthy and vulnerable land borders with poor internal communications as it was severed by the Alps, it was not a viable entity and soon fragmented. This made it difficult for a single ruler to reassemble Charlemagne's empire. Only Charles the Fat achieved this briefly.\nIn 855, the northern section became fragile Lotharingia, which became disputed by the more powerful states that evolved out of Francia Occidentalis (present day \"France\") and Francia Orientalis (present day \"Germany\"). Generations of kings of France and Germany were unable to establish a firm rule over Lothair's kingdom. While the north of Lotharingia was then composed of independent countries, the southern third of Lotharingia, Alsace-Lorraine, was traded back and forth between France and Germany from the 18th to the 20th century. In 1766, it passed to France after the death of Stanis\u0142aw Leszczy\u0144ski, who had acquired the region from the German Habsburgs by the Treaty of Vienna (1738) ending the War of Polish Succession (1733\u20131738). In 1871, Alsace-Lorraine became German, after the victory of Prussia and its German allies over the French in the Franco-Prussian War (1870\u20131871). In 1919, it became French again by the Treaty of Versailles (1919), following the French victory over the Germans in World War I (1914\u20131918). In 1940, Germany reannexed Alsace-Lorraine following Germany's conquest of France. Finally, in 1945, after World War II (1939\u20131945), Alsace-Lorraine was solidified as French territory, which it remains to this day, more than a thousand years after the Treaty of Verdun. The collapse of the Middle Frankish Kingdom also compounded the disunity of the Italian Peninsula, which persisted into the 19th century.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30900", "revid": "14979901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30900", "title": "Trance music", "text": "Genre of electronic dance music\nTrance is a genre of electronic dance music that emerged from the techno and EBM scene in Frankfurt, Germany, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and quickly spread throughout Europe.\nTrance music is typically characterized by a tempo between 120 and 150 beats per minute (BPM), repeating melodic phrases and a musical form that distinctly builds tension and elements throughout a track often culminating in 1 to 2 \"peaks\" or \"drops\". Although trance is a genre of its own, it liberally incorporates influences from other musical styles such as techno, house, chill-out, classical music, tech house, ambient and film scores.\nA trance is a state of hypnotism and heightened consciousness. This is portrayed in trance music by the mixing of layers with distinctly foreshadowed build-up and release. A common characteristic of modern trance music is a mid-song climax followed by a soft breakdown disposing of beats and percussion entirely, leaving the melody or atmospherics to stand alone for an extended period before gradually building up again. Trance tracks are often lengthy to allow for such progression and commonly have sufficiently sparse opening and closing sections to facilitate mixing by DJs.\nTrance is mostly instrumental, although vocals can be mixed in: typically they are performed by mezzo-soprano to soprano female soloists, mostly without a traditional verse/chorus structure. Structured vocal form in trance music forms the basis of the vocal trance subgenre, which has been described as \"grand, soaring, and operatic\" and \"ethereal female leads floating amongst the synths\". However, male singers, such as Jonathan Mendelsohn, are also featured.\nHistory.\nThe KLF's \"What Time is Love? (Pure Trance)\" was released in the UK in 1988. The earliest years of Trance were defined by Frankfurt labels such as Eye Q, Harthouse, Fax +49-69/450464, Force Inc., and others. Producers such as Pete Namlook, Oliver Lieb, and Rolf Ellmer created noteworthy tracks such as \"Eternal Spirit\" by 4Voice, \"Hearts\" by L.S.G., and \"We Came in Peace\" by Dance 2 Trance.\nMuch of the development of trance can be traced to Sven V\u00e4th, who was heavily influenced by his experiences traveling to Goa where DJs were using psychedelic rock and other sounds to induce a trance state at beach parties. V\u00e4th, Dag Lerner, and Torsten Fenslau had an affection for hypnotic dance sounds and the music at Dorian Gray and Omen began to reflect this.\nV\u00e4th launched Eye Q with Heinz Roth and Matthias Hoffman in 1991, followed by Harthouse in 1992, releasing some of the most well-known trance tracks of the era. Eye Q took a softer approach to trance with records such as Cygnus X's \"The Orange Theme\", Brainchild's \"Symmetry\" and Vernon's \"Wonderer\". Harthouse focused on a harder trance sound with tracks such as \"Quicksand\" by Spicelab, \"Spectrum\" by Metal Master, \"Human\" by Resistance D, and \"Acperience\" by Hardfloor. The sound of Frankfurt was the sound of trance. DJ Dag Lerner, one half of Dance to Trance has stated that he was the first to call his music trance and \"gave the child his name.\" The genre got its name from the trance-like state the music attempted to emulate in the 1990s before the genre's focus changed.\nIn a 2006 interview with Resident Advisor, Sven V\u00e4th acknowledged the role of his labels Eye Q and Harthouse in helping to create what people know as trance music today, going on to say that \"people are getting a wrong interpretation of what trance music is all about\" and differentiating his own form from modern forms, saying, \"They are following a format -- always producing the same structure. It's a pop format for trance.\"\nAs German trance made its way back to Goa, a new subgenre emerged that was more organic in sound with an oriental aesthetic in its melodies, often with references to Eastern philosophy. Goa trance would go on to spawn many sub-genres of its own, including psytrance, psybreaks, and others.\nIn 1991 in Berlin, MFS Records began to gain a trance profile, signing Mijk van Dijk, Cosmic Baby, and Paul van Dyk, soon releasing some of the most well-known early trance tracks such as \"Love Stimulation\" by Humate and \"Perfect Day\" by Visions of Shiva, as well as perhaps the first ever trance compilation, \"Tranceformed From Beyond\". While writer Bom Coen traces the roots of trance to Paul van Dyk's 1993 remix of Humate's \"Love Stimulation\", there is little evidence to support this contention. In fact, van Dyk's own trance roots can be traced further back to his work with Visions of Shiva, van Dyk's trance project with Cosmic Baby coming earlier. Early on, Paul van Dyk had been relatively sidelined on the scene, but his collaboration with Cosmic Baby quickly led him into the heart of the scene.\nIn the UK, the British approach to trance music and house music was similar: progressive chord structures, crescendos, longer breakdowns, and more organic instruments. In 1993 Platipus Records was launched by Simon Berry as an outlet for Barry's various projects, including Union Jack, Clanger, Art of Trance. Platipus would become one of the most consequential progressive trance labels. Another influential label of progressive trance was Hooj Choons with notable trance releases from artists Tilt, Oliver Lieb, Solarstone, as well as the well-known Three N' One remix of Cafe Del Mar by Energy 52.\nIn Australia, Christopher J. Dolan from Melbourne, who performs as Quench released \"Dreams\" in 1993. It was re-released in 1994 and was nominated for the ARIA Award for Best Dance Release at the ARIA Music Awards of 1995. It peaked at No. 9 on the French singles chart, and No. 75 on the United Kingdom Singles Chart. By October 2000 it had sold over a million copies worldwide.\nIn Germany, a harder sub-genre of trance emerged. With a faster tempo and gated pads, hard trance introduced the breakdown-build-anthem template that would become nearly ubiquitous in later trance sub-genres. Hard trance would inspire hardhouse, hard uplifting, jumpstyle, NRG, and hardstyle. Perhaps the best known label for this subgenre of trance was Bonzai Records, a sublabel of Lightning Records with notable tracks including Jones &amp; Stephenson's \"The First Rebirth\", Cherry Moon Trax's \"The House of House\", and Blue Alphabet's \"Cybertrance\".\nBy the late 1990s, uplifting took over the scene with its fast tempo, characteristic builds, long breakdowns and big drops. In the early 2000s, pop-style vocals began being added into the music. The development of another subgenre, epic trance, finds some of its origins in classical music, with film music also being influential. Trance was arguably at its commercial peak in the second part of 1990s and early 2000s. \nFrom the late 2000s to the mid 2010s, popular trance music providers such as Armin van Buuren's \"A State of Trance\", Paul van Dyk, and Above &amp; Beyond remained popular, while lesser known DJs changed to other sounds. In 2017 a new wave of underground DJs such as Nina Kraviz began incorporating trance music into their sets.\nIn 2023, an effort by John 00 Fleming and others led Beatport to split their trance genre category into two: Trance (Main Floor) and Trance (Raw/Deep/Hypnotic). The latter was designed for the underground side of the genre.\nProduction.\nTrance employs a time signature, generally using a tempo of 125 to 150 BPM, though the music can be any tempo, and 16- or 32-beat phrases. A kick drum is usually placed on every downbeat and a regular open hi-hat is often placed on the upbeat. While the majority of trance music uses the same \"four-on-the-floor\" beat as house and techno, in trance the kick drum is often de-emphasized to give space to the bassline, whereas in house and techno the kick drum is heavily emphasized, often being the loudest sound in the mix. Extra percussive elements are usually added, and in recent years major transitions, builds or climaxes are often foreshadowed by lengthy \"snare rolls\"\u2014a quick succession of snare drum hits that build in velocity, frequency, and volume towards the end of a measure.\nRapid arpeggios and minor keys are common features of trance, the latter being almost universal. Trance tracks often use one central \"hook\", or melody, which runs through almost the entire song, repeating at intervals anywhere between 2 beats and 32 bars, in addition to harmonies and motifs in different timbres from the central melody. Instruments are added or removed every 4, 8, 16, or 32 bars.\nIn the section before the breakdown, the lead motif is often introduced in a sliced up and simplified form, to give the audience a \"taste\" of what they will hear after the breakdown. Then later, the final climax is usually \"a culmination of the first part of the track mixed with the main melodic reprise\".\nAs is the case with many dance music tracks, trance tracks are usually built with sparser intros (\"mix-ins\") and outros (\"mix-outs\") to enable DJs to blend them together immediately.\nEDM-infused forms designed for festival main stages often incorporate other styles and elements of electronic music such as electro and progressive house into its production. It emphasizes harsher basslines and drum beats which decrease the importance of offbeats and focus primarily on a four on the floor stylistic house drum pattern. The BPM of more recent styles tends to be on par with house music at 120 to 135 beats per minute. However, unlike house music, recent forms of Uplifting continue to feature melodic breakdowns and longer transitions.\nSubgenres.\nTrance music is broken into a number of subgenres including acid trance, classic trance, hard trance, progressive trance, and uplifting trance. Uplifting trance is also known as \"anthem trance\", \"epic trance\", \"commercial trance\", \"stadium trance\", or \"euphoric trance\", and has been strongly influenced by classical music in the 1990s and 2000s by leading artists such as Ferry Corsten, Armin Van Buuren, Paul Van Dyk, Ti\u00ebsto, Push, Rank 1 and at present with the development of the subgenre \"orchestral uplifting trance\" or \"uplifting trance with symphonic orchestra\" by such artists as Sound Apparel, Andy Blueman, Ciro Visone, Soundlift, Arctic Moon, and Sergey Nevone &amp; Simon O'Shine, among others. Closely related to uplifting trance is Eurodance, which has become a general term for a wide variety of highly commercialized European dance music. Notably late in the 1990s, German producer ATB revolutionized the scene of the aforementioned Eurodance with his hit single \"9 PM (Till I Come)\". Several subgenres are crossovers with other major genres of electronic music. For instance, tech trance is a mixture of trance and techno, and vocal trance \"combines [trance's] progressive elements with pop music\". The dream trance genre originated in the mid-1990s, with its popularity then led by Robert Miles, who composed Children in 1996. Recently, there is also a very small subgenre called \"medieval trance\", which combines medieval elements together with trance elements, e.g. Maestro Giano, Green Clouds and other artists, which are effectively a kind of \"reverse Bardcore\".\nAllMusic states on progressive trance: \"the progressive wing of the trance crowd led directly to a more commercial, chart-oriented sound since trance had never enjoyed much chart action in the first place. Emphasizing the smoother sound of Eurodance or house (and occasionally more reminiscent of Jean-Michel Jarre than Basement Jaxx), Progressive Trance became the sound of the world's dance floors by the end of the millennium. Critics ridiculed its focus on predictable breakdowns and relative lack of skill to beat-mix, but progressive trance was caned by the hottest DJ.\"\nMusic festivals.\nThe following is an incomplete list of dance music festivals that showcase trance music.\nAsia.\n\"Notes:\" Sunburn was not the first festival/event to specialize in India in trance music. Much earlier pioneers of Goa parties held events as early as the late 1980s and through all of the 1990s\nEurope.\nNetherlands.\nElectronic Music festivals in the Netherlands are mainly organized by four companies ALDA Events, ID&amp;T, UDC and Q-dance:\nNorth America.\nUnited States.\nElectronic music festivals in the United States feature various electronic music genres such as trance, house, techno, electro, dubstep, and drum and bass:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30903", "revid": "27991771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30903", "title": "Thomas Pynchon", "text": "American novelist (born 1937)\nThomas Ruggles Pynchon Jr. ( , commonly ; born May 8, 1937) is an American novelist. He is noted for his complex works of postmodern fiction, characterized by dense references to popular culture, history, literature, music, science, and mathematics, as well as by humor and explorations of paranoia. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest American novelists. Pynchon is notoriously reclusive. Few photographs of him have been published, and rumors about his location and identity have circulated since the 1960s.\nBorn on Long Island, Pynchon served two years in the United States Navy and earned an English degree from Cornell University. After publishing several short stories in the late 1950s and early 1960s, he began composing the novels for which he is best known: \"V.\" (1963), \"The Crying of Lot 49\" (1966), and \"Gravity's Rainbow\" (1973). For the latter, Pynchon won the 1974 U.S. National Book Award for Fiction. Pynchon followed with the novels \"Vineland\" (1990), \"Mason &amp; Dixon\" (1997), \"Against the Day\" (2006), \"Inherent Vice\" (2009), which was adapted for film in 2014, and \"Bleeding Edge\" (2013). Pynchon's latest novel, \"Shadow Ticket\", was published in 2025.\nEarly life.\nThomas Pynchon was born on May 8, 1937, in Glen Cove, Long Island, New York, one of three children of engineer and politician Thomas Ruggles Pynchon Sr. (1907\u20131995) and Katherine Frances Bennett (1909\u20131996), a nurse. As a child, Pynchon alternately attended an Episcopal church with his father and a Catholic church with his mother.\nEducation and naval career.\nA \"voracious reader and precocious writer\", Pynchon is believed to have skipped two grades before high school. He attended Oyster Bay High School in Oyster Bay, where he was named \"student of the year\" and contributed short fictional pieces to his school newspaper. These juvenilia incorporated some of the literary motifs and subject matter he has used throughout his career: oddball names, sophomoric humor, illicit drug use, and paranoia.\nPynchon graduated from high school in 1953 at age 16. That fall, he went to Cornell University to study engineering physics. At the end of his sophomore year, he enlisted in the U.S. Navy. He attended boot camp at United States Naval Training Center Bainbridge, Maryland, then received training to be an electrician at a base in Norfolk, Virginia. In 1956, he was aboard the destroyer USS \"Hank\" in the Mediterranean during the Suez Crisis. According to recollections from his Navy friends, Pynchon said at the time that he did not intend to complete his college education.\nIn 1957, Pynchon returned to Cornell to pursue a degree in English. His first published story, \"The Small Rain\", appeared in the \"Cornell Writer\" in March 1959, and narrates an actual experience of a friend who had served in the Army. Pynchon's later fiction draws freely upon his experiences in the Navy. His short story \"Mortality and Mercy in Vienna\" was published in the Spring 1959 issue of \"Epoch\" magazine.\nWhile at Cornell, Pynchon befriended Richard Fari\u00f1a, Kirkpatrick Sale, and David Shetzline. Pynchon dedicated \"Gravity's Rainbow\" to Fari\u00f1a, and served as his best man and his pallbearer. In Pynchon's introduction to Fari\u00f1a's novel \"Been Down So Long It Looks Like Up to Me\", he writes, \"we also succeeded in getting on the same literary wavelength. We showed up once at a party, not a masquerade party, in disguise\u2014he as Hemingway, I as Scott Fitzgerald, each of us aware that the other had been through a phase of enthusiasm for his respective author\u00a0... Also in '59 we simultaneously picked up on what I still think is among the finest American novels, Oakley Hall's \"Warlock\". We set about getting others to read it too, and for a while we had a micro-cult going. Soon a number of us were talking in \"Warlock\" dialogue, a kind of thoughtful, stylized, Victorian-Wild West diction.\" Pynchon reportedly attended lectures by Vladimir Nabokov, who at the time taught literature at Cornell. Nabokov later said that he had no memory of Pynchon, but Nabokov's wife V\u00e9ra, who graded her husband's class papers, said she remembered his distinctive handwriting as a mixture of printed and cursive letters, \"half printing, half script\". In 1958, Pynchon and Sale wrote part or all of a science-fiction musical, \"Minstrel Island\", which portrays a dystopian future in which IBM rules the world. Pynchon received his B.A. with distinction as a member of Phi Beta Kappa in June 1959.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\n1950s.\nAfter leaving Cornell, Pynchon began to work on his first novel, \"V\". From February 1960 to September 1962, he was employed as a technical writer at Boeing in Seattle, where he compiled safety articles for the \"Bomarc Service News\", a support newsletter for the BOMARC surface-to-air missile deployed by the U.S. Air Force. Pynchon's experiences at Boeing inspired his depictions of the \"Yoyodyne\" corporation in \"V.\" and \"The Crying of Lot 49\", and both his background in physics and the technical journalism he undertook at Boeing provided material for \"Gravity's Rainbow\". \"V.\" won the William Faulkner Foundation Award For Notable First Novel and was a finalist for the National Book Award.\nGeorge Plimpton gave the book a positive review in \"The New York Times\", calling it a picaresque novel, in which \"The author can tell his favorite jokes, throw in a song, indulge in a fantasy, include his own verse, display an intimate knowledge of such disparate subjects as physics, astronomy, art, jazz, how a nose-job is done, the wildlife in the New York sewage system. These indeed are some of the topics which constitute a recent and remarkable example of the genre: a brilliant and turbulent first novel published this month by a young Cornell graduate, Thomas Pynchon.\" Plimpton called Pynchon \"a writer of staggering promise\".\n\"Time\"'s review of \"V.\" concluded: \"\"V.\" sails with majesty through caverns measureless to man. What does it mean? Who, finally, is V.? Few books haunt the waking or the sleeping mind, but this is one. Who, indeed?\"\".\"\n1960s.\nAfter resigning from Boeing, Pynchon spent some time in New York and Mexico before moving to California, where he was reportedly based for much of the 1960s and early 1970s, most notably in a small downstairs apartment at 217 33rd St. in Manhattan Beach where he lived as he was composing what became \"Gravity's Rainbow\".\nIn 1964 he applied to study mathematics as a graduate student at the University of California, Berkeley, but was turned down.\nIn an April 1964 letter to his agent, Candida Donadio, Pynchon wrote that he had four novels in progress, announcing: \"If they come out on paper anything like they are inside my head then it will be the literary event of the millennium.\"\nFrom the mid-1960s Pynchon regularly provided blurbs and introductions for a wide range of novels and nonfiction works. He contributed an appreciation of Oakley Hall's \"Warlock\" in a feature called \"A Gift of Books\" in the December 1965 issue of \"Holiday\". Pynchon wrote that Hall \"has restored to the myth of Tombstone its full, mortal, blooded humanity\u00a0... It is this deep sensitivity to abysses that makes \"Warlock\", I think, one of our best American novels. For we are a nation that can, many of us, toss with all aplomb our candy wrapper into the Grand Canyon itself, snap a color shot and drive away; and we need voices like Oakley Hall\u2019s to remind us how far that piece of paper, still fluttering brightly behind us, has to fall.\"\nIn December 1965, Pynchon politely turned down an invitation from Stanley Edgar Hyman to teach literature at Bennington College, writing that he had resolved, two or three years earlier, to write three novels at once. Pynchon described the decision as \"a moment of temporary insanity\", but said he was \"too stubborn to let any of them go, let alone all of them.\"\nPynchon's second novel, \"The Crying of Lot 49\", was published a few months later in 1966. Whether it was one of the three or four novels Pynchon had in progress is not known, but in a 1965 letter to Donadio, Pynchon had written that he was in the middle of writing a \"potboiler\". When the book grew to 155 pages, he called it \"a short story, but with gland trouble\", and hoped that Donadio could \"unload it on some poor sucker.\"\n\"The Crying of Lot 49\" won the Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Foundation Award shortly after publication. Although more concise and linear in its structure than Pynchon's other novels, its labyrinthine plot features an ancient, underground mail service known as \"The Tristero\" or \"Trystero\", a parody of a Jacobean revenge drama called \"The Courier's Tragedy\", and a corporate conspiracy involving the bones of World War II American GIs being used as charcoal cigarette filters. It proposes a series of seemingly incredible connections between these events and other similarly bizarre revelations that confront the novel's protagonist, Oedipa Maas. Like \"V.\", the novel contains a wealth of references to science, technology, and obscure historical events. \"The Crying of Lot 49\" also continues Pynchon's habits of writing satiric song lyrics and referencing popular culture. An example of both can be seen in allusion to the narrator of Nabokov's \"Lolita\" in the lyric of a love lament sung by a member of \"The Paranoids\", an American teenage band who deliberately sing their songs with British accents (p.\u00a017). Despite Pynchon's alleged dislike, \"Lot 49\" received positive reviews; Harold Bloom named it one of Pynchon's \"canonical works\", along with \"Gravity's Rainbow\" and \"Mason &amp; Dixon\". It was included on \"Time\"'s list of the 100 best English-language novels published since the magazine's founding in 1923. Richard Lacayao wrote, \"With its slapstick paranoia and heartbreaking metaphysical soliloquies, \"Lot 49\" takes place in the tragicomic universe that is instantly recognizable as Pynchon-land. Is it also a mystery novel? Absolutely, so long as you recognize the mystery here is the one at the heart of everything\".\nIn June 1966, Pynchon wrote \"A Journey Into the Mind of Watts\", a firsthand report on the aftermath and legacy of the Watts Riots in Los Angeles published in \"The New York Times Magazine\".\nPynchon retrospectively found that the hippie movement, both in the form of the Beats of the 1950s and the resurgence form of the 1960s, \"placed too much emphasis on youth, including the eternal variety.\"\nIn 1968, Pynchon was one of 447 signatories to the \"Writers and Editors War Tax Protest\". Full-page advertisements in the \"New York Post\" and \"The New York Review of Books\" listed the names of those who had pledged not to pay \"the proposed 10% income tax surcharge or any war-designated tax increase\", and stated their belief \"that American involvement in Vietnam is morally wrong\".\n1970s.\nPynchon's most famous novel is his third, \"Gravity's Rainbow\", published in 1973. An intricate and allusive fiction that combines and elaborates on many of the themes of his earlier work, including preterition, paranoia, racism, colonialism, conspiracy, synchronicity, and entropy, it has generated a wealth of commentary and critical material, including reader's guides, books and scholarly articles, online concordances and discussions, and art works. Its artistic value is often compared to that of James Joyce's \"Ulysses\". Some scholars have called it the greatest American post-World War II novel, and it has similarly been described as \"literally an anthology of postmodernist themes and devices\". Richard Locke, reviewing it in \"The New York Times\", wrote, \"\"Gravity's Rainbow\" is longer, darker and more difficult than his first two books; in fact it is the longest, most difficult and most ambitious novel to appear in these pages since Nabokov's \"\" four years ago; its technical and verbal resources bring to mind Melville and Faulkner.\"\nThe major portion of \"Gravity's Rainbow\" takes place in Europe in the final months of World War II and the weeks immediately following V-E Day, and is narrated for the most part from within the historical moment in which it is set. In this way, Pynchon's text enacts a type of dramatic irony whereby neither the characters nor the various narrative voices are aware of specific historical circumstances, such as the Holocaust and, except as hints, premonitions and mythography, the complicity between Western corporate interests and the Nazi war machine, which figure prominently in readers' apprehensions of the novel's historical context. For example, at war's end the narrator observes: \"There are rumors of a War Crimes Tribunal under way in N\u00fcrnberg. No one Slothrop has listened to is clear who's trying whom for what\". Such an approach generates dynamic tension and moments of acute self-consciousness, as both reader and author seem drawn ever deeper into the \"plot\", in various senses of that term:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pynchon presents us with a Disney-meets-Bosch panorama of European politics, American entropy, industrial history, and libidinal panic which leaves a chaotic whirl of fractal patterns in the reader's mind.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf they can get you asking the wrong questions, they don't have to worry about answers.\n\u2013\"Gravity's Rainbow\"\nThe novel invokes anti-authority sentiments, often through violations of narrative conventions and integrity. For example, as the protagonist, Tyrone Slothrop, considers that his own family \"made its money killing trees\", he apostrophizes his apology and plea for advice to the coppice within which he has momentarily taken refuge. In an overt incitement to eco-activism, Pynchon's narrative agency then has it that \"a medium-sized pine nearby nods its top and suggests, 'Next time you come across a logging operation out here, find one of their tractors that isn't being guarded, and take its oil filter with you. That's what you can do.'\"\nEncyclopedic in scope and often self-conscious in style, the novel displays erudition in its treatment of an array of material drawn from the fields of psychology, chemistry, mathematics, history, religion, music, literature, human sexuality, and film. Pynchon wrote the first draft in \"neat, tiny script on engineer's quadrille paper\". He worked on the novel throughout the 1960s and early 1970s while living in California and Mexico City.\n\"Gravity's Rainbow\" shared the 1974 National Book Award with \"A Crown of Feathers and Other Stories\" by Isaac Bashevis Singer (split award). That same year, the Pulitzer Prize For Fiction panel unanimously recommended \"Gravity's Rainbow\" for the award, but the Pulitzer board vetoed the recommendation, calling the novel \"unreadable\", \"turgid\", \"overwritten\", and in parts \"obscene\". No Pulitzer Prize For Fiction was awarded that year and finalists were not recognized before 1980. In 1975, Pynchon declined the William Dean Howells Medal. Along with \"Lot 49\", \"Gravity's Rainbow\" was included on \"Time\"'s list of the 100 greatest English-language novels published since the magazine's founding, with Lev Grossman and Richard Lacayao commenting on its \"fantastic multitude of meditations upon the human need to build systems of intellectual order even as we use the same powers of intellect to hasten our destruction. (Did we mention that this is also a comedy, more or less?) Among American writers of the second half of the 20th century, Pynchon is the indisputed candidate for lasting literary greatness. This book is why.\"\nHis earliest American ancestor, William Pynchon, emigrated to the Massachusetts Bay Colony with the Winthrop Fleet in 1630, then became the founder of Springfield, Massachusetts, in 1636. Thereafter a long line of Pynchon descendants found wealth and repute on American soil. Deborah Madsen argues that Pynchon's ancestry and family background have partially inspired his fiction, particularly in the Slothrop family histories related in the short story \"The Secret Integration\" (1964) and \"Gravity's Rainbow\".\nLater career.\nA collection of Pynchon's early short stories, \"Slow Learner\", was published in 1984, with a lengthy autobiographical introduction. In October of that year, an article titled \"Is It O.K. to Be a Luddite?\" was published in \"The New York Times Book Review\". In April 1988, Pynchon reviewed Gabriel Garc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez's \"Love in the Time of Cholera\" in \"The New York Times\", calling it \"a shining and heartbreaking book\". Another article, \"Nearer, My Couch, to Thee\", was published in June 1993 in \"The New York Times Book Review\", as one in a series of articles in which various writers reflected on each of the Seven Deadly Sins. Pynchon's subject was \"Sloth\". In 1989, Pynchon was one of many authors who signed a letter of solidarity with Salman Rushdie after Rushdie was sentenced to death by the Ayatollah for his novel \"The Satanic Verses\". Pynchon wrote: \"I pray that tolerance and respect for life prevail. I keep thinking of you.\"\n\"Vineland\".\nPynchon's fourth novel, \"Vineland\", was published in 1990 and disappointed some fans and critics. But it received a favorable review from Rushdie, who called it \"free-flowing and light and funny and maybe the most readily accessible piece of writing the old Invisible Man ever came up with\u00a0... the entropy's still flowing, but there is something new to report, some faint possibility of redemption, some fleeting hints of happiness and grace. Thomas Pynchon, like Paul Simon's girl in New York City, who calls herself the Human Trampoline, is bouncing into Graceland.\" The novel is set in California in the 1980s and 1960s and describes the relationship between an FBI COINTELPRO agent and a radical filmmaker. Its strong sociopolitical undercurrents detail the battle between authoritarianism and communalism and the nexus between resistance and complicity, but with a typically Pynchonian sense of humor.\nIn 1988, he received a MacArthur Fellowship and, since the early 1990s at least, he has been frequently cited as a contender for the Nobel Prize in Literature. Pynchon provided a blurb for Don DeLillo's novel \"Mao II\", about a reclusive novelist and partly inspired by the fatwa on Rushdie: \"This novel's a beauty. DeLillo takes us on a breathtaking journey, beyond all the official versions of our daily history, behind all the easy assumptions about who we're supposed to be, with a vision as bold and a voice as eloquent and morally focused as any in American writing.\"\nIn 2025, Paul Thomas Anderson released the film \"One Battle After Another\", inspired by plot points from \"Vineland\".\n\"Mason &amp; Dixon\".\nThe meticulously researched novel is a sprawling postmodernist saga recounting the lives and careers of the English astronomer Charles Mason and his partner, the surveyor Jeremiah Dixon, whose survey of the American West resulted in the Mason\u2013Dixon line, during the birth of the American Republic. The dust jacket notes that it features appearances by George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, Samuel Johnson, and a talking dog. Some commentators acknowledged it as a welcome return to form; T. C. Boyle called it \"the old Pynchon, the true Pynchon, the best Pynchon of all\" and \"a book of heart and fire and genius\". Michiko Kakutani called Mason and Dixon Pynchon's most human characters, writing that they \"become fully fleshed-out people, their feelings, hopes and yearnings made as palpably real as their outrageously comic high jinks\". The American critic Harold Bloom hailed the novel as Pynchon's \"masterpiece to date\". Bloom named Pynchon as one of the four major American novelists of his time, along with Cormac McCarthy, Philip Roth, and Don DeLillo. For \"The Independent\" feature Book Of A Lifetime, Marek Kohn chose \"Mason &amp; Dixon\" \"precisely because my own teens were long gone by the time it came out: it showed me that being exhilarated by prose is not just an effect of youthful overexcitement\".\n\"Against the Day\".\nVarious rumors about the subject matter of \"Against the Day\" circulated for years. Most specific of these were comments made by the former German minister of culture Michael Naumann, who said he assisted Pynchon in his research about \"a Russian mathematician [who] studied for David Hilbert in G\u00f6ttingen\", and that the new novel would trace the life and loves of Sofia Kovalevskaya.\nIn July 2006, a new, untitled novel by Pynchon was announced along with a description by Pynchon: \"Spanning the period between the Chicago World's Fair of 1893 and the years just after World War I, this novel moves from the labor troubles in Colorado to turn-of-the-century New York, to London and Gottingen, Venice and Vienna, the Balkans, Central Asia, Siberia at the times of the mysterious Tunguska Event, Mexico during the Revolution, postwar Paris, silent-era Hollywood, and one or two places not strictly speaking on the map at all. With a worldwide disaster looming just a few years ahead, it is a time of unrestrained corporate greed, false religiosity, moronic fecklessness, and evil intent in high places. No reference to the present day is intended or should be inferred.\" He promised cameos by Nikola Tesla, Bela Lugosi, and Groucho Marx, as well as \"stupid songs\" and \"strange sexual practices\". Subsequently, the title of the new book was reported to be \"Against the Day\" and a Penguin spokesperson confirmed that the synopsis was Pynchon's.\n\"Against the Day\" was released on November 21, 2006, and is 1,085 pages long in the first edition hardcover. The book was given almost no promotion by Penguin and professional book reviewers were given little time to review it. An edited version of Pynchon's synopsis was used as the jacket-flap copy and Kovalevskaya does appear, although as only one of over a hundred characters.\nComposed in part of a series of interwoven pastiches of popular fiction genres from the era in which it is set, the novel inspired mixed reactions from critics and reviewers. One reviewer remarked, \"It is brilliant, but it is exhaustingly brilliant.\" Other reviewers called \"Against the Day\" \"lengthy and rambling\" and \"a baggy monster of a book\", while negative appraisals condemned the novel for its \"silliness\" or characterized its action as \"fairly pointless\" and remained unimpressed by its \"grab bag of themes\".\nIn 2006, Pynchon wrote a letter defending Ian McEwan against charges of plagiarism in his novel \"Atonement\": \"Oddly enough, those of us who write historical fiction do feel some obligation to accuracy. It is that Ruskin business about 'a capacity of responsiveness to the claims of fact, but unoppressed by them.' Unless we were actually there, we must turn to people who were, or to letters, contemporary reporting, the encyclopedia, the Internet, until, with luck, at some point, we can begin to make a few things of our own up. To discover in the course of research some engaging detail we know can be put into a story where it will do some good can hardly be classed as a felonious act\u2014it is simply what we do.\"\n\"Inherent Vice\".\n\"Inherent Vice\" was published in August 2009.\nA synopsis and brief extract from the novel, along with its title and dust jacket image, were printed in Penguin Press's summer 2009 catalogue. The book was advertised by the publisher as \"part-noir, part-psychedelic romp, all Thomas Pynchon\u2014private eye Doc Sportello comes, occasionally, out of a cannabis haze to watch the end of an era as free love slips away and paranoia creeps in with the L.A. fog.\" A promotional video for the novel was released by Penguin Books on August 4, 2009, with the character voiceover narrated by Pynchon. A 2014 film adaptation of the same name was directed by Paul Thomas Anderson.\n\"Bleeding Edge\".\n\"Bleeding Edge\" takes place in Manhattan's Silicon Alley during \"the lull between the collapse of the dot-com boom and the terrible events of September 11\". The novel was published on September 17, 2013, to positive reviews.\n\"Shadow Ticket\".\nIn April 2025, Penguin Press announced a new novel by Pynchon, \"Shadow Ticket\", with a synopsis, which was published on October 7, 2025. The novel, which is set in 1932, centers on a Milwaukee private investigator who is set adrift in Hungary while tracking the heiress to a Wisconsin cheese fortune.\nArtistry.\nThemes and motifs.\nCritic Michiko Kakutani identified a central theme connecting all of Pynchon's novels: \"Is the world dominated by conspiracy or chaos? Are there patterns, secret codes, hidden agendas\u2014in short, a hidden design\u2014to the bubble and turmoil of human existence, or is it all a product of chance?\" Pynchon's work explores philosophical, theological, and sociological ideas exhaustively, though in quirky and approachable ways. His writings demonstrate a strong affinity with the practitioners and artifacts of low culture, including comic books and cartoons, pulp fiction, popular films, television programs, cookery, urban myths, conspiracy theories, and folk art. This blurring of the conventional boundary between \"high\" and \"low\" culture has been seen as one of the defining characteristics of his writing.\nPynchon makes frequent musical allusions. McClintic Sphere in \"V.\" is a composite of jazz musicians such as Ornette Coleman, Charlie Parker and Thelonious Monk. In \"The Crying of Lot 49\", the lead singer of the Paranoids sports \"a Beatle haircut\" and sings with an English accent. In the closing pages of \"Gravity's Rainbow\", there is an apocryphal report that Tyrone Slothrop, the novel's protagonist, played kazoo and harmonica as a guest musician on a record released by the Fool in the 1960s (having magically recovered the latter instrument, his \"harp\", in a German stream in 1945, after losing it down the toilet in 1939 at the Roseland Ballroom in Roxbury, Boston, to the strains of the jazz standard \"Cherokee\", upon which tune Charlie Parker was simultaneously inventing bebop in New York, as Pynchon describes). In \"Vineland\", both Zoyd Wheeler and Isaiah Two Four are also musicians: Zoyd played keyboards in a '60s surf band called the Corvairs, while Isaiah played in a punk band called Billy Barf and the Vomitones. In \"Mason &amp; Dixon\", one of the characters plays on the Clavier the varsity drinking song that will later become \"The Star-Spangled Banner\"; while in another episode a character remarks tangentially \"Sometimes, it's hard to be a woman.\" He also alludes to classical music; in \"V\"., a character sings an aria from Mozart's \"Don Giovanni\". In \"Lot 49\" Oedipa listens to \"the Fort Wayne Settecento Ensemble's variorum recording of the Vivaldi Kazoo Concerto, Boyd Beaver, soloist.\" In his introduction to \"Slow Learner\", Pynchon acknowledges a debt to the anarchic bandleader Spike Jones, and in 1994, he penned a 3,000-word set of liner notes for the album \"Spiked!\", a collection of Jones's recordings released on the short-lived BMG Catalyst label. Pynchon also wrote the liner notes for \"Nobody's Cool\", the second album of indie rock band Lotion, in which he states that \"rock and roll remains one of the last honorable callings, and a working band is a miracle of everyday life. Which is basically what these guys do.\" He is known to be a fan of Roky Erickson.\nInvestigations and digressions into human sexuality, psychology, sociology, mathematics, science, and technology recur throughout Pynchon's works. One of his earliest short stories, \"Low-lands\" (1960), features a meditation on Heisenberg's uncertainty principle as a metaphor for telling stories about one's own experiences. His next published work, \"Entropy\" (1960), introduced the concept which was to become synonymous with Pynchon's name (though Pynchon later admitted the \"shallowness of [his] understanding\" of the subject, and noted that choosing an abstract concept first and trying to construct a narrative based on it was \"a lousy way to go about writing a story\"). Another early story, \"Under the Rose\" (1961), includes among its cast of characters a cyborg set anachronistically in Victorian-era Egypt (a precursor of what is now called steampunk). This story, significantly reworked by Pynchon, appears as Chapter 3 of \"V.\" \"The Secret Integration\" (1964), Pynchon's last published short story, is a sensitively handled coming-of-age tale in which a group of young boys face the consequences of the American policy of racial integration. At one point in the story, the boys attempt to understand the new policy by way of the mathematical operation, the only sense of the word with which they are familiar.\n\"The Crying of Lot 49\" also alludes to entropy and communication theory, and contains scenes and descriptions which parody or appropriate calculus, Zeno's paradoxes, and the thought experiment known as Maxwell's demon. At the same time, the novel also investigates homosexuality, celibacy and both medically sanctioned and illicit psychedelic drug use. \"Gravity's Rainbow\" describes many varieties of sexual fetishism (including sado-masochism, coprophilia and a borderline case of tentacle erotica), and features numerous episodes of drug use, most notably cannabis but also cocaine, naturally occurring hallucinogens, and the mushroom \"Amanita muscaria.\" \"Gravity's Rainbow\" also derives much from Pynchon's background in mathematics: at one point, the geometry of garter belts is compared with that of cathedral spires, both described as mathematical singularities. \"Mason &amp; Dixon\" explores the scientific, theological, and socio-cultural foundations of the Age of Reason while also depicting the relationships between actual historical figures and fictional characters in intricate detail and, like \"Gravity's Rainbow\", is an archetypal example of the genre of historiographic metafiction.\nStyle.\nPynchon's prose, with its wide range of styles and subjects, is commonly classified as postmodern. Poet L. E. Sissman wrote in \"The New Yorker\": \"He is almost a mathematician of prose, who calculates the least and the greatest stress each word and line, each pun and ambiguity, can bear, and applies his knowledge accordingly and virtually without lapses, though he takes many scary, bracing linguistic risks. Thus his remarkably supple diction can first treat of a painful and delicate love scene and then roar, without pause, into the sounds and echoes of a drugged and drunken orgy.\" Pynchon often engages in parodies or pastiches of other styles; \"Mason &amp; Dixon\" is written in the style of the eighteenth-century, when it takes place. Anthony Lane, reviewing the novel in \"The New Yorker\", writes that \"It sounds and, more important, looks like a period novel; it comes bedecked with archaic spellings, complex punctuation, words like 'Nebulosity,' 'Fescue,' 'pinguid,' and 'G-d.'\u00a0... This is hard to fault as pastiche, and yet it moves beyond pastiche, with none of the cramped self-amusement that usually attends the genre.\" \nPynchon makes frequent allusions to other authors; in the introduction to \"Slow Learner\", a collection of his early short stories, he acknowledges his debts to the modernists, especially T. S. Eliot's \"The Waste Land\", and to the Beats, particularly Jack Kerouac's \"On the Road\". He also writes of the influence of jazz and rock and roll, and satiric song lyrics and mock musical numbers are a trademark of his fiction. In his essay \"Smoking Dope With Thomas Pynchon: A Sixties Memoir\", Andrew Gordon writes: \"Kerouac's heroes were filled with romantic angst and an unfulfilled yearning to burn like roman candles, whereas Pynchon's were clowns, schlemiels and human yo-yos, bouncing between farce and paranoia. Kerouac was of the cool fifties; he wrote jazz fiction. But Pynchon was of the apocalyptic sixties; he wrote rock and roll.\"\nPrecursors and influences.\nPynchon's novels refer overtly to writers as disparate as Henry Adams (in \"V.\", p.\u00a062), Jorge Luis Borges (in \"Gravity\u2019s Rainbow\", p.\u00a0264), Deleuze and Guattari (in \"Vineland\", p.\u00a097), Emily Dickinson (in \"Gravity\u2019s Rainbow\", pp.\u00a027\u20138), Umberto Eco (in \"Mason &amp; Dixon\", p.\u00a0559), Ralph Waldo Emerson (in \"Vineland\", p.\u00a0369), \"Hopkins, T. S. Eliot, di Chirico\u2019s novel \"Hebdomeros\"\" (in \"V.\", p.\u00a0307), William March, Vladimir Nabokov (in \"The Crying of Lot 49\", p.\u00a0120), Patrick O'Brian (in \"Mason &amp; Dixon\", p.\u00a054), Ishmael Reed (in \"Gravity\u2019s Rainbow\", p.\u00a0558), Rainer Maria Rilke (in \"Gravity\u2019s Rainbow\", p.\u00a097 f) and Ludwig Wittgenstein (in \"V.\", p.\u00a0278 f), and to a heady mixture of iconic religious and philosophical sources.\nCritics have made comparisons of Pynchon's writing with works by Rabelais, Cervantes, Laurence Sterne, Edgar Allan Poe, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Herman Melville, Charles Dickens, Joseph Conrad, Thomas Mann, William S. Burroughs, Ralph Ellison, Patrick White, and Toni Morrison.\nPynchon's work also has similarities with modernist writers who wrote long novels dealing with large metaphysical or political issues, such as James Joyce's \"Ulysses\", E. M. Forster's \"A Passage to India\", Wyndham Lewis's \"The Apes of God\", Robert Musil's \"The Man Without Qualities\" and John Dos Passos's \"U.S.A.\" trilogy. A strong influence can be discerned of Vladimir Nabokov's \"The Real Life of Sebastian Knight\" on Pynchon's first novel \"V.\", which resembles Nabokov's novel in plot, character, narration and style, and whose title alludes directly to Nabokov's narrator \"V.\" Pynchon also outlines the influence on his own early fiction of literary works by Ernest Hemingway, Henry Miller, Saul Bellow, Herbert Gold, Philip Roth, Norman Mailer, John Buchan and Graham Greene, and non-fiction works by Helen Waddell, Norbert Wiener and Isaac Asimov.\nLegacy and influence.\nPynchon's work has been cited as an influence and inspiration by many writers, among them Elfriede Jelinek (who translated \"Gravity's Rainbow\" into German), David Foster Wallace, William T. Vollmann, Richard Powers, Steve Erickson, David Mitchell, Neal Stephenson, Dave Eggers, William Gibson, T. C. Boyle, Salman Rushdie, Alan Moore, and Tommaso Pincio (whose pseudonym is an Italian rendering of Pynchon's name).\nThanks to his influence on Gibson and Stephenson in particular, Pynchon became one of the progenitors of cyberpunk fiction; a 1987 essay in \"Spin\" magazine by Timothy Leary explicitly named \"Gravity's Rainbow\" as the \"Old Testament\" of cyberpunk, with Gibson's \"Neuromancer\" and its sequels as the \"New Testament\". Though the term \"cyberpunk\" did not become prevalent until the early 1980s, since Leary's article many readers have retroactively included \"Gravity's Rainbow\" in the genre, along with other works\u2014Samuel R. Delany's \"Dhalgren\" and many works of Philip K. Dick\u2014which seem, in hindsight, to anticipate cyberpunk styles and themes. The encyclopedic nature of Pynchon's novels also led to some attempts to link his work with the hypertext fiction movement of the 1990s. \nIan Rankin, author of the Inspector Rebus mystery novels, called encountering Pynchon in college \"a revelation\": \"Pynchon seemed to fit the model I was learning of literature as an extended code or grail quest. Moreover, he was like a drug: as you worked out one layer of meaning, you quickly wanted to move to the next. He wrote action novels about spies and soldiers which also happened to be detective stories and bawdy romps. \nHis books were picaresquely post-modern and his humour was Marxian (tendance: Groucho). On page six of \"The Crying of Lot 49\", the name Quackenbush appears, and you know you are in safely comedic hands.\" \nThe main-belt asteroid 152319 is named after Pynchon.\nIn 2025, after the publication of \"Shadow Ticket\" and the release of \"One Battle After Another\" (a film adaptation of \"Vineland)\", Parul Sehgal wrote, \"beginning with his novels \"V.\" (1963) and \"The Crying of Lot 49\" (1966) and \"Gravity's Rainbow\" (1973), Pynchon unleashed a vision of America that now feels all too familiar\u2014a world swathed in conspiracy and trawled by self-appointed sleuths parsing every passing signal and sign, their paths lit by the bright beam of their own righteousness.\"\nMedia scrutiny of private life.\nRelatively little is known about Pynchon's private life; he has carefully avoided contact with reporters for more than fifty years. Only a few photos of him are known to exist, nearly all from his high school and college days, and his whereabouts have often remained undisclosed.\nA 1963 review of \"V.\" in \"The New York Times Book Review\" described Pynchon as \"a recluse\" living in Mexico, thereby introducing the media label with which journalists have characterized him throughout his career. Nonetheless, Pynchon's personal absence from mass media is one of the notable features of his life, and it has generated many rumors and apocryphal anecdotes.\nAround 1984, Pynchon wrote an introduction for his short story collection \"Slow Learner\". His comments on the stories after reading them again for the first time in many years, and his recollection of the events surrounding their creation, amount to some of the author's only autobiographical comments to his readers.\n1970s and 1980s.\nAfter the publication and success of \"Gravity's Rainbow\", interest mounted in finding out more about the identity of the author. At the 1974 National Book Awards ceremony, the president of Viking Press, Tom Guinzberg, arranged for double-talking comedian \"Professor\" Irwin Corey to accept the prize on Pynchon's behalf. Many of the assembled guests had no idea who Corey was and had never seen the author, so they assumed it was Pynchon himself on the stage delivering Corey's trademark torrent of rambling, pseudo-scholarly verbiage. Toward the end of Corey's address a streaker ran through the hall, adding further to the confusion.\nAn article by John Batchelor published in the \"SoHo Weekly News\" in 1977 claimed that Pynchon was in fact J. D. Salinger. Pynchon's written response to this theory said that \"some of it was true, but none of the interesting parts. Not bad. Keep trying.\"\nThereafter, the first piece to provide substantial information about Pynchon's personal life was a biographical account written by a former Cornell University friend, Jules Siegel, and published in \"Playboy\" magazine. In his article, Siegel reveals that Pynchon had a complex about his teeth and underwent extensive and painful reconstructive surgery, was nicknamed \"Tom\" at Cornell and attended Mass diligently, acted as best man at Siegel's wedding, and that he later also had an affair with Siegel's wife. Siegel recalls Pynchon saying he did attend some of Vladimir Nabokov's lectures at Cornell but that he could hardly make out what Nabokov was saying because of his thick Russian accent. Siegel also records Pynchon's commenting: \"Every weirdo in the world is on my wavelength\", an observation borne out by the crankiness and zealotry that have attached themselves to his name and work in subsequent years.\n1990s.\nPynchon does not like to talk to reporters, and refuses the spectacle of celebrity and public appearances. Some readers and critics have suggested that there were and are perhaps aesthetic (and ideological) motivations behind his choice to remain aloof from public life. For example, the protagonist in Janette Turner Hospital's short story \"For Mr. Voss or Occupant\" (published in 1991), explains to her daughter that she is writing\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMore recently, book critic Arthur Salm has written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPynchon has published a number of articles and reviews in the mainstream American media, including words of support for Salman Rushdie and his then-wife, Marianne Wiggins, after the fatwa was pronounced against Rushdie by the Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. The next year, Rushdie's enthusiastic review of Pynchon's \"Vineland\" prompted Pynchon to send him another message hinting that if Rushdie were ever in New York, the two should arrange a meeting. Eventually, the two did have dinner together. Rushdie later commented: \"He was extremely Pynchon-esque. He was the Pynchon I wanted him to be\".\nIn 1990, Pynchon married his literary agent, Melanie Jackson\u2014a great-granddaughter of Theodore Roosevelt and a granddaughter of Robert H. Jackson, U.S. Supreme Court Justice and Nuremberg trials prosecutor\u2014and fathered a son, Jackson, in 1991. The disclosure of Pynchon's 1990s location in New York City, after many years in which he was believed to be dividing his time between Mexico and northern California, led some journalists and photographers to try to track him down. Shortly before the publication of \"Mason &amp; Dixon\" in 1997, a CNN camera crew filmed him in Manhattan. Angered by this invasion of his privacy, he called CNN asking that he not be identified in the footage of the street scenes near his home. When asked by CNN, Pynchon rejected their characterization of him as a recluse, saying, \"My belief is that 'recluse' is a code word generated by journalists\u00a0... meaning, 'doesn't like to talk to reporters'.\" CNN also quoted him as saying, \"Let me be unambiguous. I prefer not to be photographed.\" The next year, a reporter for the \"Sunday Times\" managed to snap a photo of him as he was walking with his son.\nAfter several references to Pynchon's work and reputation were made on NBC's \"The John Larroquette Show\", Pynchon (through his agent) reportedly contacted the series' producers to offer suggestions and corrections. When a local Pynchon sighting became a major plot point in a 1994 episode of the series, Pynchon was sent the script for his approval; as well as providing the title of a fictitious work to be used in one episode (\"Pandemonium of the Sun\"), Pynchon apparently vetoed a final scene that called for an extra playing him to be filmed from behind, walking away from the shot. Pynchon also insisted that it should be specifically mentioned in the episode that he was seen wearing a Roky Erickson T-shirt. According to the \"Los Angeles Times\", this spurred an increase in sales of Erickson's albums. Also during the 1990s, Pynchon befriended members of the band Lotion and wrote liner notes for the band's 1995 album \"Nobody's Cool\". Although the band initially claimed that he had seen them in concert and become a groupie, in 2009 they told \"The New Yorker\" that they met him through his accountant, who was drummer Rob Youngberg's mother; she gave him an advance copy of the album and he agreed to write the liner notes, only later seeing them in concert. Pynchon then conducted an interview with the band (\"Lunch with Lotion\") for \"Esquire\" in June 1996 in the lead-up to the publication of \"Mason &amp; Dixon\". More recently, Pynchon provided faxed answers to questions submitted by author David Hajdu and permitted excerpts from his personal correspondence to be quoted in Hajdu's 2001 book \"Positively 4th Street: The Lives and Times of Joan Baez, Bob Dylan, Mimi Baez Fari\u00f1a and Richard Fari\u00f1a\".\nPynchon's insistence on maintaining his personal privacy and on having his work speak for itself has resulted in a number of outlandish rumors and hoaxes over the years. Indeed, claims that Pynchon was the Unabomber or a sympathizer with the Waco Branch Davidians after the 1993 siege were upstaged in the mid-1990s by the invention of an elaborate rumor that Pynchon and one \"Wanda Tinasky\" were the same person. A collection of the Tinasky letters was eventually published as a paperback book in 1996; Pynchon denied having written the letters, and no direct attribution of the letters to him was ever made. \"Literary detective\" Donald Foster subsequently showed that the \"Letters\" were in fact written by an obscure Beat writer, Tom Hawkins, who had murdered his wife and then committed suicide in 1988. Foster's evidence was conclusive, including finding the typewriter on which the \"Tinasky\" letters had been written.\nIn 1998, over 120 letters that Pynchon had written to his longtime agent, Candida Donadio, were donated by the family of a private collector, Carter Burden, to the Pierpont Morgan Library in New York City. The letters ranged from 1963 to 1982. The Morgan Library originally intended to allow scholars to view the letters, but at Pynchon's request the Burden family and Morgan Library agreed to seal them until after Pynchon's death.\n2000s.\nResponding to the image which has been manufactured in the media over the years, Pynchon made two cameo animated appearances on the television series \"The Simpsons\" in 2004. The first occurs in the episode \"Diatribe of a Mad Housewife\", in which Marge Simpson becomes a novelist. He plays himself, with a paper bag over his head, and provides a blurb for Marge's book, speaking in a broad Long Island accent: \"Here's your quote: 'Thomas Pynchon loved this book, almost as much as he loves cameras!'\" He then starts yelling at passing cars: \"Hey, over here, have your picture taken with a reclusive author! Today only, we'll throw in a free autograph! But, wait! There's more!\" In his second appearance, in \"All's Fair in Oven War\", Pynchon's dialogue consists entirely of puns on his novel titles (\"These wings are \"V\"-licious! I'll put this recipe in \"The Gravity's Rainbow Cookbook\", right next to 'The Frying of Latke 49'.\"). The cartoon representation of Pynchon reappears in a third, non-speaking cameo, as a guest at the fictional WordLoaf convention depicted in the 18th season episode \"Moe'N'a Lisa\". It first aired on November 19, 2006, the Sunday before \"Against the Day\" was released. According to Al Jean on the 15th season DVD episode commentary, Pynchon wanted to do the series because his son was a big fan.\nDuring pre-production of \"All's Fair in Oven War\", Pynchon faxed one page from the script to producer Matt Selman with several handwritten edits to his lines. Of particular emphasis was Pynchon's outright refusal to utter the line \"No wonder Homer is such a fat-ass.\" Pynchon's objection apparently had nothing to do with the salty language. He wrote in a footnote to the edit, \"Homer is my role model and I can't speak ill of him.\"\nIn celebration of the centenary of George Orwell's birth, Pynchon wrote a new foreword to Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". The introduction presents a brief biography of Orwell as well as a reflection on some of the critical responses to \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". Pynchon also offers his own reflection in the introduction that \"what is perhaps [most] important, indeed necessary, to a working prophet, is to be able to see deeper than most of us into the human soul.\"\nIn July 2006, Amazon created a page showing an upcoming 992-page, untitled Pynchon novel. A description of the soon-to-be published novel appeared on Amazon purporting to be written by Pynchon himself. The description was taken down, prompting speculation over its authenticity, but the blurb was soon back up along with the novel's title, \"Against the Day\".\nShortly before \"Against the Day\" was published, Pynchon's prose appeared in the program for \"\"The Daily Show\": Ten Fu@#ing Years (The Concert)\", a retrospective on Jon Stewart's comedy-news broadcast \"The Daily Show\".\nOn December 6, 2006, Pynchon joined a campaign by many other major authors to clear Ian McEwan of plagiarism charges by sending a typewritten letter to his British publisher, which was published in the \"Daily Telegraph\" newspaper.\nPynchon's 2009 YouTube promotional teaser for the novel \"Inherent Vice\" is the second time a recording of his voice has been released to mainstream outlets (the first being his appearances on \"The Simpsons\").\n2010s.\nIn 2012, Pynchon's novels were released in e-book format, ending a long holdout by the author. Publisher Penguin Press reported that the novels' length and complex page layouts made it a challenge to convert them to a digital format. Though they had produced a promotional video for the June release, Penguin had no expectation Pynchon's public profile would change in any fashion.\nIn 2013, his son, Jackson Pynchon, graduated from Columbia University, where he was affiliated with St. Anthony Hall.\nIn September 2014, Josh Brolin told \"The New York Times\" that Pynchon had made a cameo in the \"Inherent Vice\" film adaptation. This led to a sizable online hunt for the author's appearance, eventually targeting actor Charley Morgan, whose small role as a doctor led many to believe he was Pynchon. Morgan, son of \"M*A*S*H\"'s Harry Morgan, claimed that Paul Thomas Anderson, whom he described as a friend, had told him that such a cameo did not exist. Despite this, nothing has been directly confirmed by Anderson or Warner Bros. Pictures.\nOn November 6, 2018, Pynchon was photographed near his apartment in New York's Upper West Side district when he went to vote with his son. The photo was published by the \"National Enquirer\" and was said to be the first photo of him \"in decades\".\n2020s.\nIn December 2022, the Huntington Library announced that it had acquired the literary archive, including typescripts and drafts of each of Pynchon's novels, handwritten notes, correspondence with publishers, and research. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The following links were last verified on May 31, 2017.\""}
{"id": "30906", "revid": "35122184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30906", "title": "Transformer", "text": "Device to couple energy between circuits\nIn electrical engineering, a transformer is a passive component that transfers electrical energy from one electrical circuit to another circuit, or multiple circuits. A varying current in any coil of the transformer produces a varying magnetic flux in the transformer's core, which induces a varying electromotive force (EMF) across any other coils wound around the same core. Electrical energy can be transferred between separate coils without a metallic (conductive) connection between the two circuits. Faraday's law of induction, discovered in 1831, describes the induced voltage effect in any coil due to a changing magnetic flux encircled by the coil.\nTransformers are used to change AC voltage levels, such transformers being termed step-up or step-down type to increase or decrease voltage level, respectively. Transformers can also be used to provide galvanic isolation between circuits as well as to couple stages of signal-processing circuits. Since the invention of the first constant-potential transformer in 1885, transformers have become essential for the transmission, distribution, and utilization of alternating current electric power. A wide range of transformer designs is encountered in electronic and electric power applications. Transformers range in size from RF transformers less than a cubic centimeter in volume, to units weighing hundreds of tons used to interconnect the power grid.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrinciples.\nwhere for a step-up transformer \"a\" &lt; 1 and for a step-down transformer \"a\" &gt; 1.\nBy the law of conservation of energy, apparent, real and reactive power are each conserved in the input and output:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_1 is apparent power and formula_2 is current.\nCombining Eq. 3 and Eq. 4 with this endnote gives the ideal transformer identity:\nwhere formula_3 is the primary winding self-inductance and formula_4 is the secondary winding self-inductance.\nBy Ohm's law and the ideal transformer identity:\nwhere formula_5 is the load impedance of the secondary circuit and formula_6 is the apparent load or driving point impedance of the primary circuit, the superscript formula_7 denoting impedance referred to the primary.\nIdeal transformer.\nAn ideal transformer is linear, lossless, and perfectly coupled. Perfect coupling implies infinitely high core magnetic permeability and winding inductance and zero net magnetomotive force (i.e. \"i\"\"p\"\"n\"\"p\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"i\"\"s\"\"n\"\"s\"\u00a0=\u00a00).\nA varying current in the transformer's primary winding creates a varying magnetic flux in the transformer core, which is also encircled by the secondary winding. This varying flux at the secondary winding induces a varying electromotive force or voltage in the secondary winding. This electromagnetic induction phenomenon is the basis of transformer action and, in accordance with Lenz's law, the secondary current so produced creates a flux equal and opposite to that produced by the primary winding.\nThe windings are wound around a core of infinitely high magnetic permeability so that all of the magnetic flux passes through both the primary and secondary windings. With a voltage source connected to the primary winding and a load connected to the secondary winding, the transformer currents flow in the indicated directions and the core magnetomotive force cancels to zero.\nAccording to Faraday's law, since the same magnetic flux passes through both the primary and secondary windings in an ideal transformer, a voltage is induced in each winding proportional to its number of turns. The transformer winding voltage ratio is equal to the winding turns ratio.\nAn ideal transformer is a reasonable approximation for a typical commercial transformer, with voltage ratio and winding turns ratio both being inversely proportional to the corresponding current ratio.\nThe load impedance \"referred\" to the primary circuit is equal to the turns ratio squared times the secondary circuit load impedance.\nReal transformer.\nDeviations from ideal transformer.\nThe ideal transformer model neglects many basic linear aspects of real transformers, including unavoidable losses and inefficiencies.\n(a) Core losses, collectively called magnetizing current losses, consisting of\n(b) Unlike the ideal model, the windings in a real transformer have non-zero resistances and inductances associated with:\n(c) similar to an inductor, parasitic capacitance and self-resonance phenomenon due to the electric field distribution. Three kinds of parasitic capacitance are usually considered and the closed-loop equations are provided\nInclusion of capacitance into the transformer model is complicated, and is rarely attempted; the 'real' transformer model's equivalent circuit shown below does not include parasitic capacitance. However, the capacitance effect can be measured by comparing open-circuit inductance, i.e. the inductance of a primary winding when the secondary circuit is open, to a short-circuit inductance when the secondary winding is shorted.\nLeakage flux.\nThe ideal transformer model assumes that all flux generated by the primary winding links all the turns of every winding, including itself. In practice, some flux traverses paths that take it outside the windings. Such flux is termed \"leakage flux\", and results in leakage inductance in series with the mutually coupled transformer windings. Leakage flux results in energy being alternately stored in and discharged from the magnetic fields with each cycle of the power supply. It is not directly a power loss, but results in inferior voltage regulation, causing the secondary voltage not to be directly proportional to the primary voltage, particularly under heavy load. Transformers are therefore normally designed to have very low leakage inductance.\nIn some applications increased leakage is desired, and long magnetic paths, air gaps, or magnetic bypass shunts may deliberately be introduced in a transformer design to limit the short-circuit current it will supply. Leaky transformers may be used to supply loads that exhibit negative resistance, such as electric arcs, mercury- and sodium- vapor lamps and neon signs or for safely handling loads that become periodically short-circuited such as electric arc welders.\nAir gaps are also used to keep a transformer from saturating, especially audio-frequency transformers in circuits that have a DC component flowing in the windings. A saturable reactor exploits saturation of the core to control alternating current.\nKnowledge of leakage inductance is also useful when transformers are operated in parallel. It can be shown that if the percent impedance and associated winding leakage reactance-to-resistance (\"X\"/\"R\") ratio of two transformers were\nthe same, the transformers would share the load power in proportion to their respective ratings. However, the impedance tolerances of commercial transformers are significant. Also, the impedance and X/R ratio of different capacity transformers tends to vary.\nEquivalent circuit.\nReferring to the diagram, a practical transformer's physical behavior may be represented by an equivalent circuit model, which can incorporate an ideal transformer.\nWinding joule losses and leakage reactance are represented by the following series loop impedances of the model:\nIn normal course of circuit equivalence transformation, \"R\"S and \"X\"S are in practice usually referred to the primary side by multiplying these impedances by the turns ratio squared, (\"N\"P/\"N\"S)\u00a02\u00a0=\u00a0a2.\nCore loss and reactance is represented by the following shunt leg impedances of the model:\n\"R\"C and \"X\"M are collectively termed the \"magnetizing branch\" of the model.\nCore losses are caused mostly by hysteresis and eddy current effects in the core and are proportional to the square of the core flux for operation at a given frequency. The finite permeability core requires a magnetizing current \"I\"M to maintain mutual flux in the core. Magnetizing current is in phase with the flux, the relationship between the two being non-linear due to saturation effects. However, all impedances of the equivalent circuit shown are by definition linear and such non-linearity effects are not typically reflected in transformer equivalent circuits. With sinusoidal supply, core flux lags the induced EMF by\u00a090\u00b0. With open-circuited secondary winding, magnetizing branch current \"I\"0 equals transformer no-load current.\nThe resulting model, though sometimes termed 'exact' equivalent circuit based on linearity assumptions, retains a number of approximations. Analysis may be simplified by assuming that magnetizing branch impedance is relatively high and relocating the branch to the left of the primary impedances. This introduces error but allows combination of primary and referred secondary resistances and reactance by simple summation as two series impedances.\nTransformer equivalent circuit impedance and transformer ratio parameters can be derived from the following tests: open-circuit test, short-circuit test, winding resistance test, and transformer ratio test.\nTransformer EMF equation.\nIf the flux in the core is purely sinusoidal, the relationship for either winding between its rms voltage \"E\"rms of the winding, and the supply frequency \"f\", number of turns \"N\", core cross-sectional area \"A\" in m2 and peak magnetic flux density \"B\"peak in Wb/m2 or T (tesla) is given by the universal EMF equation:\n formula_8\nPolarity.\nA dot convention is often used in transformer circuit diagrams, nameplates or terminal markings to define the relative polarity of transformer windings. Positively increasing instantaneous current entering the primary winding's 'dot' end induces positive polarity voltage exiting the secondary winding's 'dot' end. Three-phase transformers used in electric power systems will have a nameplate that indicate the phase relationships between their terminals. This may be in the form of a phasor diagram, or using an alpha-numeric code to show the type of internal connection (wye or delta) for each winding.\nEffect of frequency.\nThe EMF of a transformer at a given flux increases with frequency. By operating at higher frequencies, transformers can be physically more compact because a given core is able to transfer more power without reaching saturation and fewer turns are needed to achieve the same impedance. However, properties such as core loss and conductor skin effect also increase with frequency. Aircraft and military equipment employ 400\u00a0Hz power supplies which reduce core and winding weight. Conversely, frequencies used for some railway electrification systems were much lower (e.g. 16.7\u00a0Hz and 25\u00a0Hz) than normal utility frequencies (50\u201360\u00a0Hz) for historical reasons concerned mainly with the limitations of early electric traction motors. Consequently, the transformers used to step-down the high overhead line voltages were much larger and heavier for the same power rating than those required for the higher frequencies.\nOperation of a transformer at its designed voltage but at a higher frequency than intended will lead to reduced magnetizing current. At a lower frequency, the magnetizing current will increase. Operation of a large transformer at other than its design frequency may require assessment of voltages, losses, and cooling to establish if safe operation is practical. Transformers may require protective relays to protect the transformer from overvoltage at higher than rated frequency.\nOne example is in traction transformers used for electric multiple unit and high-speed train service operating across regions with different electrical standards. The converter equipment and traction transformers have to accommodate different input frequencies and voltage (ranging from as high as 50\u00a0Hz down to 16.7\u00a0Hz and rated up to 25\u00a0kV).\nAt much higher frequencies the transformer core size required drops dramatically: a physically small transformer can handle power levels that would require a massive iron core at mains frequency. The development of switching power semiconductor devices made switch-mode power supplies viable, to generate a high frequency, then change the voltage level with a small transformer.\nTransformers for higher frequency applications such as SMPS typically use core materials with much lower hysteresis and eddy-current losses than those for 50/60\u00a0Hz. Primary examples are iron-powder and ferrite cores. The lower frequency-dependant losses of these cores often is at the expense of flux density at saturation. For instance, ferrite saturation occurs at a substantially lower flux density than laminated iron.\nLarge power transformers are vulnerable to insulation failure due to transient voltages with high-frequency components, such as caused in switching or by lightning.\nEnergy losses.\nTransformer energy losses are dominated by winding and core losses. Transformers' efficiency tends to improve with increasing transformer capacity. The efficiency of typical distribution transformers is between about 98 and 99 percent.\nAs transformer losses vary with load, it is often useful to tabulate no-load loss, full-load loss, half-load loss, and so on. Hysteresis and eddy current losses are constant at all load levels and dominate at no load, while winding loss increases as load increases. The no-load loss can be significant, so that even an idle transformer constitutes a drain on the electrical supply. Designing energy efficient transformers for lower loss requires a larger core, good-quality silicon steel, or even amorphous steel for the core and thicker wire, increasing initial cost. The choice of construction represents a trade-off between initial cost and operating cost.\nTransformer losses arise from:\nCurrent flowing through a winding's conductor causes joule heating due to the resistance of the wire. As frequency increases, skin effect and proximity effect causes the winding's resistance and, hence, losses to increase.\n; Hysteresis losses\nEach time the magnetic field is reversed, a small amount of energy is lost due to hysteresis within the core, caused by motion of the magnetic domains within the steel. According to Steinmetz's formula, the heat energy due to hysteresis is given by\nformula_9 and,\nhysteresis loss is thus given by\nformula_10\nwhere, \"f\" is the frequency, \"\u03b7\" is the hysteresis coefficient and \"\u03b2\"max is the maximum flux density, the empirical exponent of which varies from about 1.4 to 1.8 but is often given as 1.6 for iron. For more detailed analysis, see Magnetic core and Steinmetz's equation.\n; Eddy current losses\n Eddy currents are induced in the conductive metal transformer core by the changing magnetic field, and this current flowing through the resistance of the iron dissipates energy as heat in the core. The eddy current loss is a complex function of the square of supply frequency and inverse square of the material thickness. Eddy current losses can be reduced by making the core of a stack of laminations (thin plates) electrically insulated from each other, rather than a solid block; all transformers operating at low frequencies use laminated or similar cores.\nMagnetic flux in a ferromagnetic material, such as the core, causes it to physically expand and contract slightly with each cycle of the magnetic field, an effect known as magnetostriction, the frictional energy of which produces an audible noise known as mains hum or \"transformer hum\". This transformer hum is especially objectionable in transformers supplied at power frequencies and in high-frequency flyback transformers associated with television CRTs.\nLeakage inductance is by itself largely lossless, since energy supplied to its magnetic fields is returned to the supply with the next half-cycle. However, any leakage flux that intercepts nearby conductive materials such as the transformer's support structure will give rise to eddy currents and be converted to heat.\nThere are also radiative losses due to the oscillating magnetic field but these are usually small.\nIn addition to magnetostriction, the alternating magnetic field causes fluctuating forces between the primary and secondary windings. This energy incites vibration transmission in interconnected metalwork, thus amplifying audible transformer hum.\nConstruction.\nCores.\nClosed-core transformers are constructed in 'core form' or 'shell form'. When windings surround the core, the transformer is core form; when windings are surrounded by the core, the transformer is shell form. Shell form design may be more prevalent than core form design for distribution transformer applications due to the relative ease in stacking the core around winding coils. Core form design tends to, as a general rule, be more economical, and therefore more prevalent, than shell form design for high voltage power transformer applications at the lower end of their voltage and power rating ranges (less than or equal to, nominally, 230\u00a0kV or 75\u00a0MVA). At higher voltage and power ratings, shell form transformers tend to be more prevalent. Shell form design tends to be preferred for extra-high voltage and higher MVA applications because, though more labor-intensive to manufacture, shell form transformers are characterized as having inherently better kVA-to-weight ratio, better short-circuit strength characteristics and higher immunity to transit damage.\nLaminated steel cores.\nTransformers for use at power or audio frequencies typically have cores made of high permeability silicon steel. The steel has a permeability many times that of free space and the core thus serves to greatly reduce the magnetizing current and confine the flux to a path which closely couples the windings. Early transformer developers soon realized that cores constructed from solid iron resulted in prohibitive eddy current losses, and their designs mitigated this effect with cores consisting of bundles of insulated iron wires. Later designs constructed the core by stacking layers of thin steel laminations, a principle that has remained in use. Each lamination is insulated from its neighbors by a thin non-conducting layer of insulation. The transformer universal EMF equation can be used to calculate the core cross-sectional area for a preferred level of magnetic flux.\nThe effect of laminations is to confine eddy currents to highly elliptical paths that enclose little flux, and so reduce their magnitude. Thinner laminations reduce losses, but are more laborious and expensive to construct. Thin laminations are generally used on high-frequency transformers, with some of very thin steel laminations able to operate up to 10\u00a0kHz.\nOne common design of laminated core is made from interleaved stacks of E-shaped steel sheets capped with I-shaped pieces, leading to its name of E-I transformer. Such a design tends to exhibit more losses, but is very economical to manufacture. The cut-core or C-core type is made by winding a steel strip around a rectangular form and then bonding the layers together. It is then cut in two, forming two C shapes, and the core assembled by binding the two C halves together with a steel strap. They have the advantage that the flux is always oriented parallel to the metal grains, reducing reluctance.\nA steel core's remanence means that it retains a static magnetic field when power is removed. When power is then reapplied, the residual field will cause a high inrush current until the effect of the remaining magnetism is reduced, usually after a few cycles of the applied AC waveform. Overcurrent protection devices such as fuses must be selected to allow this harmless inrush to pass.\nOn transformers connected to long, overhead power transmission lines, induced currents due to geomagnetic disturbances during solar storms can cause saturation of the core and operation of transformer protection devices.\nDistribution transformers can achieve low no-load losses by using cores made with low-loss high-permeability silicon steel or amorphous (non-crystalline) metal alloy. The higher initial cost of the core material is offset over the life of the transformer by its lower losses at light load.\nSolid cores.\nPowdered iron cores are used in circuits such as switch-mode power supplies that operate above mains frequencies and up to a few tens of kilohertz. These materials combine high magnetic permeability with high bulk electrical resistivity. For frequencies extending beyond the VHF band, cores made from non-conductive magnetic ceramic materials called ferrites are common. Some radio-frequency transformers also have movable cores (sometimes called 'slugs') which allow adjustment of the coupling coefficient (and bandwidth) of tuned radio-frequency circuits.\nToroidal cores.\nToroidal transformers are built around a ring-shaped core, which, depending on operating frequency, is made from a long strip of silicon steel or permalloy wound into a coil, powdered iron, or ferrite. A strip construction ensures that the grain boundaries are optimally aligned, improving the transformer's efficiency by reducing the core's reluctance. The closed ring shape eliminates air gaps inherent in the construction of an E-I core. The cross-section of the ring is usually square or rectangular, but more expensive cores with circular cross-sections are also available. The primary and secondary coils are often wound concentrically to cover the entire surface of the core. This minimizes the length of wire needed and provides screening to minimize the core's magnetic field from generating electromagnetic interference.\nToroidal transformers are more efficient than the cheaper laminated E-I types for a similar power level. Other advantages compared to E-I types, include smaller size (about half), lower weight (about half), less mechanical hum (making them superior in audio amplifiers), lower exterior magnetic field (about one tenth), low off-load losses (making them more efficient in standby circuits), single-bolt mounting, and greater choice of shapes. The main disadvantages are higher cost and limited power capacity (see Classification parameters below). Because of the lack of a residual gap in the magnetic path, toroidal transformers also tend to exhibit higher inrush current, compared to laminated E-I types.\nFerrite toroidal cores are used at higher frequencies, typically between a few tens of kilohertz to hundreds of megahertz, to reduce losses, physical size, and weight of inductive components. A drawback of toroidal transformer construction is the higher labor cost of winding. This is because it is necessary to pass the entire length of a coil winding through the core aperture each time a single turn is added to the coil. As a consequence, toroidal transformers rated more than a few kVA are uncommon. Relatively few toroids are offered with power ratings above 10\u00a0kVA, and practically none above 25\u00a0kVA. Small distribution transformers may achieve some of the benefits of a toroidal core by splitting it and forcing it open, then inserting a bobbin containing primary and secondary windings.\nAir cores.\nA transformer can be produced by placing the windings near each other, an arrangement termed an \"air-core\" transformer. An air-core transformer eliminates loss due to hysteresis in the core material. The magnetizing inductance is drastically reduced by the lack of a magnetic core, resulting in large magnetizing currents and losses if used at low frequencies. Air-core transformers are unsuitable for use in power distribution, but are frequently employed in radio-frequency applications. Air cores are also used for resonant transformers such as tesla coils, where they can achieve reasonably low loss despite the low magnetizing inductance.\nWindings.\nThe electrical conductor used for the windings depends upon the application, but in all cases the individual turns must be electrically insulated from each other to ensure that the current travels throughout every turn. For small transformers, in which currents are low and the potential difference between adjacent turns is small, the coils are often wound from enameled magnet wire. Larger power transformers may be wound with copper rectangular strip conductors insulated by oil-impregnated paper and blocks of pressboard.\nHigh-frequency transformers operating in the tens to hundreds of kilohertz often have windings made of braided Litz wire to minimize the skin-effect and proximity effect losses. Large power transformers use multiple-stranded conductors as well, since even at low power frequencies non-uniform distribution of current would otherwise exist in high-current windings. Each strand is individually insulated, and the strands are arranged so that at certain points in the winding, or throughout the whole winding, each portion occupies different relative positions in the complete conductor. The transposition equalizes the current flowing in each strand of the conductor, and reduces eddy current losses in the winding itself. The stranded conductor is also more flexible than a solid conductor of similar size, aiding manufacture.\nThe windings of signal transformers minimize leakage inductance and stray capacitance to improve high-frequency response. Coils are split into sections, and those sections interleaved between the sections of the other winding.\nPower-frequency transformers may have \"taps\" at intermediate points on the winding, usually on the higher voltage winding side, for voltage adjustment. Taps may be manually reconnected, or a manual or automatic switch may be provided for changing taps. Automatic on-load tap changers are used in electric power transmission or distribution, on equipment such as arc furnace transformers, or for automatic voltage regulators for sensitive loads. Audio-frequency transformers, used for the distribution of audio to public address loudspeakers, have taps to allow adjustment of impedance to each speaker. A center-tapped transformer is often used in the output stage of an audio power amplifier in a push-pull circuit. Modulation transformers in AM transmitters are very similar.\nCooling.\nIt is a rule of thumb that the life expectancy of electrical insulation is halved for about every 7\u00a0\u00b0C to 10\u00a0\u00b0C increase in operating temperature (an instance of the application of the Arrhenius equation).\nSmall dry-type and liquid-immersed transformers are often self-cooled by natural convection and radiation heat dissipation. As power ratings increase, transformers are often cooled by forced-air cooling, forced-oil cooling, water-cooling, or combinations of these. Large transformers are filled with transformer oil that both cools and insulates the windings. Transformer oil is often a highly refined mineral oil that cools the windings and insulation by circulating within the transformer tank. The mineral oil and paper insulation system has been extensively studied and used for more than 100 years. It is estimated that 50% of power transformers will survive 50 years of use, that the average age of failure of power transformers is about 10 to 15 years, and that about 30% of power transformer failures are due to insulation and overloading failures. Prolonged operation at elevated temperature degrades insulating properties of winding insulation and dielectric coolant, which not only shortens transformer life but can ultimately lead to catastrophic transformer failure. With a great body of empirical study as a guide, transformer oil testing including dissolved gas analysis provides valuable maintenance information.\nBuilding regulations in many jurisdictions require indoor liquid-filled transformers to either use dielectric fluids that are less flammable than oil, or be installed in fire-resistant rooms. Air-cooled dry transformers can be more economical where they eliminate the cost of a fire-resistant transformer room.\nThe tank of liquid-filled transformers often has radiators through which the liquid coolant circulates by natural convection or fins. Some large transformers employ electric fans for forced-air cooling, pumps for forced-liquid cooling, or have heat exchangers for water-cooling. An oil-immersed transformer may be equipped with a Buchholz relay, which, depending on severity of gas accumulation due to internal arcing, is used to either trigger an alarm or de-energize the transformer. Oil-immersed transformer installations usually include fire protection measures such as walls, oil containment, and fire-suppression sprinkler systems.\nPolychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) have properties that once favored their use as a dielectric coolant, though concerns over their environmental persistence led to a widespread ban on their use.\nToday, non-toxic, stable silicone-based oils, or fluorinated hydrocarbons may be used where the expense of a fire-resistant liquid offsets additional building cost for a transformer vault. However, the long life span of transformers can mean that the potential for exposure can be high long after banning.\nSome transformers are gas-insulated. Their windings are enclosed in sealed, pressurized tanks and often cooled by nitrogen or sulfur hexafluoride gas.\nExperimental power transformers in the 500\u20131,000\u00a0kVA range have been built with liquid nitrogen or helium cooled superconducting windings, which eliminates winding losses without affecting core losses.\nInsulation.\nInsulation must be provided between the individual turns of the windings, between the windings, between windings and core, and at the terminals of the winding.\nInter-turn insulation of small transformers may be a layer of insulating varnish on the wire. Layer of paper or polymer films may be inserted between layers of windings, and between primary and secondary windings. A transformer may be coated or dipped in a polymer resin to improve the strength of windings and protect them from moisture or corrosion. The resin may be impregnated into the winding insulation using combinations of vacuum and pressure during the coating process, eliminating all air voids in the winding. In the limit, the entire coil may be placed in a mold, and resin cast around it as a solid block, encapsulating the windings.\nLarge oil-filled power transformers use windings wrapped with insulating paper, which is impregnated with oil during assembly of the transformer. Oil-filled transformers use highly refined mineral oil to insulate and cool the windings and core. \nConstruction of oil-filled transformers requires that the insulation covering the windings be thoroughly dried of residual moisture before the oil is introduced. Drying may be done by circulating hot air around the core, by circulating externally heated transformer oil, or by vapor-phase drying (VPD) where an evaporated solvent transfers heat by condensation on the coil and core. For small transformers, resistance heating by injection of current into the windings is used.\nBushings.\nLarger transformers are provided with high-voltage insulated bushings made of polymers or porcelain. A large bushing can be a complex structure since it must provide careful control of the electric field gradient without letting the transformer leak oil.\nClassification parameters.\nTransformers can be classified in many ways, such as the following:\nApplications.\nVarious specific electrical application designs require a variety of transformer types. Although they all share the basic characteristic transformer principles, they are customized in construction or electrical properties for certain installation requirements or circuit conditions.\nIn electric power transmission, transformers allow transmission of electric power at high voltages, which reduces the loss due to heating of the wires. This allows generating plants to be located economically at a distance from electrical consumers. All but a tiny fraction of the world's electrical power has passed through a series of transformers by the time it reaches the consumer.\nIn many electronic devices, a transformer is used to convert voltage from the distribution wiring to convenient values for the circuit requirements, either directly at the power line frequency or through a switch mode power supply.\nSignal and audio transformers are used to couple stages of amplifiers and to match devices such as microphones and record players to the input of amplifiers. Audio transformers allowed telephone circuits to carry on a two-way conversation over a single pair of wires. A balun transformer converts a signal that is referenced to ground to a signal that has balanced voltages to ground, such as between external cables and internal circuits. Isolation transformers prevent leakage of current into the secondary circuit and are used in medical equipment and at construction sites. Resonant transformers are used for coupling between stages of radio receivers, or in high-voltage Tesla coils.\nHistory.\nDiscovery of induction.\nElectromagnetic induction, the principle of the operation of the transformer, was discovered independently by Michael Faraday in 1831 and Joseph Henry in 1832. Only Faraday furthered his experiments to the point of working out the equation describing the relationship between EMF and magnetic flux now known as Faraday's law of induction:\nformula_11\nwhere formula_12 is the magnitude of the EMF in volts and \u03a6B is the magnetic flux through the circuit in webers.\nFaraday performed early experiments on induction between coils of wire, including winding a pair of coils around an iron ring, thus creating the first toroidal closed-core transformer. However he only applied individual pulses of current to his transformer, and never discovered the relation between the turns ratio and EMF in the windings.\nInduction coils.\nThe first type of transformer to see wide use was the induction coil, invented by Irish-Catholic Rev. Nicholas Callan of Maynooth College, Ireland in 1836. He was one of the first researchers to realize the more turns the secondary winding has in relation to the primary winding, the larger the induced secondary EMF will be. Induction coils evolved from scientists' and inventors' efforts to get higher voltages from batteries. Since batteries produce direct current (DC) rather than AC, induction coils relied upon vibrating electrical contacts that regularly interrupted the current in the primary to create the flux changes necessary for induction. Between the 1830s and the 1870s, efforts to build better induction coils, mostly by trial and error, slowly revealed the basic principles of transformers.\nFirst alternating current transformers.\nBy the 1870s, efficient generators producing alternating current (AC) were available, and it was found AC could power an induction coil directly, without an interrupter.\nIn 1876, Russian engineer Pavel Yablochkov invented a lighting system based on a set of induction coils where the primary windings were connected to a source of AC. The secondary windings could be connected to several 'electric candles' (arc lamps) of his own design. The coils Yablochkov employed functioned essentially as transformers.\nIn 1878, the Ganz factory, Budapest, Hungary, began producing equipment for electric lighting and, by 1883, had installed over fifty systems in Austria-Hungary. Their AC systems used arc and incandescent lamps, generators, and other equipment.\nIn 1882, Lucien Gaulard and John Dixon Gibbs first exhibited a device with an initially widely criticized laminated plate open iron core called a 'secondary generator' in London, then sold the idea to the Westinghouse company in the United States in 1886. They also exhibited the invention in Turin, Italy in 1884, where it was highly successful and adopted for an electric lighting system. Their open-core device used a fixed 1:1 ratio to supply a series circuit for the utilization load (lamps). However, the voltage of their system was controlled by moving the iron core in or out.\nEarly series circuit transformer distribution.\nInduction coils with open magnetic circuits are inefficient at transferring power to loads. Until about 1880, the paradigm for AC power transmission from a high voltage supply to a low voltage load was a series circuit. Open-core transformers with a ratio near 1:1 were connected with their primaries in series to allow use of a high voltage for transmission while presenting a low voltage to the lamps. The inherent flaw in this method was that turning off a single lamp (or other electric device) affected the voltage supplied to all others on the same circuit. Many adjustable transformer designs were introduced to compensate for this problematic characteristic of the series circuit, including those employing methods of adjusting the core or bypassing the magnetic flux around part of a coil.\nEfficient, practical transformer designs did not appear until the 1880s, but within a decade, the transformer would be instrumental in the war of the currents, and in seeing AC distribution systems triumph over their DC counterparts, a position in which they have remained dominant ever since.\nClosed-core transformers and parallel power distribution.\nIn the autumn of 1884, K\u00e1roly Zipernowsky, Ott\u00f3 Bl\u00e1thy and Miksa D\u00e9ri (ZBD), three Hungarian engineers associated with the Ganz Works, had determined that open-core devices were impracticable, as they were incapable of reliably regulating voltage. The Ganz factory had also in the autumn of 1884 made delivery of the world's first five high-efficiency AC transformers, the first of these units having been shipped on September 16, 1884. This first unit had been manufactured to the following specifications: 1,400 W, 40\u00a0Hz, 120:72 V, 11.6:19.4 A, ratio 1.67:1, one-phase, shell form. In their joint 1885 patent applications for novel transformers (later called ZBD transformers), they described two designs with closed magnetic circuits where copper windings were either wound around an iron wire ring core or surrounded by an iron wire core. The two designs were the first application of the two basic transformer constructions in common use to this day, termed \"core form\" or \"shell form\" .\nIn both designs, the magnetic flux linking the primary and secondary windings traveled almost entirely within the confines of the iron core, with no intentional path through air (see Toroidal cores below). The new transformers were 3.4 times more efficient than the open-core bipolar devices of Gaulard and Gibbs. The ZBD patents included two other major interrelated innovations: one concerning the use of parallel connected, instead of series connected, utilization loads, the other concerning the ability to have high turns ratio transformers such that the supply network voltage could be much higher (initially 1,400 to 2,000 V) than the voltage of utilization loads (100 V initially preferred). When employed in parallel connected electric distribution systems, closed-core transformers finally made it technically and economically feasible to provide electric power for lighting in homes, businesses and public spaces. Bl\u00e1thy had suggested the use of closed cores, Zipernowsky had suggested the use of parallel shunt connections, and D\u00e9ri had performed the experiments; In early 1885, the three engineers also eliminated the problem of eddy current losses with the invention of the lamination of electromagnetic cores.\nTransformers today are designed on the principles discovered by the three engineers. They also popularized the word 'transformer' to describe a device for altering the EMF of an electric current although the term had already been in use by 1882. In 1886, the ZBD engineers designed, and the Ganz factory supplied electrical equipment for, the world's first power station that used AC generators to power a parallel connected common electrical network, the steam-powered Rome-Cerchi power plant.\nWestinghouse improvements.\nBuilding on the advancement of AC technology in Europe, George Westinghouse founded the Westinghouse Electric in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, on January 8, 1886. The new firm became active in developing alternating current (AC) electric infrastructure throughout the United States. \nThe Edison Electric Light Company held an option on the US rights for the ZBD transformers, requiring Westinghouse to pursue alternative designs on the same principles. George Westinghouse had bought Gaulard and Gibbs' patents for $50,000 in February 1886. He assigned to William Stanley the task of redesign the Gaulard and Gibbs transformer for commercial use in United States. Stanley's first patented design was for induction coils with single cores of soft iron and adjustable gaps to regulate the EMF present in the secondary winding (see image). This design was first used commercially in the US in 1886 but Westinghouse was intent on improving the Stanley design to make it (unlike the ZBD type) easy and cheap to produce.\nWestinghouse, Stanley and associates soon developed a core that was easier to manufacture, consisting of a stack of thin 'E\u2011shaped' iron plates insulated by thin sheets of paper or other insulating material. Pre-wound copper coils could then be slid into place, and straight iron plates laid in to create a closed magnetic circuit. Westinghouse obtained a patent for the new low-cost design in 1887.\nOther early transformer designs.\nIn 1889, Russian-born engineer Mikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky developed the first three-phase transformer at the Allgemeine Elektricit\u00e4ts-Gesellschaft ('General Electricity Company') in Germany.\nIn 1891, Nikola Tesla invented the Tesla coil, an air-cored, dual-tuned resonant transformer for producing very high voltages at high frequency.\nAudio frequency transformers (\"repeating coils\") were used by early experimenters in the development of the telephone.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral links:"}
{"id": "30907", "revid": "445772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30907", "title": "Transubstantiation", "text": "Catholic sacramental doctrine\nTransubstantiation (; ) is, according to the teaching of the Catholic Church, \"the change of the whole substance of bread into the substance of the Body of Christ and of the whole substance of wine into the substance of the Blood of Christ\". This change is brought about in the eucharistic prayer through the efficacy of the word of Christ and by the action of the Holy Spirit. However, \"the outward characteristics of bread and wine, that is the 'eucharistic species', remain unaltered\". In this teaching, the notions of \"substance\" and \"transubstantiation\" are not linked with any particular theory of metaphysics.\nThe Catholic Church teaches that, in the Eucharistic offering, bread and wine are changed into the body and blood of Christ. The affirmation of this doctrine on the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist was expressed, using the word \"transubstantiate\", by the Fourth Council of the Lateran in 1215. It was later challenged by various 14th-century reformers, John Wycliffe in particular. \nThe manner in which the change occurs, the Catholic Church teaches, is a mystery: \"The signs of bread and wine become, in a way surpassing understanding, the Body and Blood of Christ.\" In Lutheranism, the terminology used regarding the real presence is the doctrine of the sacramental union, in which the \"very body and blood of Christ\" is received. In the Greek Orthodox Church, the doctrine has been discussed under the term of \"metousiosis\", coined as a direct loan-translation of \"transubstantiatio\" in the 17th century. In Eastern Orthodoxy in general, the Sacred Mystery (Sacrament) of the Eucharist is more commonly discussed using alternative terms such as \"trans-elementation\" (, ), \"re-ordination\" (, ), or simply \"change\" (, ).\nIn the Reformed tradition, a real spiritual presence is taught; this view is held in Anglicanism, especially by those of the Evangelical-Reformed tradition, though others including those of the High Church tradition hold to a corporeal presence.\nHistory.\nSummary.\nFrom the earliest centuries, the church spoke of the elements used in celebrating the Eucharist as being changed into the body and blood of Christ. Terms used to speak of the alteration included \"trans-elementation\". The bread and wine were said to be \"made\", \"changed into\", the body and blood of Christ. Similarly, Augustine said: \"Not all bread, but only that which receives the blessing of Christ becomes the body of Christ.\"\nThe term \"transubstantiation\" was used at least by the 11th century to speak of the change and was in widespread use by the 12th century. The Fourth Council of the Lateran used it in 1215. When later theologians adopted Aristotelian metaphysics in Western Europe, they explained the change that was already part of Catholic teaching in terms of Aristotelian substance and accidents. The sixteenth-century Reformation gave this as a reason for rejecting the Catholic teaching. The Council of Trent did not impose the Aristotelian theory of substance and accidents or the term \"transubstantiation\" in its Aristotelian meaning, but stated that the term is a fitting and proper term for the change that takes place by consecration of the bread and wine. The term, which for that Council had no essential dependence on scholastic ideas, is used in the Catholic Church to affirm the fact of Christ's presence and the mysterious and radical change which takes place, but not to explain how the change takes place, since this occurs \"in a way surpassing understanding\". The term is mentioned in both the 1992 and 1997 editions of the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" and is given prominence in the later (2005) \"Compendium of the Catechism of the Catholic Church\".\nPatristic period.\nPatristic writers had a high view of Eucharistic realism with limited interest in defining the mode of change; they were content to leave the manner of Christ\u2019s presence a mystery. Philip Schaff concludes that in the period c.100\u2013325, the doctrine of the Lord's Supper \"remained indefinite and obscure\", with the ancient church prioritizing \"worthy participation\" over logical definition, making it unhistorical to impose later theories onto this era.\nEverett Ferguson describes \"the doctrine of transubstantiation in the technical sense\" as \"a latecomer\" to Catholic theology, with the term appearing from the twelfth century, receiving conciliar expression at the Fourth Lateran Council (1215), and being given a full scholastic exposition in Thomas Aquinas's \"Summa theologiae\". Gregg R. Allison likewise characterizes early church Eucharistic theology as understanding \"the Lord's Supper in a variety of ways\", thereby distinguishing later Catholic doctrine from diverse patristic approaches. \nScholars such as Jaroslav Pelikan, Esp\u00edn, and Nickoloff define transubstantiation as an Aristotelian explanation of how the substance of the bread and wine becomes the body and blood of the risen Christ while the accidents remain.\nWilliam A. Jurgens states Irenaeus' teaching on the Eucharistic teaching as more indicative of an \"impanation mentality\" than of later transubstantiation and notes that Irenaeus does not attempt to explain how Christ is present in the elements. Bradley G. Green suggests that, in light of later Western developments, it is \"appropriate to recognize a hope of transubstantiation in Irenaeus\".\nBrett Salkeld argues that in the patristic period a \"symbol\" was understood as a participating presence, not a mere sign, so the Fathers could call the Eucharist both Christ\u2019s body and its \"figure\" without contradiction; later \"realist\" versus \"symbolist\" labels impose anachronistic categories on this shared Platonist worldview.\nCited quotations.\nThe short document known as the \"Teachings of the Apostles\" or \"Didache\", which may be the earliest Christian document outside of the New Testament to speak of the Eucharist, says, \"Let no one eat or drink of your Eucharist, unless they have been baptized into the name of the Lord; for concerning this also the Lord has said, 'Give not that which is holy to the dogs'.\"\nIgnatius of Antioch, writing in about AD\u00a0106 to the Roman Christians, says: \"I desire the bread of God, the heavenly bread, the bread of life, which is the flesh of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who became afterwards of the seed of David and Abraham; and I desire the drink of God, namely His blood, which is incorruptible love and eternal life.\"\nWriting to the Christians of Smyrna in the same year, he warned them to \"stand aloof from such heretics\", because, among other reasons, \"they abstain from the Eucharist and from prayer, because they confess not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ, which suffered for our sins, and which the Father, of His goodness, raised up again.\"\nIn about 150, Justin Martyr, referring to the Eucharist, wrote: \"Not as common bread and common drink do we receive these; but in like manner as Jesus Christ our Savior, having been made flesh by the Word of God, had both flesh and blood for our salvation, so likewise have we been taught that the food which is blessed by the prayer of His word, and from which our blood and flesh by transmutation are nourished, is the flesh and blood of that Jesus who was made flesh.\"\nIn about AD\u00a0200, Tertullian wrote: \"Having taken the bread and given it to His disciples, He made it His own body, by saying, This is my body, that is, the figure of my body. A figure, however, there could not have been, unless there were first a veritable body. An empty thing, or phantom, is incapable of a figure. If, however, (as Marcion might say) He pretended the bread was His body, because He lacked the truth of bodily substance, it follows that He must have given bread for us.\"\nThe \"Apostolic Constitutions\" (compiled c.\u2009380) says: \"Let the bishop give the oblation, saying, The body of Christ; and let him that receiveth say, Amen. And let the deacon take the cup; and when he gives it, say, The blood of Christ, the cup of life; and let him that drinketh say, Amen.\"\nAmbrose of Milan (died 397) wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther fourth-century Christian writers say that in the Eucharist there occurs a \"change\", \"transelementation\", \"transformation\", \"transposing\", \"alteration\" of the bread into the body of Christ.\nAugustine declares that the bread consecrated in the Eucharist actually \"becomes\" (in Latin, fit) the Body of Christ: \"The faithful know what I'm talking about; they know Christ in the breaking of bread. It isn't every loaf of bread, you see, but the one receiving Christ's blessing, that becomes the body of Christ.\"\nClement of Alexandria, who uses the word \"symbol\" concerning the Eucharist, is quoted as an exception, although this interpretation is disputed on the basis of Alexandrian overlaps of symbology and literalism.\nMiddle Ages.\nPaschasius Radbertus (785\u2013865) was a Carolingian theologian, and the abbot of Corbie, whose most well-known and influential work is an exposition on the nature of the Eucharist written around 831, entitled \"De Corpore et Sanguine Domini\". In it, Paschasius agrees with Ambrose in affirming that the Eucharist contains the true, historical body of Jesus Christ. According to Paschasius, God is truth itself, and therefore, his words and actions must be true. Christ's proclamation at the Last Supper that the bread and wine were his body and blood must be taken literally, since God is truth. He thus believes that the change of the substances of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ offered in the Eucharist really occurs. Only if the Eucharist is the actual body and blood of Christ can a Christian know it is salvific.\nIn the 11th century, Berengar of Tours stirred up opposition when he denied that any material change in the elements was needed to explain the fact of the Real Presence. His position was never diametrically opposed to that of his critics, and he was probably never excommunicated, but the controversies that he aroused (see Stercoranism) forced people to clarify the doctrine of the Eucharist.\nThe earliest known use of the term \"transubstantiation\" to describe the change from bread and wine to body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist was by Hildebert de Lavardin, Archbishop of Tours, in the 11th century. By the end of the 12th century the term was in widespread use.\nThe Fourth Council of the Lateran in 1215 spoke of the bread and wine as \"transubstantiated\" into the body and blood of Christ: \"His body and blood are truly contained in the sacrament of the altar under the forms of bread and wine, the bread and wine having been transubstantiated, by God's power, into his body and blood\". Catholic scholars and clergy have noted numerous reports of Eucharistic miracles contemporary with the council, and at least one such report was discussed at the council. It was not until later in the 13th century that Aristotelian metaphysics was accepted and a philosophical elaboration in line with that metaphysics was developed, which found classic formulation in the teaching of Thomas Aquinas and in the theories of later Catholic theologians in the medieval period (Robert Grosseteste, Giles of Rome, Duns Scotus and William of Ockham).\nReformation.\nDuring the Protestant Reformation, the doctrine of transubstantiation was heavily criticised as an Aristotelian \"pseudophilosophy\" imported into Christian teaching and jettisoned in favor of Martin Luther's doctrine of sacramental union, or in favor, per Huldrych Zwingli, of the Eucharist as memorial.\nIn the Reformation, the doctrine of transubstantiation became a matter of much controversy. Martin Luther held that \"It is not the doctrine of transubstantiation which is to be believed, but simply that Christ really is present at the Eucharist\". In his \"On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church\" (published on 6 October 1520) Luther wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Therefore, it is an absurd and unheard-of juggling with words, to understand \"bread\" to mean \"the form, or accidents of bread\", and \"wine\" to mean \"the form, or accidents of wine\". Why do they not also understand all other things to mean their forms, or accidents? Even if this might be done with all other things, it would yet not be right thus to emasculate the words of God and arbitrarily to empty them of their meaning.\nMoreover, the Church had the true faith for more than twelve hundred years, during which time the holy Fathers never once mentioned this transubstantiation \u2013 certainly, a monstrous word for a monstrous idea \u2013 until the pseudo-philosophy of Aristotle became rampant in the Church these last three hundred years. During these centuries many other things have been wrongly defined, for example, that the Divine essence neither is begotten nor begets, that the soul is the substantial form of the human body, and the like assertions, which are made without reason or sense, as the Cardinal of Cambray himself admits.\nIn his 1528 \"Confession Concerning Christ's Supper\", he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Why then should we not much more say in the Supper, \"This is my body\", even though bread and body are two distinct substances, and the word \"this\" indicates the bread? Here, too, out of two kinds of objects a union has taken place, which I shall call a \"sacramental union\", because Christ's body and the bread are given to us as a sacrament. This is not a natural or personal union, as is the case with God and Christ. It is also perhaps a different union from that which the dove has with the Holy Spirit, and the flame with the angel, but it is also assuredly a sacramental union.\nWhat Luther thus called a \"sacramental union\" is often erroneously called \"consubstantiation\" by non-Lutherans. In \"On the Babylonian Captivity\", Luther upheld belief in the Real Presence of Jesus and, in his 1523 treatise \"The Adoration of the Sacrament\", defended adoration of the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist.\nIn England, the Six Articles of 1539 prescribed the death penalty for any who denied transubstantiation. This was changed under Elizabeth\u00a0I. In the Thirty-nine Articles of 1563, the Church of England declared: \"Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy Writ; but is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath given occasion to many superstitions\". Laws were enacted against participation in Catholic worship, which remained illegal until 1791.\nFor a century and half \u2013 1672 to 1828 \u2013 transubstantiation had an important role, in a negative way, in British political and social life. Under the Test Act, the holding of any public office was made conditional upon explicitly denying Transubstantiation. Any aspirant to public office had to repeat the formula set out by the law: \"I, \"N\", do declare that I do believe that there is not any transubstantiation in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or in the elements of the bread and wine, at or after the consecration thereof by any person whatsoever.\"\nCouncil of Trent.\nIn 1551, the Council of Trent declared that the doctrine of transubstantiation is a dogma of faith and stated that \"by the consecration of the bread and wine there takes place a change of the whole substance of the bread into the substance of the body of Christ our Lord and of the whole substance of the wine into the substance of his blood. This change the holy Catholic Church has fittingly and properly called transubstantiation.\" In its 13th session ending 11 October 1551, the Council defined transubstantiation as \"that wonderful and singular conversion of the whole substance of the bread into the Body, and of the whole substance of the wine into the Blood \u2013 the species only of the bread and wine remaining \u2013 which conversion indeed the Catholic Church most aptly calls Transubstantiation\". This council officially approved use of the term \"transubstantiation\" to express the Catholic Church's teaching on the subject of the conversion of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist, with the aim of safeguarding Christ's presence as a literal truth, while emphasizing the fact that there is no change in the empirical appearances of the bread and wine. It did not however impose the Aristotelian theory of substance and accidents: it spoke only of the species (the appearances), not the philosophical term \"accidents\", and the word \"substance\" was in ecclesiastical use for many centuries before Aristotelian philosophy was adopted in the West, as shown for instance by its use in the Nicene Creed which speaks of Christ having the same \" (Greek) or \" (Latin) as the Father.\nSince the Second Vatican Council.\nMonstrance with transparent host (detail from the Eucharist window by J. Mehoffer in the Cathedral of St Nicholas in Fribourg, Switzerland)\nThe \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" states the Church's teaching on transubstantiation twice.\nIt repeats what it calls the Council of Trent's summary of the Catholic faith on \"the conversion of the bread and wine into Christ's body and blood [by which] Christ becomes present in this sacrament\", faith \"in the efficacy of the Word of Christ and of the action of the Holy Spirit to bring about this conversion\": \"[B]y the consecration of the bread and wine there takes place a change of the whole substance of the bread into the substance of the body of Christ our Lord and of the whole substance of the wine into the substance of his blood. This change the holy Catholic Church has fittingly and properly called transubstantiation\".\nAs part of its own summary (\"In brief\") of the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" on the sacrament of the Eucharist, it states: \"By the consecration the transubstantiation of the bread and wine into the Body and Blood of Christ is brought about. Under the consecrated species of bread and wine Christ himself, living and glorious, is present in a true, real, and substantial manner: his Body and his Blood, with his soul and his divinity (cf. Council of Trent: DS 1640; 1651).\"\nThe Church's teaching is given in the \"Compendium of the Catechism of the Catholic Church\" in question and answer form:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;283. What is the meaning of \"transubstantiation\"?\n\"Transubstantiation\" means the change of the whole substance of bread into the substance of the Body of Christ and of the whole substance of wine into the substance of his Blood. This change is brought about in the eucharistic prayer through the efficacy of the word of Christ and by the action of the Holy Spirit. However, the outward characteristics of bread and wine, that is the \"eucharistic species\", remain unaltered.\nThe Anglican\u2013Roman Catholic Joint Preparatory Commission stated in 1971 in their common declaration on Eucharistic doctrine: \"The word transubstantiation is commonly used in the Roman Catholic Church to indicate that God acting in the eucharist effects a change in the inner reality of the elements.\"\nOpinions of some individuals (not necessarily typical).\nIn 2017 Irish Augustinian Gabriel Daly said that the Council of Trent approved use of the term \"transubstantiation\" as suitable and proper, but did not make it obligatory, and he suggested that its continued use is partly to blame for lack of progress towards sharing of the Eucharist between Protestants and Catholics.\nTraditionalist Catholic Paolo Pasqualucci said that the absence of the term in the Second Vatican Council's constitution on the liturgy \"Sacrosanctum Concilium\" means that it presents the Catholic Mass \"in the manner of the Protestants\". To this Dave Armstrong replied that \"the word may not be present; but the concept is\". For instance, the document \"Gaudium et spes\" refers to the \"sacrament of faith where natural elements refined by man are gloriously changed into His Body and Blood, providing a meal of brotherly solidarity and a foretaste of the heavenly banquet\" (Chapter 3).\nThomas J. Reese commented that \"using Aristotelian concepts to explain Catholic mysteries in the 21st century is a fool's errand\", while Timothy O'Malley remarked that \"it is possible to teach the doctrine of transubstantiation without using the words 'substance' and 'accidents'. If the word 'substance' scares people off, you can say, 'what it really is', and that is what substance is. What it really is, what it absolutely is at its heart is Christ's body and blood\".\nGeneral belief and doctrine knowledge among Catholics.\nA Georgetown University CARA poll of United States Catholics in 2008 showed that 57% said they believed that Jesus Christ is really present in the Eucharist in 2008 and nearly 43% said that they believed the wine and bread are symbols of Jesus. Of those attending Mass weekly or more often, 91% believed in the Real Presence, as did 65% of those who merely attended at least once a month, and 40% of those who attended at most a few times a year.\nAmong Catholics attending Mass at least once a month, the percentage of belief in the Real Presence was 86% for pre\u2013Vatican II Catholics, 74% for Vatican II Catholics, 75% for post-Vatican II Catholics, and 85% for Millennials.\nA 2019 Pew Research Report found that 69% of United States Catholics believed that in the Eucharist the bread and wine \"are symbols of the body and blood of Jesus Christ\", and only 31% believed that, \"during Catholic Mass, the bread and wine actually become the body and blood of Jesus\". Of the latter group, most (28% of all US Catholics) said they knew that this is what the Church teaches, while the remaining 3% said they did not know it. Of the 69% who said the bread and wine are symbols, almost two-thirds (43% of all Catholics) said that what they believed is the Church's teaching, 22% said that they believed it in spite of knowing that the Church teaches that the bread and wine actually become the body and blood of Christ. Among United States Catholics who attend Mass at least once a week, the most observant group, 63% accepted that the bread and wine actually become the body and blood of Christ; the other 37% saw the bread and wine as symbols, most of them (23%) not knowing that the Church, so the survey stated, teaches that the elements actually become the body and blood of Christ, while the remaining 14% rejected what was given as the Church's teaching. The Pew Report presented \"the understanding that the bread and wine used in Communion are symbols of the body and blood of Jesus Christ\" as contradicting belief that, \"during Catholic Mass, the bread and wine actually become the body and blood of Jesus\". The Catholic Church itself speaks of the bread and wine used in Communion both as \"signs\" and as \"becoming\" Christ's body and blood: \"[...] the signs of bread and wine become, in a way surpassing understanding, the Body and Blood of Christ\".\nIn a comment on the Pew Research Report, Greg Erlandson drew attention to the difference between the formulation in the CARA survey, in which the choice was between \"Jesus Christ is really present in the bread and wine of the Eucharist\" and \"the bread and wine are symbols of Jesus, but Jesus is not really present\", and the Pew Research choice between \"during Catholic Mass, the bread and wine actually become the body and blood of Jesus\" and \"the bread wine are symbols of the body and blood of Jesus Christ\". He quotes an observation by Mark Gray that the word \"actually\" makes it sound like \"something that could be analyzed under a microscope or empirically observed\", while what the Church teaches is that the \"substance\" of the bread and wine are changed at consecration, but the \"accidents\" or appearances of bread and wine remain. Erlandson commented further: \"Catholics may not be able to articulately define the 'Real Presence', and the phrase [\"sic\"] 'transubstantiation' may be obscure to them, but in their reverence and demeanor, they demonstrate their belief that this is not just a symbol\".\nTheology.\nCatholic Church.\nWhile the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation in relation to the Eucharist can be viewed in terms of the Aristotelian distinction between substance and accident, Catholic theologians generally hold that, \"in referring to the Eucharist, the Church does not use the terms substance and accident in their philosophical contexts but in the common and ordinary sense in which they were first used many centuries ago. The dogma of transubstantiation does not embrace any philosophical theory in particular.\" This ambiguity was recognized also by then-Lutheran theologian Jaroslav Pelikan, who, while himself interpreting the terms as Aristotelian, states that \"the application of the term 'substance' to the discussion of the Eucharistic presence antedates the rediscovery of Aristotle. [...] Even 'transubstantiation' was used during the twelfth century in a nontechnical sense. Such evidence lends credence to the argument that the doctrine of transubstantiation, as codified by the decrees of the Fourth Lateran and Tridentine councils, did not canonize Aristotelian philosophy as indispensable to Christian doctrine. But whether it did so or not in principle, it has certainly done so in effect\".\nThe view that the distinction is independent of any philosophical theory has been expressed as follows: \"The distinction between substance and accidents is real, not just imaginary. In the case of the person, the distinction between the person and his or her accidental features is after all real. Therefore, even though the notion of substance and accidents originated from Aristotelian philosophy, the distinction between substance and accidents is also independent of philosophical and scientific development.\" \"Substance\" here means what something is in itself: take some concrete object \u2013 e.g. your own hat. The shape is not the object itself, nor is its color, size, softness to the touch, nor anything else about it perceptible to the senses. The object itself (the \"substance\") \"has\" the shape, the color, the size, the softness and the other appearances, but is distinct from them. While the appearances are perceptible to the senses, the substance is not.\nThe philosophical term \"accidents\" does not appear in the teaching of the Council of Trent on transubstantiation, which is repeated in the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\". For what the Council distinguishes from the \"substance\" of the bread and wine it uses the term \"species\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Council of Trent summarizes the Catholic faith by declaring: \"Because Christ our Redeemer said that it was truly his body that he was offering under the species of bread, it has always been the conviction of the Church of God, and this holy Council now declares again, that by the consecration of the bread and wine there takes place a change of the whole substance of the bread into the substance of the body of Christ our Lord and of the whole substance of the wine into the substance of his blood. This change the holy Catholic Church has fittingly and properly called transubstantiation.\"\nThe \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" cites the Council of Trent also in regard to the mode of the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the most blessed sacrament of the Eucharist \"the body and blood, together with the soul and divinity, of our Lord Jesus Christ and, therefore, the whole Christ is truly, really, and substantially contained.\" (Council of Trent (1551): DS 1651) \"This presence is called 'real' \u2013 by which is not intended to exclude the other types of presence as if they could not be 'real' too, but because it is presence in the fullest sense: that is to say, it is a substantial presence by which Christ, God and man, makes himself wholly and entirely present.\" (Paul VI, MF 39).\nThe Catholic Church holds that the same change of the substance of the bread and of the wine at the Last Supper continues to occur at the consecration of the Eucharist when the words are spoken \"in persona Christi\" \"This is my body ... this is my blood.\" In Orthodox confessions, the change is said to start during the Dominical or Lord's Words or Institution Narrative and be completed during the Epiklesis.\nTeaching that Christ is risen from the dead and is alive, the Catholic Church holds, in addition to the doctrine of transubstantiation, that when the bread is changed into his body, not only his body is present, but Christ as a whole is present (\"the body and blood, together with the soul and divinity\"). The same holds when the wine is transubstantiated into the blood of Christ. This is known as the doctrine of concomitance.\nIn accordance with the dogmatic teaching that Christ is really, truly and substantially present under the appearances of bread and wine, and continues to be present as long as those appearances remain, the Catholic Church preserves the consecrated elements, generally in a church tabernacle, for administering Holy Communion to the sick and dying.\nIn the arguments which characterised the relationship between Catholicism and Protestantism in the 16th century, the Council of Trent declared subject to the ecclesiastical penalty of anathema anyone who\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;denieth, that, in the sacrament of the most holy Eucharist, are contained truly, really, and substantially, the body and blood together with the soul and divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and consequently the whole Christ; but saith that He is only therein as in a sign, or in figure, or virtue [... and anyone who] saith, that, in the sacred and holy sacrament of the Eucharist, the substance of the bread and wine remains conjointly with the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, and denieth that wonderful and singular conversion of the whole substance of the bread into the Body, and of the whole substance of the wine into the Blood \u2013 the species only of the bread and wine remaining \u2013 which conversion indeed the Catholic Church most aptly calls Transubstantiation, let him be anathema.\u2014\u200a\nThe Catholic Church asserts that the consecrated bread and wine are not merely \"symbols\" of the body and blood of Christ: they \"are\" the body and blood of Christ. It also declares that, although the bread and wine completely cease to be bread and wine (having become the body and blood of Christ), the appearances (the \"species\" or look) remain unchanged, and the properties of the appearances also remain (one can be drunk with the appearance of wine despite it only being an appearance). They are still the appearances of bread and wine, not of Christ, and do not inhere in the substance of Christ. They can be felt and tasted as before, and are subject to change and can be destroyed. If the appearance of bread is lost by turning to dust or the appearance of wine is lost by turning to vinegar, Christ is no longer present.\nThe essential signs of the Eucharistic sacrament are wheat bread and grape wine, on which the blessing of the Holy Spirit is invoked and the priest pronounces the words of consecration spoken by Jesus during the Last Supper: \"This is my body which will be given up for you.\u00a0... This is the cup of my blood\u00a0...\" When the signs cease to exist, so does the sacrament.\nAccording to Catholic teaching, the whole of Christ, body and blood, soul and divinity, is really, truly and substantially in the sacrament, under each of the appearances of bread and wine, but he is not in the sacrament as in a place and is not moved when the sacrament is moved. He is perceptible neither by the sense nor by the imagination, but only by the intellectual eye.\nSt Thomas Aquinas gave poetic expression to this perception in the devotional hymn \"Adoro te devote\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nAn official statement from the Anglican\u2013Roman Catholic International Commission titled \"Eucharistic Doctrine\", published in 1971, states that \"the word \"transubstantiation\" is commonly used in the Catholic Church to indicate that God acting in the Eucharist effects a change in the inner reality of the elements. The term should be seen as affirming the \"fact\" of Christ's presence and of the mysterious and radical change which takes place. In Catholic theology it is not understood as explaining \"how\" the change takes place.\" In the smallest particle of the host or the smallest droplet from the chalice Jesus Christ himself is present: \"Christ is present whole and entire in each of the species and whole and entire in each of their parts, in such a way that the breaking of the bread does not divide Christ.\"\nEastern Christianity.\nAs the \"Disputation of the Holy Sacrament\" took place in the Western Church after the Great Schism, the Eastern Churches remained largely unaffected by it. The debate on the nature of \"transubstantiation\" in Greek Orthodoxy begins in the 17th century, with Cyril Lucaris, whose \"The Eastern Confession of the Orthodox Faith\" was published in Latin in 1629.\nThe Greek term \"metousiosis\" () is first used as the translation of Latin in the Greek edition of the work, published in 1633.\nThe Eastern Catholic, Oriental Orthodox and Eastern Orthodox Churches, along with the Assyrian Church of the East, agree that in a valid Divine Liturgy bread and wine truly and actually become the body and blood of Christ.\nIn Orthodox confessions, the change is said to start during the Liturgy of Preparation and be completed during the Epiklesis. However, there are official church documents that speak of a \"change\" (in Greek ) or \"metousiosis\" () of the bread and wine. \"\u039c\u03b5\u03c4-\u03bf\u03c5\u03c3\u03af-\u03c9\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2\" (\"met-ousi-osis\") is the Greek word used to represent the Latin word \"trans-substanti-atio\", as Greek \"\u03bc\u03b5\u03c4\u03b1-\u03bc\u03cc\u03c1\u03c6-\u03c9\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2\" (\"meta-morph-osis\") corresponds to Latin \"trans-figur-atio\". Examples of official documents of the Eastern Orthodox Church that use the term \"\u03bc\u03b5\u03c4\u03bf\u03c5\u03c3\u03af\u03c9\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2\" or \"transubstantiation\" are the \"Longer Catechism of The Orthodox, Catholic, Eastern Church\" (question 340) and the declaration by the Eastern Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem of 1672:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the celebration of [the Eucharist] we believe the Lord Jesus Christ to be present. He is not present typically, nor figuratively, nor by superabundant grace, as in the other Mysteries, nor by a bare presence, as some of the Fathers have said concerning Baptism, or by impanation, so that the Divinity of the Word is united to the set forth bread of the Eucharist hypostatically, as the followers of Luther most ignorantly and wretchedly suppose. But [he is present] truly and really, so that after the consecration of the bread and of the wine, the bread is \"transmuted, transubstantiated, converted and transformed\" into the true Body Itself of the Lord, Which was born in Bethlehem of the ever-Virgin, was baptized in the Jordan, suffered, was buried, rose again, was received up, sits at the right hand of the God and Father, and is to come again in the clouds of Heaven; and the wine is converted and transubstantiated into the true Blood Itself of the Lord, Which as He hung upon the Cross, was poured out for the life of the world.\nThe way in which the bread and wine become the body and blood of Christ has never been dogmatically defined by the Eastern Orthodox Churches. However, St Theodore the Studite writes in his treatise \"On the Holy Icons\": \"for we confess that the faithful receive the very body and blood of Christ, according to the voice of God himself.\" This was a refutation of the iconoclasts, who insisted that the eucharist was the only true icon of Christ. Thus, it can be argued that by being part of the dogmatic \"horos\" against the iconoclast heresy, the teaching on the \"real presence\" of Christ in the eucharist is indeed a dogma of the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nProtestantism.\nLutheranism.\nLutherans explicitly reject transubstantiation believing that the bread and wine remain fully bread and fully wine while also being truly the body and blood of Jesus Christ. Lutheran churches instead emphasize the sacramental union (not exactly the consubstantiation, as is often claimed) and believe that within the Eucharistic celebration the body and blood of Jesus Christ are objectively present \"in, with, and under the forms\" of bread and wine (cf. Book of Concord). They place great stress on Jesus's instructions to \"take and eat\", and \"take and drink\", holding that this is the proper, divinely ordained use of the sacrament, and, while giving it due reverence, scrupulously avoid any actions that might indicate or lead to superstition or unworthy fear of the sacrament.\nIn dialogue with Catholic theologians, a large measure of agreement has been reached by a group of Lutheran theologians. They recognize that \"in contemporary Catholic expositions, ... transubstantiation intends to affirm the fact of Christ's presence and of the change which takes place, and is not an attempt to explain how Christ becomes present. ... [And] that it is a legitimate way of attempting to express the mystery, even though they continue to believe that the conceptuality associated with 'transubstantiation' is misleading and therefore prefer to avoid the term.\"\nReformed churches.\nThe Reformed tradition (Continental Reformed, Presbyterian, Congregationalist, and Classical Anglican) holds John Calvin's view of \"pneumatic presence\" or \"spiritual feeding\", a Real Presence by the Holy Spirit for those who have faith. Calvin \"can be regarded as occupying a position roughly midway between\" the doctrines of Martin Luther on one hand and Huldrych Zwingli on the other. He taught that \"the thing that is signified is effected by its sign\", declaring: \"Believers ought always to live by this rule: whenever they see symbols appointed by the Lord, to think and be convinced that the truth of the thing signified is surely present there. For why should the Lord put in your hand the symbol of his body, unless it was to assure you that you really participate in it? And if it is true that a visible sign is given to us to seal the gift of an invisible thing, when we have received the symbol of the body, let us rest assured that the body itself is also given to us.\"\nThe Westminster Shorter Catechism summarises the teaching:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Q. What is the Lord's supper?\nA. The Lord's supper is a sacrament, wherein, by giving and receiving bread and wine according to Christ's appointment, his death is showed forth; and the worthy receivers are, not after a corporal and carnal manner, but by faith, made partakers of his body and blood, with all his benefits, to their spiritual nourishment and growth in grace.\nAnglicanism.\nTransubstantiation is generally rejected in Anglicanism. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nElizabeth I gave royal assent to the 39 Articles. The Articles declared that \"Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy Writ; but is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath given occasion to many superstitions.\" The Elizabethan Settlement accepted the Real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, but refused to define it, preferring to leave it a mystery. Indeed, for many years it was illegal in Britain to hold public office whilst believing in transubstantiation, as under the Test Act of 1673. Archbishop John Tillotson decried the \"real barbarousness of this Sacrament and Rite of our Religion\", considering it a great impiety to believe that people who attend Holy Communion \"verily eat and drink the natural flesh and blood of Christ. And what can any man do more unworthily towards a Friend? How can he possibly use him more barbarously, than to feast upon his living flesh and blood?\" (\"Discourse against Transubstantiation\", London 1684, 35). In the Church of England today, clergy are required to assent that the 39 Articles have borne witness to the Christian faith.\nThomas Cranmer, the guiding figure of the Protestant Reformation in England, aligned himself with the Eucharistic theology of John Calvin, which is reflected in the 28th Article of the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England: \"the Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten, in the Supper, only after an heavently and spiritual manner.\" This view is the real spiritual presence (pneumatic presence) and is held by denominations of the Reformed (Continental Reformed, Presbyterian, Congregationalist, and Reformed Anglican) tradition.\nThe Eucharistic teaching labeled \"receptionism\", defined by Claude Beaufort Moss as \"the theory that we receive the Body and Blood of Christ when we receive the bread and wine, but they are not identified with the bread and wine which are not changed\", was commonly held by 16th and 17th-century Anglican theologians. It was characteristic of 17th century thought to \"insist on the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, but to profess agnosticism concerning the manner of the presence\". It remained \"the dominant theological position in the Church of England until the Oxford Movement in the early nineteenth century, with varying degrees of emphasis\". Importantly, it is \"a doctrine of the real presence\" but one which \"relates the presence primarily to the worthy receiver rather than to the elements of bread and wine\".\nAnglicans generally consider no teaching binding that, according to the Articles, \"cannot be found in Holy Scripture or proved thereby\", and are not unanimous in the interpretation of such passages as John 6 and 1 Corinthians 11, although all Anglicans affirm a view of the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist: some Anglicans (especially Anglo-Catholics and some other High Church Anglicans) hold to a belief in the corporeal presence while Evangelical Anglicans hold to a belief in the pneumatic presence. As with all Anglicans, Anglo-Catholics and other High Church Anglicans historically held belief in the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist but were \"hostile to the doctrine of transubstantiation\". A major leader in the Anglo-Catholic Oxford Movement, Edward Pusey, championed the view of consubstantiation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, in the first half of the twentieth century, the Catholic Propaganda Society upheld both Article XXVIII and the doctrine of transubstantiation, stating that the 39 Articles specifically condemn a pre-Council of Trent \"interpretation which was included by some under the term Transubstantiation\" in which \"the bread and wine were only left as a delusion of the senses after consecration\"; it stated that \"this Council propounded its definition after the Articles were written, and so cannot be referred to by them\".\nTheological dialogue with the Catholic Church has produced common documents that speak of \"substantial agreement\" about the doctrine of the Eucharist: the ARCIC Windsor Statement of 1971, and its 1979 Elucidation. Remaining arguments can be found in the Church of England's pastoral letter: \"The Eucharist: Sacrament of Unity\".\nMethodism.\nMethodists believe in the real spiritual presence of Christ in the bread and wine (or grape juice) while, like Presbyterians, rejecting transubstantiation. Methodism inherited the Reformed view of the Lord's Supper through the Twenty-five Articles, in which Article XVIII posits a real spiritual presence of Christ in the Eucharist, noting that the \"body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only after an heavenly and spiritual manner.\" According to the United Methodist Church, \"Jesus Christ, who 'is the reflection of God's glory and the exact imprint of God's very being', is truly present in Holy Communion.\"\nWhile upholding the view that scripture is the primary source of Church practice, Methodists also look to church tradition and base their beliefs on the early Church teachings on the Eucharist, that Christ has a real presence in the Lord's Supper. The \"Catechism for the use of the people called Methodists\" thus states that, \"[in Holy Communion] Jesus Christ is present with his worshipping people and gives himself to them as their Lord and Saviour\".\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "30908", "revid": "42906708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30908", "title": "Thomas Brackett Reed", "text": "American politician (1839\u20131902)\nThomas Brackett Reed Jr. (October 18, 1839 \u2013 December 7, 1902) was an American attorney, author, parliamentarian and Republican Party politician from Maine who served as the 32nd Speaker of the United States House of Representatives from 1889 to 1891 and 1895 to 1899. He represented Maine's 1st congressional district in the House from 1877 to 1899 and, prior to his time in Congress, represented Portland in the Maine legislature and served as Attorney General of Maine. In 1876, he was elected to represent Cumberland and York counties in the U.S. House and was re-elected for twelve consecutive terms.\nAs Speaker, Reed had greater influence over the agenda and operations of the House than any prior Speaker. His first term was marked by a dramatic expansion of the Speaker's formal authority through changes to the House Rules, and he remains one of the most powerful Speakers in House history. He set out to put into practical effect his dictum \"The best system is to have one party govern and the other party watch\" and dramatically increased the power of the Speaker over the House by limiting the ability of the minority party to prevent the establishment of a quorum. Reed helped pass the Lodge Bill, which sought to protect African American voting rights in the Southern United States, but the bill failed in the Senate and never became law.\nIn 1896, he ran for president on a hard currency platform but lost the Republican nomination to William McKinley. He voted in favor of the Spanish-American War, but while serving as Speaker in 1899, Reed resigned from the House in opposition to growing American imperialism, which left him politically isolated following the American victory over Spain and the passage of the Newlands Resolution.\nEarly life and education.\nThomas Brackett Reed was born on October 18, 1839, in a small two-story tenement on Hancock Street in Portland, Maine. His parents, Matilda Prince (n\u00e9e Mitchell) and Thomas Brackett Reed Sr., were natives of Maine who traced their American ancestry to the \"Arbella\" and \"Mayflower\", respectively. The Reed family were not wealthy; Thomas Sr. was captain of a fishing boat before becoming a watchman in a Portland sugar warehouse.\nReed attended public schools, including the Portland Boys' School, and was an avid student and reader. He showed interest in public affairs from an early age, attending Neal Dow's trial for involvement in the Portland Rum Riot in 1855. He was also an avid member of the Congregational Church as a young man. Members of his congregation raised funds to provide him a college education with intent that he become a minister, but he left the church and returned the donations.\nBowdoin College (1856\u20131860).\nAfter graduating high school, Reed entered Bowdoin College in 1856 and undertook a mandatory course centered on Christian theology, Latin, Greek, and mathematics. Bowdoin was noted for its required courses in English composition and oratory and had already produced Nathaniel Hawthorne, President of the United States Franklin Pierce, and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. The faculty consisted of ten men, led by president Leonard Woods and including Charles Carroll Everett, Thomas C. Upham, Alpheus Packard, and William Smyth. Reed's professor of rhetoric and oratory, Joshua Chamberlain, later distinguished himself at the Battle of Gettysburg and served as Governor of Maine during Reed's term in the state legislature.\nAt Bowdoin, Reed gained a personal reputation for his ability to recite Joseph Butler's \"Analogy of Religion, Natural and Revealed\" from memory. He was a member of the rowing crew, chess club, Psi Upsilon fraternity, and an editor of the annual yearbook. He debated as a member of the Peucinian Society and was an avid reader of Carlyle, Goethe, Thackeray, Macaulay, and Charles Reade, among other less popular authors.\nReed kept a small, close group of friends, including Samuel Fessenden, the son of U.S. Senator William Pitt Fessenden, who provided Reed a loan to complete his education. Samuel Fessenden was an avid abolitionist who participated in the civil conflict in Kansas and, one year after graduation, died at the Second Battle of Bull Run. His death had a profound impact on Reed, who memorialized Fessenden as \"the quiet associate of the studious hours ... sublimated in the crucible of death from all imperfections, clothed upon with all his virtues and radiant with all the possibilities of a generous youth.\"\nLegal and U.S. Navy career (1860\u20131865).\nAs a senior, Reed reversed a previously mediocre academic record to lead his class; he finished fifth in the graduating class of 1860 and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. Abandoning any interest in ministry, he spent the next years doing odd jobs and studying law. He taught school in Portland for a year before moving to California in 1861. He was admitted to the bar in San Jose on September 8, 1863, after an examination by eminent California attorney William T. Wallace. While in San Jose, he delivered pro-Union speeches and signed a letter from sixteen members of the bar endorsing judge Samuel Bell McKee for re-election to the bench, citing McKee's determination to \"uphold the Administration in its present efforts to suppress the rebellion and sustain the Constitution and laws of the United States.\" However, he soon returned to Portland, deciding \"nature never intended any man to live [in California], only to dig gold and get himself out of it, and to shudder in dreams ever afterwards.\"\nOn his return to Maine, Reed joined the law offices of Howard and Strout as a clerk. He joined the United States Navy in April 1864, winning an appointment as acting assistant paymaster on the recommendation of Senator Fessenden. He served in that role, primarily on the gunboat USS \"Sibyl\" on the Mississippi and Tennessee rivers, until honorably discharged in late 1865. When a Reed supporter later pointed out his opponents boasted of their war records, he retorted, \"Tell them I kept a grocery on a gunboat down in Louisiana in wartime.\"\nState politics (1867\u20131876).\nMaine legislator (1867\u20131870).\nAfter the war, Reed returned to Portland and was admitted to the Maine bar in October 1865. He opened a practice in Portland, taking petty civil and criminal cases. In 1867, his colleague Nathan Webb secured Reed's nomination for the Maine House of Representatives; after some persuading, Reed agreed to run. In the heavily Republican city of Portland, he was easily elected; he was re-elected to a second term in 1868.\nReed, one of the youngest members of the Maine House at the time, served on the joint legislative committee on the judiciary and drafted a bills for a general law of incorporation and the abolition of capital punishment in the state; both failed. He distinguished himself for parliamentary skill in the 1869 U.S. Senate election between former Vice President Hannibal Hamlin and incumbent Senator Lot M. Morrill, whom Reed supported. In the Republican caucus to nominate a candidate, Reed moved to rule a blank ballot invalid, breaking a tie in favor of Morrill. (Hamlin was later elected by a vote of the whole legislature.) Despite his youth, by March 1869 the Portland \"Press\" considered Reed \"the actual though not the nominal leader of [the House].\"\nIn 1869, Reed was elected Senator for Cumberland County. He continued to serve on the joint committee on the judiciary and successfully led the fight to delay construction of the Portland and Rutland Railroad. He also paid homage to his former patron, Senator Fessenden, who died in 1869. Though Fessenden had become unpopular in the state owing to his vote against the impeachment of Andrew Johnson, Reed aggressively defended Fessenden's legacy and wartime service.\nReed later reflected that his greatest achievement as a state legislator was securing the re-organization of the Cumberland County courts in an effort to reduce the time necessary to bring cases to a final judgment.\nAttorney General of Maine (1870\u20131873).\nIn January 1870, the Republican caucus nominated Reed for Attorney General, and he was elected easily. As Attorney General, Reed significantly raised his profile. His first months in office were marked by the high-profile trial of a man charged with killing his wife's lover. Overcoming a \"crime of passion\" defense, Reed won a manslaughter verdict, though he had asked for a charge of murder. As a result, Reed advocated for the abolition of spousal privilege, which had excluded the only witness, the defendant's wife, from testifying. He also advocated separately as Attorney General for bail bond reform and an increase in the State's peremptory challenges in jury selection. Most of Reed's suggestions did eventually become law, but were not adopted immediately, which he attributed to the fact that prosecutors were barred by virtue of their office from advising the legislature.\nHe continued to oppose the railroad corporations, calling for an increase in the $5,000 cap ($ in 2024) on wrongful death claims and challenging the merger of the Portland and Kennebec with the Maine Central under a writ of quo warranto; his action was rendered moot when the legislature recognized the merger as valid. In 1894, Reed spoke out in favor of consolidation and declared the writ was a mistake, arguing that the merger had \"resulted in better stations, better trains, better transportation facilities of every kind.\"\nReed served as Attorney General for the three years prescribed by tradition before leaving office in 1873. He returned to a more lucrative private practice and served for three years as Portland city solicitor, representing the city in personal injury suits and routine business.\nEarly United States House career (1877\u201381).\n1876 election.\nReed was nominated for Congress from Maine's first district in 1876. Incumbent Representative John H. Burleigh had split from the state party organization, led by Senators James G. Blaine and Hannibal Hamlin, and Reed, a respected organization man, was chosen to oppose him. Reed's strength was in the city of Portland, while most of Burleigh's support was from York County. Reed narrowly carried the district convention on June 29. The conflict between Reed and Burleigh carried into the general election, with a Burleigh ticket in the campaign. Reed campaigned in favor of prohibition and was attacked for his association with Robert G. Ingersoll, known for his radical advocacy for agnosticism. Reed was forced to deny that he was an atheist, but the charge would be repeated in later campaigns. Ultimately, Reed narrowly won by fewer than 1,000 votes on September 9, with Burleigh receiving 177.\nEarly congressional service and rise.\nReed was relatively active in debate during his first term, speaking against Fernando Wood in support of funding for the United States diplomatic corps and delivering his most famous early speech against the federal restoration of the campus of William &amp; Mary College, which was destroyed during the war. Arguing that the expenditure would set a precedent which would allow \"every claim agent who loved the Lost Cause and a good many who did not\" to raid the Treasury, Reed argued, \"You were beaten and yet you want us to take the consequences. You come forward and insist that the victorious country shall pay for the damages inflicted upon it by its enemies.\"\nThe highlight of his first term was his appointment on May 20, 1878, to the committee to investigate charges of fraud in the 1876 presidential election. Reed used the politically sensitive role to advocate the Republican position, restoring the party's fortunes ahead of the 1880 election. Reed defended the legitimacy of Hayes's victory in the state of Louisiana, in particular focusing on East Feliciana Parish, where he alleged that a violent wave of crime (including murder) had been for the purpose of political intimidation, as it had ended suddenly on election day and the victims had been primarily Republicans. Reed also cross-examined William T. Pelton, Tilden's nephew and aide, regarding evidence Pelton had delivered bribes on behalf of his uncle's campaign. Pelton's testimony under Reed's questioning was so damaging that Tilden appeared before the committee himself to deny the accusations. The final Republican minority report suggested Pelton, a poor man, could not have made such bribes without Tilden's knowledge. While the report did not vindicate Hayes, it softened the political blow by demonstrating that electioneering and misconduct had not been one-sided and raised Reed's profile beyond that of an ordinary House freshman.\nHis seat was nevertheless threatened by the rise of the Greenback Party, which favored an inflationary monetary policy, and his vote against the Bland-Allison Act. In his 1878 re-election campaign, he came out vigorously against paper currency and was aided by appearances from James Garfield and Galusha Grow. His re-election was ultimately owed to the failure of the opposition to settle on a single candidate, and he won with a plurality. During the campaign, Reed developed a widely quoted aphorism against monetary expansion: \"You won't have any more potatoes if you call them four thousand pecks than if you call them one thousand bushels.\"\nIn 1880, Reed joined the rest of Maine in supporting James G. Blaine's unsuccessful campaign for the Republican nomination. He was a delegate to the 1880 Republican National Convention. In the fall, he faced a united opposition following the fusion of the Greenback and Democratic ticket in Maine. Returns gave Reed a 109-vote lead, but his opponent alleged fraud and challenged his election in the House. The Republican majority declared Reed the victor.\nParty leadership (1881\u20131889).\nJudiciary chair (1881\u20131883).\nAfter Reed's election to a third term, he was briefly considered to succeed Hannibal Hamlin in the United States Senate, but he publicly declined to be a candidate. He attributed his decision to the narrow Republican majority in the House and the possibility that his seat would flip.\nBy the time the 47th United States Congress met on December 5, 1881, the new President James A. Garfield had been assassinated and Chester A. Arthur had succeeded him. With few tested leaders in the House, the Republican caucus turned to J. Warren Keifer as Speaker of the House after sixteen ballots; Reed finished third with eleven votes on the final ballot, behind Frank Hiscock. In a concession to his opponents, Keifer named Hiscock and Reed to House leadership as chairs of the powerful committees on Appropriations and the Judiciary, respectively. In a significant step, Reed also joined the Speaker and George Robeson on the powerful Committee on Rules after January 9, 1882, when Godlove Orth, another Keifer opponent who was left out of leadership, resigned in protest.\nIn both roles, Reed defended the authority of the office of Speaker and majority rule. When Orth introduced a resolution to select committees and their chairs by an elective board of eleven members, Reed spoke out against it on the grounds that \"the Speaker is not only under constant supervision of public opinion but also of the House.\" The resolution lost by a large nonpartisan majority. During a May 1882 debate over a contested election in North Carolina, the parties came to a head over the minority's use of the filibuster. In response, Reed moved to amend the House Rules to bar any dilatory motion while a motion to adjourn was on the table. After a week of efforts by the Democratic minority to delay this Rules amendment, Reed moved that the dilatory tactics were out of order and proposed that \"no member or set of members have any right to use the rules which are to be changed to prevent the change which the House desires to make. ... There is no such thing as suicide in any provision of the Constitution of the United States.\" After three hours of debate, Keifer upheld Reed on the point of order. Former Speaker Samuel J. Randall protested and appealed to the House, where the Speaker's decision was upheld by a majority vote. According to De Alva S. Alexander, \"[From] that hour Reed became the real leader of his party. Ever after, so long as he remained in Congress, his voice gave the word of command.\"\nReed further expanded the principle of majority rule in debate over Tariff of 1883. As a protectionist, Reed supported higher tariffs on imports, but the House appeared unlikely to pass an independent tariff bill. Instead, Reed presented a report from the Rules Committee to suspend the rules by majority vote and request a conference committee to consider the \"internal\" revenue bill, to which the Senate had attached tariff amendments. Reed's report passed the House, but only after the first vote failed to show a quorum. The report was highly controversial; Samuel S. Cox denounced it as \"a fraud on parliamentary law,\" and Senators Thomas F. Bayard and James B. Beck refused to sit on the conference committee. The resulting bill itself, sometimes called the \"mongrel tariff,\" was highly unpopular as well; Reed later wrote of his regret over the episode, claiming that none of the tariff commissioners' report had been enacted, \"but all of its mistakes were.\"\nHouse Minority leadership (1883\u201389).\nIn 1882, the Democratic Party regained control of the House and John G. Carlisle of Kentucky was elected Speaker. Reed continued to seek reform of the House Rules from the minority by exploiting disagreements between Samuel J. Randall and William Ralls Morrison, two members of Democratic leadership who disagreed sharply over tariff policy. Reed retained his seats on the Rules and Judiciary committees and gained a spot on the powerful Committee on Ways and Means.\nDuring his six years in the House minority, Reed also grew in party influence. Former Speaker Keifer, by virtue of seniority, retained leadership of the minority, but ultimately lost re-election to his House seat in 1884. When the next Congress met, Reed's name was placed in nomination by William McKinley for the party endorsement for Speaker; he defeated Frank Hiscock by 63 votes against 42 for the honor, thus formally sanctioning Reed as the party's floor leader. Hiscock also left the House in 1887 when he was elected to the U.S. Senate, leaving Reed the undisputed leader of the party in the House, though McKinley, Nelson Dingley, and Joe Cannon were rising stars.\nSpeaker of the House (1889\u201391, 1895\u201399).\nFirst term (1889\u201391).\nIn 1888, the Republican Party retook control of the House of Representatives and the White House in an election defined by their support for the protective tariff. In Congress, Reed was a leader of the campaign, delivering a lengthy and celebrated May 19 speech against tariff reform legislation before the House. Following the election, \"The Washington Post\" reported that the \"speakership question was regarded on all sides as being settled\" in favor of Reed, though his leading rival, McKinley, was personally very popular. Reed's election as Speaker was decisively ensured by the support of the New York delegation on November 29, 1889. He carried the caucus the next day on the second ballot with 85 votes to McKinley's 38 and was elected speaker at the opening of the next session on December 2, 1889.\nMcKinley was named chair of Ways and Means, placing him in charge of the tariff, with Reed's lesser rivals Cannon and David B. Henderson on Appropriations and Julius C. Burrows as chair of Manufactures. McKinley and Cannon also joined Reed on the Rules Committee.\nRules reform.\nEven before his election as Speaker, Reed had renewed his calls for rules reform. In a March 1889 article for \"Century\" magazine, he demanded checks on dilatory motions and a restoration of the \"morning hour,\" permitting the House to consider urgent measures for prompt action at the start of each day, rather than consider measures in the order they were presented. In the October \"North American Review\", Reed compared the situation in the House to that in the House of Commons, where Reed argued Irish nationalists had hijacked the rules beyond their original intent in order to extract concessions through obstruction. Reed vowed that the incoming Republican House would adopt new Rules wholesale, as opposed to the traditional practice of adopting the previous House's rules \"pro forma\" and amending as needed.\nOn January 21, 1890, Reed made his first serious reform to House Rules when he refused a motion by Richard P. Bland to require tellers for a motion to adjourn, on the grounds that the motion was merely intended to delay adjournment and obstruct House business. After a prolonged and heated debate, the Speaker's decision was ratified 149 to 137.\nIn particular, Reed sought to circumscribe the \"disappearing quorum\"\u2014the ability of the minority to block business by remaining silent during a quorum call, which, under the rules, prevented a member from being counted as present even if physically in the chamber, thus forcing the House to suspend business. Reed's solution was implemented on January 29, 1890, in what has popularly been called the \"Battle of the Reed Rules,\" when Democrats attempted to prevent Charles Brooks Smith, a Republican from West Virginia whose election was contested, from being seated. The motion to seat Brooks passed 162\u20131, short of the 165 required for quorum; when voting closed Democrats shouted, \"No quorum,\" a formal quorum count was triggered. Reed began the roll call, and when members refused to answer, Reed directed the Clerk to count them as present but not voting. Startled Democrats protested heatedly, directing verbal abuse, threats, and insults at Reed, while James B. McCreary, a Democrat from Kentucky, challenged Reed's authority to count him since he had not answered to his name when the roll was called. Reed replied \"The Chair is making a statement of fact that the gentleman from Kentucky is present. Does he deny it?\" Unable to deny their presence, some Democrats tried to flee the chamber or hide under their desks, but Reed ordered the doors locked. One Representative, Constantine B. Kilgore of Texas, was able to flee by kicking his way through a door. The conflict over parliamentary procedure lasted three days, with Democrats delaying consideration of the bill by introducing points of order to challenge the maneuver and then appealing Reed's rulings to the floor. Democrats finally dropped their objections on January 31, and Smith was seated on February 3 by a vote of 166\u20130. Six days later, Reed won a vote to formalize the new Rules, eliminating the disappearing quorum and lowering the quorum to 100 members. Though Democrats reinstated the disappearing quorum when they took control of the House the following year, Reed would prove so adroit at using the tactic against them that they reinstated the \"Reed Rules\" in 1894.\nFollowing his decisive victory in the Smith election contest, Reed introduced wholesale reforms designed to speed the pace of legislation in the House. The Democratic minority permitted the resumption of business, with former Speaker Carlisle admitting, \"We protest, but the case must be tried elsewhere.\" Under those conditions, the 51st Congress was the most productive since the Civil War and passed at least twenty-six pieces of major legislation, including the McKinley Tariff, Sherman Silver Purchase Act, Sherman Antitrust Act, and Immigration Act of 1891.\nMcKinley Tariff.\nAs the campaign of 1888 had been waged over the issue of protective tariff policy, passing a heightened tariff was a key priority of the 51st Congress. The resulting bill, known as the McKinley Tariff after its primary author, passed the House on May 21, 1890, after an expedited drafting process. A revised bill passed the Senate on September 10 with a reciprocity clause (supported by now-Secretary of State James G. Blaine) attached. Despite Reed's opposition, the reciprocity clause was allowed to remain after some further amendments, and the bill was signed into law on October 1.\nWith a month to the House elections, the McKinley Tariff was immediately the center of political debate; no tariff since the so-called \"Tariff of Abominations\" had been as controversial. The Tariff was seen as favoring the industrial and financial regions of the Northeast and Midwest over the rural South and West, which were suffering under poor conditions for the agricultural industry. The free trade publication \"The Nation\" referred to it as \"a series of minute interferences with trade and industry for the benefit of individuals, firms and corporations\" and attributed its passage to the repayment of campaign debts to corporate donors. Though Reed defended the tariff package in public, he ultimately blamed it for the party's massive defeat in the 1890 elections and in 1894, admitted that protection had been carried to its extreme on certain goods. However, he later argued that the tariff had been a success in light of the impending global financial collapse, which had rendered the international mercantile situation \"a quicksand which then began to give signs of sinking.\" Though repealed and replaced by the next Congress, it gained greater support after the Panic of 1893 and made McKinley a serious national political figure; he would go on to win the White House in 1896 as the premier champion of industrial protection.\nSherman Silver Purchase Act.\nBy 1888, there was a growing movement in both parties to return the country to a currency system backed by both silver and gold (thus expanding the money supply), and it had become conventional wisdom that it was necessary to \"do something for silver.\" Though Reed was a firm supporter of \"sound money,\" which tended to favor the more stable gold standard, a majority in both chambers of Congress had some level of sympathy for the free silver movement. On January 20, 1890, Edwin H. Conger (chair of Coinage, Weights and Measures) introduced a bill authorizing the Treasury to issue notes in exchange for silver bullion at market price. A revised version of Conger's bill, providing for the purchase of $4,500,000 of silver per month ($ in 2024), was reported to the House in early June. If silver reached the ratio of 16 to 1 under this bill, free coinage was authorized.\nIn a party caucus on June 4, Reed spoke against any further concessions to silver advocates; the silver Republicans dissented, seriously threatening party unity. On June 5, the Rules Committee (Reed, McKinley, and Cannon) passed a special order to permit only two days of debate before a final vote at 3 o'clock on June 7. After an outbreak of acrimonious dissent, the special order passed 120 to 117, and the bill ultimately passed on schedule without further amendments by a vote of 135 to 119.\nHowever, the Senate, controlled by silver advocates, passed an amended version adopting an unconditional free coinage amendment on June 17. The amendment caught Reed and House Republicans by surprise; a considerable number of Representatives were absent, making its passage likely if brought to an immediate vote. When McKinley moved on June 19 for approval of the House Journal (containing the procedural business of the day), Roger Q. Mills objected that the Journal had not been read in its entirety. The omitted portions were the read, revealing the Senate bill had been referred to the Committee on Coinage, sparking an uproar. In a rare parliamentary defeat for Reed, the Journal was not approved by a vote of 105 to 117. Mills then successfully moved to have the Journal amended, hastening a vote. On June 20, Richard P. Bland moved to debate the bill before the House. Conger and Reed engaged in a series of dilatory maneuvers, arguing that the bill was not on available for debate, because it was before Conger's committee. By the time the bill came for a vote the next day, enough Republican votes had been whipped via telegraph to return a working majority to Washington, and Bland's motion was defeated by a vote of 144 to 117.\nA conference bill, called the Sherman Silver Purchase Act after John Sherman, emerged which omitted the free coinage of silver and called for the parity of the two metals. The bill passed with great difficulty in the lame duck 1891 session.\nLodge Federal Elections Bill.\nOne of the most significant and controversial pieces of legislation which Reed pressed for passage in the 51st Congress did not become law. In 1889 and 1890, Republicans undertook one last stand in favor of federal enforcement of the Fifteenth Amendment to protect the voting rights of blacks in the Solid South, and Reed took a special interest in the project. Under the Lodge Bill, introduced on June 14, 1890, congressional elections would be placed under the protection of the federal government; Reed personally defended the bill and the concept of equality of races under the law in an April 1890 speech and published article in the June 1890 \"North American Review\". Opponents, especially in the South, derided it as the \"Force Bill,\" and cynics attributed the proposal to an effort to secure Southern seats in the face of waning Republican support in the West. Reed also aroused Northern opposition in his speech, when he defended black voting in the South by way of comparison to immigrant votes in New York and other cities, arguing, \"Why should they poll their ignorance and we not poll ours?\" Reed, McKinley, and Cannon voted the Bill out of committee on June 25 and, over Democratic objections, it passed after a strict debate schedule on July 2.\nIn the Senate, the bill was filibustered through two sessions of Congress, until it was ultimately laid aside during the lame duck session of January 1891 in favor of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act. Notably, several Republican Senators from the newly admitted Western states voted to prioritize the Silver Purchase Act; likely in retaliation, the House rejected a free silver bill which passed the Senate to \"provide against the contraction of the currency.\" The Lodge Bill was the last serious effort in Congress to enforce the terms of the Fifteenth Amendment until the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and its defeat is sometimes marked as the beginning of the decline in American race relations.\nReturn to minority (1891\u201395).\nIn reaction to Reed's aggressive legislative agenda and the new appropriations associated with it, the 51st Congress was branded by critics as the \"Billion Dollar Congress.\" Democrats regained the House by a wide majority, and both of Reed's top lieutenants, McKinley and Cannon, were defeated. Republicans retained the Senate by a reduced margin. With government thus divided in the 52nd Congress, legislation reached a standstill. In Reed's words, the House \"led a gelatinous existence, the scorn of all vertebrate animals.\"\nAnticipating a further disaster in the 1892 elections, Reed privately opposed the nomination of President Harrison for a second term, and his own name gained some traction in the press as a potential compromise candidate. When Harrison was ultimately nominated, Reed declined to campaign for him in the general election. Grover Cleveland was elected and the Republicans lost the Senate, giving the Democratic Party control of the White House, Senate, and House for the first time since the Civil War. Reed did win a minor victory in 1892, when the Supreme Court decided \"United States v. Ballin\", determining that Reed had acted within the Constitution in defining a quorum to include all members present.\nThe 53rd Congress was dominated by the Panic of 1893; it convened early in summer 1893 when President Cleveland called a special session asking for the repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act. Though Reed was still a member of the minority for partisan purposes, he could be counted among the leaders of the cross-party majority which supported repeal. Reed gave the closing argument for repeal on August 26, 1893, arguing that the regular schedule of redemptions had drained the nation's currency reserves and undermined confidence in the financial system. Two days later, repeal carried in the House by a vote of 240 to 110. A vote for free silver was defeated 227 to 124. When the Senate delayed passage of the repeal bill, Reed delivered a public speech on October 25 arguing that the Senate was directly opposed to the will of the majority; five days later, repeal passed the Senate 43 to 22.\nThe remainder of the term was marked by infighting among the majority, which had become hopelessly divided over the currency issue; meanwhile, the Republican minority remained loyally unified behind Reed, delivering him opportunities to undermine Speaker Charles Frederick Crisp. A frustrated Crisp remarked of his predecessor on March 29, 1894: \"The leader that they follow without question has one great thought, one great idea in his mind, and that is to force this side to count a quorum. Every other question, no matter who great, no matter how important it may be, sinks into insignificance. Gentlemen on that side blindly follow him, no matter how their own convictions may differ from his. He is the great leader on that side. You will hear them privately saying 'Reed ought not to do that,' or 'This is wrong,' but when Reed says 'Do it,' they all step up and do it.\"Given Crisp's failure to hold his majority together, the House officially adopted a rule to use a present, rather than voting, quorum on April 17, 1894, consistent with Reed's 1890 reforms.\nReturn to speakership (1895\u201399).\n1896 presidential campaign.\nAfter four years in the minority, the economic situation and divisions in the Democratic majority delivered the Republicans a historic landslide in the 1894 elections. In the House, the party gained 110 seats; as of 2025[ [update]], this remains the largest single-election seat swing in United States history. With a wide majority but little room for common ground with President Cleveland outside of the currency issue, Reed's focus during the 54th Congress was his highly anticipated campaign for the presidency. Observers in the capital soon found Reed a changed man; he shaved his trademark mustache and was less given to humor or sarcasm, giving the impression of a man who felt \"a necessity of taking himself seriously, of presenting an impressive aspect, of looking as wise as he can.\"\nAt the start of the 54th Congress, Reed was widely regarded as the favorite for the Republican nomination as the party's leading figure and spokesman on financial matters. He had the vigorous support of Henry Cabot Lodge and Theodore Roosevelt, and party bosses including Joseph H. Manley, Matt Quay, J. Donald Cameron, and Thomas C. Platt were reported to be sympathetic. His chief opponent for the nomination was William McKinley, his longtime lieutenant and rival for party supremacy, now serving as Governor of Ohio. McKinley's campaign was managed by Mark Hanna, who raised unprecedented sums of money for the race. Hanna also launched a nationwide publicity campaign to raise McKinley's profile and successfully framed the issue in the campaign as protective tariffs, McKinley's strength, rather than the currency question, acknowledged to be Reed's strength. As the year 1896 began, McKinley supporters claimed the secure support of 433 delegates, only thirty short of nomination on the first ballot. When New Hampshire senator William E. Chandler accused Hanna of effectively taking bribes from mercantile interests in exchange for promises of a new protective tariff, the backlash permanently damaged the struggling Reed campaign. Some accused Chandler, whose reputation for political corruption rendered his charge hypocritical, of deliberately sabotaging Reed. When the Vermont convention declared for McKinley on April 28, breaking solidarity in the New England ranks, Reed's campaign was effectively doomed.\nIn addition to the vigorous campaign by Hanna and Chandler's gaffe, Reed's ultimate failure to secure the nomination has been attributed to his refusal to make pledges or commitments in exchange for political or financial support. Despite his unvarnished ambition for the White House, Reed refused to give special consideration to allies or supporters when considering committee appointments or appropriations. On one occasion, he was quoted, \"The bill will not be allowed to come up even with that Reed button on your coat.\" By the time the 1896 Republican National Convention met in St. Louis, McKinley had secured a greater share of delegate pledges than any candidate since Ulysses S. Grant in 1872, and he became the first candidate since Grant in 1868 to win an open nomination (i.e., without an incumbent in the race) on the first ballot. Reed received the support of Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island, as well as a handful of Southern delegates. Reed supporters at the convention, led by Lodge, did succeed in including a gold standard plank in the party platform, abandoning their prior proposal for bimetallism by international agreement. Reed vigorously supported McKinley in the general election against William Jennings Bryan, a vocal free silver advocate.\nThe election of 1896 returned the Republican Party to control of government, with McKinley as President and majorities in both the House and Senate. Despite some suggestions that Reed would sabotage the McKinley administration as retribution for his defeat in 1896, he set personal differences aside and was again credited as the shepherd of the Republican agenda. Nelson Dingley returned as chair of Ways and Means and set about drafting the protective tariff legislation for which McKinley had campaigned, ultimately passed as the Dingley Tariff in July 1897.\nSpanish-American War and resignation.\nBeginning in 1895, the struggle for Cuban independence was the subject of increasing American attention during the McKinley presidency. The severity of Spanish rule and the potential for an economic and military foothold in the Caribbean drew calls for an American intervention on the island, which had long been the target of expansionists. Reed was an opponent of \"jingoism\" and expansionism generally, having privately criticized Benjamin Harrison's involvement in Chile and publicly opposed efforts to annex Hawaii. Foreign policy is the constitutional province of the Senate, giving Reed few opportunities to participate in the growing debate over Cuba. On July 7, 1897, the issue came before the House for the first time when Representative Benton McMillin offered a resolution recognizing the Cuban rebels. Nelson Dingley promptly moved for adjournment.\nReed continued to avoid addressing Cuba in the House but made his position public through a series of interviews and articles. In September, he published an article in the \"Illustrated American\" which called for the government to avoid foreign entanglements, \"grow up to the territory we have already,\" and strive for national unity. He added that there was no serious threat of attack from Spain or Cuba and, while he supported naval power as a form of insurance, over-insurance was \"costly and makes a moral hazard and danger of a conflagration which might burn what we have not protected.\" In a second article titled \"Empire Can Wait,\" he pointed to historical examples to argue expansion created variation in the thought and needs of a country and that unassimilated populations would inevitably create a strain on American institutions. He further arraigned the press for feeding public interest in \"prurient details of crime\" in Cuba and Turkey in an effort to influence foreign policy.\nInitially, Reed and President McKinley agreed on the issue. McKinley actively sought a peaceful solution to the Cuban Revolution and Reed gave him full support. However, after the publication of the De L\u00f4me Letter and the sinking of the USS \"Maine\" in Havana harbor on February 15, 1898, public opinion rapidly turned against peace and in favor of a declaration of war. Reed refused to believe the \"Maine\" was intentionally sunk by Spain, a position he maintained until his death. On March 8, Joe Cannon (as chair of Appropriations) introduced a bill at the behest of McKinley to appropriate $50 million (approximately $ in 2024) for defense, and it received almost unanimous support. Reed clung to hope that war could be avoided, and his suppression of a resolution to recognize Cuban independence aroused resentment throughout the country. Though public opinion was growing in favor of war, the question of Cuban independence remained considerably more controversial. A war resolution passed on April 19 with only six votes against. Reed was quoted as telling one of the six, \"I envy you the luxury of your vote. I was where I could not do it.\"\nReed's political position became increasingly fraught following the easy American victory at Manila Bay on May 1, as the aims of American expansion grew to include strategic positions in the Pacific. The Newlands Resolution, which would prove Reed's signal defeat, was introduced in the House on May 4. For three weeks, the Speaker blocked its consideration but, when opinion in the House became overwhelming and a petition for its introduction was signed by Republican members, Reed surrendered. On June 2, it was announced that the resolution would be passed before adjournment. Reed was re-elected in 1898 and retained the Speaker's gavel but became increasingly isolated during the debate over the ratification of the Treaty of Paris and imperial expansion, especially after the loss of three key allies: Theodore Roosevelt and Henry Cabot Lodge were ardent expansionists, and Nelson Dingley died on January 13, 1899. After meeting with President McKinley on Jekyll Island in the spring, Reed finally announced on April 19 that he would retire from public life and become senior partner in the firm of Simpson, Thatcher and Barnum. His resignation was made formally effective on September 4.\nPersonal life.\nReed married his childhood friend and classmate Susan P. Merrill in 1871, when he was a member of the Maine legislature. She was born at Center Harbor, New Hampshire, on Lake Winnipesaukee to the Rev. Samuel H. Merrill, a well-known Congregational clergyman, and Hannah Prentis, a native of New Hampshire. She had one brother, Edward P. Merrill, and one sister, who resided in Lowell, Massachusetts. They had one daughter, Katherine Reed Balentine, who was born January 23, 1875. Katherine later started a monthly magazine called \"The Yellow Ribbon\", which promoted women's suffrage.\nReed was well known for his acerbic wit (asked if his party might nominate him for president, he noted, \"They could do worse, and they probably will\"). His size, standing at over 6 feet in height and weighing over 300\u00a0lbs (136\u00a0kg), was also a distinguishing factor. Reed was a member of the social circle that included intellectuals and politicians Henry Cabot Lodge, Theodore Roosevelt, Henry Adams, and John Hay. Upon his retirement from public life, he also counted Mark Twain among his personal friends.\nIn 1894, Reed published his handbook on parliamentary procedure, titled \"Reed's Rules: A Manual of General Parliamentary Law\", which was, at the time, a very popular text on the subject and is still in use in the legislature of the State of Washington.\nDeath and legacy.\nIn early December 1902, Reed was in Washington on business with the United States Supreme Court. On December 2, Reed visited his former colleagues in the Ways and Means Committee room. Later that day, he became ill while in another room of the Capitol and was rushed to the nearby Arlington Hotel. In the Arlington, Reed was diagnosed with Bright's disease complicated by appendicitis; he died five days later at 12:10am on December 7 with his wife and daughter at his bedside. A Gridiron Club dinner was occurring at the same time in the same hotel as Reed's death. When news broke of Reed's passing, \"the diners rose to drink a silent toast to a man who had so often been among them\".\nIn announcing his death to the House, Representative James S. Sherman said, \"He was so great, his service to his country so valuable, that it seems we may fitly depart from what is the usual custom of the House when one not in public life dies.\" The House thus adopted a resolution honoring Reed as \"a distinguished statesman, a lofty patriot, a cultured scholar, an incisive writer, a unique orator, an unmatched debater, a master of logic, wit, satire, the most famous of the world's parliamentarians, the great and representative citizen of the American Republic.\" Henry Cabot Lodge eulogized him as \"a good hater, who detested shams, humbugs and pretense above all else.\" Mark Twain wrote of him, \"He was transparently honest and honorable, there was no furtiveness about him, and whoever came to know him trusted him and was not disappointed. He was wise, he was shrewd and alert, he was a clear and capable thinker, a logical reasoner, and a strong and convincing speaker.\"\nHe was buried in Evergreen Cemetery in Portland, Maine. His will was executed by his good friend, the financier Augustus G. Paine Sr. He left his family an estate of $200,000 (approximately $ in 2024).\nMemorials.\nThere is a Reed House at Bowdoin College.\nHis home town of Portland, Maine, erected a statue of him at the corner of Western Promenade and Pine Street in a ceremony on August 31, 1910. His last home in Portland has been designated a National Historic Landmark in his honor.\nBiographies.\nBiographies of the life of Thomas Brackett Reed have been written by Samuel McCall (Houghton Mifflin Company, 1914), William A. Robinson (Dodd, Mead &amp; Company, 1930), and Richard Stanley Offenberg (Ph.D. diss., New York University, 1963). Finance writer James Grant wrote a biography entitled, \"Mr. Speaker! The Life and Times of Thomas B. Reed: the Man who Broke the Filibuster.\" The most recent scholarly biography is \"Thomas Brackett Reed: The Gilded Age Speaker Who Made the Rules for American Politics\" by Robert J. Klotz (University Press of Kansas, 2022). One chapter of Barbara Tuchman's \"The Proud Tower\" is substantially devoted to Reed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30910", "revid": "141421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30910", "title": "Thermodynamic reversibility", "text": ""}
{"id": "30912", "revid": "1699854", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30912", "title": "Transcription", "text": "Transcription refers to the process of converting sounds (voice, music etc.) into letters or musical notes, or producing a copy of something in another medium, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSpeech transcription.\nThe process of converting spoken words into text, such as in:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30913", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30913", "title": "Thunderbird and Whale", "text": "Indigenous myth of a number of tribes from the Pacific Northwest\n\"Thunderbird and Whale\" is an indigenous myth belonging to the mythological traditions of a number of tribes from the American Pacific Northwest.\nOverview.\nThe myth of the epic struggle between Thunderbird and Whale is found in common among different language/cultural groups of the Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast of America, and seems to be uniquely localized to this area. It is also the major archetypal motif in carvings and painted art, particularly among the natives along the outlying coasts of Vancouver Island, e.g., the Kwakiutl (Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw) or the Nootka (Nuu-chah-nulth) people.\nExamples.\nQuileute.\nOne version can be summarized as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhale was a monster, killing other whales and depriving the Quileute tribe of meat and oil. Thunderbird, a benevolent supernatural being, saw from its home high in the mountains that the people were starving.\nIt soared out over the coastal waters, then plunged into the ocean and seized Whale.\nA struggle ensued; the ocean receded and rose again. Many canoes were flung into trees and many people were killed.\nThunderbird eventually succeeded in lifting Whale out of the ocean, carrying it high into the air and then dropping it. \nThen another great battle occurred on the land.\nThe famine experienced on Quileute may not necessarily be blamed on the whales, and Thunderbird makes a gift of a whale, its usual prey to the starving folk, as in a version collected by Ella E. Clark (pub. 1953).\nThere are also disparate short pieces of lore which Clark stitches together into one narrative; with the individual pieces resembling the short lore collected by Albert B. Reagan (mostly 1905\u20131909).\nThus one narrative tells of the Thunderbird pitted against its prey, the whale which kept trying to elude capture, and this escalated to such turmoil that it uprooted trees, and no tree ever grew back again in the area.\nAnother narrative is the recurrent battle between Thunderbird and the \"Mimlos-Whale\", an orca that repeatedly escapes to sea after capture, and this struggle resulted in great tremors in the mountains and leveling of trees, offering a mythic explanation of the origin of the Olympic Peninsula prairies.\nKwakwaka\u02bcwakw.\nSome of the lore among the Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw, regarding the Thunderbird's has been collated by Franz Boas.\nBut in Boas's version the battle takes place between Thunderbird and \u014c\u02bc\u1d4bm\u00e4t (K!w\u0113\u02bck!wax\u0101\u02bcw\u0113\u1d4b), the leader of the animals. The latter retaliates against Thunderbird carrying away one of his sons, by raising an army carried in an artificial whale. In the battle at the village, Thunderbird's four children (named \"One-Whale-Carrier\", etc.) are drowned, and Thunderbird himself is killed, survived only by the \"nine-month old infant in the cradle\".\nComox.\nIn one of many variant versions of the myth, the sound of the whale dropping into the sea is the source of thunder. A young boy of a Vancouver Island people, the Comox, was fascinated by the sound of thunder, and heard it from behind a point of land. He crossed that point, following the sound of thunder, and discovered the spectacle of the Thunderbird seizing and dropping the whale. The Thunderbird saw the boy, and told him that the story was now his, and he had the right to wear the Thunderbird mask and wings at the potlatch.\nReconstructing the myth.\nIn the 1980s, geologists found evidence that an earthquake, powerful enough to send a tsunami all the way to Japan, hit the American Pacific Northwest in 1700. Some ethnologists believe that \"Thunderbird and Whale\" is a description of that disaster.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30916", "revid": "47183485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30916", "title": "Tomato sauce", "text": "Sauce made primarily from tomatoes\nTomato sauce (; ; ) can refer to many different sauces made primarily from tomatoes. In some countries the term refers to a sauce to be served as part of a dish; in others, it is a condiment. \nTomatoes have a rich flavor, high water content, soft flesh which breaks down easily, and the right composition to thicken into a sauce when stewed, without the need for thickeners such as roux or masa. All of these qualities make them ideal for simple and appealing sauces. Tomato sauce typically has a thinner consistency than tomato paste and tomato pur\u00e9e; however, tomato sauces may use either as an ingredient.\nIn dishes tomato sauces are common for meat and vegetables such as in stews, but they are perhaps best known as bases for Italian pasta or pizza dishes, or in Mexican salsas.\nIn countries such as the United Kingdom, India, Pakistan, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa, the term \"tomato sauce\" is used to describe a condiment similar to what Americans call ketchup. In some of these countries, both terms are used for the condiment.\nHistory.\nTomato sauces, along with similarly related and prepared tomatillo sauces, are presumed to have been in use since antiquity by the peoples of Central and South America as bases for many dishes. However, much of Pre-Columbian cuisine history in Mexico, along with other culturally significant information, had been purged during the periods of conquest by Europeans, chiefly the Spanish. Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan, a Franciscan friar from the Kingdom of Spain, is believed to be the first European to write about tomato sauce after encountering it for sale in the markets of Tenochtitlan (today Mexico City).\nThe first Italian recipe of tomato sauce was published under the name \"Spanish tomato sauce\" in \"Lo Scalco alla Moderna\" ('The Modern Steward'), written by Italian chef Antonio Latini and published in two volumes in 1692 and 1694. Tomato sauce also began to be used in the cuisine of the south of France at the same time, particularly in Provence and the Basque Country. The Proven\u00e7als who went to Paris for the National Federation Day of July 14, 1790, demanded tomatoes everywhere they went. The use of tomato sauce with pasta appeared for the first time in 1790 in the Italian cookbook \"L'Apicio moderno\", by Roman chef Francesco Leonardi.\nThe first written recipe for canned tomatoes comes from Vaucluse, in southern France; it appears in a document written by an individual in 1795.\nRaw tomato sauces.\nIn Italy, there are many pasta sauces based on raw, uncooked tomatoes. In Mexico, the best-known raw tomato sauce is \"pico de gallo\", also known as \"salsa cruda\".\nIn France, raw tomato sauce is known as saoussoun in the Alpes-Maritimes. Sauce vierge is another French sauce made from raw tomato, basil, lemon juice and olive oil, created and popularized by chef Michel Gu\u00e9rard in 1976 as part of his nouvelle cuisine movement. The sauce bears similarities to Mexican pico de gallo, which predates it by several centuries, leading some culinary writers to note the resemblance between the two fresh tomato preparations, with a Greedy Gourmet source noting it \"reminds of the Mexican pico de gallo\" \nVarieties.\nMexico.\nTomato sauce was an ancient condiment in Mesoamerican food. The first person to write about what may have been a tomato sauce was Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan, a Spanish Franciscan friar who later moved to New Spain, who made note of a prepared sauce that was offered for sale in the markets of Tenochtitlan (Mexico City today). He wrote (translated from Spanish), &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They sell some stews made of peppers and tomatoes \u2013 usually put in them peppers, pumpkin seeds, tomatoes, green peppers and fat tomatoes and other things that make tasty stews.\u2014\u200a\nBasic Mexican tomato sauce was traditionally prepared using a \"molcajete\" to puree the tomatoes. Food that is cooked in tomato sauce is known as \"entomatada\". Tomato sauce is used as a base for spicy sauces and \"moles\".\nItaly.\nTomato sauce in Italian cuisine is first mentioned in Antonio Latini's cookbook \"Lo scalco alla moderna\" (Naples, 1692). Latini was chef to the Spanish viceroy of Naples, and one of his tomato recipes is for sauce \"in the Spanish style\" (). The first known use of tomato sauce with pasta appears in the Italian cookbook \"L'Apicio moderno\", by the Roman chef Francesco Leonardi, published in 1790.\nTomato-garlic sauce is prepared using tomatoes as a main ingredient, and is used in various cuisines and dishes. In Italian cuisine, \"alla pizzaiola\" is tomato-garlic sauce, which is used on pizza, pasta and meats.\nFrance.\n\"Sauce tomate\" is one of the five mother sauces of classical French cooking, as codified by Auguste Escoffier in the early 20th century. It consists of salt belly of pork, onions, bay leaves, thyme, tomato pur\u00e9e or fresh tomatoes, roux, garlic, salt, sugar, and pepper.\nTomato sauce can also be served raw, in which case it is named \"saoussoun\" (grated raw tomato with onions, olive oil and herbs), or \"sauce vierge\" (diced raw tomato with olive oil, lemon, garlic, and basil).\nAustralia, New Zealand, and South Africa.\nTomato sauce is a popular, commercially produced table sauce, similar to tomato ketchup, which is typically applied to foods such as meat pies, sausages, and fish and chips. Tomato sauce tends to be more sour due to taste preference for sour adopted from the English and Europeans; while Americans tend to prefer sweeter flavours with American Ketchup being sweeter and thicker. According to Heinz, Ketchup contains more tomatoes, with Australian Heinz Tomato Ketchup stating that it contains \"162g of Tomatoes per 100mL\" equating to 77% concentrated tomatoes, while other tomato sauce brands have tomato concentrations (from paste or puree) between 75-85%.\nTomato-based sauces served with pasta are commonly referred to as \"pasta sauce\", and a strained, uncooked tomato pur\u00e9e is called passata.\nUnited Kingdom.\n\"Collins English Dictionary\" lists the term as \"another name for tomato ketchup\" in British English.\nCanada and United States.\nIn Canada and the U.S., tomato sauce is typically sold jarred or canned, with minimal ingredients, and is not normally used as is. Related ingredients are tomato pur\u00e9e and tomato paste, each of which is similar but paste has a thicker consistency. Tomato pur\u00e9e and tomato paste have US FDA standards of identity (since 1939) for percentage of tomato solids, and historically did not contain seasonings other than salt; in recent decades variants with basil or other traditional Italian seasonings became common. Tomato sauce is non-standardized.\nTomato gravy.\nTomato gravy is originally an Italian American term for a tomato sauce cooked with meat, \"gravy\" being an Americanized form of rag\u00f9. Tomato gravy was associated with Sunday dinner in Italian American households from the 19th century onwards, and was also called \"Sunday gravy\". Although the origins was a dish with more meat than tomatoes, tomato gravy soon developed into a tomato sauce that often had no pieces of meat, but included animal fat. The cooked tomatoes, some fat (usually cured pork fat) and flour are cooked together until thick, and seasoned with salt and pepper. Onions or bell peppers may be added as well. Typically, tomato gravy is served over pasta.\nIndia.\nSome Indian curries have a tomato-based sauce, notably many vegetarian-style dishes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30919", "revid": "49168980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30919", "title": "Triage", "text": "Emergency medical process\nIn medicine, triage (, ; ) is a process by which care providers such as medical professionals and those with first aid knowledge determine the order of priority for providing treatment to injured individuals and/or inform the rationing of limited supplies so that they go to those who can most benefit from it. Triage is usually relied upon when there are more injured individuals than available care providers (known as a mass casualty incident), or when there are more injured individuals than supplies to treat them.\nThe methodologies of triage vary by institution, locality, and country but have the same universal underlying concepts. In most cases, the triage process places the most injured and most able to be helped as the first priority, with the most terminally injured the last priority (except in the case of reverse triage). Triage systems vary dramatically based on a variety of factors, and can follow specific, measurable metrics, like trauma scoring systems, or can be based on the medical opinion of the provider. Triage is an imperfect practice, and can be largely subjective, especially when based on general opinion rather than a score. This is because triage needs to balance multiple and sometimes contradictory objectives simultaneously, most of them being fundamental to personhood: likelihood of death, efficacy of treatment, patients' remaining lifespan, ethics, and religion.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology and origin.\nThe term \"triage\" comes directly from French , meaning the action of picking or sorting, it itself coming from the Old French verb , meaning to separate, sort, shift, or select; with in turn came from late Latin tritare, to grind. Although the concept existed much earlier, at least as far back as the reign of Maximillian I, it was not until the 1800s that the Old French trier was used to describe the practice of triage. That year, Baron Dominique-Jean Larrey, the Surgeon in Chief of Napoleon's Imperial Guard laid the groundwork for what would eventually become modern triage introducing the concept of \"treat[ing] the wounded according to the observed gravity of their injuries and the urgency for medical care, regardless of their rank or nationality\".\nConcepts in triage.\nSimple triage.\nSimple triage is usually used in a scene of an accident or \"mass-casualty incident\" (MCI), in order to sort patients into those who need critical attention and immediate transport to a secondary or tertiary care facility to survive, those who require low-intensity care to survive, those who are uninjured, and those who are deceased or will be so imminently. In the United States, this most commonly takes the form of the START triage model, in Canada, the CTAS model, and in Australia the ATS model. Assessment often begins with asking anyone who can walk to walk to a designated area, labeling them the lowest priority, and assessing other patients from there. Upon completion of the initial assessment by the care provider, which is based on the so-called ABCDE approach, patients are generally labelled with their available information, including \"patient\u2019s name, gender, injuries, interventions, care-provider IDs, casualty triage score, and an easily visible overall triage category\".\nABCDE Assessment.\nAn ABCDE assessment (other variations include ABC, ABCD, ABCDEF, and many others, including those localized to non-English) is rapid patient assessment designed to check bodily function in order of importance.\nTags.\nA triage tag is a premade label placed on each patient that serves to accomplish several objectives:\nTriage tags take a variety of forms. Some countries use a nationally standardized triage tag, while in other countries commercially available triage tags are used, which vary by jurisdictional choice. In some cases, international organizations also have standardized tags, as is the case with NATO. The most commonly used commercial systems include the METTAG, the SMARTTAG, E/T LIGHT and the CRUCIFORM systems. More advanced tagging systems incorporate special markers to indicate whether or not patients have been contaminated by hazardous materials, and also tear off strips for tracking the movement of patients through the process.\nAdvanced triage.\nIn advanced triage, those with advanced training, such as doctors, nurses and paramedics make further care determinations based on more in-depth assessments, and may make use of advanced diagnostics like CT scans. This can also be a form of secondary triage, where the evaluation occurs at a secondary location like a hospital, or after the arrival of more qualified care providers.\nReverse triage.\nThere are three primary concepts referred to as reverse triage. The first is concerned with the discharge of patients from hospital often to prepare for an incoming mass casualty. The second concept of Reverse Triage is utilized for certain conditions such as lightning injuries, where those appearing to be dead may be treated ahead of other patients, as they can typically be resuscitated successfully. The third is the concept of treating the least injured, often to return them to functional capability. This approach originated in the military, where returning combatants to the theatre of war may lead to overall victory (and survivability).\nUndertriage and overtriage.\nUndertriage is underestimating the severity of an illness or injury. An example of this would be categorizing a Priority 1 (Immediate) patient as a Priority 2 (Delayed) or Priority 3 (Minimal). The rate of undertriage generally varies by the location of the triage, with a 2014 review of triage practices in emergency rooms finding that in-hospital undertriaging occurred 34% of the time in the United States, while reviews of pre-hospital triage finding undertriage rates of 14%.\nOvertriage is the overestimating of the severity of an illness or injury. An example of this would be categorizing a Priority 3 (Minimal) patient as a Priority 2 (Delayed) or Priority 1 (Immediate). Acceptable overtriage rates have been typically up to 50% in an effort to avoid undertriage. Some studies suggest that overtriage is less likely to occur when triaging is performed by hospital medical teams, rather than paramedics or EMTs.\nTelephone triage.\nIn telephone triage, care providers like nurses assess symptoms and medical history, and make a care recommendation over the phone. A review of available literature found that these services provide accurate and safe information about 90% of the time.\nPalliative care.\nIn triage, palliative care takes on a wider applicability, as some conditions which may be survivable outside of extreme circumstances become unsurvivable due to the nature of a mass casualty incident. For these patients, as well as those who are deemed to be unsavable, palliative care can mean the difference of a painful death, and a relatively peaceful one. During the COVID-19 pandemic issues of palliative care in triage became more obvious as some countries were forced to deny care to large groups of individuals due to lack of supplies and ventilators.\nEvacuation.\nIn the field, evacuation of all casualties is the ultimate goal, so that the site of the incident can ultimately be cleared, if necessary investigated, and eventually rendered safe. Additional considerations must be made to avoid overwhelming local resources, and in some extreme cases, this can mean evacuating some patients to other countries.\nAlternative care facilities.\nAlternative care facilities are places that are set up for the care of large numbers of patients, or are places that could be so set up. Examples include schools, sports stadiums, and large camps that can be prepared and used for the care, feeding, and holding of large numbers of victims of a mass casualty or other type of event. Such improvised facilities are generally developed in cooperation with the local hospital, which sees them as a strategy for creating surge capacity. While hospitals remain the preferred destination for all patients, during a mass casualty event such improvised facilities may be required in order to divert low-acuity patients away from hospitals in order to prevent the hospitals becoming overwhelmed.\nPre-modern history of triage.\nThe Edwin Smith Papyrus.\nThe general concept was first described in a 17th-century BCE Egyptian document, the Edwin Smith Papyrus. Discovered in 1862, outside of modern-day Luxor, Egypt, the Edwin Smith Papyrus contains descriptions of the assessment and treatment of a multitude of medical conditions, and divides injuries into three categories:\nThe Holy Roman Empire.\nDuring the reign of Emperor Maximilian I, during wartime, a policy was implemented where soldiers were prioritized over all others in hospitals, and the sickest soldiers received treatment first.\nModern history of triage.\nNapoleonic triage.\nModern triage grew out of the work of Baron Dominique-Jean Larrey and Pierre-Fran\u00e7ois Percy during the reign of Napoleon. Larrey in particular introduced the concept of a \"flying ambulance\" (flying in this case meaning rapidly moving) or in its native French, Ambulance Volante.\nWorld War I.\nIn 1914, Antoine Depage developed the five-tiered \"Ordre de Triage\", a triage system which set specific benchmarks on evacuation, described staged evacuation. French and Belgian doctors began using these concepts to inform the treatment of casualties at aid stations behind the front. Those responsible for the removal of the wounded from a battlefield or their care afterwards would divide the victims into three categories:\nFrom that delineation, aid workers would follow the \"Ordre de Triage\":\nFirst Order of Triage.\nIn the first order of triage, the injured would be evacuated to clearing stations in the night, when darkness offered maximum protection from the German forces.\nSecond Order of Triage.\nOnce at a casualty clearing station, wounds were dressed, and anyone requiring immediate surgical intervention was placed in a cart and brought immediately to an ambulance pickup area. If the wounded could wait, they would be evacuated by ambulance during the night.\nThird Order of Triage.\nAmbulances, driven by YMCA and American Red Cross trained drivers then removed the casualties to mobile surgical centers, called \"postes avances des hospitaux du front\" or outposts of the frontline hospitals.\nFourth Order of Triage.\nAt the mobile surgical hospitals, the most severe cases were treated, specifically those who were likely to die before reaching a permanent, more equipped hospital. Anyone who could survive the trip was transported to a farther away, often costal, hospital.\nFifth Order of Triage.\nUpon reaching a permanent hospital, casualties received appropriate care to treat all of their injuries.\nWorld War II.\nBy the onset of World War II, American and British forces had adopted and adapted triage, with other global powers doing the same. The increased availability of airplanes allowed rapid evacuation to a hospital outside of the warzone to become a part of the triage process. Although the basic practices remained the same as in World War I, with initial evacuation to an aid station, followed by transitions to higher levels of care, and eventual admission to a permanent hospital, more advanced care was provided at each stage, and the mindset of treating only what was absolutely necessary fell away. Although triage almost certainly occurred in the days after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the pandemonium caused by the attack left records of such action non-existent until after the fifth day, at which point they are largely without historical use.\nThe Texas City disaster (1947).\nIn 1947, the Texas City Disaster occurred when the SS \"Grandcamp\" exploded in Texas City, Texas, killing 600 people and injuring thousands more. The entire fire department was killed in the blast, and what followed was a massive informal triage of the victims. Drug stores, clinics, and homes were opened as makeshift triage stations. As the city has no hospital, they had to evacuate casualties to area facilities, including those in Galveston and Houston, with at least one doctor relying on skills he had learned in World War II to inform care decisions.\nThe Korean War.\nThe Korean War saw the advent of the tiered triage, wherein care providers sorted people into categories defined ahead of time. These categories, immediate, delayed, minimal and expectant are still the basis for most triage systems today. The time period was also marked by improvements in medical understanding, including shock, which allowed effective interventions to be administered earlier in the Triage process, which in turn significantly improved outcomes. At the same time, Mobile Army Surgical Hospitals (MASH) were introduced along with helicopters for evacuation. These helicopters, however were used for evacuation only, and care was not provided in the air during the evacuation. These advances reduced fatalities for injured soldiers by up to 30%, and changed the nature of battlefield medicine significantly.\nThe Vietnam War.\nThe conditions of the Vietnam War drove further development on the concepts created during the Korean War. Advances in helicopters allowed the introduction of the first helicopter medics, who were able to provide fluid resuscitation, and other interventions mid-flight. This made it so that the average time from injury to definitive care was less than two hours. This evolution also flowed into the everyday life, with air ambulances emerging in the civilian world by the mid-1960's. The use of triage in emergency departments and ambulance services also quickly followed.\nThe World Trade Center bombing (1993).\nIn 1993, the north tower of the World Trade Center was bombed, in a plot with a similar intended outcome as the later September 11th attacks. While search, rescue and triage operations immediately following were ordinary, the attack itself represented one of the first terrorist attacks affecting the United States directly. The fact that the U.S. was no longer seen as untouchable, along with the later Oklahoma City bombing in 1995, and the September 11th attack lead to long term changes in triage practices to be more focused on operational safety and the risk of secondary attacks designed to kill care providers.\nMatsumato sarin attack (1994).\nIn June 1994, emergency crews began responding to calls related to symptoms of toxic gas exposure in a neighborhood. Without proper personal protective equipment, more than 253 residents were evacuated and 50 were hospitalized. 20 vehicles were called to the scene, and a mobile operating center was setup nearby, likely within the zone of contamination. Unaware of the presence of Sarin, triage was performed following the standard system of the time, which ultimately resulted in eight care givers experiencing mild sarin poisoning, and an unknown amount of additional staff experiencing general malaise.\nAt the time, no decontamination procedures or gas masks were available for incidents involving contaminants. In response, the Japan Self-Defense Forces created a decontamination team, which was then instrumental to the response of the Tokyo subway sarin attack which occurred only seven months later.\nTriage in the present day.\nAs medical technology has advanced, so have modern approaches to triage, which are increasingly based on scientific models. The categorizations of the victims are frequently the result of triage scores based on specific physiological assessment findings. Some models, such as the START model may be algorithm-based. As triage concepts become more sophisticated, and to improve patient safety and quality of care, several human-in-the-loop decision-support tools have been designed on top of triage systems to standardize and automate the triage process (e.g., eCTAS, NHS 111) in both hospitals and the field. Moreover, the recent development of new machine learning methods offers the possibility to learn optimal triage policies from data and in time could replace or improve upon expert-crafted models.\nSpecific triage systems and methods.\nMost simply, the general purpose of triage is to sort patients by level of acuity to inform care decisions; so that the most people possible can be saved. Although a multitude of systems, color codes, codewords, and categories exist to help direct it, in all cases, triage follows the same basic process. In all systems, patients are first assessed for injuries, then, they are categorized based on the severity of those injuries. Although the number of categories differs from system to system, all have at least three in common; high severity, low severity, and deceased. Some systems involve features like scoring systems, such as the Revised Trauma Score, the Injury Severity Score, and the Trauma and Injury Severity Score, the latter of which has been shown to be most effective at determining outcome.\nTriage systems by methodology.\nS.T.A.R.T. model.\nS.T.A.R.T. (Simple Triage and Rapid Treatment) is a simple triage system that can be performed by lightly trained lay and emergency personnel in emergencies. It was developed at Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach, California for use by emergency services in 1983.\nTriage separates the injured into four groups:\nTriage also sets priorities for evacuation and transport as follows:\nJumpSTART triage.\nThe JumpSTART pediatric triage MCI triage tool is a variation of the S.T.A.R.T. model. Both systems are used to sort patients into categories at mass casualty incidents (MCIs). However, JumpSTART was designed specifically for triaging children in disaster settings. Though JumpSTART was developed for use in children from infancy to age 8, where age is not immediately obvious, it is used in any patient who appears to be a child (patients who appear to be young adults are triaged using START).\nTriage systems by country.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nIn hospital settings, Australia and New Zealand rely on the \"Australasian Triage Scale\" (abbreviated \"ATS\" and formally known as the \"National Triage Scale\"). The scale has been in use since 1994. The scale consists of 5 levels, with 1 being the most critical (resuscitation), and 5 being the least critical (nonurgent).\nIn field settings, various standardized triage systems are used, and there is no area wide standard.\nCanada.\nIn 1995, the CAEP Triage and Acuity scale was launched in Canada relying on a simplified version of the Australian National Triage Scale. This scale used three categories, emergent, urgent, and non-urgent. This scale was deprecated in 1999 with the introduction of the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS), which is used across the country to sort incoming patients. The system categorizes patients by both injury and physiological findings, and ranks them by severity from 1\u20135 (1 being highest). The model is not currently used for mass casualty triage, and instead the START protocol and METTAG triage tags is used.\nFrance.\nIn France, the Prehospital triage in case of a disaster uses a multi-tier scale:\nThis triage is performed by a physician called \"m\u00e9decin trieur\" (sorting medic).\nGermany.\nThe German triage system uses four color codes:\nIn addition, also the \"Manchester\" triage system has been introduced in Germany as well as in its German speaking neighbour countries: in Germany itself in 2004, in Austria in 2009, and in German speaking parts of Switzerland in 2011 (see also Manchester-Triage-System (in German).\nHong Kong.\nIn Hong Kong, triage in accident and emergency departments is performed by experienced registered nurses, and patients are divided into five triage categories: \"Critical\", \"Emergency\", \"Urgent\", \"Semi-urgent\" and \"Non-urgent\". In mass casualty incidents, the START triage system is used.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, the triage system is mainly used by health professionals. The categories of triage, in corresponding color codes, are:\nPortugal.\nIn Portugal, the \"Manchester\" triage protocol is used.\nSingapore.\nAll public hospitals in Singapore use the Patient Acuity Category Scale (PACS) to triage patient in Emergency Departement. PACS is a symptom-based differential diagnosis approach that triages patients according to their presenting complaints and objective assessments such as vital signs and Glasgow Coma Scale, allowing acute patients to be identified quickly for treatment. PACS classifies patients into four main categories: P1, P2, P3, and P4.\nIn mass casualty incidents, the START triage system is used.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, there are two models which are the most common found in hospitals around the country:\nIn mass casualty incidents, the \"Modelo Extrahospitalario de Triaje Avanzado\" (META)/Advanced Triage Out of Hospital Model system is used. META is a seven-stage system, classifying patients as: Red 1st, Red 2nd, Red 3rd, Yellow 1st, Yellow 2nd, Green, and Deceased. The system aligns with the ABCDE framework.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn April 2023, the NHS and ambulance services adopted two new triage tools to be used in major incidents, replacing the NASMeD Triage Sieve. These new tools resulted from a multi-stakeholder review led by the NHS but its implementation became more urgent after the Manchester Arena Inquiry made it a monitored recommendation for the NHS and National Ambulance Resilience Unit to adopt.\nTen Second Triage Tool.\nThe Ten Second Triage Tool (TST) was introduced as a way for all emergency services, including the police and fire service, to assess and prioritise mass casualties to provide lifesaving intervention. The tool allows for rapid assessment by removing the need to measure physiological vital signs focusing on what the emergency responder can see.\nNHS Major Incident Triage Tool.\nThe Major Incident Triage Tool (MITT) serves as the more advanced triage tool for emergency medial responders to triage casualties. The tool, derived from the Modified Physiological Triage Tool, can be used on both adults and children, and also includes the assessment of physiological vital signs.\nUnited States.\nA multitude of triage systems exist in the United States, and there is no national standard. Among local, regional, state, and interstate systems, the START triage method is most commonly used.\nUnited States Armed Forces.\nThe U.S. armed forces utilize a four-stage system, A battlefield situation, care providers rank casualties for precedence, treat those who they can safely, and transport casualties who need it to a higher level of care, either a Forward Surgical Team or Combat Support Hospital.\nThe triage categories (with corresponding color codes), in order of priority, are:\nLimitations of current practices.\nNotions of mass casualty triage as an efficient rationing process of determining priority based upon injury severity are not supported by research, evaluation and testing of current triage practices, which lack scientific and methodological bases. START and START-like (START) triage that use color-coded categories to prioritize provide poor assessments of injury severity and then leave it to providers to subjectively order and allocate resources within flawed categories. Some of these limitations include:\nResearch indicates there are wide ranges and overlaps of survival probabilities of the Immediate and Delayed categories, and other START limitations. The same physiologic measures can have markedly different survival probabilities for blunt and penetrating injuries. For example, a START Delayed (second priority) can have a survival probability of 63% for blunt trauma and a survival probability of 32% for penetrating trauma with the same physiological measures \u2013 both with expected rapid deterioration, while a START Immediate (first priority) can have survival probabilities that extend to above 95% with expected slow deterioration. Age categories exacerbate this. For example, a geriatric patient with a penetrating injury in the Delayed category can have an 8% survival probability, and a pediatric patient in the Immediate category can have a 98% survival probability. Issues with the other START categories have also been noted. In this context, color-coded tagging accuracy metrics are not scientifically meaningful.\nPoor assessments, invalid categories, no objective methodology and tools for prioritizing casualties and allocating resources, and a protocol of worst first triage provide some challenges for emergency and disaster preparedness and response. These are clear obstacles for efficient triage and resource rationing, for maximizing savings of lives, for best practices and National Incident Management System (NIMS) compatibilities, and for effective response planning and training.\nInefficient triage also provides challenges in containing health care costs and waste. Field triage is based upon the notion of up to 50% overtriage as being acceptable. There have been no cost-benefit analyses of the costs and mitigation of triage inefficiencies embedded in the healthcare system. Such analyses are often required for healthcare grants funded by taxpayers, and represent normal engineering and management science practice. These inefficiencies relate to the following cost areas:\nEthical considerations.\nBecause treatment is intentionally delayed or withheld from individuals under this system, triage has ethical implications that complicate the decision-making process. Individuals involved in triage must take a comprehensive view of the process to ensure fidelity, veracity, justice, autonomy, and beneficence are safeguarded.\nEthical implications vary between different settings and the type of triage system employed, culminating in no single gold-standard approach to triage. Emergency departments are advised to preemptively plan strategies in attempts to mitigate the emotional burden on these triage responders. While doing so, standards of care must be maintained to preserve the safety of both patients and providers.\nThere is widespread agreement among ethicists that, in practice, during the COVID-19 pandemic triage should prioritize \"those who have the best chance of surviving\" and follow guidelines with strict criteria that consider both short-term and long-term survivability. Likewise, the triage of other health services has been adjusted during the pandemic to limit resource strain on hospitals.\nUtilitarian approach and critique.\nUnder the utilitarian model, triage works to maximize the survival outcomes of the most people possible. This approach implies that some individuals may likely suffer or die, in order for the majority to survive. Triage officers must allocate limited resources and weigh an individual's needs along with the needs of the population as a whole.\nSome ethicists argue the utilitarian approach to triage is not an impartial mechanism, but rather a partial one that fails to address the social conditions that prevent optimal outcomes in marginalized communities, rendering it a practical but inadequate means of distributing health resources.\nSpecial population groups.\nThere is wide discussion regarding how VIPs and celebrities should be cared for in the emergency department. It is generally argued that giving special considerations or deviating from the standard medical protocol for VIPs or celebrities is unethical due to the cost to others. However, others argue that it may be morally justifiable as long as their treatment does not hinder the needs of others after assessing overall fairness, quality of care, privacy, and other ethical implications.\nProposed frameworks in conflict.\nA variety of logistical challenges complicate the triage and ultimate provision of care in conflict situations. Humanitarian actors acknowledge challenges like disruptions in food and medical supply chains, lack of suitable facilities, and existence of policies that prohibit administration of care to certain communities and populations as elements that directly impede the successful delivery of care. The logistical realities of humanitarian emergencies and conflict situations threatens the bioethical principle of beneficence, the obligation to act for the benefit of others.\nTechnical challenges of triage in conflict settings.\nTo address the ethical concerns that underpin triage in conflict situations and humanitarian crises, new triage frameworks and classification systems have been suggested that aim to uphold human rights. Scholars have argued that new frameworks must prioritize informed consent and rely on established medical criteria only in order to respect the human rights considerations set forth by the Geneva Convention of 1864 and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, but no comprehensive triage model has been adopted by international bodies.\nVeterinary triage.\nEmergency veterinarian Jessica Fragola wrote in 2022 about the ethics of animal triage. She said that pressures on veterinarians having been exacerbated by staffing shortages that resulted from the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with growth in spending on veterinary care and on pet insurance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30925", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30925", "title": "Tolstoy family", "text": "Russian noble family\nThe House of Tolstoy, or Tolstoi (), is a family of Russian nobility (\"dvoryanstvo\") that acceded to the high aristocracy of the Russian Empire. The name \"Tolstoy\" is itself derived from the Russian adjective ( lit.\u2009'thick, stout, fat'). They are the descendants of Andrey Kharitonovich Tolstoy (\"the Fat\"), who moved from Chernigov to Moscow and served under Vasily II of Moscow in the 15th century. The \"wild Tolstoys\", as they were known in the high society of Imperial Russia, have left a lasting legacy in Russian politics, military history, literature, and fine arts. The most famous member of the family is the author Leo Tolstoy.\nOrigins.\nThe Tolstoys were a family of provincial Muscovite \"dvoryanstvo\" who claimed their ancestry to a mythical Lithuanian nobleman named Indris, stated by Pyotr Tolstoy as supposedly having arrived from the Holy Roman Empire to Chernigov in 1353, the very year when the city became part of Grand Duchy of Lithuania, together with his two sons Litvinos (or Litvonis, \"Lithuanian\") and Zimonten (or Zigmont, or \"Samogitian\") and a druzhina of 3000 men. Litvonis and Zimonten possibly refer to the two main parts of Lithuania at the time - Samogitia was considered administratively separate from Lithuania Proper (in the narrow sense) for much of history. Indris was then supposedly converted to Eastern Orthodoxy as Leonty and his sons \u2014 as Konstantin and Feodor, respectively; adopting religion of the locals was typical of Lithuanian nobility at the time and characteristic of the Lithuanian style of governing. Konstantin's grandson, Andrei Kharitonovich, was nicknamed Tolstiy (translated as \"fat\") by Vasily II of Moscow after he moved from Chernigov to Moscow.\nBecause of the pagan names and the fact that Chernigov at the time was ruled by Demetrius I Starshy some research concluded that they were Lithuanians who arrived from the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, then in conflict with the State of the Teutonic Order. At the same time, no mention of Indris was ever found in the 14-16th century documents, while the Chernigov Chronicles used by Pyotr Tolstoy as a reference were lost. The first documented members of the Tolstoy family also lived in the 17th century. House of Durnovo is a side branch of the Tolstoy family. Pyotr Tolstoy is the founder of the titled branch of the family; he was granted the title of count by Peter the Great. \nThe untitled branch of the same stem is descended from Ivan Andreevich Tolstoy. Their common ancestor was Andrey Vasilievich Tolstoy, who married Stepanida Andreevna Miloslavskaya, a cousin of the tsarina. This marriage had allowed the average \"dvoryanstvo\" family to enter the Moscow court. \nThe Tolstoy surname is also found amongst untitled provincial \"dvoryanstvo\".\nIn the Napoleonic Wars.\nTwo members of the family were active during the Napoleonic Wars. Count Pyotr Aleksandrovich Tolstoy (1761\u20131844) served under Suvorov in wars against Poland and the Ottoman Empire, was made a general-adjutant in 1797, went as an ambassador to Paris in 1807 and tried to persuade Alexander I to prepare for the war against France, without much success though. He served as the governor of St Petersburg and Kronstadt from 1828 until his death.\nAlexander Ivanovich Tolstoy (1770\u20131857), stemming from a collateral branch of the family, inherited the comital title and estates of his childless uncle, the last of the Ostermanns.\nHe first distinguished himself in the Battle of Czarnowo on the night and following morning of 23\u201324 December 1806, where under his command the 2nd Division of the Russian Army in Poland held out for fifteen hours against the whole army commanded by Napoleon. One of the most admired generals of the anti-Napoleonic coalition, he was rewarded for his courage in the battles at Pultusk and Eylau. At Guttstadt he was wounded so seriously that they feared for his life. In the great battle of Borodino he brilliantly commanded the key positions until he was shell-shocked and taken away from the battlefield. Ostermann-Tolstoy was once again wounded in the battle of Bautzen (1813) but did not give up command of his force. His crowning achievement was the victory at Kulm (August 30, 1813), which cost him amputation of the left arm. When the war was over, he quarreled with the Emperor, resigned and spent the rest of his life in Europe.\nIn high society.\nCount Feodor Petrovich Tolstoy (1783\u20131873), sympathetically mentioned by Pushkin in \"Eugene Onegin\", was one of the most fashionable Russian drawers and painters of the 1820s. Although he prepared fine illustrations for Bogdanovich's \"Dushenka\", his genuine vocation was wax modeling and the design of medals. As he gradually went blind he had to give up drawing and started writing ballets and librettos for operas. He was appointed Vice-President of the Academy of Arts in 1828. Many of his works may be seen in the Russian Museum, St Petersburg.\nCount Fyodor Ivanovich Tolstoy (1782\u20131846) was a notorious drunkard, gastronome, and duellist. It is said that he killed 11 people in duels. In 1803 he participated in the first Russian circumnavigation of the Earth. After he had his body tattooed at the Marquesas and debauched all the crew, captain Krusenstern had to maroon him on the Aleutian Islands near Kamchatka. When he returned to St Petersburg, Count Fedor was nicknamed \"Amerikanets\" (\"the American\"). He fought bravely in the Patriotic War of 1812 but scandalized his family again by marrying a Gypsy singer in 1821. Alexander Griboyedov satirized him in \"Woe from Wit\", and his cousin Leo Tolstoy \u2014 who called him an \"extraordinary, criminal, and attractive man\" \u2014 fictionalized him as Dolokhov in \"War and Peace\".\nIn Russian literature.\nMany of the Tolstoys devoted their spare time to literary pursuits. For instance, Count Alexei Konstantinovich (1817\u201375) was a courtier but also one of the most popular Russian poets of his time. He wrote admirable ballads, a historical novel, some licentious verse, and satires published under the penname of Kozma Prutkov. His lasting contribution to the Russian literature was a trilogy of historical dramas, modelled after Pushkin's \"Boris Godunov\".\nCount Lev Nikolaevich (1828\u20131910), more widely known abroad as Leo Tolstoy, is acclaimed as one of the greatest novelists of all time. After he started his career in the military, he was first drawn to writing books when he served in Chechenya, and already his first story, \"Detstvo\" (\"Childhood\"), was something quite unlike anything written before him. It was in his family estate Yasnaya Polyana near Tula that he created two novels, \"War and Peace\" and \"Anna Karenina\", that are widely acclaimed as among the best novels ever written. Later he developed a kind of non-traditional Christian philosophy, described in his work \"The Kingdom of God is Within You\" which inspired Rainer Maria Rilke and Mohandas Gandhi, then a young lawyer, whose influence extended to Martin Luther King Jr. and James Bevel.\nOf Lev's thirteen children, most spent their life either promoting his teachings or denouncing them. His youngest daughter and secretary, Alexandra Lvovna (1884\u20131979), had a particularly troubled life. Although she shared with her father the doctrine of nonviolence, she felt it was her duty to take part in the events of World War I.\nCount Aleksey Nikolayevich Tolstoy (1883\u20131945) belonged to a different branch of the family. His early short stories, published in 1910s, were panned by critics for excessive naturalism and wanton eroticism. After the Revolution he briefly emigrated to Germany, but then changed his political views and returned to the Soviet Union. His science fiction novels \"Aelita\" (1923), about a journey to Mars, and \"The Garin Death Ray\" (1927) are still popular with readers. In his later years he published two lengthy novels on historical subjects, \"Peter the First\" (1929\u201345) and \"The Road to Calvary\" (1922-41). As a staunch supporter of Joseph Stalin, he became known as \"Red Count\" or \"Comrade Count\" and his works were acknowledged as classics of Soviet literature. Most of his reputation declined with that of Socialist Realism, but his children's tale character Buratino retains his strong legacy with the younger audience of Russia and across the former Soviet space, appearing as popular reading, a movie, and a variety of derivative forms.\nHis granddaughter Tatyana Tolstaya (born May 3, 1951) is one of the foremost Russian short story writers. Another member of the family is Count Nikolai Tolstoy-Miloslavsky (born in 1935), a British historian and monarchist, and nominal head of the House of Tolstoy today.\nAfter the Russian Revolution.\nSome of the members of the Tolstoy family left Russia in the aftermath of the Russian Revolution and the subsequent establishment of the Soviet Union, and many of the Leo Tolstoy's relatives and descendants today live in Sweden, Germany, the United Kingdom, France and the United States. Among them are Swedish jazz singer Viktoria Tolstoy. Leo Tolstoy's last surviving grandchild, Countess Tatiana Tolstoy-Paus, died in 2007 at Herresta manor in Sweden, which is owned by Leo Tolstoy's descendants in the Paus family. Two of Leo Tolstoy's great-great-grandsons are Pyotr Tolstoy, a Russian TV presenter and State Duma deputy since 2016 and Vladimir Tolstoy, journalist and adviser to the President of Russia on culture.\nPlaces.\nSeveral places in Russia are named to commemorate Leo Tolstoy, e.g., Tolstoy-Yurt, village in Chechnya.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30928", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30928", "title": "Transpositional pun", "text": "Form of joke\nA transpositional pun is a pun format with two aspects. It involves transposing the words in a well-known phrase or saying to get a daffynition-like clever redefinition of a well-known word unrelated to the original phrase. The redefinition is thus the first aspect, and the transposition the second aspect. As a result, transpositional puns are considered among the most difficult to create, and commonly the most challenging to comprehend, particularly for non-native speakers of the language in which they're given (most commonly English).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30930", "revid": "50335409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30930", "title": "Tom Daschle", "text": "American politician (born 1947)\nThomas Andrew Daschle ( ; born December 9, 1947) is an American politician and lobbyist who represented South Dakota in the United States Senate from 1987 to 2005. A member of the Democratic Party, he led the Senate Democratic Caucus during the final ten years of his tenure, during which time he served as Senate Minority Leader and Majority Leader.\nAfter leaving the United States Air Force, he was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1978 and served four terms. In 1986, he was elected to the U.S. Senate, becoming Minority Leader in 1995 and Majority Leader in 2001, becoming the highest-ranking elected official in South Dakota history.\nIn 2004, he was defeated for reelection in a close race by John Thune, who would go on to become a party leader himself. Later, he took a position as a policy advisor with a lobbying firm, became a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress, and co-authored a book advocating universal health care.\nDaschle was an early supporter of Barack Obama's presidential candidacy, and was nominated by President-elect Obama for the position of Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services after the 2008 election. However, Daschle withdrew his name on February 3, 2009, amid a growing controversy over his failure to properly report and pay income taxes. He is currently working for The Daschle Group, a Public Policy Advisory of Baker Donelson, a large law firm and lobbying group.\nEarly life and education.\nDaschle was born in Aberdeen, South Dakota, the son of Elizabeth B. (n\u00e9e Meier) and Sebastian C. Daschle, both of German descent. His paternal grandparents were Volga Germans. He grew up in a working-class Roman Catholic family, the eldest of four brothers.\nHe attended Central High School in Aberdeen before becoming the first person in his family to graduate from college when he earned a Bachelor of Arts from the Department of Political Science at South Dakota State University in 1969. While attending South Dakota State University, Daschle became a brother of Alpha Phi Omega. From 1969 to 1972, Daschle served in the United States Air Force as an intelligence officer with the Strategic Air Command.\nIn the mid-1970s Daschle was an aide to Senator James Abourezk.\nHouse of Representatives (1979\u20131987).\nIn 1978 Daschle was elected to the United States House of Representatives at the age of 31, winning the race by a margin of 139 votes, following a recount, out of more than 129,000 votes cast. Daschle served four terms in the House of Representatives and quickly became a part of the Democratic leadership.\nAlthough Daschle was not seeking the vice presidency, he received 10 (0.30%) delegate votes for Vice President of the United States at the 1980 Democratic National Convention. Several others also received protest votes, but incumbent Vice President Walter Mondale was nevertheless renominated easily.\nUnited States Senate (1987\u20132005).\nIn 1986, Daschle was elected to the U.S. Senate in a close victory over incumbent Republican James Abdnor. In his first year, he was appointed to the Finance Committee.\nParty leadership.\nIn 1994, he was chosen by his colleagues to succeed the retiring Senator George Mitchell as Democratic minority leader. In the history of the Senate, only Lyndon B. Johnson had served fewer years before being elected to lead his party. In addition to the minority leader's post, Daschle served as a member of the Senate Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry Committee. South Dakotans reelected Daschle to the Senate with 62.1% of votes in 1998.\nAt various points in his career, he served on the Veterans Affairs, Indian Affairs, Finance, and Ethics Committees.\nWhen the 107th Congress commenced on January 3, 2001, the Senate was evenly divided\u2014that is, there were 50 Democrats and 50 Republicans. Outgoing Vice President Al Gore acted in his constitutional capacity as ex officio President of the Senate, and used his tie-breaking vote to give the Democrats the majority in that chamber. For the next 17 days, Daschle served as Senate Majority Leader.\nUpon the commencement of the Bush administration on January 20, 2001, Dick Cheney became president of the senate, thereby returning Democrats to the minority in that body; Daschle reverted to the position of Senate Minority Leader. However, on June 6, 2001, Senator Jim Jeffords of Vermont announced that he was leaving the Senate Republican caucus to become an independent and to caucus with Democrats; this once again returned control of the body to the Democrats and Daschle again became majority leader.\nDemocratic losses in the November 2002 elections returned the party to the minority in the senate in January 2003, and Daschle once more reverted to being minority leader.\nDaschle recounted his senate experiences from 2001 to 2003 in his first book, \"Like No Other Time: The 107th Congress and the Two Years That Changed America Forever\", published in 2003. With Charles Robbins, he has also written the book \"The U.S. Senate\", part of the \"Fundamentals of American Government\" series.\nAnthrax case in 2001.\nIn October 2001, while he was the Senate Majority Leader, Daschle's office received a letter containing anthrax, becoming a target of the 2001 anthrax attacks. Some of his staffers were confirmed to have been exposed, as well as several of Senator Russ Feingold's staffers and Capitol police officers. His suite at the Hart Senate Office Building was the focus of an intensive cleanup led by the Environmental Protection Agency.\nViews on abortion.\nDaschle has a mixed voting record on abortion-related issues, which led the pro-choice organization NARAL to give him a 50% vote rating.\nIn 1999 and 2003, Daschle voted in favor of the ban on partial-birth abortion, and supported legislation making it a crime to harm an unborn child when someone attacks a pregnant woman. Investigators into the 2001 anthrax attacks, which included Senator Daschle's Capitol Hill office, suspect that alleged anthrax mailer Bruce Ivins may have chosen to target Daschle over his views on abortion, although Ivins's lawyer disputed this alleged motive.\nIn 2003, Roman Catholic Bishop Robert Carlson reportedly wrote to Daschle, criticizing his stance on abortion as conflicting with Roman Catholic teaching, and stating that Daschle should no longer identify himself as a Catholic.\n2004 Senate election.\nIn the 2004 Senate election, John Thune defeated Daschle by 4,508 votes, 50.6% to 49.4%. It was the first time that a Senate party leader had lost a bid for reelection since 1952, when Barry Goldwater defeated Ernest McFarland in Arizona. Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist visited South Dakota to campaign for Thune, breaking an unwritten tradition that a leader of one party would not actively campaign for the defeat of the other.\nThroughout the campaign, Thune, along with Frist, President George W. Bush, and Vice President Cheney, frequently accused Daschle of being the \"chief obstructionist\" of Bush's agenda and charged him with using filibusters to unjustly block confirmation of several of Bush's nominees. The Republican candidate also drove home his strong support for the war. In a nationally televised debate on NBC's \"Meet the Press\", Thune accused Daschle of \"emboldening the enemy\" in his skepticism of the Iraq War.\nWhen the race began in early 2004, Daschle led by 7% in January and February. By May, his lead was just 2% and summer polls showed a varying number of trends: Daschle or Thune led by no more than 2%, but some polls showed a tie. Throughout September, Daschle led Thune by margins of 2\u20135% while during the entire month of October into the November 2 election, most polls showed that Thune and Daschle were dead even, usually tied 49\u201349 among likely voters. Some polls showed either Thune or Daschle leading by extremely slim margins.\nPost-Senate career.\nCareer and public service.\nFollowing his reelection defeat, Daschle took a position with the lobbying arm of the K\u00a0Street law firm Alston &amp; Bird. Because he was prohibited by law from lobbying for one year after leaving the Senate, he instead worked as a \"special policy adviser\" for the firm.\nAlston &amp; Bird's healthcare clients include CVS Caremark, the National Association for Home Care and Hospice, Abbott Laboratories, and HealthSouth. The firm was paid $5.8 million between January and September 2008 to represent companies and associations before Congress and the executive branch, with 60% of that money coming from the healthcare industry. Daschle was recruited by the former Republican Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole. Daschle's salary from Alston &amp; Bird for the year 2008 was reportedly $2 million.\nDaschle was also a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress. In addition, he served as National Co-Chair of ONE Vote '08, along with former senator Bill Frist. He and former senators George Mitchell, Bob Dole, and Howard Baker formed the Bipartisan Policy Center (BPC), dedicated to finding bipartisan solutions for policy disputes. Daschle is also a co-chair of BPC's Health Project.\nIn 2003, Daschle received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement presented by Awards Council member Senator Bill Frist.\nIn May 2005, South Dakota State University, Daschle's alma mater, conferred upon him an honorary doctorate for public service. In May 2011, Daschle was further honored with an honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters by Northern State University in his hometown of Aberdeen.\nIn late September 2005, Daschle caught the attention of the media by reactivating his political action committee, changing its name from DASHPAC to New Leadership for America PAC and procuring a speaking slot at the Iowa Democratic Party's annual Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner. He continued to keep a relatively high-profile among Democratic interest groups. These moves were interpreted by the media as an exploration of a potential 2008 Presidential candidacy. On December 2, 2006, he announced he would not run for president in 2008.\nIn an appearance on \"Meet the Press\" on February 12, 2006, Daschle endorsed a controversial warrantless surveillance program conducted by the National Security Agency (NSA), explaining that he had been briefed on the program while he was the Democratic leader in the Senate.\nIn addition, Senator Daschle is a member of the board of trustees for the Richard C. Blum Center for Developing Economies at the University of California, Berkeley. The center is focused on finding solutions to address the crisis of extreme poverty and disease in the developing world.\nDaschle is a Member of the Global Leadership Foundation, an organization which works to support democratic leadership, prevent and resolve conflict through mediation and promote good governance in the form of democratic institutions, open markets, human rights and the rule of law. It does so by making available, discreetly and in confidence, the experience of former leaders to today's national leaders. It is a not-for-profit organization composed of former heads of government, senior governmental and international organization officials who work closely with heads of Government on governance-related issues of concern to them.\nDaschle also served as vice chair of the board of directors of National Democratic Institute for International Affairs.\nDaschle is a member of the ReFormers Caucus of Issue One.\nDaschle is the co-chair of the national advisory board at the National Institute for Civil Discourse (NICD). The institute was created at the University of Arizona after the 2011 shooting of former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords that killed six people and wounded 13 others.\nIn 2019, Daschle was named to the advisory board of Northern Swan Holdings Inc., a cannabis investment firm. Daschle stated: \"I believe it is imperative to loosen the restrictions on cannabis so we can research its properties and fully understand how patients can benefit from its medicinal use.\" In 2020, Daschle endorsed Constitutional Amendment A, a ballot initiative to legalize cannabis for recreational use in South Dakota.\nIn 2021, Daschle co-wrote an op-ed for \"The Hill\" criticizing proposed cuts to pandemic preparedness programs, describing them as \"unthinkable\" in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nObama campaign.\nOn February 21, 2007, the Associated Press reported that Daschle, after ruling out a presidential bid of his own in December 2006, had thrown his support behind Senator Barack Obama of Illinois for the 2008 presidential election, saying that Obama \"personifies the future of Democratic leadership in our country.\"\nIn January 2005, having suggested that Obama take on some of his staffers, Daschle exited the Senate just as Obama entered. These included Daschle's outgoing chief-of-staff Pete Rouse who helped to create a two-year plan in the Senate that would fast-track Obama for the presidential nomination. Daschle himself told Obama in 2006 that \"windows of opportunity for running for the presidency close quickly. And that he should not assume, if he passes up this window, that there will be another.\"\nDuring the 2008 presidential campaign, Daschle served as a key advisor to Obama and one of the national co-chairs for Obama's campaign. On June 3, 2008, Obama lost to Hillary Clinton in the Democratic primary in Daschle's home state of South Dakota, although that night Obama clinched his party's nomination anyway.\nTwo days later, sources indicated Daschle \"is interested in universal health care and might relish serving as HHS secretary.\" In the general election campaign, Daschle continued to consult Obama, campaign for him across swing states, and advise his campaign organization until Obama was ultimately elected the 44th President of the United States on November 4, 2008.\nObama administration nomination.\nOn November 19, 2008, the press reported that Daschle had accepted Obama's offer to be nominated for Health and Human Services Secretary. His selection was announced at a news conference with Obama on December 11, 2008.\nSome organizations objected to Daschle's selection, arguing that his work at Alston &amp; Bird was tantamount to lobbying and therefore his selection violated Obama's promise to keep special interests out of the White House. According to Ellen Miller, executive director of the Sunlight Foundation, Daschle technically complies with the transition rules against lobbyists but \"many power brokers never register as lobbyists, but they are every bit as powerful.\" Stephanie Cutter, a spokeswoman for the Obama transition, responded that Daschle's work \"does not represent a bar to his service in the transition\" since \"he was not a lobbyist, and he will recuse himself from any work that presents a conflict of interest.\" Ron Pollack, executive director of Families USA, praised Daschle on his nomination to Secretary of Health and Human Services for his \"deep commitment to securing high-quality, affordable health care for everyone in our nation.\"\nWhen Daschle was officially nominated for his Cabinet position on January 20, 2009, confirmation by the Senate was required. The Senate Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions (HELP) Committee held a confirmation hearing for Daschle on January 8, 2009. A second Senate committee, the Finance Committee, also traditionally reviews HHS Secretary nominees; the committee discussed his nomination behind closed doors on February 2, 2009.\nWithdrawal.\nOn January 30, 2009, it was reported that Daschle's friendship and business partnership with businessman Leo Hindery could cause problems for Daschle's Senate confirmation. Daschle has been a paid consultant and advisor to Hindery's InterMedia Partners since 2005, during which time he received from Hindery access to a limousine and chauffeur. Daschle reportedly did not declare this service on his annual tax forms as required by law. A spokeswoman for Daschle said that he \"simply and probably naively\" considered the use of the car and driver \"a generous offer\" from Hindery, \"a longtime friend.\" Daschle told the Senate Finance Committee that in June 2008\u2014just as he was letting the press know he would like to be HHS secretary in an Obama administration\u2014that \"something made him think that the car service might be taxable\" and he began seeking to remedy the situation.\nDaschle reportedly also did not pay taxes on an additional $83,333 that he earned as a consultant to InterMedia Partners in 2007; this was discovered by Senator Daschle's accountant in December 2008. According to ABC News, Daschle also took tax deductions for $14,963 in donations that he made between 2005 and 2007 to charitable organizations that did not meet the requirements for being tax deductible.\nThe former senator paid the three years of owed taxes and interest\u2014an amount totaling $140,167\u2014in January 2009, but still reportedly owed \"Medicare taxes equal to 2.9 percent\" of the value of the car service he received, amounting to \"thousands of dollars in additional unpaid taxes.\"\nOn February 3, 2009, Daschle withdrew his nomination, saying that he did not wish to be a \"distraction\" to the Obama agenda.\nHealth policy.\nDaschle co-wrote the 2008 book \"Critical: What We Can Do About the Health-Care Crisis\" . He and his co-authors point out that \"most of the world's highest-ranking health-care systems employ some kind of 'single-payer' strategy \u2013 that is, the government, directly or through insurers, is responsible for paying doctors, hospitals, and other health-care providers.\" They argue that a single-payer approach is simple, equitable, provides everyone with the same benefits, and saves billions of dollars through economies of scale and simplified administration. They concede that implementing a single-payer system in the United States would be \"politically problematic\" even though some polls show more satisfaction with the single-payer Medicare system than private insurance.\nA key element of the single-payer plan that Daschle and his co-authors propose in the book is a new \"Federal Health Board\" that would establish the framework and fill in the details. The board would somehow be simultaneously \"insulated from political pressure\" and \"accountable to elected officials and the American people.\" The board would \"promote 'high-value' medical care by recommending coverage of those drugs and procedures backed by solid evidence.\" This proposal has been criticized by conservatives and libertarians who argue that such a board will lead to rationing of health care, and by progressives who believe the board will, as one writer put it, \"get defanged by lobbyists immediately.\"\nOne of Daschle's co-authors, Jeanne Lambrew, had been slated before his withdrawal to serve as his deputy in the White House Office of Health Reform.\nDaschle also served as a panelist on the Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense, a body that recommended changes to U.S. policy to strengthen national biodefense. In order to address biological threats facing the nation, the Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense created a 33 step initiative for the U.S. Government to implement. Headed by former senator Joe Lieberman and former governor Tom Ridge, the Study Panel assembled in Washington, D.C., for four meetings concerning current biodefense programs. The Study Panel concluded that the federal government had little to no defense mechanisms in case of a biological event. The Study Panel's final report, \"The National Blueprint for Biodefense\", proposes a string of solutions and recommendations for the U.S. Government to take, including items such as giving the vice president authority over biodefense responsibilities and merging the entire biodefense budget. These solutions represent the Panel's call to action in order to increase awareness and activity for pandemic related issues.\n9/11.\nDaschle claims he was asked by vice president Dick Cheney \"not to investigate\" the events of 9/11.\nHe told reporters, \"the vice president expressed the concern that a review of what happened on September 11 would take resources and personnel away from the effort in the war on terrorism. I acknowledged that concern, and it is for that reason that the Intelligence Committee is going to begin this effort, trying to limit the scope and the overall review of what happened. But clearly, I think the American people are entitled to know what happened and why.\"\nPersonal life.\nDaschle has been married to Linda Hall, who was Miss Kansas in 1976, since 1984, one year after his marriage to his first wife, Laurie, later-U.S. Ambassador to Denmark, ended in divorce.\nHall was acting administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration in the Clinton administration; she is now a Washington lobbyist. Her lobbying clients have included American Airlines, Lockheed Martin, and Boeing, Senate lobbying records show.\nTom Daschle has three children from his first marriage: Kelly, Nathan, and Lindsay. Nathan is the CEO of Ruck.us and former executive director of the Democratic Governors Association.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30932", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30932", "title": "Network throughput", "text": "Rate at which data is processed in communication networks\nNetwork throughput (or just throughput, when in context) refers to the rate of message delivery over a communication channel in a communication network, such as Ethernet or packet radio. The data that these messages contain may be delivered over physical or logical links, or through network nodes. Throughput is usually measured in bits per second (bit/s, sometimes abbreviated bps), and sometimes in packets per second (p/s or pps) or data packets per time slot.\nThe aggregate throughput is the sum of the data rates that are delivered over all channels in a network. Throughput represents digital bandwidth consumption.\nThe throughput of a communication system may be affected by various factors, including the limitations of the underlying physical medium, available processing power of the system components, end-user behavior, etc. When taking various protocol overheads into account, the useful rate of the data transfer can be significantly lower than the maximum achievable throughput; the useful part is usually referred to as goodput.\nMaximum throughput.\nUsers of telecommunications devices, systems designers, and researchers into communication theory are often interested in knowing the expected performance of a system. From a user perspective, this is often phrased as either \"which device will get my data there most effectively for my needs?\", or \"which device will deliver the most data per unit cost?\". Systems designers often select the most effective architecture or design constraints for a system, which drive its final performance. In most cases, the benchmark of what a system is capable of, or its \"maximum performance\" is what the user or designer is interested in. The term \"maximum throughput\" is frequently used when discussing end-user maximum throughput tests. Maximum throughput is essentially synonymous with digital bandwidth capacity.\nFour different values are relevant in the context of maximum throughput are used in comparing the \"upper limit\" conceptual performance of multiple systems. They are \"maximum theoretical throughput\", \"maximum achievable throughput\", \"peak measured throughput\", and \"maximum sustained throughput\". These values represent different qualities, and care must be taken that the same definitions are used when comparing different \"maximum throughput\" values. \nEach bit must carry the same amount of information if throughput values are to be compared. Data compression can significantly alter throughput calculations, including generating values exceeding 100% in some cases.\nIf the communication is mediated by several links in series with different bit rates, the maximum throughput of the overall link is lower than or equal to the lowest bit rate. The lowest value link in the series is referred to as the bottleneck.\nMaximum theoretical throughput.\nMaximum theoretical throughput is closely related to the channel capacity of the system, and is the maximum possible quantity of data that can be transmitted under ideal circumstances. In some cases, this number is reported as equal to the channel capacity, though this can be deceptive, as only non-packetized systems technologies can achieve this. Maximum theoretical throughput is more accurately reported taking into account format and specification overhead with best-case assumptions.\nAsymptotic throughput.\nThe asymptotic throughput (less formal asymptotic bandwidth) for a packet-mode communication network is the value of the maximum throughput function, when the incoming network load approaches infinity, either due to a message size, or the number of data sources. As with other bit rates and data bandwidths, the asymptotic throughput is measured in bits per second (bit/s) or (rarely) bytes per second (B/s), where 1 B/s is 8 bit/s. Decimal prefixes are used, meaning that 1 Mbit/s is 1000000 bit/s.\nAsymptotic throughput is usually estimated by sending or simulating a very large message (sequence of data packets) through the network, using a greedy source and no flow control mechanism (i.e., UDP rather than TCP), and measuring the volume of data received at the destination node. Traffic load between other sources may reduce this maximum network path throughput. Alternatively, a large number of sources and sinks may be modeled, with or without flow control, and the aggregate maximum network throughput measured (the sum of traffic reaching its destinations). In a network simulation model with infinitately large packet queues, the asymptotic throughput occurs when the latency (the packet queuing time) goes to infinity, while if the packet queues are limited, or the network is a multi-drop network with many sources, and collisions may occur, the packet-dropping rate approaches 100%.\nA well-known application of asymptotic throughput is in modeling point-to-point communication where message latency formula_1 is modeled as a function of message length formula_2 as formula_3 where formula_4 is the asymptotic bandwidth and formula_5 is the half-peak length.\nAs well as its use in general network modeling, asymptotic throughput is used in modeling performance on massively parallel computer systems, where system operation is highly dependent on communication overhead, as well as processor performance. In these applications, asymptotic throughput is used modeling which includes the number of processors, so that both the latency and the asymptotic throughput are functions of the number of processors.\nPeak measured throughput.\nWhere asymptotic throughput is a theoretical or calculated capacity, \"peak measured throughput\" is throughput measured on a real implemented system, or on a simulated system. The value is the throughput measured over a short period of time; mathematically, this is the limit taken with respect to throughput as time approaches zero. This term is synonymous with \"instantaneous throughput\". This number is useful for systems that rely on burst data transmission; however, for systems with a high duty cycle, this is less likely to be a useful measure of system performance.\nMaximum sustained throughput.\nMaximum sustained throughput is the throughput averaged or integrated over a long time. For networks under constant load, this is likely to be the most accurate indicator of system performance. The maximum throughput is defined as the asymptotic throughput when the load is large. In packet-switched networks while packet loss is not occurring, the load and the throughput always are equal. The maximum throughput may be defined as the minimum load in bit/s that causes packet loss or causes the latency to become unstable and increase towards infinity.\nChannel utilization and efficiency.\nThroughput is sometimes normalized and measured in percentage, but normalization may cause confusion regarding what the percentage is related to. \"Channel utilization\", \"channel efficiency\" and \"packet drop rate\" in percentage are less ambiguous terms.\nThe channel efficiency, also known as bandwidth utilization efficiency, is the percentage of the net bit rate (in bit/s) of a digital communication channel that goes to the achieved throughput. For example, if the throughput is 70 Mbit/s over a 100 Mbit/s Ethernet connection, the channel efficiency is 70%.\nChannel utilization includes both the data bits and the transmission overhead in the channel. The transmission overhead consists of preamble sequences, frame headers and acknowledgment packets. In a simplistic approach, channel efficiency can be equal to channel utilization assuming that acknowledge packets are zero-length and that the communications provider will not see any bandwidth relative to retransmissions or headers. Therefore, certain texts mark a difference between channel utilization and protocol efficiency.\nIn a point-to-point or point-to-multipoint communication link, where only one terminal is transmitting, the maximum throughput is often equivalent to or very near the physical data rate (the channel capacity), since the channel utilization can be almost 100% in such a network, except for a small inter-frame gap.\nFor example, the maximum frame size in Ethernet is 1526 bytes: up to 1500 bytes for the payload, eight bytes for the preamble, 14 bytes for the header, and 4 bytes for the trailer. An additional minimum interframe gap corresponding to 12 bytes is inserted after each frame. This corresponds to a maximum channel utilization of 1526\u00a0/ (1526\u00a0+ 12)\u00a0\u00d7 100%\u00a0= 99.22%, or a maximum channel use of 99.22 Mbit/s inclusive of Ethernet datalink layer protocol overhead over a 100 Mbit/s Ethernet connection. The maximum throughput or channel efficiency is then 1500\u00a0/ (1526\u00a0+ 12)\u00a0= 97.5%, exclusive of the Ethernet protocol overhead.\nFactors affecting throughput.\nThe throughput of a communication system will be limited by a number of factors. Some of these are described below.\nAnalog limitations.\nThe maximum achievable throughput (the channel capacity) is affected by the bandwidth in hertz and signal-to-noise ratio of the analog physical medium. Limited current drive capability in communications equipment can limit the effective signal-to-noise ratio for high capacitance links.\nDespite the conceptual simplicity of digital information, all electrical signals traveling over wires are analog. The analog limitations of wires or wireless systems inevitably provide an upper bound on the amount of information that can be sent. The dominant equation here is the Shannon\u2013Hartley theorem, and analog limitations of this type can be understood as factors that affect either the analog bandwidth of a signal or as factors that affect the signal-to-noise ratio. The bandwidth of twisted pair cabling used by Ethernet is limited to approximately 1\u00a0GHz, and PCB traces are limited by a similar amount.\nDigital systems refer to the \"knee frequency\", the amount of time for the digital voltage to rise from 10% of a nominal digital 0 to a nominal digital 1 or vice versa. The knee frequency is related to the bandwidth of a channel, and can be related to the 3 db bandwidth of a system by the equation: formula_6\nWhere Tr is the 10% to 90% rise time, and K is a constant of proportionality related to the pulse shape, equal to 0.35 for an exponential rise, and 0.338 for a Gaussian rise.\nOther analog factors include:\nHardware and protocol considerations.\nLarge data loads that require processing impose data processing requirements on hardware. For example, a gateway router must examine and perform routing table lookups on billions of packets per second.\nCSMA/CD and CSMA/CA backoff waiting time and frame retransmissions after detected collisions slows transmissions. This may occur in Ethernet bus networks and hub networks, as well as in wireless networks.\nFlow control, for example, in the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) protocol, affects the throughput if the bandwidth-delay product is larger than the TCP window. In that case, the sending computer must wait for acknowledgement of the data packets before it can send more packets.\nTCP congestion avoidance controls the data rate. A so-called \"slow start\" occurs in the beginning of a file transfer, and after packet drops caused by router congestion or bit errors in, for example, wireless links.\nMulti-user considerations.\nEnsuring that multiple users can harmoniously share a single communications link requires some kind of equitable sharing of the link. If a communication link offering data rate \"R\" is shared by \"N\" active users, ideally, every user can typically achieve a throughput of approximately \"R/N\".\nNetwork schedulers in routers and switches ultimately determine how bandwidth is shared. If fair queuing is not provided, users that send large packets will get higher bandwidth. Some users may be prioritized in a weighted fair queuing (WFQ) algorithm if differentiated or guaranteed quality of service (QoS) is provided.\nIn some communications systems, such as satellite networks, only a finite number of channels may be available to a given user at a given time. Channels are assigned either through preassignment or through Demand Assigned Multiple Access (DAMA). In these cases, throughput is quantized per channel, and unused capacity on partially utilized channels is lost.\nGoodput and overhead.\nThe maximum throughput is often an unreliable measurement of perceived bandwidth, for example the file transmission data rate in bits per seconds. As pointed out above, the achieved throughput is often lower than the maximum throughput. Also, the protocol overhead affects the perceived bandwidth. The throughput is not a well-defined metric when it comes to how to deal with protocol overhead. It is typically measured at a reference point below the network layer and above the physical layer. The simplest definition is the number of bits per second that are physically delivered. A typical example where this definition is practiced is an Ethernet network. In this case, the maximum throughput is the gross bit rate or raw bit rate.\nHowever, in schemes that include forward error correction codes (channel coding), the redundant error code is normally excluded from the throughput. An example in modem communication, where the throughput typically is measured in the interface between the Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) and the circuit-switched modem connection. In this case, the maximum throughput is often called net bit rate or useful bit rate.\nTo determine the actual data rate of a network or connection, the \"goodput\" measurement definition may be used. For example, in file transmission, the \"goodput\" corresponds to the file size (in bits) divided by the file transmission time. The \"goodput\" is the amount of useful information that is delivered per second to the application layer protocol. Dropped packets or packet retransmissions, as well as protocol overhead, are excluded. Because of that, the \"goodput\" is lower than the throughput. Technical factors that affect the difference are presented in the \"goodput\" article.\nOther uses of throughput for data.\nIntegrated circuits.\nOften, a block in a data flow diagram has a single input and a single output, and operate on discrete packets of information. Examples of such blocks are fast Fourier transform modules or binary multipliers. Because the units of throughput are the reciprocal of the unit for propagation delay, which is 'seconds per message' or 'seconds per output', throughput can be used to relate a computational device performing a dedicated function such as an ASIC or embedded processor to a communications channel, simplifying system analysis.\nWireless and cellular networks.\nIn wireless networks or cellular systems, the system spectral efficiency in bit/s/Hz/area unit, bit/s/Hz/site or bit/s/Hz/cell, is the maximum aggregate throughput divided by the analog bandwidth and some measure of the system coverage area.\nOver analog channels.\nThroughput over analog channels is defined entirely by the modulation scheme, the signal-to-noise ratio, and the available bandwidth. Since throughput is normally defined in terms of quantified digital data, the term 'throughput' is not normally used; the term 'bandwidth' is more often used instead.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30933", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30933", "title": "TCA", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTCA may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30934", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30934", "title": "Tricarboxylic acid cycle", "text": ""}
{"id": "30935", "revid": "383280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30935", "title": "Trekker", "text": "Trekker may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30936", "revid": "19616463", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30936", "title": "TiVo", "text": "Series of digital video recorders\nTiVo ( ) is a discontinued line of digital video recorders (DVR) developed and marketed by Xperi (previously by TiVo Corporation and TiVo Inc.) and introduced in 1999. TiVo provides an on-screen guide of scheduled broadcast programming television programs, whose features include \"OnePass\" schedules which record every new episode of a series, and wishlist searches which allow the user to find and record shows that match their interests by title, actor, director, category, or keyword. TiVo also provides a range of features when the TiVo DVR is connected to a home network, including film and TV show downloads, advanced search, online scheduling, and at one time, personal photo viewing and local music playback.\nAfter its launch in its home market of the United States, TiVo units were also sold in Australia, Canada, Mexico, New Zealand, Puerto Rico, Sweden, Taiwan, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Later models adopted the CableCARD standard, which is only deployed in the United States, and which limits the availability of certain features. TiVo discontinued its DVR hardware products in October 2025.\nHistory.\nTiVo was developed by Jim Barton and Mike Ramsay through a corporation they named \"Teleworld\" which was later renamed to TiVo Inc. Though they originally intended to create a home network device, it was redesigned as a device that records digitized video onto a hard disk.\nAfter exhibiting at the Consumer Electronics Show in January 1997, Mike Ramsay announced to the company that the first version of the TiVo digital video recorder would be released \"in Q1\" (the last day of which is March 31) despite an estimated 4 to 5 months of work remaining to complete the device. Because March 31, 1999, was a blue moon, the engineering staff code-named this first version of the TiVo DVR \"Blue Moon\".\nThe original TiVo DVR digitized and compressed analog video from any source (antenna, cable or direct broadcast satellite). TiVo also integrated its DVR service into the set-top boxes of satellite and cable providers. In late 2000, Philips Electronics introduced the DSR6000, the first DirecTV receiver with an integrated TiVo DVR. This new device, nicknamed the \"DirecTiVo\", stored digital signals sent from DirecTV directly onto a hard disk.\nIn early 2000, TiVo partnered with electronics manufacturer Thomson Multimedia (now Technicolor SA) and broadcaster British Sky Broadcasting to deliver the TiVo service in the UK market. This partnership resulted in the Thomson PVR10UK, a stand-alone receiver released in October 2000 that was based on the original reference design used in the United States by both Philips and Sony. TiVo ended UK unit sales in January 2003, though it continued to sell subscriptions and supply guide data to existing subscribed units until June 2011. TiVo branded products returned to the UK during 2010 under an exclusive partnership with cable TV provider Virgin Media.\nTiVo was launched in Australia in July 2008 by Hybrid Television Services, a company owned by Australia's Seven Media Group and New Zealand's TVNZ. TiVo Australia also launched a TiVo with a 320Gb hard Drive in 2009. TiVo Australia also launched Blockbuster on demand and in December 2009 launched a novel service called Caspa on Demand. TiVo also went on sale in New Zealand on 6 November 2009.\nJanet Jackson's Super Bowl halftime show incident on February 1, 2004, set a record for being the most watched, recorded and replayed moment in TiVo history. The baring of one of Jackson's breasts at the end of her duet with Justin Timberlake, which caused a flood of outraged phone calls to CBS, was replayed a record number of times by TiVo users. A company representative stated, \"The audience measurement guys have never seen anything like it. The audience reaction charts looked like an electrocardiogram.\"\nIn April 2016, Rovi acquired TiVo for $1.1 billion.\nIn December 2019, it was announced that TiVo would merge with Xperi Corporation. The merger completed in May 2020.\nIn early February 2024, TiVo removed the antenna version of the TiVo Edge from their website, apparently discontinuing their OTA line of DVRs. The cable version of the TiVo Edge as well as the TiVo Mini LUX and TiVo Stream 4K continued to be available.\nThe TiVo Mini LUX went permanently out of stock in June/July 2025. It has yet to be clarified when the TiVo Stream 4K was discontinued. The TiVo Edge DVR for Cable, along with all remaining hardware accessories, were removed from sale on TiVo's website in late September/early October 2025, and sales of annual and lifetime service subscriptions were discontinued, leaving monthly subscriptions as the only remaining service option for TiVo Roamio, TiVo BOLT, and TiVo Edge boxes that do not already have active service plans. \"Variety\" reported that TiVo had exited the hardware manufacturing business on October 1, 2025, and that remaining inventory had been depleted.\nService.\nA TiVo DVR serves a function similar to that of a videocassette recorder (VCR), in that both allow a TV viewer to record programming for viewing at a later time, known as time shifting. Unlike a videocassette recorder, which uses removable magnetic tape cartridges, a TiVo DVR stores TV programs on an internal hard drive, much like a computer.\nA TiVo DVR also automatically records programs that the user is likely to be interested in. TiVo DVRs also implement a patented feature that TiVo calls \"trick play\", allowing the viewer to pause live television and rewind and replay up to 30 minutes of recently viewed TV. TiVo DVRs can be connected to a computer local area network, allowing the TiVo device to download information, access video streaming services such as Netflix or Hulu, as well as music from the Internet.\nFunctions.\nTiVo DVRs communicate with TiVo's servers on a regular basis to receive program information updates, including description, regular and guest actors, directors, genres, whether programs are new or repeats, and whether broadcast is in High Definition (HD). Information is updated daily into its program guide from Rovi (Tribune Media Services was used prior to September 2016).\nUsers can select individual programs to record or a \"OnePass\" (formerly \"Season Pass\") to record all episodes of a show. There are options to record First Run Only, First Run and Repeats, or All Episodes. An episode is considered \"First Run\" if aired within two weeks of that episode's initial air date. OnePasses can also \"bookmark\" shows from internet streaming video services and show a combined view of recordings and bookmarks.\nWhen users' requests for multiple programs are conflicting, the lower priority program in the OnePass Manager is either not recorded or clipped where times overlap. The lower priority program will be recorded if it is aired later. TiVo DVRs with multiple tuners simultaneously record the top priority programs.\nTiVo pioneered recording programs based on household viewing habits; this is called TiVo Suggestions. Users can rate programs from three \"thumbs up\" to three \"thumbs down\". TiVo user ratings are combined to create a recommendation, based on what TiVo users with similar viewing habits watch. For example, if one user likes \"American Idol\", \"America's Got Talent\" and \"Dancing with the Stars\", then another TiVo user who watched just \"American Idol\" might get a recommendation for the other two shows. As of 2023, TiVo Suggestions are no longer supported. The Thumbs Up/Down buttons can no longer be used to rate programs.\nThe amount of storage capacity for programs is dependent upon the size of the hard drive inside the TiVo; different models have different sized hard drives. When the space is full on the hard drive, the oldest programs are deleted to make space for the newer ones; programs that users flag to not be deleted are kept and TiVo Suggestions are always lowest priority. The recording capacity of a TiVo HD DVR can be expanded with an external hard drive, which can add additional hours of HD recording space and standard definition video recording capacity.\nWhen not recording specific user requests, the current channel is recorded for up to 30 minutes. Dual-tuner models record two channels. This allows users to rewind or pause anything that has been shown in the last thirty minutes\u00a0\u2014 useful when viewing is interrupted. Shows already in progress can be entirely recorded if less than 30 minutes have been shown. Unlike VCRs, TiVo can record and play at the same time. A program can be watched from the beginning even if it is in the middle of being recorded, which is something that VCRs cannot do. Some users take advantage of this by waiting 10 to 15 minutes after a program starts (or is replayed from a recording), so that they can fast forward through commercials. In this way, by the end of the recording viewers are caught up with live television.\nUnlike most DVRs, TiVo DVRs are easily connected to home networks, allowing users to schedule recordings on TiVo's website (via TiVo Central Online), and transfer recordings between TiVo units (Multi-Room Viewing (MRV)). Former and now discontinued features included the ability transfer recordings to and from a home computer (TiVoToGo (TTG) transfers), play music and view photos over the network, and access third-party applications written for TiVo's Home Media Engine (HME) API.\nTiVo added a number of broadband features, most of which are no longer offered. These include:\nIntegration with Amazon Video on Demand, Jaman.com and Netflix Watch Instantly, offering users access to thousands of movie titles and television shows right from the comfort of their couch. Additionally, broadband connected to TiVo boxes can access digital photos from Picasa Web Albums or Photobucket. Another popular feature is access to Rhapsody music through TiVo, allowing users to listen to virtually any song from their living room. TiVo also teamed up with One True Media to give subscribers a private channel for sharing photos and video with family and friends. They can also access weather, traffic, Fandango movie listings (including ticket purchases), and music through Live365. In the summer of 2008 TiVo announced the availability of YouTube videos on TiVo.\nOn June 7, 2006, TiVo began offering TiVoCast, a broadband download service that initially offered content from places such as Rocketboom or, The New York Times; now there are over 70 TivoCast channels available for TiVo subscribers.\nIn January 2005, TiVoToGo, a feature allowing transfer of recorded shows from TiVo boxes to PCs, was added. TiVo partnered with Sonic in the release of MyDVD 6.1, software for editing and converting TiVoToGo files. In January, 2007, TiVoToGo was extended to the Macintosh with Toast Titanium 8, Roxio software for assembly and burning digital media on CD and DVD media. In August, 2005, TiVo rolled out \"TiVo Desktop\" allowing the copying of MPEG2 video files from PCs to TiVo for playback by DVR. As of June 5, 2013, TiVo stopped distributing the free version of TiVo Desktop for PC in favor of selling TiVo Desktop Plus. Users who previously downloaded the free version of TiVo Desktop could continue to use the software without paying a fee for the Plus edition.\nTiVo KidZone (later removed in the Premiere and Roamio devices) was designed to give parents greater control over what their children see on television. This feature allows parents to choose which shows their children can watch and record. It also helps kids discover new shows through recommendations from leading national children's organizations. TiVo KidZone provides a customized Now Playing List for children that displays only pre-approved shows, keeping television as safe as possible.\nSubscription service.\nThe information that a TiVo DVR downloads regarding television schedules, as well as software updates and any other relevant information is available through a monthly service subscription in the United States. A different model applies in Australia, where the TiVo media device is bought for a one-off fee, without further subscription costs.\nThere are multiple types of Product Lifetime Service. For satellite-enabled TiVo DVRs, the lifetime subscription remains as long as the account is active; the subscription does not follow a specific piece of hardware. This satellite lifetime subscription cannot be transferred to another person. Toshiba and Pioneer TiVo DVD recording equipped units include a \"Basic Lifetime Subscription\", which is very similar to Full Lifetime, except only three days of the program guide are viewable; and search and Internet capabilities are not available, or at least are limited. All units (except satellite but including DVD units) can have \"Product Lifetime Subscription\" added to the TiVo service, which covers the life of the TiVo DVR, not the life of the subscriber. The Product Lifetime Subscription accompanies the TiVo DVR in case of ownership-transfer. TiVo makes no warranties or representations as to the expected lifetime of the TiVo DVR (aside from the manufacturer's Limited Warranty). In the past TiVo has offered multiple \"Trade Up\" programs where you could transfer the Product Lifetime Subscription from an old unit to a newer model with a fee. A TiVo can be used without a service-agreement, but it will act more like a VCR in that you can only perform manual recordings and the TiVo can't be connected to the TiVo service for local time, program guide data, software updates, etc. or TiVo will shut down the recording function.\nInternational operations.\nThe TiVo service is available in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Mexico, Spain and Taiwan at present. Over the years since its initial release in the United States, TiVo Series1 and Series2 DVRs have also been modified by end users to work in Australia, Brazil, Canada, New Zealand, the Netherlands, and South Africa.\nTiVo went on sale in New Zealand in the first week of November 2009.\nThe TiVo Service came to an end in Australia on 31 October 2017. The electronic programming guide and TiVo recording features are no longer available, thus making all TiVo machines in Australia virtually useless.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe TiVo service was launched in the United Kingdom in the autumn of 2000. It sold only 35,000 units over the next 18 months. Thomson, makers of the only UK TiVo box, abandoned it in early 2002 after BSkyB launched its Sky+ integrated \"set-top\" decoder and DVR, which dominated the market for DVRs in homes subscribing to BSkyB's paid-for satellite television service. Many manufacturers, including Thomson have launched integrated decoder boxes/DVRs in the UK for other digital platforms, including free satellite, terrestrial, cable and IPTV.\nA technical issue caused TiVo Suggestions to stop recording for S1 UK TiVo customers in late September 2008, but this was fixed in late January 2009.\nSince December 2010, UK TiVo units that were not already on an active monthly subscription or lifetime subscription could no longer be re-activated. BSkyB who were operating the support for TiVo no longer had full access to the TiVo systems to activate accounts.\nThe TiVo S1 subscription service was maintained for both lifetime and monthly subscriptions until 1 June 2011. A community project known as AltEPG was established in March 2011 with the aim of providing a replacement for the discontinued subscription service. This project now provides programme guide data and software upgrades for S1 TiVos.\nOn 24 November 2009, cable television provider Virgin Media entered into a strategic partnership with TiVo. Under the mutually exclusive agreement, TiVo developed a converged television and broadband interactive interface to power Virgin Media's next generation, high definition set top boxes. TiVo will become the exclusive provider of middleware and user interface software for Virgin Media's next generation set top boxes. Virgin Media will be the exclusive distributor of TiVo services and technology in the United Kingdom. Virgin Media released its first TiVo co-branded product in December 2010. On 17 March 2011, Virgin Media enabled access to a third tuner.\nAs of 12 February 2015, Virgin Media has 2 million TiVo customers, 50% of their TV customers.\nIn November 2020, Virgin Media launched Virgin TV 360, beginning to move away from TiVo.\nFrom July 2025, Virgin Media offered customers a free over-the-air software update from TiVo to Virgin TV 360, and announced that certain services would no longer function on TiVo, such as BBC iPlayer.\nHardware.\nThe TiVo DVR was designed by TiVo Inc., which currently provides the hardware design and Linux-based TiVo software, and operates a subscription service (without which most models of TiVo will not operate). TiVo units have been manufactured by various OEMs, including Philips, Sony, Cisco, Hughes, Pioneer, Toshiba, and Humax, which license the software from TiVo Inc. To date, there have been six \"series\" of TiVo units produced.\nTiVo DVRs are based on PowerPC (Series1) or MIPS (Series2) processors connected to MPEG-2 encoder/decoder chips and high-capacity IDE/ATA hard drives. Series1 TiVo units used one or two drives of 13\u201360 GB; Series2 units have drives of 40\u2013250 GB in size. TiVo has also partnered with Western Digital to create an external hard drive, the My DVR Expander, for TiVo HD and Series3 Boxes. It plugs into the TiVo box using an eSATA interface. It expands the High-Definition boxes by up to 67 hours of HD, and around 300 hours of standard programming. Other TiVo users have found many ways to expand TiVo storage, although these methods are not supported by TiVo, and may void the warranty.\nSome recent models manufactured by Toshiba, Pioneer, and Humax, under license from TiVo, contain DVD-R/RW drives. The models can transfer recordings from the built-in hard drive to DVD Video compliant disc, playable in most modern DVD systems.\nMost standalone TiVo DVRs have coax/RF-in and an internal cable-ready tuner, as well as analog video input\u00a0\u2014 composite/RCA and S-Video, for use with an external cable box or satellite receiver. The TiVo unit can use a serial cable or infrared blasters to control the external receiver. They have coax/RF, composite/RCA, and S-Video output (newer models have HDMI output for video and audio), and the DVD systems also have component out. Audio is RCA stereo, and the DVD systems also have digital optical out.\nUntil 2006, standalone TiVo systems could only record one channel at a time, though a dual-tuner Series2DT (S2DT) box was introduced in April 2006. The S2DT has two internal cable-ready tuners and it supports a single external cable box or satellite receiver. The S2DT is therefore capable of recording two analog cable channels, one analog and one digital cable channel, or one analog cable and one satellite channel at a time, with the correct programming sources. Note, however, that the S2DT, unlike earlier units, cannot record from an antenna. This is due to an FCC mandate that all devices sold after March 2007 with an NTSC tuner must also contain an ATSC tuner. TiVo therefore had to choose between adding ATSC support, or removing NTSC support. With the S2DT they opted to remove NTSC; the Series3 supports NTSC and ATSC, along with digital cable channels (with CableCards).\nThe Series2 DVRs also have USB ports, currently used only to support network (wired Ethernet and WiFi) adapters. The early Series2 units, models starting with 110/130/140, have USB1.1 hardware, while all other systems have USB2.0. There have been four major generations of Series2 units. The TiVo-branded 1xx and 2xx generations were solid grey-black. The main difference was the upgrade from USB\u00a01.1 to the much faster USB\u00a02.0. The 5xx generation was a new design. The chassis is silver with a white oval in the faceplate. The white oval is backlit, leading to these units being called \"Nightlight\" boxes. The 5xx generation was designed to reduce costs, and this also caused a noticeable drop in performance in the system menus as well as a large performance drop in network transfers. The 5xx generation also introduced changes in the boot PROM that make them unmodifiable without extensive wiring changes. The 6xx generation resembles the previous 5xx model, except that it has a black oval. The 6xx is a new design and the only model available today is the S2DT with dual tuners and a built-in 10/100baseT Ethernet port as well. The 6xx is the best performing Series2 to date, outperforming even the old leader, the 2xx, and far better than the lowest performing 5xx.\nSome TiVo systems are integrated with DirecTV receivers. These \"DirecTiVo\" recorders record the incoming satellite MPEG-2 digital stream directly to hard disk without conversion. Because of this and the fact that they have two tuners, DirecTiVos are able to record two programs at once. In addition, the lack of digital conversion allows recorded video to be of the same quality as live video. DirecTiVos have no MPEG encoder chip, and can only record DirecTV streams. However, DirecTV has disabled the networking capabilities on their systems, meaning DirecTiVo does not offer such features as multi-room viewing or TiVoToGo. Only the standalone systems can be networked without additional unsupported hacking.\nDirecTiVo units (HR10-250) can record HDTV to a 250 GB hard drive, both from the DirecTV stream and over-the-air via a standard UHF- or VHF-capable antenna. They have two virtual tuners (each consisting of a DirecTV tuner paired with an ATSC over-the-air tuner) and, like the original DirecTiVo, can record two programs at once; further, the program guide is integrated between over-the-air and DirecTV so that all programs can be recorded and viewed in the same manner.\nIn 2005, DirecTV stopped marketing recorders powered by TiVo and focused on its own DVR line developed by its business units. DirecTV continues to support the existing base of DirecTV recorders powered by TiVo.\nOn 8 July 2006, DirecTV announced an upgrade to version 6.3 on all remaining HR10-250 DirecTiVo receivers, the first major upgrade since this unit was released. This upgrade includes features like program grouping (folders), a much faster on-screen guide, and new sorting features.\nIn September 2008, DirecTV and TiVo announced that they have extended their current agreement, which includes the development, marketing and distribution of a new HD DIRECTV DVR featuring the TiVo service, as well as the extension of mutual intellectual property arrangements.\nSince the discontinued Hughes Electronics DirecTV DVR with TiVo model HR10-250, all TiVo units have been fully HDTV capable. Other TiVo models will only record analog standard definition television (NTSC or PAL/SECAM). The Series3 \"TiVo HD, and TiVo HD XL\" DVRs and the Series4 \"TiVo Premiere and TiVo Premiere XL\" DVRs are capable of recording HDTV both from antenna (over the air) and cable (unencrypted QAM tuner or encrypted with a Cable Card) in addition to normal standard definition television from the same sources. Unlike the HR10-250, neither the Series3 nor Series4 units can record from the DirecTV service; conversely, the HR10-250 cannot record from digital cable. Other TiVo models may be connected to a high definition television (HDTV), but are not capable of recording HDTV signals, although they may be connected to a cable HDTV set-top box and record the down-converted outputs.\nIn 2008, some cable companies started to deploy switched digital video (SDV) technology, which initially was incompatible with the Series3 and TiVo HD units. TiVo Inc worked with cable operators on a tuning-adapter with USB connection to the TiVo to enable SDV. Some MSOs now offer these adapters for free to their customers with TiVo DVRs.\nDrive expansion.\nTiVo has partnered with Western Digital to create an external hard drive, the My DVR Expander eSATA Edition, for TiVo HD and Series3 systems. The external drive plugs into the TiVo box using an eSATA interface. The first version of the eSATA drive shipped was a 500 GB drive that shipped in June 2008. In June 2009 the 1 TB version of the drive began shipping. The 1 TB version expands the TiVo HD and Series3 systems' capacity by up to 140 hours of HD content or 1,200 hours of standard programming.\nTiVo was not designed to have an external drive disconnected once it has been added, because data for each recording is spread across both the internal and external disk drives. As a result, it is not possible to disconnect the external drive without deleting content recorded after the external drive was added. If disconnected, any recordings made will not be usable on either the internal or external drives. However, the external drive may be removed (along with content) without losing settings.\nVarious capacities of external drives have been shipped since the product was initially released. There were reports of product reliability issues, and a brief period of unavailability.\nThe Western Digital 1 TB and 500 GB My DVR Expander eSATA Edition and My DVR Expander USB Edition drives have been discontinued and replaced with the Western Digital My Book AV DVR Expander 1 TB drive. This drive has received a facelift from the previous generation, which now sports a glossy finish, and a tiny white LED power indicator, along with a push button power switch in the back. The biggest change is that this drive now includes both eSATA and USB in one device. This device is DirectTV, Dish Network, TiVo, Moxi, Pace, and Scientific Atlanta (Cisco) certified. Seagate has come out with their own DVR-oriented drive called the Seagate GoFlex DVR which comes in a 1 TB and 2 TB capacity. TiVo has not approved the Seagate product for use with TiVo DVRs and they will not currently function with any TiVo products.\nHacking.\nUsers have installed additional or larger hard drives in their TiVo boxes to increase their recording capacity. Others have designed and built Ethernet cards and a Web interface (TiVoWeb), and figured out how to extract, insert and transfer video among their TiVo boxes. Other hacks include adding time to the start and end of recording intelligently and sending daily e-mails of the TiVo's activity.\nTiVo still uses the same encoding, however, for the media files (saved as .TiVo files). These are MPEG files encoded with the user's Media Access Key (MAK). However, software developers have written programs such as tivodecode and tivodecode Manager to strip the MAK from the file, allowing the user to watch or send the recordings to friends.\nTiVo in the cloud.\nOn January 4, 2018, TiVo announced its next-gen platform, a catch-all product for providers like cable companies. It's available for multiple TV devices, including not only Linux- and Android TV-based set-top boxes and traditional DVRs, but also DVR-free streaming devices like Apple TV and Amazon's Fire TV, as well as phones, tablets and PCs. The platform allows providers to take advantage of TiVo's user interface, voice control, personalization and recommendations. TiVo expects its user interface could provide an advantage over competitors such as Netflix, Hulu, and Amazon Video \"in a world where cord-cutting is increasingly popular.\"\nIn the 2020s, Internet service providers such as TDS and Astound started using set-top boxes with TiVo user interfaces to provide TV and cloud DVR service to their customers. These devices can also run apps for streaming services such as Netflix and Prime Video.\nCompetitors and market share.\nWhile its former main competitor in the United States, ReplayTV, had adopted a commercial-skip feature, TiVo decided to avoid automatic implementation fearing such a move might provoke backlash from the television industry. ReplayTV was sued over this feature as well as the ability to share shows over the Internet, and these lawsuits contributed to the bankruptcy of SONICblue, its owner at the time. Its new owner, DNNA, dropped both features in the final ReplayTV model, the 5500.\nAfter demonstrating the WebTV capability at the same 1999 CES with TiVo and ReplayTV demonstrating their products, Dish (then named Dish Network) a few months later added DVR functionality to their DishPlayer 7100 (and later its 7200) with its Echostar unit producing the hardware while Microsoft provided the software that included WebTV, the same software Microsoft would later use for its UltimateTV DVR for DirecTV. The TiVo, ReplayTV, and DishPlayer 7100 represent very first DVRs that were in development at the same time and were released to market at about the same time.\nSONICblue, the owners of ReplayTV would file for bankruptcy after being sued for its ability to automatically skip commercials and other features that were thought to violate copyrights; Echostar (Dish) would eventually sue Microsoft in 2001 for failing to support the software in DishPlayer 7100 and 7200 with Dish ending their relationship with Microsoft and cease offering the DishPlayer 7100/7200 to its subscribers and, instead, produce their own in-house DVR; and DirecTV would eventually drop Microsoft's UltimateTV and keep DirecTiVo as its only DVR offering for quite some time.\nOther distributors' competing DVR sets in the United States include Comcast and Verizon, although both distribute third-party hardware from manufacturers such as Motorola and the former Scientific Atlanta unit of Cisco Systems with this functionality built-in. Verizon uses boxes fitted for FiOS, allowing high-speed Internet access and other features. However, TiVo is compatible with the FiOS TV service because when the TV programming arrives at the home via FiOS Fiber to the Home network, it is converted to CableLabs specification QAM channels exactly as those used by cable TV companies. AT&amp;T is an IPTV service that is incompatible with the TiVo.\nDespite having gained 234,000 subscribers in the last quarter of 2011, as of January 2012 TiVo had only (approximately) 2.3 million subscribers in the United States. This is down from a peak of 4.36 million in January 2006. As of January 31, 2016, TiVo reported 6.8 million subscribers.\nIssues.\nPrivacy concerns.\nTiVo collects detailed usage data from units via broadband Internet. As units are downloading schedule data, they transmit household viewing habits to TiVo Inc. Collected information includes a log of everything watched (time and channel) and remote keypresses such as fast forwarding through or replaying content. Many users were surprised when TiVo released data on how many users rewatched the exposure of Janet Jackson's breast during the 2004 Super Bowl. TiVo records usage data for their own research and they also sell it to other corporations such as advertisers. Nielsen and TiVo have also previously collaborated to track viewing habits. This data is sold to advertising agencies as a way of documenting the number of viewers watching specific commercials to their corporate clients.\nTiVo has three levels of data collection. By default, the user is in \"opt-out\" status, where all usage data is aggregated by ZIP Code, and individual viewing habits are not tracked. Certain optional features and promotions require the user to opt in, and individual information is then collected for targeted show suggestions or advertising. Users can request that TiVo block the collection of anonymous viewing information and diagnostic information from their TiVo DVR.\nLitigation.\nTiVo holds several patents regarding digital video recorder technology, including one for its \"Time Warp\" feature, which have been asserted against cable TV operators and competing DVR box makers.\nOpposition by content providers.\nContent flagging.\nIn September 2005, a TiVo software upgrade added the ability for broadcasters to \"flag\" programs to be deleted after a certain date. Some customers had recordings deleted, or could not use their flagged recordings (transfer to a computer or burn to DVD), as they could with unflagged material. The initial showing of this for random shows was a bug in the software. It later was enabled on pay-per-view and video-on-demand content.\nPop-up advertisements.\nDuring early 2005, TiVo began test marketing \"pop-up\" advertisements to select subscribers, to explore it as an alternative source of revenue. The idea was that as users fast-forward through certain commercials of TiVo advertisers, they would also see a static image ad more suitable and effective than the broken video stream.\nAt its announcement, the concept of extra advertisements drew heavy criticism from subscribers. Some lifetime subscribers were upset that they had already paid for a service based upon their previous ad-free experience, while others argued that they had purchased the service for the specific purpose of dodging advertisements. In 2007, TiVo made changes to its pop-up ad system to show pop-up ads only if the user fast-forwards through a commercial that has a corresponding pop-up ad.\nIn 2019, some TiVo DVRs began running \"pre-roll advertisements.\" These ads are short, but mandatory. The ads run before the user can play a recorded program. The ads are downloaded from the Internet, so a brief delay occurs before the mandatory ads begin, further delaying playback. Only TiVo DVRs using TiVo Experience 4 software (Roamio, Bolt, Edge, etc.) have this forced advertising, earlier TiVo software does not deploy pre-roll ads.\nGNU General Public License and Tivoization.\nIn 2006, the Free Software Foundation decided to combat TiVo's technical system of blocking users from running modified software.\nThis behavior, which Richard Stallman dubbed Tivoization, was tackled by creating a new version of the GNU General Public License, the GNU GPLv3, which prohibits this activity.\nThe kernel of the operating system of TiVo-branded hardware, the Linux kernel, is distributed under the terms of the GNU GPLv2. The FSF's goal is to ensure that all recipients of software licensed under the GPLv3 are not restricted by hardware constraints on the modification of distributed software.\nThis new license provision was acknowledged by TiVo in its April 2007 SEC filing: \"we may be unable to incorporate future enhancements to the GNU/Linux operating system into our software, which could adversely affect our business\".\nCableCard Support Uncertainty (USA).\nIn September 2020, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) changed its rules so that cable television providers no longer must support CableCard. Providers may choose to keep supporting CableCard, but TiVo owners have no assurance. The cable television provider may discontinue CableCard support at any time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30937", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30937", "title": "TDMA", "text": "TDMA may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30938", "revid": "47521577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30938", "title": "Tony McManus (musician)", "text": "Tony McManus (born 1965) is a guitarist from Paisley, Scotland, who plays finger-style acoustic guitar arrangements of tunes from Celtic music, classical music, and other genres. He emigrated from Scotland to Canada in 2003.\nMusic career.\nIn 1988, McManus substituted for the guitarist Soig Siberil in the supergroup Celtic Fiddle Festival, which consisted of the fiddlers Johnny Cunningham, Kevin Burke and Christian Lemaitre. He has worked as an accompanist for Catriona MacDonald and for the singer, guitarist and fiddler Brian McNeill. His album, \"Return to Kintail\", was a duet with the Scottish fiddler Alasdair Fraser.\nIn addition to traditional Celtic music, McManus plays classical music and other genres. He performed a piece by Erik Satie for the soundtrack of a movie by Neil Jordan. The mandolin player Mike Marshall prodded him to learn Bach's \"E Major Prelude\". He performed a chaconne by J.S. Bach at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City with the jazz fusion guitarist John McLaughlin.\nHe released his first album, \"Tony McManus\", in 1996 on Greentrax Recordings. He recorded his second album, \"Pourquoi Quebec?\", in Quebec, Canada and released it on the same label in 1998. His third album, \"Ceol More\", was released in 2002 and achieved widespread critical acclaim.\nChristina Roden wrote on \"AllMusic\", \"As usual, his command of acoustic guitar technique is flawless, with a chesty, rounded, gorgeous tone and a knack for well-marked rhythms and singing phrases.\" Gordon Potter wrote in \"Living Tradition\", \"Here is a musician demonstrating talent by making it seem understated. This is good, this is very good indeed, and there's not much else that can be said.\"\nThe album includes a version of Charles Mingus' \"Goodbye Porkpie Hat\". He recorded an album with the bass guitarist Alain Genty, titled \"Singing Sands\".\nIn 2017, McManus was named one of \"50 Transcendent Acoustic Guitarists\" in \"Guitar Player\" magazine.\nSignature model.\nIn 2011, PRS Guitars created a McManus signature model guitar, a distinction he shares with the jazz guitarist Al Di Meola, the folk guitarist Martin Simpson and the rock guitarists Carlos Santana, John Mayer, Mark Lettieri, Ted Nugent and Orianthi Panagaris. The custom model, designed by Paul Reed Smith, went into development after McManus visited the bluegrass musician Ricky Skaggs in Nashville, Tennessee, while on tour in America.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30939", "revid": "3454040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30939", "title": "Trenton", "text": "Trenton may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlaces.\nUnited States.\nWithin the United States, Trenton, New Jersey, the capital of the State of New Jersey, is the most populous and well known municipality bearing the name of Trenton.\nOther American localities of this namesake include:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30940", "revid": "24043204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30940", "title": "Thalarctos maritimus", "text": ""}
{"id": "30941", "revid": "28979433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30941", "title": "Tacticity", "text": "Relative conformational uniformity of repeating units in a macromolecule\nTacticity (from , \"relating to arrangement or order\") is the relative stereochemistry of adjacent chiral centers within a macromolecule. The practical significance of tacticity rests on the effects on the physical properties of the polymer. The regularity of the macromolecular structure influences the degree to which it has rigid, crystalline long range order or flexible, amorphous long range disorder. Precise knowledge of tacticity of a polymer also helps understanding at what temperature a polymer melts, how soluble it is in a solvent, as well as its mechanical properties.\nA tactic macromolecule in the IUPAC definition is a macromolecule in which essentially all the configurational (repeating) units are identical. In a hydrocarbon macromolecule with all carbon atoms making up the backbone in a tetrahedral molecular geometry, the zigzag backbone is in the paper plane with the substituents either sticking out of the paper or retreating into the paper;, this projection is called the Natta projection after Giulio Natta. Tacticity is particularly significant in vinyl polymers of the type -H2C-CH(R)-, where each repeating unit contains a substituent R attached to one side of the polymer backbone. The arrangement of these substituents can follow a regular pattern- appearing on the same side as the previous one, on the opposite side, or in a random configuration relative to the preceding unit. Monotactic macromolecules have one stereoisomeric atom per repeat unit, ditactic to n-tactic macromolecules have more than one stereoisomeric atom per unit.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIUPAC definition\n The orderliness of the succession of configurational repeating units inthe main chain of a regular macromolecule, a regular oligomer molecule,a regular block, or a regular chain. \nDefinition.\nDiads.\nTwo adjacent structural units in a polymer molecule constitute a diad. Diads overlap: each structural unit is considered part of two diads, one diad with each neighbor. If a diad consists of two identically oriented units, the diad is called an m diad (formerly \"meso diad\", as in a meso compound, now proscribed). If a diad consists of units oriented in opposition, the diad is called an r diad (formerly \"racemo diad\", as in a racemic compound, now proscribed). In the case of vinyl polymer molecules, an m diad is one in which the substituents are oriented on the same side of the polymer backbone; in the Natta projection, they both point into the plane or both point out of the plane.\nTriads.\nThe stereochemistry of macromolecules can be defined even more precisely with the introduction of triads. An isotactic triad (\"mm\") is made up of two overlapping m diads, a syndiotactic triad (also spelled syndyotactic) (\"rr\") consists of two overlapping r diads, and a heterotactic triad (\"rm\") is composed of an r diad overlapping an m diad. The mass fraction of isotactic (\"mm\") triads is a common quantitative measure of tacticity.\nWhen the stereochemistry of a macromolecule is considered to be a Bernoulli process, the triad composition can be calculated from the probability \"P\"m of a diad being m type. For example, when this probability is 0.25 then the probability of finding:\nwith a total probability of 1. Similar relationships with diads exist for tetrads.\nTetrads, pentads, etc..\nThe definition of tetrads and pentads introduce further sophistication and precision to defining tacticity, especially when information on long-range ordering is desirable. Tacticity measurements obtained by carbon-13 NMR are typically expressed in terms of the relative abundance of various pentads within the polymer molecule, e.g. \"mmmm\", \"mrrm\".\nOther conventions for quantifying tacticity.\nThe primary convention for expressing tacticity is in terms of the relative weight fraction of triad or higher-order components, as described above. An alternative expression for tacticity is the average length of \"m\" and \"r\" sequences within the polymer molecule. The average m-sequence length may be approximated from the relative abundance of pentads as follows:\nformula_1\nPolymers.\nIsotactic polymers.\nIsotactic polymers are composed of isotactic macromolecules (IUPAC definition). In isotactic macromolecules, all the substituents are located on the same side of the macromolecular backbone. An isotactic macromolecule consists of 100% m diads, though IUPAC also allows the term for macromolecules with at least 95% m diads if that looser usage is explained. Polypropylene formed by Ziegler\u2013Natta catalysis is an example of an isotactic polymer. Isotactic polymers are usually semicrystalline and generally (but not exclusively) crystallize in a helical configuration. \n\nSyndiotactic polymers.\nIn syndiotactic or syntactic macromolecules the substituents have alternate positions along the chain. The macromolecule comprises 100% r diads, though IUPAC also allows the term for macromolecules with at least 95% r diads if that looser usage is explained. Syndiotactic polystyrene, made by metallocene catalysis polymerization, is crystalline with a melting point of 161\u00a0\u00b0C. Gutta percha is also an example syndiotactic polymer.\n \nAtactic polymers.\nIn atactic macromolecules the substituents are placed randomly along the chain. The percentage of m diads is understood to be between 45 and 55% unless otherwise specified, but it could be any value other than 0 or 100% if that usage is clarified. With the aid of spectroscopic techniques such as NMR, it is possible to pinpoint the composition of a polymer in terms of the percentages for each triad.\nPolymers that are formed by free-radical mechanisms, such as polyvinyl chloride are usually atactic. Due to their random nature atactic polymers are usually amorphous. In \"hemi-isotactic macromolecules\" every other repeat unit has a random substituent.\nAtactic polymers such as polystyrene (PS) are technologically very important. It is possible to obtain syndiotactic polystyrene using a Kaminsky catalyst, but most industrial polystyrene produced is atactic. The two materials have very different properties because the irregular structure of the atactic version makes it impossible for the polymer chains to stack in a regular fashion: whereas syndiotactic PS is a semicrystalline material, the more common atactic version cannot crystallize and forms a \"glass\" instead. This example is quite general in that many polymers of economic importance are atactic glass formers.\nEutactic polymers.\nIn eutactic macromolecules, substituents may occupy any specific (but potentially complex) sequence of positions along the chain. Isotactic and syndiotactic polymers are instances of the more general class of eutactic polymers, which also includes heterogeneous macromolecules in which the sequence consists of substituents of different kinds (for example, the side-chains in proteins and the bases in nucleic acids).\nEffect on polymer properties.\nTacticity has a significant effect on polymer crystallinity, and thus affects other properties that depend on crystallinity such as strength, melting point, and solubility. Isotactic and syndiotactic polymers have a more ordered structure and can form semicrystalline materials, while atactic polymers are generally amorphous (i.e. not crystalline) because their lack of order prevents them from packing into a crystal lattice. Crystallinity generally leads to better mechanical strength, solvent resistance, and barrier properties, but amorphous polymers do not necessarily have poor mechanical properties and can have other advantages such as optical clarity. As an example, atactic polypropylene is an amorphous polymer with a glass-transition temperature, \"T\"g, of -27\u00a0\u00b0C, while isotactic polypropylene is crystalline with a \"T\"g of -26\u00a0\u00b0C and a melting temperature, \"T\"m, of 160\u00a0\u00b0C and syndiotactic polypropylene is also crystalline with a higher \"T\"g of -4.3\u00a0\u00b0C and a lower \"T\"m of 126\u00a0\u00b0C. Isotactic polypropylene is strong and high-melting and so is widely used in a range of applications, while atactic polypropylene is soft and waxy and sees only limited use in adhesives and as an asphalt additive.\nStereocontrolled polymerization.\nPolymers with controlled tacticity (i.e. not atactic) must be produced via some type of stereocontrolled polymerization. Stereocontrolled polymerizations have been demonstrated with a variety of chain-growth polymerization mechanisms, although stereocontrolled radical and cationic polymerizations are less common than stereocontrolled coordination and anionic polymerizations due to a lack of stereochemical definition at the propagating chain end. Stereocontrolled polymerization of chiral monomers can also be enantioselective, meaning that one enantiomer of the monomer is selectively polymerized to give an isotactic polymer. Depending on the origin of stereoselectivity, stereocontrolled polymerizations can be classified as polymer chain-end control or enantiomorphic site control.\nPolymer chain-end control.\nIn polymer chain-end control, the stereochemistry of the most recent monomer added to the polymer chain determines the stereochemistry of the next monomer added. In an isoselective polymerization, the next monomer to be inserted will have the same stereochemistry as the previous monomer, while in a syndioselective polymerization it will be the opposite. The stereoselectivity of a polymerization with polymer chain-end control is quantified by \"P\"m and \"P\"r, the probabilities of forming an m and r diad, respectively. An isoselective polymerization has a \"P\"m approaching 1, while a syndioselective polymerization has a \"P\"r approaching 1. When a stereoerror occurs (i.e. a monomer is added in the less favored orientation, such as the formation of a r diad in an isoselective polymerization), it is propagated, meaning that in an isoselective polymerization the substituents would switch from all being on one side of the polymer chain to all being on the other side.\nEnantiomorphic site control.\nIn enantiomorphic site control, the stereochemistry of the next monomer added is instead determined by the stereochemistry of the catalyst. The stereoselectivity of a polymerization with enantiomorphic site control is often quantified by the site control selectivity \u03b1, the probability of adding a monomer with a certain absolute configuration. For an isoselective polymerization, an \u03b1 value of 0 or 1 indicates a fully isotactic polymer while an \u03b1 value of 0.5 indicates an atactic polymer. When a stereoerror occurs, it is corrected, meaning that (in an isoselective polymerization) substituents will return to being on the same side of the polymer chain that they were on before the error. \nHead/tail configuration.\nIn vinyl polymers, the complete configuration can be further described by defining polymer head/tail configuration. In a regular macromolecule, monomer units are normally linked in a head to tail configuration such that \u03b2-substituents are located on alternating carbon atoms. However, it is possible for defects to form where substituents are placed on adjacent carbon atoms, producing a head/head tail/tail configuration, such as by recombination of two growing radical chains, or by direct head-head addition if steric effects are weak enough, such as in polyvinylidene fluoride.\nTechniques for measuring tacticity.\nTacticity may be measured directly using proton or carbon-13 NMR. This technique enables quantification of the tacticity distribution by comparison of peak areas or integral ranges corresponding to known diads (r, m), triads (mm, rm+mr, rr) and/or higher order \"n\"-ads, depending on spectral resolution. In cases of limited resolution, stochastic methods such as Bernoullian or Markovian analysis may also be used to fit the distribution and predict higher \"n\"-ads and calculate the isotacticity of the polymer to the desired level.\nOther techniques sensitive to tacticity include x-ray powder diffraction, secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), vibrational spectroscopy (FTIR) and especially two-dimensional techniques. Tacticity may also be inferred by measuring another physical property, such as melting temperature, when the relationship between tacticity and that property is well-established.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30942", "revid": "33989260", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30942", "title": "Tobacco", "text": "Agricultural product processed from the leaves of plants in the genus Nicotiana\nTobacco is the common name of several plants in the genus \"Nicotiana\" of the family Solanaceae, and the general term for any product prepared from the cured leaves of these plants. Seventy-nine species of tobacco are known, but the chief commercial crop is \"N. tabacum\". The more potent variant \"N. rustica\" is also used in some countries.\nDried tobacco leaves are mainly used for smoking in cigarettes and cigars, as well as pipes and shishas. They can also be consumed as snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, and snus.\nTobacco contains the highly addictive stimulant alkaloid nicotine as well as harmala alkaloids. Due to the widespread availability and legality of tobacco, nicotine is one of the most widely used recreational drugs. Tobacco use is a cause or risk factor for many deadly diseases, especially those affecting the heart, liver, and lungs, as well as many cancers. In 2008, the World Health Organization named tobacco use as the world's single greatest preventable cause of death.\nEtymology.\nThe English word 'tobacco' originates from the Spanish word \"tabaco\". The precise origin of this word is disputed, but it is generally thought to have derived, at least in part, from Ta\u00edno, the Arawakan language of the Caribbean. In Ta\u00edno, it was said to mean either a roll of tobacco leaves (according to Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas, 1552), or to \"tabago\", a kind of Y-shaped pipe used for sniffing tobacco smoke (according to Oviedo, with the leaves themselves being referred to as \"cohiba\").\nHowever, perhaps coincidentally, similar words in Spanish, Portuguese and Italian were used from 1410 for certain medicinal herbs. These probably derived from the Arabic (also ), a word reportedly dating to the ninth century, referring to various herbs.\nHistory.\nCultural significance.\nAccording to Haudenosaunee mythology, tobacco first grew out of Earth Woman's head after she died giving birth to her twin sons, Sapling and Flint.\nTraditional use.\nTobacco has long been used in the Americas, with some cultivation sites in Mexico dating back to 1400\u20131000 BCE. Many Native American tribes traditionally grow and use tobacco. Historically, people from the Northeast Woodlands cultures have carried tobacco in pouches as a readily accepted trade item. It was smoked both socially and ceremonially, such as to seal a peace treaty or trade agreement. In some Native cultures, tobacco is seen as a gift from the Creator, with the ceremonial tobacco smoke carrying one's thoughts and prayers to the Creator.\nSome Native Americans consider tobacco to be a medicine and advocate for its respectful usage, rather than a commercial one.\nPopularization.\nFollowing the arrival of the Europeans to the Americas, tobacco became increasingly popular as a trade item. In 1559, Francisco Hern\u00e1ndez de Toledo, Spanish chronicler of the Indies, was the first European to bring tobacco seeds to the Old World, following orders of King Philip II of Spain. These seeds were planted in the outskirts of Toledo, more specifically in an area known as \"Los Cigarrales\" named after the continuous plagues of cicadas (\"cigarras\" in Spanish). Before the development of the lighter Virginia and white burley strains of tobacco, the smoke was too harsh to be inhaled. Small quantities were smoked at a time, using a pipe like the \"midwakh\" or \"kiseru,\" or newly invented waterpipes such as the bong or the hookah (see thu\u1ed1c l\u00e0o for a modern continuance of this practice). Tobacco became so popular that the English colony of Jamestown used it as currency and began exporting it as a cash crop; tobacco is often credited as being the export that saved Virginia from ruin. While a lucrative product, the growing expansion of tobacco demand was intimately tied to the history of slavery in the Caribbean.\nThe alleged benefits of tobacco also contributed to its success. The astronomer Thomas Harriot, who accompanied Sir Richard Grenville on his 1585 expedition to Roanoke Island, thought that the plant \"openeth all the pores and passages of the body\" so that the bodies of the natives \"are notably preserved in health, and know not many grievous diseases, wherewithal we in England are often times afflicted.\"\nProduction of tobacco for smoking, chewing, and snuffing became a major industry in Europe and its colonies by 1700.\nTobacco has been a major cash crop in Cuba and in other parts of the Caribbean since the 18th century. Cuban cigars are world-famous.\nCigarettes became increasingly popular in the late 19th century when James Bonsack invented a machine to automate cigarette production. This increase in production allowed tremendous growth in the tobacco industry until the health revelations of the 20th century.\nContemporary.\nFollowing the scientific revelations of the early-to-mid-20th century, tobacco was condemned as a health hazard and eventually became recognized as a cause of cancer, as well as other respiratory and circulatory diseases. In the United States, this led to the adoption of the 1998 Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement, which settled the many lawsuits by the U.S. states in exchange for a combination of yearly payments to the states and voluntary restrictions on advertising and marketing of tobacco products.\nIn the 1970s, Brown &amp; Williamson crossbred tobacco to produce Y1, a strain containing an unusually high nicotine content, nearly doubling from 3.2\u20133.5% to 6.5%. In the 1990s, this prompted the Food and Drug Administration to allege that tobacco companies were intentionally manipulating the nicotine content of cigarettes.\nThe desire of many addicted smokers to quit has led to the development of tobacco cessation products.\nIn 2003, in response to growth of tobacco use in developing countries, the World Health Organization successfully rallied 168 countries to sign the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. The convention is designed to push for effective legislation and enforcement in all countries to reduce the harmful effects of tobacco. Between 2019 and 2021, concerns about increased COVID-19 health risks due to tobacco consumption facilitated smoking reduction and cessation.\nBiology.\n\"Nicotiana\".\nMany species of tobacco are in the genus of herbs \"Nicotiana\". It is part of the nightshade family (Solanaceae) indigenous to North and South America, Australia, south west Africa, and the South Pacific.\nMost nightshades contain varying amounts of nicotine, a powerful neurotoxin to insects. However, tobacco contains a much higher concentration of nicotine than the others. Unlike many other Solanaceae species, they do not contain tropane alkaloids, which are often poisonous to humans and other animals.\nDespite containing enough nicotine and other compounds such as germacrene and anabasine and other piperidine alkaloids (varying between species) to deter most herbivores, a number of such animals have evolved the ability to feed on \"Nicotiana\" species without being harmed. Nonetheless, tobacco is unpalatable to many species due to its other attributes. For example, although the cabbage looper is a generalist pest, tobacco's gummosis and trichomes can harm early larvae survival. As a result, some tobacco plants (chiefly \"N. glauca\") have become established as invasive weeds in some places.\nTypes.\nThe types of tobacco include:\nParasites.\nTobacco, alongside its related products, can be infested by parasites such as \"Lasioderma serricorne\" (the tobacco beetle) and \"Ephestia elutella\" (the tobacco moth), which are the most widespread and damaging parasites to the tobacco industry. Infestation can range from the tobacco cultivated in the fields to the tobacco leaves used for manufacturing cigars, cigarillos, cigarettes, etc. Both the larvae of \"Lasioderma serricorne\" and caterpillars of \"Ephestia elutella\" are considered major pests.\nProduction.\nCultivation.\nTobacco is cultivated similarly to other agricultural products. Seeds were at first quickly scattered onto the soil. However, young plants came under increasing attack from flea beetles (\"Epitrix cucumeris\" or \"E. pubescens\"), which caused destruction of half the tobacco crops in United States in 1876. By 1890, successful experiments were conducted that placed the plant in a frame covered by thin cotton fabric. Modern tobacco seeds are sown in cold frames or hotbeds, as their germination is activated by light. In the United States, tobacco is often fertilized with the mineral apatite, which partially starves the plant of nitrogen, to produce a more desired flavor.\nAfter the plants are about tall, they are transplanted into the fields. Farmers used to have to wait for rainy weather to plant. A hole is created in the tilled earth with a tobacco peg, either a curved wooden tool or deer antler. After making two holes to the right and left, the planter would move forward two feet, select plants from his/her bag, and repeat. Various mechanical tobacco planters like Bemis, New Idea Setter, and New Holland Transplanter were invented in the late 19th and 20th centuries to automate the process: making the hole, watering it, guiding the plant in\u2014all in one motion.\nTobacco is cultivated annually, and can be harvested in several ways. In the oldest method, still used, the entire plant is harvested at once by cutting off the stalk at the ground with a tobacco knife; it is then speared onto sticks, four to six plants a stick, and hung in a curing barn. In the 19th century, bright tobacco began to be harvested by pulling individual leaves off the stalk as they ripened. The leaves ripen from the ground upwards, so a field of tobacco harvested in this manner entails the serial harvest of a number of \"primings\", beginning with the \"volado\" leaves near the ground, working to the \"seco\" leaves in the middle of the plant, and finishing with the potent \"ligero\" leaves at the top. Before harvesting, the crop must be \"topped\" when the pink flowers develop. Topping always refers to the removal of the tobacco flower before the leaves are systematically harvested. As the industrial revolution took hold, the harvesting wagons which were used to transport leaves were equipped with man-powered stringers, an apparatus that used twine to attach leaves to a pole. In modern times, large fields are harvested mechanically, although topping the flower and in some cases the plucking of immature leaves is still done by hand.\nIn the U.S., North Carolina and Kentucky are the leaders in tobacco production, followed by Tennessee, Virginia, Georgia, South Carolina and Pennsylvania.\nCuring.\nCuring and subsequent aging allow for the slow oxidation and degradation of carotenoids in tobacco leaf. This produces certain compounds in the tobacco leaves and gives a sweet hay, tea, rose oil, or fruity aromatic flavor that contributes to the \"smoothness\" of the smoke. Starch is converted to sugar, which glycates protein, which is oxidized into advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs), a caramelization process that also adds flavor. Inhalation of these AGEs in tobacco smoke contributes to atherosclerosis and cancer. Levels of AGEs are dependent on the curing method used.\nTobacco can be cured through several methods, including:\nSome tobaccos go through a second stage of curing, known as \"fermenting\" or \"sweating\". Cavendish undergoes fermentation pressed in a \"casing\" solution containing sugar and/or flavoring.\nGlobal production.\nTrends.\nProduction of tobacco leaf increased by 40% between 1971, when 4.2\u00a0million tons of leaf were produced, and 1997, when 5.9\u00a0million tons of leaf were produced. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, tobacco leaf production was expected to hit 7.1\u00a0million tons by 2010. This number is a bit lower than the record-high production of 1992, when 7.5\u00a0million tons of leaf were produced. The production growth was almost entirely due to increased productivity by developing nations, where production increased by 128%. During that same time, production in developed countries actually decreased. China's increase in tobacco production was the single biggest factor in the increase in world production. China's share of the world market increased from 17% in 1971 to 47% in 1997. This growth can be partially explained by the existence of a low import tariff on foreign tobacco entering China. While this tariff was reduced from 66% in 1999 to 10% in 2004, it has still led to local Chinese cigarettes being preferred over foreign cigarettes because of their lower cost.\nMajor producers.\nEvery year, about 5.9\u00a0million tons of tobacco are produced. Top producers are China (36.3%), India (12.9%), Brazil (11.9%) and Zimbabwe (3.5%).\nChina.\nAround the peak of global tobacco production, 20 million rural Chinese households were producing tobacco on 2.1\u00a0million hectares of land. While it is the major crop for millions of Chinese farmers, growing tobacco is not as profitable as cotton or sugarcane, because the Chinese government sets the market price. While this price is guaranteed, it is lower than the natural market price, because of the lack of market risk. To further control tobacco in their borders, China founded a State Tobacco Monopoly Administration (STMA) in 1982. The STMA controls tobacco production, marketing, imports, and exports, and contributes 12% to the nation's national income. As noted above, despite the income generated for the state by profits from state-owned tobacco companies and the taxes paid by companies and retailers, China's government has acted to reduce tobacco use.\nIndia.\nIndia's Tobacco Board is headquartered in Guntur in the state of Andhra Pradesh. India has 96,865 registered tobacco farmers and many more who are not registered. In 2010, 3,120 tobacco product manufacturing facilities were operating in all of India. Around 0.25% of India's cultivated land is used for tobacco production.\nSince 1947, the Indian government has supported growth in the tobacco industry. India has seven tobacco research centers, located in Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar, Mysore, and West Bengal which houses the core research institute.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, around 135,000 family farmers cite tobacco production as their main economic activity. Tobacco has never exceeded 0.7% of the country's total cultivated area. In the southern regions of Brazil, Virginia, and Amarelinho, flue-cured tobacco, as well as burley and Galp\u00e3o Comum air-cured tobacco, are produced. These types of tobacco are used for cigarettes. In the northeast, darker, air- and sun-cured tobacco is grown. These types of tobacco are used for cigars, twists, and dark cigarettes. Brazil's government has made attempts to reduce the production of tobacco but has not had a successful systematic antitobacco farming initiative. Brazil's government, however, provides small loans for family farms, including those that grow tobacco, through the \"Programa Nacional de Fortalecimento da Agricultura Familiar\".\nLebanon.\nAlthough only being the 35th biggest tobacco producer in 2023, the crop plays an important role in parts of Lebanon. The cultivation of tobacco in Lebanon dates back to the 17th century and today the crop is grown by all religious sects. In the southern parts of the country, the plant's resilience in difficult conditions - including the climate, the mountainous geography, and recurring wars - makes it an important source of income. The role of tobacco in the region is twofold. On the one hand, it is called the \"crop of resistance\" as it allows the population to navigate the consequences of a decades-long violent conflict and a certain degree of detachment, making it a symbol of hope, resistance, and resilience. On the other hand, the hard conditions of tobacco farming also made it the \"bitter crop,\" as the farming is often times done by women and children without professional equipment. According to Munira Khayyat, tobacco production in the southern parts of Lebanon, like many other sectors where the state is absent (e.g. health care, employment, education), is overseen by Hezbollah and, though to a minor degree, also by AMAL.\nProblems in production.\nChild labor.\nThe International Labour Office reported that the most child-laborers work in agriculture, which is one of the most hazardous types of work. The tobacco industry houses some of these working children. Use of children is widespread on farms in Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Malawi, and Zimbabwe. While some of these children work with their families on small, family-owned farms, others work on large plantations.\nIn late 2009, reports were released by the London-based human-rights group Plan International, claiming that child labor was common on Malawi (producer of 1.8% of the world's tobacco) tobacco farms. The organization interviewed 44 teens, who worked full-time on farms during the 2007\u201308 growing season. The child-laborers complained of low pay and long hours, as well as physical and sexual abuse by their supervisors. They also reported experiencing green tobacco sickness, a form of nicotine poisoning. When wet leaves are handled, nicotine from the leaves gets absorbed in the skin and causes nausea, vomiting, and dizziness. Children were exposed to levels of nicotine equivalent to smoking 50 cigarettes, just through direct contact with tobacco leaves. The effects of nicotine on human brain development in children can permanently alter brain structure and function.\nEconomy.\nMajor tobacco companies have encouraged global tobacco production. Philip Morris, British American Tobacco, and Japan Tobacco each own or lease tobacco-manufacturing facilities in at least 50 countries and buy crude tobacco leaf from at least 12 more countries. This encouragement, along with government subsidies, has led to a glut in the tobacco market. This surplus has resulted in lower prices, which are devastating to small-scale tobacco farmers. According to the World Bank, between 1985 and 2000, the inflation-adjusted price of tobacco dropped 37%. Tobacco is the most widely smuggled legal product.\nEnvironment.\nTobacco production requires the use of large amounts of pesticides. Tobacco companies recommend up to 16 separate applications of pesticides just in the period between planting the seeds in greenhouses and transplanting the young plants to the field. Pesticide use has been worsened by the desire to produce larger crops in less time because of the decreasing market value of tobacco. Pesticides often harm tobacco farmers because they are unaware of the health effects and the proper safety protocol for working with pesticides. These pesticides, as well as fertilizers, end up in the soil, waterways, and the food chain. Coupled with child labor, pesticides pose an even greater threat. Early exposure to pesticides may increase a child's lifelong cancer risk, as well as harm their nervous and immune systems.\nAs with all crops, tobacco crops extract nutrients (such as phosphorus, nitrogen, and potassium) from soil, decreasing its fertility.\nFurthermore, the wood used to cure tobacco in some places leads to deforestation. While some big tobacco producers such as China and the United States have access to petroleum, coal, and natural gas, which can be used as alternatives to wood, most developing countries still rely on wood in the curing process. Brazil alone uses the wood of 60 million trees per year for curing, packaging, and rolling cigarettes.\nIn 2017 WHO released a study on the environmental effects of tobacco.\nResearch.\nSeveral tobacco plants have been used as model organisms in genetics. Tobacco BY-2 cells, derived from \"N. tabacum\" cultivar 'Bright Yellow-2', are among the most important research tools in plant cytology. Tobacco has played a pioneering role in callus culture research and the elucidation of the mechanism by which kinetin works, laying the groundwork for modern agricultural biotechnology. The first genetically modified plant was produced in 1982, using \"Agrobacterium tumefaciens\" to create an antibiotic-resistant tobacco plant. This research laid the groundwork for all genetically modified crops.\nGenetic modification.\nBecause of its importance as a research tool, transgenic tobacco was the first genetically modified (GM) crop to be tested in field trials, in the United States and France in 1986; China became the first country in the world to approve commercial planting of a GM crop in 1993, which was tobacco.\nField trials.\nMany varieties of transgenic tobacco have been intensively tested in field trials. Agronomic traits such as resistance to pathogens (viruses, particularly to the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV); fungi; bacteria and nematodes); weed management via herbicide tolerance; resistance against insect pests; resistance to drought and cold; and production of useful products such as pharmaceuticals; and use of GM plants for bioremediation, have all been tested in over 400 field trials using tobacco.\nProduction.\nCurrently, only the US is producing GM tobacco. The Chinese virus-resistant tobacco was withdrawn from the market in China in 1997. From 2002 to 2010, cigarettes made with GM tobacco with reduced nicotine content were available in the US under the market name Quest.\nConsumption.\nTobacco is consumed in many forms and through a number of different methods. Some examples are:\nIn the mouth.\nTobacco used in the mouth (buccal (sublabial), sublingual):\nInfluence.\nSocial.\nSmoking in public was, for a long time, reserved for men, and smoking by women was sometimes associated with promiscuity; in Japan, during the Edo period, prostitutes and their clients often approached one another under the guise of offering a smoke. The same was true in 19th-century Europe.\nFollowing the American Civil War, the use of tobacco, primarily in cigars, became associated with masculinity and power. Modern tobacco use has often been stigmatized; this has spawned quitting associations and antismoking campaigns. Bhutan is the only country in the world where tobacco sales are illegal. Due to its propensity for causing detumescence and erectile dysfunction, some studies have described tobacco as an anaphrodisiacal substance.\nReligion.\nChristianity.\nIn Christian denominations of the conservative holiness movement, such as the Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection and Evangelical Wesleyan Church, the use of tobacco and other drugs is prohibited; \u00b642 of the 2014 Book of Discipline of the Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the judgment of The Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection (Original Allegheny Conference), the use of tobacco is a great evil, unbecoming a Christian, a waste of the Lord's money, and a defilement of the body, which should be the temple of the Holy Ghost. We do, therefore, most earnestly require our members to refrain from its cultivation, manufacture, and sale, and to abstain from its use in all forms, for Jesus' sake. We will not receive as members into our churches nor will we ordain or license to preach or to exhort, persons who use, cultivate, manufacture, or sell tobacco. Using tobacco by a member of a church or of the Conference after being received from this date (June 28, 1927) is a violation of the law of the church, and the offending party should be dealt with according to the judiciary rules.\nMembers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (popularly known as Mormons) adhere to the Word of Wisdom, a religious health code that is interpreted as prohibiting the consumption of tobacco as well as alcohol, coffee, and tea.\nIslam.\nMost Islamic scholars have condemned tobacco due to its harmful effects on health. The earliest fatwa (religious opinion) against tobacco use dates from 1602. Most major Islamic sects prohibit its use. While tobacco is not mentioned in the Quran, the Quran does instruct Muslims to live healthy lives.\nSikhism.\nSikhism, a Dharmic religion from India, considers tobacco consumption as a taboo and very bad for health and spirituality. Initiated Sikhs are never to consume tobacco in any form.\nDemographic.\nResearch on tobacco use is limited mainly to smoking, which has been studied more extensively than any other form of consumption. An estimated 1.1\u00a0billion people, and up to one-third of the adult population, use tobacco in some form. Smoking is more prevalent among men (however, the gender gap declines with age), the poor, and in transitional or developing countries. A study published in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report found that in 2019 approximately one in four youths (23.0%) in the U.S. had used a tobacco product during the past 30 days. This represented approximately three in 10 high school students (31.2%) and approximately one in eight middle school students (12.5%).\nRates of smoking continue to rise in developing countries, but have leveled off or declined in developed countries. Smoking rates in the United States have dropped by half from 1965 to 2006, falling from 42% to 20.8% in adults. In the developing world, tobacco consumption is rising by 3.4% per year.\nHealth effects.\nAccording to the World Health Organization, tobacco kills more than 8 million people every year worldwide, including about 1.3 million non-smokers exposed to secondhand smoke.\nChemicals.\nTobacco smoking harms health because of the toxic chemicals in tobacco smoke, including carbon monoxide, cyanide, and carcinogens, which have been proven to cause heart and lung diseases and cancer.\nThousands of different substances in cigarette smoke, including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (such as benzopyrene), formaldehyde, cadmium, nickel, arsenic, tobacco-specific nitrosamines, and phenols contribute to the harmful effects of smoking.\nAccording to the World Health Organization, tobacco is the single greatest cause of preventable death globally. WHO estimates that tobacco caused 5.4\u00a0million deaths in 2004 and 100 million deaths over the course of the 20th century. Similarly, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention describe tobacco use as \"the single most important preventable risk to human health in developed countries and an important cause of premature death worldwide.\" Due to these health consequences, it is estimated that a 10 hectare (approximately 24.7 acre) field of tobacco used for cigarettes causes 30 deaths per year \u2013 10 from lung cancer and 20 from cigarette-induced diseases like cardiac arrest, gangrene, bladder cancer, mouth cancer, etc.\nThe harms caused by inhaling tobacco smoke include diseases of the heart and lungs, with smoking being a major risk factor for heart attacks, strokes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (emphysema), and cancer (particularly cancers of the lungs, larynx, mouth, and pancreas). Cancer is caused by inhaling carcinogenic substances in tobacco smoke.\nInhaling secondhand tobacco smoke (which has been exhaled by a smoker) can cause lung cancer in nonsmoking adults. In the United States, about 3,000 adults die each year due to lung cancer from secondhand smoke exposure. Heart disease caused by secondhand smoke kills around 46,000 nonsmokers every year.\nIn children, exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke is associated with a higher incidence and severity of respiratory illnesses, middle ear disease, and asthma attacks. Each year in the United States, secondhand smoke exposure causes 24,500 infants to be born with low birthweight, 71,900 preterm births, 202,300 episodes of asthma, and 790,000 health care visits for ear infections.\nThe addictive alkaloid nicotine is a stimulant, and popularly known as the most characteristic constituent of tobacco. In drug effect preference questionnaires, a rough indicator of addictive potential, nicotine scores almost as highly as opioids. Users typically develop tolerance and dependence. Nicotine is known to produce conditioned place preference, a sign of psychological enforcement value. In one medical study, tobacco's overall harm to user and self was determined at three percent below cocaine, and 13 percent above amphetamines, ranking sixth most harmful of the 20 drugs assessed.\nTobacco also contains 2,3,6-Trimethyl-1,4-naphthoquinone (sometimes called 2,3,6-TQ and TMN) which is a reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor of type A and B with a binding affinity somewhat similar to that of clorgyline and deprenyl. It is a stronger dopamine releasing agent than nicotine and inhibits dopamine metabolism from its MAOI activity. Tobacco also contains Harmine and Norharmine which is a reversible MAO-A inhibitor. The MAO-A activity of tobacco alkaloids have been thought to play a role in the addictive qualities of tobacco.\nRadioactivity.\nPolonium-210 is a radioactive trace contaminant of tobacco, providing additional explanation for the link between smoking and bronchial cancer.\nThe radioactive particles build up over time in the lungs and a UCLA study has estimated that the radiation from 25 years of smoking would cause over 120 deaths per thousand smokers.\nEconomic.\nTobacco makes a significant economic contribution. The global tobacco market in 2010 was estimated at US$760\u00a0billion, excluding China. The global revenues from tobacco taxes in 2013\u20132014 was approximately $269\u00a0billion.\nIn China, cigarette manufacturing is one of the few profitable state-owned industries. For example, in 1998 the 1 429 state-owned enterprises in Yunnan province had revenue of Renminbi (RMB) 69.1\u00a0billion (US$8.3\u00a0billion) while 8 cigarette manufacturing plants alone accounted for about 53 percent (or RMB 36.2\u00a0billion) of total provincial industry sales. The Chinese government also collects tax on tobacco products. Tax revenues from cigarettes increased from 740 to 842\u00a0billion Chinese yuan between 2014 and 2016. This generated an additional 101\u00a0billion Chinese yuan in tax revenues for the government.\nIn India, tobacco generates approximately 20\u00a0billion Indian rupees (US$0.45\u00a0billion) of income per annum as a result of employment, income and government revenue.\nStatistica estimates that in the U.S. alone, the tobacco industry has a market of US$121\u00a0billion, despite the fact the CDC reports that US smoking rates are declining steadily. In terms of health expenditures, cigarette smoking contributed to more than $225\u00a0billion (or 11.7%) of annual healthcare spending in the U.S. in 2014. Smoking-attributable healthcare spending increased more than 30% for Medicaid between 2010 and 2014.\nIn the US, the decline in the number of smokers, the end of the Tobacco Transition Payment Program in 2014, and competition from growers in other countries, made tobacco farming economics more challenging.\nOf the 1.22\u00a0billion smokers worldwide, 1\u00a0billion of them live in developing or transitional economies, and much of the disease burden and premature mortality attributable to tobacco use disproportionately affect the poor. While smoking prevalence has declined in many developed countries, it remains high in others, and is increasing among women and in developing countries. Between one-fifth and two-thirds of men in most populations smoke. Women's smoking rates vary more widely but rarely equal male rates.\nTobacco users must also spend a significant amount of money on cigarettes to maintain regular use, as tobacco products are often heavily taxed by governments. For example, a pack a day smoker in the state of New York would have to spend around $4,690.25 a year on cigarettes alone.\nIn Indonesia, the lowest income group spends 15% of its total expenditures on tobacco. In Egypt, more than 10% of low-income household expenditure is on tobacco. The poorest 20% of households in Mexico spend 11% of their income on tobacco.\nAdvertising.\nThe tobacco industry advertises its products through a variety of media, including sponsorship, particularly of sporting events. Because of the health risks of these products, this is now one of the most highly regulated forms of marketing. Some or all forms of tobacco advertising are banned in many countries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30944", "revid": "30585864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30944", "title": "National anthem of South Africa", "text": " \nThe national anthem of South Africa was adopted in 1997 and is a hybrid song combining extracts of the 19th century Xhosa hymn \"\" (, lit.\u2009'\"Lord Bless Africa\"') and the Afrikaans song that was used as the South African national anthem during the apartheid era, \"Die Stem van Suid-Afrika\" (), with new English lyrics.\nThe anthem is often referred to by its incipit of \"Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika\", but this has never been its official title, which is simply \"National Anthem of South Africa\".\nThe committee responsible for this new composition included Anna Bender, Elize Botha, Richard Cock, Dolf Havemann (Secretary), Mzilikazi Khumalo (chairman), Masizi Kunene, John Lenake, Fatima Meer, Khabi Mngoma, Wally Serote, Johan de Villiers, and Jeanne Zaidel-Rudolph.\nStructure.\nThe lyrics employ the five most widely spoken of South Africa's twelve official languages \u2013 Xhosa (first stanza, first two lines), Zulu (first stanza, last two lines), Sesotho (second stanza), Afrikaans (third stanza), and English (final stanza). The lyrics are sung in these languages regardless of the native language of the singer. The first half was arranged by Mzilikazi Khumalo and the latter half of the song was arranged by Jeanne Zaidel-Rudolph, who also wrote the final verse. The anthem is compositionally unusual as it employs progressive tonality, starting in G major but modulating to and ending in D major (the Italian, Spanish, and Philippine national anthems also have progressive tonality).\nHistory.\nBackground.\nFrom the late 1940s to the early 1990s, South Africa was governed by a system known as apartheid, a widely condemned system of institutionalized racial segregation and discrimination that was based on white supremacy and the repression of the black majority for the benefit of the politically and economically dominant Afrikaner minority and other whites. During this period, South Africa's national anthem was \"Die Stem van Suid-Afrika\", also known as \"Die Stem\", an Afrikaans-language song that chronicled the Voortrekkers and the Great Trek. \"Die Stem\" is a poem written by C. J. Langenhoven in 1918 and was set to music by Marthinus Lourens de Villiers in 1921. \"Die Stem\" () was the co-national anthem with \"God Save the King\" between 1938 and 1957, when it became the sole national anthem until 1994. \"Die Stem van Suid-Afrika\" was composed of eight stanzas: the original four in Afrikaans and four in English - a translation of the Afrikaans with a few modifications. It was seldom sung in its entirety; usually, the first stanza was the most widely known and sung sometimes followed by the last stanza.\nWhen apartheid came to an end in the early 1990s, the future of \"Die Stem van Suid-Afrika\" was called into question. It was ultimately retained as the national anthem, though \"Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika\", a Xhosa language song that was used by the anti-apartheid movement, was also introduced and adopted as a second national anthem of equal standing. \"Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika\" was composed by a Methodist school teacher named Enoch Sontonga in 1897. It was first sung as a church hymn but later became an act of political defiance against the apartheid regime.\nThe South African government adopted both songs as dual national anthems in 1994, when they were performed at Nelson Mandela's inauguration.\nFor the 1995 Rugby World Cup, Morn\u00e9 du Plessis suggested that the Springboks learn all the words of \"Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika\", and \"they did so with great feeling\", according to their instructor Anne Munnik.\nInception.\nThe practice of having two national anthems proved to be a cumbersome arrangement as performing both of them took as much as five minutes. This was rectified when South Africa's dual national anthems were merged in abridged forms in early 1997 to form the current national anthem. The new national anthem was performed at an opening of the South African parliament in February 1997, and was published in the South African \"Government Gazette\" on 10 October 1997. During the drafting of the new national anthem, it was requested by South African president Nelson Mandela that it be not more than one minute and 48 seconds in length (which was the average length of other countries' anthems being used for reference). The new English lyrics were adapted from the last four lines of the first stanza of \"Die Stem van Suid-Afrika\" (), with the changes made to reflect hope in post-apartheid South African society.\nLines borrowed from the two previous national anthems were modified to be more inclusive, omitting overt reference to specific groups of the country's population groups. Thus, lines from the apartheid-era national anthem's first stanza referencing the Voortrekkers' Great Trek were omitted, as \"this was the experience of only one section of\" South African society. Likewise, the words \"Woza Moya\", used in \"Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika\" were also omitted, as the phrase is a specifically Christian reference, rather than a generically religious one, and thus not acceptable to South Africans of other religions, particularly Muslim South Africans. A new verse found in neither song was also added. The English version of \"Die Stem van Suid-Afrika\" was less prominent than the Afrikaans version and thus could be changed with little objection or controversy. As such, the English portion of the new South African national anthem was the one that had its lyrics changed from the previous version.\nCriticism.\nIn recent years, the South African national anthem has come under criticism for its Afrikaans verse as it was originally part of the national anthem of South Africa that was used during the apartheid era, with some such as the Economic Freedom Fighters calling for the verse to be removed, supposedly because of this connection. Others defend the inclusion of the verse, pointing out that it is included in large part due to the wishes of the first post-apartheid South African president, Nelson Mandela, who intended its inclusion as a reconciliatory measure for the post-apartheid future of South Africa.\nLyrics.\nTranslations.\nBesides English, the anthem has also been fully translated into the other official languages of South Africa.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30947", "revid": "36742351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30947", "title": "Titan", "text": "Titan most often refers to:\nTitan or Titans may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30950", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30950", "title": "The Undertones", "text": "Northern Irish punk rock band\nThe Undertones are a rock band formed in Derry, Northern Ireland in 1974. From 1975 to 1983, the Undertones consisted of Feargal Sharkey (vocals), John O'Neill (rhythm guitar, vocals), Damian O'Neill (lead guitar, vocals), Michael Bradley (bass, vocals) and Billy Doherty (drums). Much of the earlier Undertones material drew influence from punk rock and new wave; the Undertones also incorporated elements of rock, glam rock and post-punk into material released after 1979, before citing soul and Motown as the influence for the material released upon their final album. The Undertones released thirteen singles and four studio albums between 1978 and 1983 before Sharkey announced his intention to leave the band in May 1983, citing musical differences as the reason for the break up.\nDespite the backdrop of the Troubles in Derry and across Northern Ireland, the vast majority (though not all) of the material the Undertones released focused not upon the political climate, but upon issues such as adolescence, teenage angst and heartbreak. \"AllMusic\" has stated that guitarists John and Damian O'Neill \"mated infectious guitar hooks to 1960s garage, 1970s glam rock, and Feargal Sharkey's signature vocal quaver.\"\nIn 1999, the Undertones reformed, replacing lead singer Sharkey with Paul McLoone.\nThe Undertones remain the most successful band to have emerged from Derry, and one of the most successful bands to have emerged from Northern Ireland.\nFormation and early gigs.\nThe Undertones formed in Derry, Northern Ireland in 1974. The band members were five friends from Creggan and the Bogside, who originally drew inspiration from such artists as the Beatles, Small Faces and Lindisfarne and who decided in part to form their own band due to both their common interest in music and the fact that\u2014because of the Troubles\u2014many entertainment venues in the city were closed in late evenings.\nThe band initially rehearsed cover versions at the home of the guitarists, brothers John and Vincent O'Neill, and in the shed of a neighbour. (In early 1976, before the band had played gigs at any venues, Vincent O'Neill left the band; he was soon replaced by his younger brother Damian.)\nBeginning in February 1976 the group, at this stage still unnamed, began playing gigs at various minor local venues, including schools, parish halls and Scout huts, where the band's lead singer, Feargal Sharkey, was a local Scout leader. Sharkey was also responsible for giving the band their first name: at the introduction to a gig at Saint Joseph's Secondary School in Derry on 16 March 1976, Feargal Sharkey was asked the name of the band and quickly replied \"The Hot Rods\". At a later gig, Sharkey named the band \"Little Feat\": another name already used by another group.\nLater that year, drummer Billy Doherty proposed an alternate name for the group: The Undertones, which Doherty had discovered in his school history book. The other members of the band agreed to the proposal.\nWith the arrival of punk rock in late 1976, the artistic focus of the band changed. Artists such as the Adverts, Sex Pistols, Buzzcocks and, particularly, the Ramones became major influences on the Undertones.\nIn addition to being a Scout leader, Feargal Sharkey worked as a television repairman and delivery man. The van which Sharkey drove in this employment was used by the Undertones to transport their equipment to and from various venues.\nThe Casbah.\nBy 1977 the band were performing their own three-chord pop punk material, which was performed alongside cover versions at concerts, primarily at the Casbah Bar, where the band began to perform in February. The Undertones had occasionally earned money at venues where they had performed throughout 1976, but these gigs at the Casbah were the first performances for which the Undertones were paid on a regular basis, as performing at the Casbah earned the group up to \u00a330 for each attendance fee. Both the money earned and their popularity at this venue inspired the band to write and rehearse further material, as a means of remaining a popular act at the Casbah. By the following year, the concerts the Undertones performed would include the song \"Teenage Kicks\", which had been written by guitarist John O'Neill in mid-1977. The gigs performed at the Casbah gave the Undertones increased confidence in their musical ability, and in June 1977 they performed concerts outside Derry for the first time, supporting a Dublin punk group named The Radiators from Space.\nIn March 1978, the Undertones recorded a demo tape at Magee University in Derry and sent copies of the tape to various record companies in the hope of securing a record deal, but only received official letters of rejection. On 15 June 1978, the band recorded their debut four-song EP \"Teenage Kicks\" on a budget of only \u00a3200. The EP was engineered by Davy Shannon at Wizard Studios, Belfast, and was released on Belfast's Good Vibrations record label. The title song became a hit with support from BBC Radio 1 DJ John Peel, who considered \"Teenage Kicks\" his all-time favourite song, an opinion he held through to his death in 2004.\nSire Records.\nSeymour Stein, the president of Sire Records \u2013 in London on business \u2013 heard John Peel play \"Teenage Kicks\" on BBC Radio 1 and became interested in the band. Stein sent a London-based representative named Paul McNally to Derry to discuss a record deal with the band. McNally saw the band play live in what would ultimately prove to be their final performance at the Casbah on 29 September 1978. The following day, McNally convened with the Undertones to discuss a record contract. Three members of the band signed the proposed contract on this date, with the understanding that Feargal Sharkey and Michael Bradley would discuss negotiations to the contract with Seymour Stein in person in London.\n\"Teenage Kicks\" (1978\u20131979).\nOn 2 October 1978, Bradley and Sharkey agreed to an increased advance fee of \u00a310,000 offered by Stein upon the recording contract and signed to Sire Records on a five-year contract. Sire Records subsequently obtained all rights to the material released upon the Teenage Kicks EP and the song was re-released as a standard vinyl single upon Sire's own label two weeks later.\nOn 26 October, the Undertones performed \"Teenage Kicks\" live on \"Top of the Pops\". With help from Peel (who had also recorded and broadcast a \"Peel Session\" with the Undertones on the 16th), Teenage Kicks peaked at number 31 in the UK Singles Chart the following month.\nIn November 1978, the Undertones embarked on their first tour of the UK. This tour lasted until 16 December and saw the band appear as the supporting act for The Rezillos and John Otway in England and Wales in addition to headlining in three concerts in Belfast and Derry.\nIn January 1979, the Undertones recorded their eponymous debut album at Eden Studios in Acton, West London, using producer Roger Bechirian, whom the band had worked with for the first time the previous December, when Bechirian had produced the band's second single, \"Get Over You\". Much of the material upon their first album had been performed regularly at the Casbah, and the band were able to record this album in the space of less than four weeks.\nFollowing the release of \"Get Over You\" in February 1979, the Undertones' eponymous debut album was released in May. The primary lyrical concern of the songs focused upon youthful relationships and adolescence. Three further punk singles: \"Jimmy Jimmy\", \"Here Comes the Summer\" and \"You've Got My Number (Why Don't You Use It?)\" were released between April and October 1979, each to critical acclaim. In September 1979, the Undertones toured the United States for the first time, supporting The Clash with eight concerts in six different States.\n\"Hypnotised\" (1980).\nFollowing the 'You Got My Number tour' of October 1979, the Undertones began recording the songs for their second album, \"Hypnotised\", at Wisseloord Studios in the Netherlands. The recording of the songs began in December. Ten songs were recorded before the band returned to Derry prior to Christmas to write and record further songs for the album. Three further songs were written during this break: \"Tearproof\", \"More Songs About Chocolate and Girls\" and \"Wednesday Week\".\nIn January 1980, the production of \"Hypnotised\" was finished at Eden Studios in London, with the Undertones recording the three further songs written the previous December, plus two further songs: \"Hypnotised\" and a cover of \"Under The Boardwalk\". Following the completion of their second LP, the band embarked upon a two-week tour of Ireland before touring continental Europe for the first time in March.\nOn 28 March 1980, the Undertones released their sixth single, \"My Perfect Cousin\". The song, which had been written the previous summer by Damian O'Neill and Michael Bradley, reached number 9 in the UK charts and would subsequently prove to be the band's highest-charting single in the United Kingdom. The following month, on 21 April 1980, the band's second LP, \"Hypnotised\" was released. This album reached number 6 in the UK Albums Chart, remaining in the Top 10 for one month. The same week the album was released, the Undertones embarked on their 'Humming tour', which saw the band play a total of 25 gigs across the UK between April and June.\nLess than two weeks after the completion of the 'Humming tour', the Undertones toured the United States for the second time, this time as the headlining band. \"Wednesday Week\"\u2014the second single to be released from \"Hypnotised\"\u2014was released in July 1980. This single reached number 11 in the UK chart and remained in the Top 40 for a total of seven weeks.\nBetween September and December 1980, the Undertones performed two further tours: the 'Disaster Tour (European Style)', which saw the band perform in continental Europe and\u2014in December\u2014the 'See No More' tour of the UK.\nIn terms of chart sales, the year 1980 was the Undertones' most successful year. In a review by \"Sounds\" magazine the same year, the Undertones were described as: \"Possibly the best pop group in the English speaking world.\"\nEMI.\n\"Positive Touch\" (1981\u20131982).\nIn December 1980, the Undertones announced their intention to split from Sire Records as they were unhappy with the lack of promotion they were receiving outside of the UK, particularly in the US. Following negotiations, their manager, Andy Ferguson, succeeded in the band retaining ownership rights to the material released on Sire Records; Ferguson subsequently signed the group to EMI in March 1981.\nOn 4 January 1981, the band began recording their third album, \"Positive Touch\", again at Wisseloord Studios, and again with Roger Bechirian as producer. The band recorded a total of eight songs in five days before returning to Derry. Later the same month, the band returned to Wisseloord Studios to complete the recording of the LP. The songs on this album indicated a change in both musical and lyrical influences: although the songs remained largely guitar-oriented, the band had written songs which focused upon the Troubles in Northern Ireland such as \"Crisis of Mine\", \"You're Welcome\" and the single \"It's Going To Happen!\", which preceded the release of the LP and was partly inspired by the 1980\u201381 Hunger Strikes. In addition, several songs upon the LP included instruments such as pianos, saxophones, recorders and brass instruments, with two further songs (\"Julie Ocean\" and \"It's Going To Happen!\") drawing musical inspiration from contemporary artists Orange Juice and Dexy's Midnight Runners respectively. The band themselves were content with the change of influences for \"Positive Touch\", which bassist Michael Bradley later described as a \"natural progression\" for the band, adding that, at the time, consensus between the band members was that the songs upon the LP were their best yet.\nOne month prior to the release of this third album, in April 1981, the Undertones embarked on their 'Positive Touch tour'; this tour saw the band perform a total of 36 gigs across the UK mainland in the space of less than two months.\n\"Positive Touch\" was released in May 1981. This third album peaked at number 17 in the UK charts\u2014remaining in the Top 40 for a total of four weeks. The album also received favourable reviews from several music critics and was listed by \"NME\" as one of the best albums to be released in 1981, although neither the album nor either of the singles released were as successful as any of the material released the previous year.\nFollowing the conclusion of their 'Positive Touch tour' in June 1981, the Undertones released their second single of 1981, \"Julie Ocean\". The single \u2013 an extended recording of the 90-second album version \u2013 was produced by Hugh Jones and Dave Balfe.\nOn 29 September 1981, the Undertones embarked on their biggest tour of continental Europe, which lasted until 20 October 1981 and saw the band perform a total of 19 concerts in six countries.\n1982 saw a lull in activity from the Undertones, who only performed live on a total of five occasions throughout the entire year. Two of these gigs were held in England, with three further live appearances held in the United States in August. Much of the time the band spent together was devoted towards writing and recording songs for their next LP in their 8-track demo studio. Damian O'Neill, the Undertones' lead guitarist, later admitted: \"We (had) definitely lost a bit of the spark. I don't know but I tend to think some of us got too complacent sitting in our homes in Derry.\" The Undertones released two studio singles, \"Beautiful Friend\" and \"The Love Parade\", in February and October; both of these singles failed to make an impact upon the UK charts.\n\"The Sin of Pride\" (1983).\nIn March 1983, the Undertones released their fourth album, \"The Sin of Pride\". This album, which drew inspiration from both soul and Motown, was produced by Mike Hedges, who had replaced Roger Bechirian as the Undertones' producer following the 1981 release of \"Positive Touch\". Feargal Sharkey is known to have stated he had worked harder upon this album than at any point in his singing career to date, and that he considers this album the finest the Undertones ever produced. \"The Sin of Pride\" was met with critical acclaim upon release, and the Undertones performed several gigs in both Scotland and England to promote the release of this album; it reached number 43 in the UK chart.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"Certainly the Undertones were a completely different band by the time we made \"Positive Touch\" and the last album, \"The Sin of Pride\", which was an even bigger departure. We thought we were doing all these good things, taking up all these challenges and, we felt, meeting them, and nobody was saying a damn thing about it. Everybody wanted us to be these 16-year-old kids covered in acne and playing 'Teenage Kicks'.\"\n Feargal Sharkey reflecting on the Undertones' final two albums. April 1986\nThe Undertones released two further studio singles in 1983; their first single, \"Got To Have You Back\"\u2014an Isley Brothers cover which was inspired by both ABC and Smokey Robinson\u2014was released in February and their second single, \"Chain of Love\", was released in May. Both failed to make any major impact on the UK chart.\nDisbandment.\nIn April 1983, the Undertones embarked on their 'UK Sin of Pride tour' to promote their latest album. By this stage in their career, the band were acutely aware of the pressure they were under from EMI, who were unhappy with the lack of chart success of much of the material the band had released since the release of their \"Positive Touch\" LP. In addition, relations between various members of the band, in particular between Feargal Sharkey and John O'Neill, had deteriorated significantly. These factors led to Sharkey announcing his intentions to leave the Undertones during the 'European Tour 1983', which the group performed in May of that year.\nTo fulfill agreed commitments, the Undertones remained together for a further two months, performing several gigs across continental Europe before disbanding in mid-1983, with their final concert being played at Punchestown Racecourse in County Kildare in Ireland on 17 July.\nSubsequent careers.\nFollowing the disbandment of the Undertones in 1983, Feargal Sharkey was invited by Vince Clarke and Eric Radcliffe of the synthpop duet The Assembly to provide lead vocals on the single \"Never Never\", which was released by The Assembly in November 1983 and peaked at number 4 in the UK charts. Sharkey was never officially a member of The Assembly and his vocal contribution to \"Never Never\" proved to be Sharkey's only recording with the band, who would only issue this one single before folding.\nSharkey subsequently embarked upon a brief, but commercially successful solo career in the mid-1980s to early 1990s.\nTwo of the other band members, John O'Neill and Damian O'Neill, formed That Petrol Emotion in 1984. That Petrol Emotion released a total of fifteen singles and six albums between 1985 and 1994.\nIn the 1990s John O'Neill formed a trip hop group called Rare under the stage name Se\u00e1n \u00d3'N\u00e9ill with vocalist Mary Gallagher. They only had one notable chart appearance and disbanded shortly after the release of their only album in 1998.\nReunion.\nThe Undertones reformed in November 1999, initially to play concerts in Derry. For their reformation, the Undertones replaced Sharkey (who had declined to rejoin the band) with singer Paul McLoone. Since 1999, the Undertones have performed several tours across the UK, Ireland, Continental Europe, Japan, Turkey and North America and continue to perform live.\nNoteworthy gigs by the Undertones since their 1999 reformation include performing at the Glastonbury Festival in June 2005 and 2022, providing pre-match entertainment prior to kick-off at Celtic Park in the UEFA Champions League play-off between Celtic and Arsenal in August 2009 and, in March and April 2011, performing a series of UK gigs in which they played their debut album, \"The Undertones,\" in its entirety as part of each show. This tour was timed to accompany a re-release of a double compilation album containing all of the A- and B-sides of their singles.\nSince their reformation, the Undertones have released two albums of original material with Paul McLoone providing vocals: \"Get What You Need\" on 30 September 2003; and \"Dig Yourself Deep\", on 15 October 2007.\nIn April 2013, the Undertones released their first new material for over five years with the double A-side single \"Much Too Late / When It Hurts I Count To Ten\". This single\u2014limited to 1,000 numbered copies\u2014was released as part of the Record Store Day promotion in the UK and was recorded at Toe Rag Studios in London.\nMedia recognition.\nIn a 2000 poll by \"Q\" to discover the 100 greatest British albums of all time as voted by the British public, the Undertones' eponymous debut LP was voted the 90th greatest British album.\nThe Undertones have also been the subject of two documentaries: The first documentary to be produced: \"The Story of the Undertones: Teenage Kicks\", was recorded in 2001 and released in 2004. Directed by Tom Collins, this 65-minute documentary was produced with the cooperation of John Peel, who interviews all current and former members of the band (with the exception of Vincent O'Neill) in addition to Seymour Stein and Eamonn McCann. In this documentary, the band discuss their formation, career, subsequent careers, personal lives and 1999 reunion.\nThe second documentary relating to The Undertones: \"Here Comes the Summer: The Undertones Story\", was commissioned by the BBC and broadcast on BBC Four in September 2012. This documentary also features with interviews with current and former members of the Undertones (excluding Feargal Sharkey) in addition to numerous fans, friends, journalists, and additional personnel involved in the band's recordings and career.\nThe band were also portrayed in the 2013 film \"Good Vibrations\" about Terri Hooley and the Good Vibrations record label, featuring Jodie Whittaker and Richard Dormer.\nMembers.\nCurrent members\nFormer members\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30951", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30951", "title": "Tom Lehrer", "text": "American musician and mathematician (1928\u20132025)\nThomas Andrew Lehrer (; April 9, 1928 \u2013 July 26, 2025) was an American musician, singer-songwriter, satirist and mathematician, who later taught mathematics and musical theater. He recorded pithy, humorous, and often political songs that became popular in the 1950s and 1960s. His songs often parodied popular musical forms, though they usually had original melodies. An exception is \"The Elements\", in which he set the names of the chemical elements to the tune of the \"Major-General's Song\" from Gilbert and Sullivan's \"The Pirates of Penzance\".\nLehrer's early performances dealt with non-topical subjects and black humor in songs such as \"Poisoning Pigeons in the Park\". In the 1960s, he produced songs about timely social and political issues, particularly for the U.S. version of the television show \"That Was the Week That Was\". The popularity of these songs has far outlasted their topical subjects and references. Lehrer quoted a friend's explanation: \"Always predict the worst and you'll be hailed as a prophet.\" In the early 1970s, Lehrer largely retired from public performance to devote his time to teaching mathematics and musical theater history at the University of California, Santa Cruz.\nEarly life.\nThomas Andrew Lehrer was born in New York City on April 9, 1928, and grew up on Manhattan's Upper East Side. He was the son of Morris James Lehrer (1897\u20131986), a successful necktie designer, and Anna Lehrer (n\u00e9e Waller; 1905\u20131978) and older brother of Barry Waller Lehrer (1930\u20132007). Lehrer told an interviewer that he recalled an idyllic childhood on Manhattan's Upper West Side that included attending Broadway shows with his family and walking through Central Park day or night. He and his family were ethnically Jewish, following a generally secular lifestyle that included attending Jewish Sunday school but also celebrating Christmas; he remarked that his ties to Judaism were \"more to do with the delicatessen than the synagogue (...) and 'God' was primarily an expletive(.)\" As a child, he loved logic puzzles and math. He began taking classical piano lessons at the age of seven, but was more interested in the popular music of the age. Eventually, his mother sent him to a piano teacher who taught him how to play the Broadway show tunes he loved. At this early age, he began writing show tunes, which eventually helped him as a satirical composer and writer in his years of lecturing at Harvard University and later at other universities.\nLehrer attended the Horace Mann School in Riverdale, part of the Bronx borough of New York. He also attended Camp Androscoggin, both as a camper and a counselor. Stephen Sondheim had Tom Lehrer as a camp counselor.\nLehrer was considered a child prodigy and skipped two grades. After graduation from Loomis School, at the age of 15 he entered Harvard College, where one of his professors was Irving Kaplansky. As an undergraduate student at Harvard, he began to write comic songs, to entertain his friends, including \"Fight Fiercely, Harvard\". \nA fellow student and friend, the physicist Jeremy Bernstein, recalled that he was told to organize a luncheon entertainment for the seniors graduating in 1951. He knew only two entertainers, Lehrer and Al Capp, both of whom agreed. Lehrer (\"and a small group of co-conspirators,\" Bernstein wrote) performed his songs as \"The Physical Revue\" for Harvard's physics department then and again in 1952. (Bernstein said, \"This performance had remarkable consequences for Lehrer. Capp had a weekly radio program, and Lehrer became a fixture. I think that this was the first time he had been let loose on the general public, although the program only lasted four weeks.\") The revue was punningly revived by Lehrer in 1993 as \"Songs of the Physical Revue\" \u2013 a special performance for the American Physical Society to commemorate the centenary of their journal, the \"Physical Review\".\nAcademic and military career.\nLehrer graduated from Harvard with a Bachelor of Arts in mathematics, \"magna cum laude\", in 1946. At Harvard, he was the roommate of the Canadian theologian Robert Crouse. He received his MA degree the next year and was inducted into Phi Beta Kappa. He later taught mathematics and other classes at MIT, Harvard, Wellesley, and the University of California, Santa Cruz.\nLehrer remained in Harvard's doctoral program for several years, taking time also for his musical career. \"I spent many, many years satisfying all the requirements, as many years as possible, and I started on the thesis,\" he once said. \"But I just wanted to be a grad student, it's a wonderful life. That's what I wanted to be, and unfortunately, you can't be a Ph.D. and a grad student at the same time.\"\nLehrer reportedly worked briefly as a researcher with Stan Ulam at the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory for two months in 1952.\nIn 1953, he left Harvard, to work for Baird-Atomic, which made scientific and industrial instruments, including radiation detection and spectroscopy.\nLehrer was drafted into the U.S. Army in 1955. He served until 1957, working at the National Security Agency (NSA). Lehrer once stated that he invented the Jello shot during this time, as a means of circumventing the base's ban on alcoholic beverages. \nDespite holding a master's degree in an era when American conscripts often lacked high school diplomas, Lehrer served as an enlisted soldier, achieving the rank of specialist third class, which he described as being a \"corporal without portfolio\". These experiences became fodder for songs, such as \"The Wild West is Where I Want to Be\" and \"It Makes a Fellow Proud to Be a Soldier\". In 2020 Lehrer publicly revealed that he had been assigned to the NSA; since the mere fact of the NSA's existence was classified at the time, Lehrer found himself in the position of implicitly using nuclear weapons work as a cover story for something more sensitive.\nIn 1960, Lehrer returned to full-time mathematics studies at Harvard. From 1962 he taught mathematics in the political science department at MIT in Cambridge, Massachusetts. In 1965 he gave up on his mathematics dissertation on modes in statistics, after working on it intermittently for 15 years.\nLehrer grew tired of shoveling snow in the harsh Cambridge winters and already knew he liked California's Bay Area. He contacted botany professor Kenneth V. Thimann, provost of Crown College, University of California, Santa Cruz, and suggested teaching courses in musical theater. Since Crown was science-oriented, Thimann asked mathematician Anthony Joseph Tromba, who had been at Harvard and knew of Lehrer's musical antics, to find him a position at humanities-heavy Cowell College instead. Tromba sold Lehrer to the Fellowship Committee: \"No one on the committee had heard of Tom. So I had to convince them that it was a great idea... We had Ph.D.s in music and art history who did scholarly work. But Cowell also wanted to have practicing artists to give students actual meaningful contact with them. Rather than just writing papers about Michelangelo, let's have Michelangelo here\u2014and why not?\" So in 1972, Lehrer joined the faculty of the University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC). Tromba said that Lehrer was officially a \"Lecturer in American Studies,\" not mathematics, though he taught two introductory classes, \"The Nature of Mathematics\" and \"Mathematics in the Social Sciences,\" to liberal arts majors\u2014\"Math for Tenors\", according to Lehrer. He occasionally performed songs in his lectures. \nIn 2001, Lehrer taught his last mathematics class, on the topic of infinity, and retired from academia. He remained in the area, maintaining homes in both Santa Cruz and Cambridge. In 2003 Lehrer confirmed he still \"h[ung] out\" around UCSC. Mike Pe\u00f1a of UCSC said in 2025, \"Lehrer's reputation matched UC Santa Cruz's creative and irreverent spirit; and his talents played perfectly into the campus's original intent to elevate the humanities and foster deeper connections between scholarship and society... Lehrer taught at UC Santa Cruz until 2001 and last came here about five years ago. His cultural contributions are so woven into the American fabric that they ensure his place as one of the most beloved educators ever to teach at our campus.\"\nMusical career.\nStyle and influences.\nLehrer was mainly influenced by musical theater. According to Gerald Nachman's book \"Seriously Funny\", the Broadway musical \"Let's Face It!\" made an early and lasting impression on him. Lehrer's style consists of parodying various forms of popular song. For example, his appreciation of list songs led him to write \"The Elements\", which lists the chemical elements to the tune of Gilbert and Sullivan's \"Major-General's Song\".\n\"He gave his first public concert as a third-year graduate student, at the Sanders Theatre in 1950.\" \u2013 Jeremy Bernstein\nIn author and Boston University professor Isaac Asimov's second autobiographical volume, \"In Joy Still Felt\", Asimov recounted seeing Lehrer perform in a Boston nightclub on October 9, 1954. Lehrer sang a song about Jim getting it from Louise, and Sally from Jim, \"...\u00a0and after a while you gathered the 'it' was venereal disease. Suddenly, as the combinations grew more grotesque, you realized he was satirizing every known perversion without using a single naughty phrase. It was clearly unsingable outside a nightclub.\" Asimov also recalled a song that dealt with the Boston subway system, making use of the stations leading into town from Harvard, observing that the local subject-matter rendered the song useless for general distribution. Lehrer subsequently granted Asimov permission to print the lyrics to \"The Subway Song\" in his book. \"I haven't gone to nightclubs often,\" said Asimov, \"but of all the times I have gone, it was on this occasion that I had by far the best time.\"\nRecordings.\nLehrer was encouraged by the success of his performances, so he paid $15 () to record in a single one-hour session on January 22, 1953, at the TransRadio studio on Boylston Street in Boston, \"Songs by Tom Lehrer\". The initial pressing was 400 copies. Radio stations would not air his songs because of his controversial subjects, so he sold the album on campus at Harvard for $3, , while \"several stores near the Harvard campus sold it for $3.50, taking only a minimal markup as a kind of community service. Newsstands on campus sold it for the same price.\" After one summer, he started to receive mail orders from all parts of the country, as far away as San Francisco, after the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" wrote an article on the record. Interest in his recordings spread by word of mouth. People played their records for friends, who then also wanted a copy. Lehrer recalled, \"Lacking exposure in the media, my songs spread slowly. Like herpes, rather than ebola.\"\nThe album included the macabre \"I Hold Your Hand in Mine\", the mildly risqu\u00e9 \"Be Prepared\", and \"Lobachevsky\", regarding plagiarizing mathematicians. It became a cult success by word of mouth, despite being self-published and without promotion. The limited distribution of the album led to a knock-off album by Jack \"Enjal\" (a pseudonym of Jack Nagel) being released in 1958 without Lehrer's approval, where some of the lyrics were mistranscribed.\nLehrer embarked on a series of concert tours and recorded a second album in 1959. He released the second album in two versions: the songs were the same, but \"More of Tom Lehrer\" was a studio recording and \"An Evening Wasted with Tom Lehrer\" was recorded live in concert. In 2013, Lehrer recalled the studio session for \"Poisoning Pigeons in the Park\", which referred to the practice of controlling pigeons in Boston with strychnine-treated corn:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTouring.\nLehrer had a breakthrough in the United Kingdom on December 4, 1957, when the University of London awarded a doctor of music degree \"honoris causa\" to Princess Margaret, and the public orator, Professor J. R. Sutherland, said it was \"in the full knowledge that the Princess is a connoisseur of music and a performer of skill and distinction, her taste being catholic, ranging from Mozart to the calypso and from opera to the songs of Miss Beatrice Lillie and Tom Lehrer.\" This prompted significant interest in Lehrer's works and helped to secure distribution in Britain for his five-year-old debut album. It was there that his music achieved real sales popularity, as a result of the proliferation of university newspapers referring to the material, and inadvertently due to the BBC, which in 1958 banned from broadcast 10 of the 12 songs on the album. By the end of the 1950s, Lehrer had sold 370,000 records.\n\"That Was The Week That Was\".\nIn 1960, Lehrer essentially retired from touring in the U.S. That same year, however, he toured Australia and New Zealand, performing a total of 33 concerts to great acclaim and controversy. While in New Zealand, he penned lyrics critical of the All Blacks' upcoming tour of Apartheid-era South Africa and Prime Minister Walter Nash's stance on it. Lehrer's tours occurred during a time in which he was, he said, \"banned, censored, mentioned in several houses of parliament and threatened with arrest.\" In particular, \"Be Prepared\" drew advance resistance in Brisbane from the commissioner of police. He performed several songs in Australia that were still unreleased, including \"The Masochism Tango.\" \nIn the early 1960s, Lehrer was employed as the resident songwriter for the U.S. edition of \"That Was The Week That Was\" (TW3), a satirical television show. A greater proportion of his output became overtly political, or at least topical, on subjects such as education (\"New Math\"), the Second Vatican Council (\"The Vatican Rag\"), race relations (\"National Brotherhood Week\"), air and water pollution (\"Pollution\"&lt;ref name=\"cbc/player/9.6847426\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;), American militarism (\"Send the Marines\"), and nuclear proliferation (\"Who's Next?\" and \"MLF Lullaby\"). He also wrote a song satirizing rocket scientist Wernher von Braun, who worked for Nazi Germany before working for the United States. Lehrer did not appear on TW3; vocalist Nancy Ames performed his songs (to Lehrer's chagrin), and lines were often cut from his songs. Lehrer later performed nine of these songs at the Hungry i nightclub in San Francisco, and this became the album \"That Was the Year That Was\" (1965).\nIn 1966, BBC TV host David Frost returned to the UK with the BBC program \"The Frost Report\"; alongside Julie Felix, Lehrer provided musical satire on the weekly subject. The show was transmitted live, and he pre-recorded all his segments at one performance. Lehrer was not featured in every edition, but his songs featured in an appropriate part of each show. At least two of these songs were not included on any of his LPs: a reworking of No\u00ebl Coward's \"That is the End of the News\" (with some new lyrics) and a comic explanation of how Britain might adapt to the coming of decimal currency. \nLehrer's record deal with Reprise Records for \"That Was The Year That Was\" also gave Reprise distribution rights for his earlier recordings, because Lehrer wanted to wind up his own record imprint. The Reprise issue of \"Songs by Tom Lehrer\" was a stereo re-recording. This version was not issued on CD, as Lehrer was unhappy with this version. The live recording included bonus tracks \"L-Y\" and \"Silent E\", two of the ten songs that he wrote for the PBS children's educational series \"The Electric Company\". Lehrer later commented that worldwide sales of the recordings under Reprise surpassed 1.8 million units in 1996. That same year, \"That Was The Year That Was\" went gold. The album liner notes promote his songs with self-deprecating humor, such as quoting a \"New York Times\" review from 1959: Mr. Lehrer's muse is \"not fettered by such inhibiting factors as taste\".\nLehrer toured Sweden, Norway, and Denmark in 1967; his concert in Oslo was recorded for Danish television and subsequently released on DVD some 40 years later. He performed as a prominent international guest at the \"Studenterforeningen\" (student association) in Copenhagen, which was televised, and he commented on stage that he might be America's \"revenge for Victor Borge\". He performed original songs in a Dodge automobile industrial film distributed primarily to automobile dealers and shown at promotional events in 1967, set in a fictional American wild west town and titled \"The Dodge Rebellion Theatre presents Ballads For '67\". He attempted to adapt \"Sweeney Todd\" as a Broadway musical, working with Joe Raposo, to star Jerry Colonna. They started a few songs but, as Lehrer noted, \"Nothing ever came of it, and of course twenty years later Stephen Sondheim .\"\nDeparture from the music scene.\nAlthough Lehrer was \"a hero of the anti-nuclear, civil rights left\", he disliked the aesthetics of the counterculture of the 1960s and largely stopped performing in the United States as the movement gained momentum.\nIn the 1970s, Lehrer concentrated on teaching mathematics and musical theater, although he also wrote ten songs for the educational children's television show \"The Electric Company\". His last public performance for many years took place in 1972, on a fundraising tour for the anti-Vietnam War Democratic U.S. presidential candidate George McGovern.\nWhen asked why he had abandoned his musical career in an interview for the booklet accompanying his CD boxed set, \"The Remains of Tom Lehrer\" (2000), Lehrer replied: \"If an idea came to me, I'd write, and if it didn't I wouldn't\u2014and, gradually, the second option prevailed over the first. Occasionally people ask 'If you enjoyed it'\u2014and I did\u2014'why don't you do it again?' I reply, 'I enjoyed high school but I certainly wouldn't want to do \"that\" again.'\" \nYet at different times he gave other explanations for quitting. In 1973, he had said that \"political satire became obsolete when Henry Kissinger was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.\" In 1981, at a New York performance of \"Tomfoolery\", he told \"The New York Times\", \"The Vietnam War is what changed it. Everybody got earnest. My purpose was to make people laugh and not applaud. If the audience applauds they\u2019re just showing they agree with me. But that\u2019s not humor. So I dropped out just in time.\" \nLehrer's musical career was relatively brief. He once mentioned that he performed a mere 109 shows and wrote 37 songs over 20 years. Nevertheless, he developed a cult following in subsequent decades.\nRevivals and reissues.\nLehrer's music became a staple of \"The Doctor Demento Show\" when it began national syndication in 1977. In 1980, Cameron Mackintosh produced \"Tomfoolery\", a revue of Lehrer's songs that was a hit on the London stage. Lehrer was not initially involved with the show, but he was pleased with it; he eventually gave the stage production his full support and updated several of his lyrics for the show. \"Tomfoolery\" contained 27 songs and led to more than 200 productions, including an Off-Broadway production at the Village Gate which ran for 120 performances in 1981. Lehrer made a rare TV appearance on BBC's \"Parkinson\" show in conjunction with the \"Tomfoolery\" premiere in 1980 at the Criterion Theatre in London, where he sang \"I Got It from Agnes\". There were \"Tomfoolery\" performances in San Francisco about 1982 and in 2018\u201319. \"Tomfoolery\" was performed at the Arena Stage Theater in Washington, DC, in 1982. In 1993, he wrote \"That's Mathematics\" for the closing credits to a Mathematical Sciences Research Institute video celebrating the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.\nOn June 7 and 8, 1998, Lehrer performed in public for the first time in 18 years at the Lyceum Theatre, London, as part of the show \"Hey, Mr. Producer!\" celebrating the career of Cameron Mackintosh, who had produced \"Tomfoolery\". The June 8 show was his only performance before Queen Elizabeth II. Lehrer sang \"Poisoning Pigeons in the Park\" and an updated version of the nuclear proliferation song \"Who's Next?\".\nIn 2000, Lehrer commented that he doubted his songs had any real effect on those not already critical of the establishment: \"I don't think this kind of thing has an impact on the unconverted, frankly. It's not even preaching to the converted; it's titillating the converted\u00a0... I'm fond of quoting Peter Cook, who talked about the satirical Berlin Kabaretts of the 1930s, which did so much to stop the rise of Hitler and prevent the Second World War.\"\nLehrer said, jokingly, of his musical career: \"If, after hearing my songs, just one human being is inspired to say something nasty to a friend, or perhaps to strike a loved one, it will all have been worth the while.\" In 2003, Lehrer commented that his particular brand of political satire is more difficult in the modern world: \"The real issues I don't think most people touch. The Clinton jokes are all about Monica Lewinsky and all that stuff and not about the important things, like the fact that he wouldn't ban land mines\u00a0... I'm not tempted to write a song about George W. Bush. I couldn't figure out what sort of song I would write. That's the problem: I don't want to satirize George Bush and his puppeteers, I want to vaporize them.\" Earlier, he had said: \"Political satire became obsolete when Henry Kissinger was awarded the Nobel peace prize.\"\nIn 2000, the boxed CD set \"The Remains of Tom Lehrer\" was released by Rhino Entertainment. It included live and studio versions of his first two albums, \"That Was The Year That Was\", the songs that he wrote for \"The Electric Company\", some previously unreleased material, and a small hardbound lyrics book with an introduction by Dr. Demento. In 2010, Shout! Factory launched a reissue campaign, making Lehrer's out-of-print albums available digitally. The CD/DVD combo \"The Tom Lehrer Collection\" was issued, including his best-known songs, with a DVD featuring an Oslo concert.\nLater life and death.\nIn a February 2008 phone call, Gene Weingarten of \"The Washington Post\" interviewed Lehrer off the record. When Weingarten asked if there was anything he could print for the record, Lehrer responded, \"Just tell the people that I am voting for Obama.\"\nIn 2012, rapper 2 Chainz sampled Lehrer's song \"The Old Dope Peddler\" on his debut album, \"Based on a T.R.U. Story\". In 2013, Lehrer said he was \"very proud\" to have his song sampled \"literally sixty years after I recorded it\". Lehrer went on to describe his official response to the request to use his song: \"As sole copyright owner of 'The Old Dope Peddler', I grant you motherfuckers permission to do this. Please give my regards to Mr. Chainz, or may I call him 2?\"\nIn October 2020, Lehrer transferred the music and lyrics for all songs he had ever written into the public domain:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In short, I no longer retain any rights to any of my songs.\nSo help yourselves, and don\u2019t send me any money.\u2014\u200a\nIn November 2022, Lehrer formally relinquished the copyright and performing/recording rights on his songs, making all music and lyrics composed by him free for anyone to use, and established a website from which all of his recordings and printable copies of all of his songs could be downloaded. His statement releasing all his works into the public domain concludes with this note: \"This website will be shut down at some date in the not too distant future, so if you want to download anything, don't wait too long.\" As of October 2025, the website is still online.\nComedy label Stand Up! Records released Lehrer's holiday songs \"(I'm Spending) Hanukkah in Santa Monica,\" which he had written for Garrison Keillor's \"The American Radio Company of the Air\" in 1990 and recorded later, and \"A Christmas Carol\" as a seven-inch single in 2024. The limited-edition release also included sheet music for both songs.\nLehrer never married and had no children. He died at his home in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on July 26, 2025, at the age of 97.\nMusical legacy.\nIn 1967, Swedish actor Lars Ekborg, known outside Sweden for his part in Ingmar Bergman's \"Summer with Monika\", made an album called \"I Tom Lehrers vackra v\u00e4rld\" (\"In the beautiful world of Tom Lehrer\"), with 12 of Lehrer's songs translated into Swedish. Lehrer wrote in a letter to the producer Per-Anders Boquist that, \"Not knowing any Swedish, I am obviously not equipped to judge, but it sounds to me as though Mr. Ekborg is perfect for the songs\", along with further compliments to pianist Leif Asp for unexpected additional flourishes.\nIn 1971, Argentinian singer Nacha Guevara sang Spanish versions of several Lehrer songs for the show/live album \"Este es el a\u00f1o que es\". In the 1950s, Georg Kreisler wrote two songs likely inspired by Tom Lehrer's \"Poisoning Pigeons in the Park\" and \"I Hold Your Hand in Mine\", as mentioned by Lehrer himself even though disputed by Kreisler. Composer Randy Newman said of Lehrer, \"He's one of the great American songwriters without a doubt, right up there with everybody, the top guys. As a lyricist, as good as there's been in the last half of the 20th century.\" Singer and comedian Dillie Keane has acknowledged Lehrer's influence on her work.\nDr. Demento praised Lehrer as \"the best musical satirist of the twentieth century.\" Other artists who cite Lehrer as an influence include \"Weird Al\" Yankovic, whose work generally addresses more popular and less technical or political subjects, and educator and scientist H. Paul Shuch, who tours under the stage name Dr. SETI, and calls himself \"a cross between Carl Sagan and Tom Lehrer: He sings like Sagan and lectures like Lehrer.\" Yankovic saw Daniel Radcliffe (who called Lehrer his \"hero\") perform \"The Elements\" on \"The Graham Norton Show\" in his native United Kingdom,&lt;ref name=\"youtube/rSAaiYKF0cs\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; which led to Radcliffe starring in \"\".\nFrom January 16 to February 25, 2006, the play \"Letters from Lehrer\", written and performed by Canadian Richard Greenblatt, ran at CanStage in Toronto. It followed Lehrer's musical career, the meaning of several songs, the politics of the time, and Greenblatt's own experiences with Lehrer's music, while playing some of Lehrer's songs.\nIn the March 16, 2006, issue of \"New York\" magazine, Donald Fagen of Steely Dan named Tom Lehrer among the writers who had influenced him and his songwriting partner Walter Becker. \"We also liked comic songwriting, like Tom Lehrer. He was a piano player and songwriter who wrote these grim, funny songs.\"\nIn 2010, the German musician-comedian Felix Janosa released an album with the title \"Tauben vergiften: Die b\u00f6sen Lieder von Tom Lehrer\" (\"Poisoning pigeons: The Evil Songs of Tom Lehrer\"), with German versions of some of his best-known songs.\nIn 2024, Francis Beckett wrote a play \"Tom Lehrer Is Teaching Math and Doesn't Want to Talk to You\", which features Lehrer's music and was performed with Lehrer's tacit approval at the Upstairs at The Gatehouse theatre in Highgate, London.\nIn 2025, \"The Harvard Crimson\" recalls how Lehrer expressed his surprise that \"well, I wrote 'Fight Fiercely, Harvard' in 1945\" and it was still being performed in the 21st century. \"The Crimson\" comments, \"[As] Harvard squares off with the Trump administration, the song \u2014 which genteelly urges football players to 'hurl that spheroid down the field' \u2014 has become a protest anthem of sorts, too.\" \nPerformers influenced by Lehrer's style include American political satirist Mark Russell, Canadian comedian and songwriter Randy Vancourt, and the British duo Kit and The Widow. Composer/cabarettist Leonard Lehrman extended three of Lehrer's songs, writing a new verse 4 to \"Clementine\", a new verse 2 to \"Hanukkah in Santa Monica\", and a new verse 3 to \"The Elements\".\nLehrer has been referred to as the \"King of Satire\" by fans.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nLive albums\nCompilation albums\nSingles\nCovers\nMany of Lehrer's songs are performed by others in \"That Was The Week That Was\" (Radiola LP, 1981).\nPublications.\nMathematics\nsee: gambler's ruin, note reference to Lobachevsky (song), this paper was later edited and published in March 1958\nThe American Mathematical Society database lists him as co-author of two papers:\nSongs\nTwo of Lehrer's songs were reprinted, with his permission, in \"Mad\" magazine:\nSheet music \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nPapers\nAudio\nMetadata\nFan sites"}
{"id": "30953", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30953", "title": "Time sharing", "text": ""}
{"id": "30954", "revid": "10728040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30954", "title": "Type (metaphysics)", "text": ""}
{"id": "30955", "revid": "5042921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30955", "title": "Sophia of Jesus Christ", "text": "Christian Gnostic text\nThe Sophia The Christ, also known as the Wisdom of Jesus Christ, is a Gnostic text that was first discovered in the Berlin Codex (a Codex purchased in Cairo in 1896 and given to the Berlin Museum which also contains the \"Gospel of Mary\", the \"Apocryphon of John\", and a summary of the \"Act of Peter\"). More famously, the \"Sophia of Jesus Christ\" is also among the many Gnostic tractates in the Nag Hammadi codices, discovered in Egypt in 1945. The Berlin-Codex manuscript (as opposed to its contents) probably dates to c. AD 400, and the Nag-Hammadi manuscript has been dated to the 300s. However, these are complemented by a few fragments in Greek dating from the 200s, indicating an earlier date for the contents. \nWhile the title may refer to Sophia, Roel van den Broek argues that \"Sophia\" should be understood in its ordinary meaning as \"wisdom\", analogous to the titles Wisdom of Solomon and Wisdom of Sirach.\nThe text incorporates almost the entirety of the \"Epistle of Eugnostos\", which is also found in the Nag Hammadi codices, but incorporates it into a Christian frame narrative, in which Jesus answers questions from his disciples by quoting from \"Eugnostos\" verbatim.\nBackground.\nThe debate about dating is critical, since some argue that it reflects the \"true, recorded, sayings\" of Jesus, which is possible if they were to be dated as far back as the 1st century. Others argue that they are, in fact, considerably later, and constitute an unreliable secondary source (at best \"post factum\" hearsay). Roel van den Broek argues that because the text presupposes a familiarity with gnostic myth, it is unlikely to predate the mid-second century.\nMost scholars argue that the text is of Gnostic origin, based on the similarities between the mystical teachings found in the text itself and standard Gnostic themes. Highly mystical, the content of this text concerns creation of gods, angels, and the universe with an emphasis on infinite and metaphysical truth. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The perfect saviour hath said: \"Come (you) from things unseen unto the end of those that are seen, and the very emanation of Thought shall reveal unto you how faith in they which are unseen was found in them which are seen, they that belong to the Unbegotten Father. Whomsoever hath ears to hear, let him hear!\"\u2014\u200a\nThe text is composed of 13 questions from the disciples, followed by brief discourses by Jesus in response. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30957", "revid": "3215664", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30957", "title": "Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann", "text": "Pantheon of pre-Christian Ireland\nThe Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann (, usually translated \"folk of the goddess Danu\"), also known by the earlier name Tuath D\u00e9 (\"tribe of the gods\" or \"divine tribe\"), are a supernatural race in Irish mythology. Many of them are thought to represent deities of pre-Christian Gaelic Ireland.\nThe Tuath D\u00e9 Danann are often depicted as kings, queens, druids, bards, warriors, heroes, healers and craftsmen who have supernatural powers. They dwell in the Otherworld but interact with humans and the human world. They are associated with the \"s\u00eddhe\": prominent ancient burial mounds such as Br\u00fa na B\u00f3inne, which are entrances to Otherworld realms. Their traditional rivals are the Fomorians (Fomoire), who might represent the destructive powers of nature, and whom the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann defeat in the Battle of Mag Tuired. Prominent members include the Dagda (\"the great god\"); The Morr\u00edgan (\"the great queen\" or \"phantom queen\"); Lugh; Nuada; Aengus; Brigid; Manann\u00e1n; Dian Cecht the healer; and Goibniu the smith, one of the \"Tr\u00ed D\u00e9 D\u00e1na\" (\"three gods of craft\"). Several of the Tuath D\u00e9 are cognate with ancient Celtic deities: Lugh with Lugus, Brigit with Brigantia, Nuada with Nodons, Ogma with Ogmios, and Goibniu with Gobannus.\nMedieval texts about the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann were written by Christians. Sometimes they explained the Tuath D\u00e9 as fallen angels who were neither wholly good nor evil, or ancient people who became highly skilled in magic, but several writers acknowledged that at least some of them had been gods. Some of them have multiple names, but in the tales, they often appear to be different characters. Originally, these probably represented different aspects of the same deity, while others were regional names.\nThe Tuath D\u00e9 eventually became the aes s\u00eddhe, the \"s\u00eddhe\"-folk or \"fairies\" of later folklore.\nName.\nThe Old Irish word \"t\u00faath\" (plural \"t\u00faatha\") means \"tribe, folk, people\"; \"d\u00e9\" is the genitive case of \"d\u00eda\" and, depending on context, can mean \"god, gods, goddess\" or more broadly \"deity, divinity, supernatural being, object of worship\". In the earliest writings, the mythical race are referred to as the \"T\u00faath D\u00e9\", \"tribe of gods/divine tribe\", or \"T\u00faatha D\u00e9\", \"tribes of gods/divine tribes\". In the \"Lebor Bretnach\" their name is translated into Latin as \"plebes deorum\", \"god-folk\". However, Irish monks also began using the term \"T\u00faath D\u00e9\" to refer to the Israelites, with the meaning \"People of God\". Apparently to avoid confusion with the Israelites, writers began to refer to the mythical race as the \"T\u00faath(a) D\u00e9 Danann\" or \"T\u00faath(a) D\u00e9 Donann\" (). This is generally translated as \"folk of the goddess Danu\". It may also have been a way of humanising them: instead of 'god-folk', they were now the folk of a particular goddess. \n\"Danann\" is generally believed to be the genitive of a female name, for which the nominative case is not attested. It has been reconstructed as \"*Danu\", of which \"Anu\" (genitive \"Anann\") may be an alternative form. \"Anu\" is called \"mother of the Irish gods\" by Cormac mac Cuilenn\u00e1in. This may be linked to the Welsh mythical figure D\u00f4n. Hindu mythology also has a goddess called Danu, who may be an Indo-European parallel. However, this reconstruction is not universally accepted. It has also been suggested that \"Danann\" is a conflation of \"d\u00e1n\" (\"skill, craft\") and the goddess name \"Anann\". The name is also found as \"Donann\" and \"Domnann\", which may point to the origin being proto-Celtic \"*don\", meaning \"earth\" (compare the Old Irish word for earth, \"doman\"). T\u00edrech\u00e1n described the \"s\u00eddh\" folk as \"dei terreni\", \"earthly gods\". The name could be cognate with the mythical Fir Domnann and the British Dumnonii.\nEarly Christian writers also referred to them as the \"fir d\u00e9\" (god-men) and \"cen\u00e9la d\u00e9\" (god-kindreds), again possibly to avoid calling them simply 'gods'. Some of the Tuath D\u00e9 are occasionally called the \"clann Eladan\", \"children of art\".\nDescription.\nThe Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann are described as a supernatural race, much like idealised humans, who are immune to ageing and sickness, and who have powers of magic. The powers most often attributed to them are control over the weather and the elements, and the ability to shapeshift themselves and other things. They are also said to control the fertility of the land; the tale \"De Gab\u00e1il in t-S\u00edda\" says the first Gaels had to establish friendship with the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann before they could raise crops and herds.\nThey live in the Otherworld, which is described as either a parallel world or a heavenly land beyond the sea or under the earth's surface. Many of them are associated with specific places in the landscape, especially the \"s\u00eddh\" mounds; the ancient burial mounds and passage tombs which are entrances to Otherworld realms. The Tuath D\u00e9 can hide themselves with a \"f\u00e9th f\u00edada\" ('magic mist') and appear to humans only when they wish to.\nIn some tales, such as \"Baile in Sc\u00e1il\", a king receives affirmation of his legitimacy from one of the Tuath D\u00e9. In other tales, a king's right to rule is affirmed by an encounter with an otherworldly woman. It has been argued that the inauguration of Irish kings originally represented their ritual marriage to the goddess of the land (see sovereignty goddess). The Tuath D\u00e9 can also bring doom to unrightful kings.\nThe medieval writers who wrote about the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann were Christians. Sometimes they explained the Tuath D\u00e9 as fallen angels; neutral angels who sided neither with God nor Lucifer and were punished by being forced to dwell on the Earth; or humans who had become highly skilled in magic. However, several writers acknowledged that at least some of them had been gods.\nThere is strong evidence that many of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann represent the gods of Irish paganism. The name itself means \"tribe of gods\", and the ninth-century \"Sc\u00e9l Tuain meic Cairill\" (Tale of Tuan mac Cairill) speaks of the \"Tuath D\u00e9 ocus And\u00e9\", \"tribe of gods and un-gods\". Goibniu, Credne and Luchta are called the \"tr\u00ed d\u00e9 d\u00e1no\", \"three gods of craft\". In \"Sanas Cormaic\" (Cormac's Glossary), Anu is called \"mother of the Irish gods\", N\u00e9t a \"god of war\", and Brigit a \"goddess of poets\" whose father is the Dagda; his own name meaning \"the great god\". Writing in the seventh century, T\u00edrech\u00e1n explained the \"s\u00eddh\" folk as \"earthly gods\" (Latin \"dei terreni\"), while \"Fiacc's Hymn\" says the Irish adored the \"s\u00eddh\" before the coming of Saint Patrick. Goibniu, Dian C\u00e9cht the physician, and Flidais the mistress of animals are invoked in incantations, further evidence that they were seen as supernatural powers. Several of the Tuath D\u00e9 are cognate with ancient Celtic deities: Lugh with Lugus, Brigit with Brigantia, Nuada with Nodons, and Ogma with Ogmios.\nNevertheless, John Carey notes that it is not wholly accurate to describe all of them as gods in the medieval literature itself. He argues that the literary Tuath D\u00e9 are \"sui generis\", and suggests \"immortals\" might be a more neutral term.\nLegend.\nIn euhemerized accounts, the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann were descended from Nemed, leader of a previous wave of inhabitants of Ireland. In non-euhemerized accounts, they are descended from Danu/Anu, a mother goddess. They came from four cities to the north of Ireland\u2014Falias, Gorias, Murias and Finias\u2014where they taught their skills in the sciences, including architecture, the arts and magic. According to \"Lebor Gab\u00e1la \u00c9renn\", they came to Ireland \"in dark clouds\" and \"landed on the mountains of [the] Conmaicne Rein in Connachta\", otherwise Sliabh an Iarainn, \"and they brought a darkness over the sun for three days and three nights\". They immediately burnt the ships \"so that they should not think of retreating to them, and the smoke and the mist that came from the vessels filled the neighbouring land and air. Therefore it was conceived that they had arrived in clouds of mist\".\nA poem in the \"Lebor Gab\u00e1la \u00c9renn\" says of their arrival:\n&lt;poem&gt;It is God who suffered them, though He restrained them\nthey landed with horror, with lofty deed,\nin their cloud of mighty combat of spectres,\nupon a mountain of Conmaicne of Connacht.\nWithout distinction to discerning Ireland,\nWithout ships, a ruthless course\nthe truth was not known beneath the sky of stars,\nwhether they were of heaven or of earth.&lt;/poem&gt;\nAccording to Tuan:\nFrom them are the Tuatha D\u00e9 and And\u00e9, whose origin the learned do not know, but that it seems likely to them that they came from heaven, on account of their intelligence and for the excellence of their knowledge.\nLed by king Nuada, they fought the First Battle of Magh Tuireadh on the west coast, in which they defeated and displaced the native Fir Bolg, who then inhabited Ireland. In the battle, Nuada lost an arm to their champion, Sreng. Since Nuada was no longer \"unblemished\", he could not continue as king and was replaced by the half-Fomorian Bres, who turned out to be a tyrant. The physician Dian Cecht replaced Nuada's arm with a working silver one and he was reinstated as king. However, Dian Cecht's son Miach was dissatisfied with the replacement, so he recited the spell, \"ault fri halt d\u00ed &amp; f\u00e9ith fri f\u00e9th\" (joint to joint of it and sinew to sinew), which caused flesh to grow over the silver prosthesis over the course of nine days and nights. However, in a fit of jealous rage Dian Cecht slew his own son. Because of Nuada's restoration as the leader, Bres complained to his family and his father, Elatha, who sent him to seek assistance from Balor, king of the Fomorians.\nThe Tuath D\u00e9 then fought the Second Battle of Magh Tuireadh against the Fomorians. Nuada was killed by the Fomorian king Balor's poisonous eye, but Balor was killed by Lugh, champion of the Tuath D\u00e9, who then took over as king.\nA third battle was fought against a subsequent wave of invaders, the Milesians, from the northwest of the Iberian Peninsula (present-day Galicia and Northern Portugal), descendants of M\u00edl Esp\u00e1ine (who are thought to represent the Goidelic Celts). The Milesians encountered three Tuath D\u00e9 goddesses, \u00c9riu, Banba, and Fodla, who asked that the island be named after them; \u00c9riu is the origin of the modern name \u00c9ire, and Banba and Fodla are still sometimes used as poetic names for Ireland.\nTheir three husbands, Mac Cuill, Mac Cecht and Mac Gr\u00e9ine, were kings of the Tuath D\u00e9 at that time, and asked for a truce of three days, during which the Milesians would lie at anchor nine waves' distance from the shore. The Milesians complied, but the Tuath D\u00e9 created a magical storm in an attempt to drive them away. The Milesian poet Amergin calmed the sea with his verse, then his people landed and defeated the Tuath D\u00e9 at Tailtiu. When Amergin was called upon to divide the land between the Tuath D\u00e9 and his own people, he cleverly allotted the portion above ground to the Milesians and the portion underground to the Tuath D\u00e9. The Tuath D\u00e9 were led underground into the Sidhe mounds by Manann\u00e1n mac Lir and T\u00edr na n\u00d3g onto a flowery plain/plain of honey attested to in the Voyage of Bran.\nThe Four Treasures.\nThe Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann brought four magical treasures with them to Ireland, one apiece from their Four Cities:\nTuatha D\u00e9 Danann High Kings of Ireland.\nThe following is a chronology from the \"Annals of the Four Masters\", based on reign-lengths given in Geoffrey Keating's \"Forus Feasa ar Erinn\". Nuada's original reign lacks a precise start date.\nAdditional references.\nIn the Irish version of the Historia Britonum of Nennius, the chief men of science of the \"Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann\" are listed with their partly Latin names and associations as follows:\nIn the Annals of Inisfallen, the following are listed as members of the \"Tuatha D\u00e9\" who overcame the Fir Bolg:\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nPrimary sources"}
{"id": "30958", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30958", "title": "Time-sharing", "text": "Computing resource shared by concurrent users\nIn computing, time-sharing is the concurrent sharing of a computing resource among many tasks or users by giving each task or user a small slice of processing time. This quick switch between tasks or users gives the illusion of simultaneous execution. It enables multi-tasking by a single user or enables multiple-user sessions.\nDeveloped during the 1960s, its emergence as the prominent model of computing in the 1970s represented a major technological shift in the history of computing. By allowing many users to interact concurrently with a single computer, time-sharing dramatically lowered the cost of providing computing capability, made it possible for individuals and organizations to use a computer without owning one, and promoted the interactive use of computers and the development of new interactive applications.\nHistory.\nBatch processing.\nThe earliest computers were extremely expensive devices, and very slow. Machines were typically dedicated to a particular set of tasks and operated by control panels, the operator manually entering small programs via switches one at a time. These programs might take hours to run. As computers increased in speed, run times dropped, and soon the time taken to start up the next program became a concern. Newer batch processing software and methodologies, including batch operating systems such as IBSYS (1960), decreased these \"dead periods\" by queuing up programs ready to run.\nComparatively inexpensive card punch or paper tape writers were used by programmers to write their programs \"offline\". Programs were submitted to the operations team, which scheduled them to be run. Output (generally printed) was returned to the programmer. The complete process might take days, during which time the programmer might never see the computer. Stanford students made a short film humorously critiquing this situation.\nThe alternative of allowing the user to operate the computer directly was generally far too expensive to consider. This was because users might have long periods of entering code while the computer remained idle. This situation limited interactive development to those organizations that could afford to waste computing cycles: large universities for the most part.\nTime-sharing.\nThe term time-sharing has had two major uses, one prior to 1960 and the other after. In the earliest uses, the term (used without the hyphen) referred to what we now call multiprogramming.\nRobert Dodds claimed to have been first to describe this form of time sharing in a letter he wrote to Bob Bemer in 1949. Later John Backus described the concept in the 1954 summer session at MIT. In a 1957 article \"How to consider a computer\" in \"Automatic Control Magazine\" , Bob Bemer outlined the economic reasons for using one large computer shared among multiple users, whose programs are \u201cinterleaved.\u201d He also proposed a computer utility that would provide computing power to multiple users, similarly to how electricity is provided by power companies. In a paper published in December 1958, W. F. Bauer described how a \"parallel system\" like LARC or Gamma 60 allowed \"large components of the machine [to] be time-shared\" and also proposed that large regional computers provide computing power to organizations in their region.\nChristopher Strachey, who became Oxford University's first professor of computation, filed a patent application in the United Kingdom for \"time-sharing\" in February 1959. In June of that year, he gave a paper \"Time Sharing in Large Fast Computers\" at the first UNESCO Information Processing Conference in Paris, in which he described solutions to various technical problems raised by the idea of time-sharing. At the same conference, he passed the concept on to J. C. R. Licklider of Bolt Beranek and Newman (BBN). This paper was credited by the MIT Computation Center in 1963 as \"the first paper on time-shared computers\".\nAfter 1960, the meaning of the term \"time-sharing\" shifted from its original usage and it came to mean sharing a computer interactively among multiple users. In 1984 Christopher Strachey wrote he considered the change in the meaning of the term \"time-sharing\" a source of confusion and not what he meant when he wrote his paper in 1959.\nThe first interactive, general-purpose time-sharing system usable for software development, Compatible Time-Sharing System, was initiated by John McCarthy at MIT writing a memo in 1959. Fernando J. Corbat\u00f3 led the development of the system, a prototype of which had been produced and tested by November 1961. Philip M. Morse arranged for IBM to provide a series of their mainframe computers starting with the IBM 704 and then the IBM 709 product line IBM 7090 and IBM 7094. IBM loaned those mainframes at no cost to MIT along with the staff to operate them and also provided hardware modifications mostly in the form of RPQs as prior customers had already commissioned the modifications. There were certain stipulations that governed MIT's use of the loaned IBM hardware. MIT could not charge for use of CTSS. MIT could only use the IBM computers for eight hours a day; another eight hours were available for other colleges and universities; IBM could use their computers for the remaining eight hours, although there were some exceptions. In 1963 a second deployment of CTSS was installed on an IBM 7094 that MIT has purchased using ARPA money. This was used to support Multics development at Project MAC.\nDuring the same period, Licklider led the development of the BBN Time-Sharing System, which began operation and was publicly demonstrated in 1962.\nJOSS began time-sharing service in January 1964. Dartmouth Time-Sharing System (DTSS) began service in March 1964.\nDevelopment.\nThroughout the late 1960s and the 1970s, computer terminals were multiplexed onto large institutional mainframe computers (centralized computing systems), which in many implementations sequentially polled the terminals to see whether any additional data was available or action was requested by the computer user. Later technology in interconnections were interrupt driven, and some of these used parallel data transfer technologies such as the IEEE 488 standard. Generally, computer terminals were utilized on college properties in much the same places as \"desktop computers\" or \"personal computers\" are found today. In the earliest days of personal computers, many were in fact used as particularly smart terminals for time-sharing systems.\nDTSS's creators wrote in 1968 that \"any response time which averages more than 10 seconds destroys the illusion of having one's own computer\". Conversely, timesharing users thought that their terminal was the computer, and unless they received a bill for using the service, rarely thought about how others shared the computer's resources, such as when a large JOSS application caused paging for all users. The \"JOSS Newsletter\" often asked users to reduce storage usage. Time-sharing was nonetheless an efficient way to share a large computer. As of 1972[ [update]] DTSS supported more than 100 simultaneous users. Although more than 1,000 of the 19,503 jobs the system completed on \"a particularly busy day\" required ten seconds or more of computer time, DTSS was able to handle the jobs because 78% of jobs needed one second or less of computer time. About 75% of 3,197 users used their terminal for 30 minutes or less, during which they used less than four seconds of computer time. A football simulation, among early mainframe games written for DTSS, used less than two seconds of computer time during the 15 minutes of real time for playing the game. With the rise of microcomputing in the early 1980s, time-sharing became less significant, because individual microprocessors were sufficiently inexpensive that a single person could have all the CPU time dedicated solely to their needs, even when idle.\nHowever, the Internet brought the general concept of time-sharing back into popularity. Expensive corporate server farms costing millions can host thousands of customers all sharing the same common resources. As with the early serial terminals, web sites operate primarily in bursts of activity followed by periods of idle time. This bursting nature permits the service to be used by many customers at once, usually with no perceptible communication delays, unless the servers start to get very busy.\nTime-sharing business.\nGenesis.\nIn the 1960s, several companies started providing time-sharing services as service bureaus. Early systems used Teletype Model 33 KSR or ASR or Teletype Model 35 KSR or ASR machines in ASCII environments, and IBM Selectric typewriter-based terminals (especially the IBM 2741) with two different seven-bit codes. They would connect to the central computer by dial-up Bell 103A modem or acoustically coupled modems operating at 10\u201315 characters per second. Later terminals and modems supported 30\u2013120 characters per second. The time-sharing system would provide a complete operating environment, including a variety of programming language processors, various software packages, file storage, bulk printing, and off-line storage. Users were charged rent for the terminal, a charge for hours of connect time, a charge for seconds of CPU time, and a charge for kilobyte-months of disk storage.\nCommon systems used for time-sharing included the SDS 940, the PDP-10, the IBM 360, and the GE-600 series. Companies providing this service included GE's GEISCO, the IBM subsidiary The Service Bureau Corporation, Tymshare (founded in 1966), National CSS (founded in 1967 and bought by Dun &amp; Bradstreet in 1979), Dial Data (bought by Tymshare in 1968), AL/COM, Bolt, Beranek, and Newman (BBN) and Time Sharing Ltd. in the UK. By 1968, there were 32 such service bureaus serving the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) alone. The \"Auerbach Guide to Timesharing\" (1973) lists 125 different timesharing services using equipment from Burroughs, CDC, DEC, HP, Honeywell, IBM, RCA, Univac, and XDS.\nRise and fall.\nIn 1975, acting president of Prime Computer Ben F. Robelen told stockholders that \"The biggest end-user market currently is time-sharing\". For DEC, for a while the second largest computer company (after IBM), this was also true: Their PDP-10 and IBM's 360/67 were widely used by commercial timesharing services such as CompuServe, On-Line Systems, Inc. (OLS), Rapidata and Time Sharing Ltd.\nThe advent of the personal computer marked the beginning of the decline of time-sharing. The economics were such that computer time went from being an expensive resource that had to be shared to being so cheap that computers could be left to sit idle for long periods in order to be available as needed.\nRapidata as an example.\nAlthough many time-sharing services simply closed, Rapidata held on, and became part of National Data Corporation. It was still of sufficient interest in 1982 to be the focus of \"A User's Guide to Statistics Programs: The Rapidata Timesharing System\". Even as revenue fell by 66% and National Data subsequently developed its own problems, attempts were made to keep this timesharing business going.\nThe computer utility.\nBeginning in 1964, the Multics operating system was designed as a computing utility, modeled on the electrical or telephone utilities. In the 1970s, Ted Nelson's original \"Xanadu\" hypertext repository was envisioned as such a service. \nSecurity.\nTime-sharing was the first time that multiple processes, owned by different users, were running on a single machine, and these processes could interfere with one another. For example, one process might alter shared resources which another process relied on, such as a variable stored in memory. When only one user was using the system, this would result in possibly wrong output - but with multiple users, this might mean that other users got to see information they were not meant to see.\nTo prevent this from happening, an operating system needed to enforce a set of policies that determined which privileges each process had. For example, the operating system might deny access to a certain variable by a certain process.\nThe first international conference on computer security in London in 1971 was primarily driven by the time-sharing industry and its customers.\nTime-sharing in the form of shell accounts has been considered a risk.\nNotable time-sharing systems.\nSignificant early timesharing systems:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
