{"id": "38422", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38422", "title": "Plotinus", "text": "Hellenistic founder of Neoplatonism (c. 204/5 \u2013 270)\nPlotinus (; , \"Pl\u014dt\u00eenos\"; c.\u2009204/5\u00a0\u2013 270 CE) was a hellenised Egyptian Platonist philosopher, born and raised in Roman Egypt. Plotinus is regarded by modern scholarship as the founder of Neoplatonism. His teacher was the self-taught philosopher Ammonius Saccas, who belonged to the Platonic tradition. Historians of the 19th century invented the term \"neoplatonism\" and applied it to refer to Plotinus and his philosophy, which was vastly influential during late antiquity, the Middle Ages, and the Renaissance. Much of the biographical information about Plotinus comes from Porphyry's preface to his edition of Plotinus' most notable literary work, \"The Enneads\". In his metaphysical writings, Plotinus described three fundamental principles: the One, the Intellect, and the Soul. His works have inspired centuries of pagan, Jewish, Christian, Gnostic, and early Islamic metaphysicians and mystics, including developing precepts that influence mainstream theological concepts within religions, such as his work on duality of the One in two metaphysical states.\nBiography.\nPorphyry reported that Plotinus was sixty-six years old when he died in 270 CE, the second year of the reign of the Roman Emperor Claudius II, thus giving us the year of his birth as around 204. Eunapius reported that Plotinus was born in Lyco, which could either refer to the modern Asyut in Upper Egypt or Deltaic Lycopolis, in Lower Egypt. This has led to speculations that his family was either (Hellenized) Egyptian, Greek, or Roman. Historian Lloyd P. Gerson states that Plotinus was \"almost certainly\" a Greek. A.H. Armstrong, one of the foremost authorities on the philosophical teachings of Plotinus, writes that: \"All that can be said with reasonable certainty is that Greek was his normal language and that he had a Greek education\". Plotinus himself was said to have had little interest in his ancestry, birthplace, or that of anyone else for that matter. His native language was Greek.\nPlotinus had an inherent distrust of materiality (an attitude common to Platonism), holding to the view that phenomena were a poor image or mimicry (\"mimesis\") of something \"higher and intelligible\" (VI.I) which was the \"truer part of genuine Being\". This distrust extended to the body, including his own; it is reported by Porphyry that at one point he refused to have his portrait painted, presumably for much the same reasons of dislike. Likewise, Plotinus never discussed his ancestry, childhood, or his place or date of birth. From all accounts his personal and social life exhibited the highest moral and spiritual standards.\nPlotinus took up the study of philosophy at the age of twenty-eight, around the year 232, and travelled to Alexandria to study. There he was dissatisfied with every teacher he encountered, until an acquaintance suggested he listen to the ideas of the self-taught Platonist philosopher Ammonius Saccas. Upon hearing Ammonius' lecture, Plotinus declared to his friend: \"this is the man I was looking for\", began to study intently under his new instructor, and remained with him as his student for eleven years. Besides Ammonius, Plotinus was also influenced by the philosophical works of Aristotle, the pre-Socratic philosophers Empedocles and Heraclitus, the Middle Platonist philosophers Alexander of Aphrodisias and Numenius of Apamea, along with various Stoics and Neopythagoreans.\nExpedition to Persia and return to Rome.\nAfter having spent eleven years in Alexandria, he then decided, at the age of around thirty-eight, to investigate the philosophical teachings of the Persian and Indian philosophers. In the pursuit of this endeavor he left Alexandria and joined the army of the Roman emperor Gordian III as it marched on Persia (242\u2013243). However, the campaign was a failure, and on Gordian's eventual death Plotinus found himself abandoned in a hostile land, and only with difficulty found his way back to safety in Antioch.\nAt the age of forty, during the reign of Emperor Philip the Arab, he came to Rome, where he stayed for most of the remainder of his life. There he attracted a number of students. His innermost circle included Porphyry, Amelius Gentilianus of Tuscany, the Senator Castricius Firmus, and Eustochius of Alexandria, a doctor who devoted himself to learning from Plotinus and attending to him until his death. Other students included: Zethos, an Arab by ancestry who died before Plotinus, leaving him a legacy and some land; Zoticus, a critic and poet; Paulinus, a doctor of Scythopolis; and Serapion from Alexandria. He had students amongst the Roman Senate beside Castricius, such as Marcellus Orontius, Sabinillus, and Rogantianus. Women were also numbered amongst his students, including Gemina, in whose house he lived during his residence in Rome, and her daughter, also Gemina; and Amphiclea, the wife of Ariston, the son of Iamblichus. Finally, Plotinus was a correspondent of the philosopher Cassius Longinus.\nLater life.\nWhile in Rome, Plotinus also gained the respect of the Emperor Gallienus and his wife Salonina. At one point Plotinus attempted to interest Gallienus in rebuilding an abandoned settlement in Campania, known as the 'City of Philosophers', where the inhabitants would live under the constitution set out in Plato's \"Laws\". An Imperial subsidy was never granted, for reasons unknown to Porphyry, who reports the incident.\nPlotinus subsequently went to live in Sicily. He spent his final days in seclusion on an estate in Campania which his friend Zethos had bequeathed him. According to the account of Eustochius, who attended him at the end, Plotinus' final words were: \"Try to raise the divine in yourselves to the divine in the all.\" Eustochius records that a snake crept under the bed where Plotinus lay, and slipped away through a hole in the wall; at the same moment the philosopher died.\nPlotinus wrote the essays that became the \"Enneads\" (from Greek \u1f10\u03bd\u03bd\u03ad\u03b1 (\"enn\u00e9a\"), or group of nine) over a period of several years from c. 253 until a few months before his death seventeen years later. Porphyry makes note that the \"Enneads\", before being compiled and arranged by himself, were merely the enormous collection of notes and essays which Plotinus used in his lectures and debates, rather than a formal book. Plotinus was unable to revise his own work due to his poor eyesight, yet his writings required extensive editing, according to Porphyry: his master's handwriting was atrocious, he did not properly separate his words, and he cared little for niceties of spelling. Plotinus intensely disliked the editorial process, and turned the task to Porphyry, who polished and edited them into their modern form.\nMajor ideas.\nThe One.\nPlotinus taught that there is a supreme, totally transcendent \"One\", containing no division, multiplicity, or distinction; beyond all categories of being and non-being. His \"One\" \"cannot be any existing thing\", nor is it merely the sum of all things (compare the Stoic doctrine of disbelief in non-material existence), but \"is prior to all existents\". Plotinus identified his \"One\" with the concept of 'Good' and the principle of 'Beauty'. (I.6.9)\nHis \"One\" concept encompassed thinker and object. Even the self-contemplating intelligence (the noesis of the nous) must contain duality. \"Once you have uttered 'The Good,' add no further thought: by any addition, and in proportion to that addition, you introduce a deficiency.\" (III.8.11) Plotinus denies sentience, self-awareness or any other action (\"ergon\") to the One (\u03c4\u1f78 \u1f1d\u03bd, \"to hen\"; V.6.6). Rather, if we insist on describing it further, we must call the One a sheer potentiality (\"dynamis\") without which nothing could exist. (III.8.10) As Plotinus explains in both places and elsewhere (e.g. V.6.3), it is impossible for the One to be Being or a self-aware Creator God. At (V.6.4), Plotinus compared the One to \"light\", the Divine Intellect/Nous (\u039d\u03bf\u1fe6\u03c2, \"Nous\"; first will towards Good) to the \"Sun\", and lastly the Soul (\u03a8\u03c5\u03c7\u03ae, \"Psyche\") to the \"Moon\" whose light is merely a \"derivative conglomeration of light from the 'Sun'\". The first light could exist without any celestial body.\nThe One, being beyond all attributes including being and non-being, is the source of the world\u2014but not through any act of creation, since activity cannot be ascribed to the unchangeable, immutable One. Plotinus argues instead that the multiple cannot exist without the simple. The \"less perfect\" must, of necessity, \"emanate\", or issue forth, from the \"perfect\" or \"more perfect\". Thus, all of \"creation\" emanates from the One in succeeding stages of lesser and lesser perfection. These stages are not temporally isolated, but occur throughout time as a constant process.\nThe One is not just an intellectual concept but something that can be experienced, an experience where one goes beyond all multiplicity. Plotinus writes, \"We ought not even to say that he will \"see\", but he will \"be\" that which he sees, if indeed it is possible any longer to distinguish between seer and seen, and not boldly to affirm that the two are one.\"\nEmanation by the One.\nAlthough Plotinus never mentions Christianity in any of his works, he seems to offer an alternative to the orthodox Christian notion of creation \"ex nihilo\" (out of nothing), though this is disputed. The metaphysics of emanation (\u1f00\u03c0\u03bf\u03c1\u03c1\u03bf\u03ae \"aporrhoe\" (\u0399\u0399.3.2) or \u1f00\u03c0\u03cc\u03c1\u03c1\u03bf\u03b9\u03b1 \"aporrhoia\" (II.3.11)) (literally a flowing, \u03c1\u03bf\u03b7, out, \u03b1\u03c0\u03bf), similar to the metaphysics of Creation, describes the absolute transcendence of the One or of the Divine, as the source of the Being of all things, but which remains transcendent of them in its own nature. The One is in no way affected or diminished by these emanations, just as the Christian God in no way is augmented or diminished by the act of Creation. Plotinus, using a venerable analogy that would become crucial for the (largely neoplatonic) metaphysics of developed Christian thought, likens the One to the Sun which emanates light indiscriminately without thereby diminishing itself, or reflection in a mirror which in no way diminishes or otherwise alters the object being reflected.\nThe first emanation is \"Nous\" (Divine Mind, \"Logos\", Order, Thought, Reason), identified metaphorically with the Demiurge in Plato's \"Timaeus\". It is the first Will toward Good. From \"Nous\" proceeds the World Soul, which Plotinus subdivides into upper and lower, identifying the lower aspect of Soul with nature. From the world soul proceeds individual human souls, and finally, matter, at the lowest level of being and thus the least perfected level of the cosmos. Plotinus asserted the ultimately divine nature of material creation since it ultimately derives from the One, through the mediums of \"Nous\" and the world soul. It is by the Good or through beauty that we recognize the One, in material things and then in the Forms. (I.6.6 and I.6.9)\nThe essentially devotional nature of Plotinus' philosophy may be further illustrated by his concept of attaining ecstatic union with the One (\"henosis\"). Porphyry relates that Plotinus attained such a union four times during the years he knew him. This may be related to enlightenment, liberation, and other concepts of mysticism common to many Eastern traditions.\nThe true human and happiness.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe philosophy of Plotinus has always exerted a peculiar fascination upon those whose discontent with things as they are has led them to seek the realities behind what they took to be merely the appearances of the sense.\n\"The philosophy of Plotinus: representative books from the Enneads\", p. vii\nAuthentic human happiness for Plotinus consists of the true human identifying with that which is the best in the universe. Because happiness is beyond anything physical, Plotinus stresses the point that worldly fortune does not control true human happiness, and thus \u201c\u2026 there exists no single human being that does not either potentially or effectively possess this thing we hold to constitute happiness.\u201d (Enneads I.4.4) The issue of happiness is one of Plotinus\u2019 greatest imprints on Western thought, as he is one of the first to introduce the idea that eudaimonia (happiness) is attainable only within consciousness.\nThe true human is an incorporeal contemplative capacity of the soul, and superior to all things corporeal. It then follows that real human happiness is independent of the physical world. Real happiness is, instead, dependent on the metaphysical and authentic human being found in this highest capacity of Reason. \u201cFor man, and especially the Proficient, is not the Couplement of Soul and body: the proof is that man can be disengaged from the body and disdain its nominal goods.\u201d (Enneads I.4.14) The human who has achieved happiness will not be bothered by sickness, discomfort, etc., as his focus is on the greatest things. Authentic human happiness is the utilization of the most authentically human capacity of contemplation. Even in daily, physical action, the flourishing human\u2019s \u201c\u2026 Act is determined by the higher phase of the Soul.\u201d (Enneads III.4.6) Even in the most dramatic arguments Plotinus considers (if the Proficient is subject to extreme physical torture, for example), he concludes this only strengthens his claim of true happiness being metaphysical, as the truly happy human being would understand that which is being tortured is merely a body, not the conscious self, and happiness could persist.\nPlotinus offers a comprehensive description of his conception of a person who has achieved eudaimonia. \u201cThe perfect life\u201d involves a man who commands reason and contemplation. (Enneads I.4.4) A happy person will not sway between happy and sad, as many of Plotinus' contemporaries believed. Stoics, for example, question the ability of someone to be happy (presupposing happiness is contemplation) if they are mentally incapacitated or even asleep. Plotinus disregards this claim, as the soul and true human do not sleep or even exist in time, nor will a living human who has achieved eudaimonia suddenly stop using its greatest, most authentic capacity just because of the body\u2019s discomfort in the physical realm. \u201c\u2026 The Proficient\u2019s will is set always and only inward.\u201d (Enneads I.4.11)\nOverall, happiness for Plotinus is \"... a flight from this world's ways and things.\" (Theaet. 176) and a focus on the highest, i.e. Forms and the One.\nPlotinus regarded happiness as living in an interior way (interiority or self-sufficiency), and this being the obverse of attachment to the objects of embodied desires.\nHenosis.\nHenosis is the word for mystical \"oneness\", \"union\", or \"unity\" in classical Greek. In Platonism, and especially neoplatonism, the goal of henosis is union with what is fundamental in reality: the One (\u03c4\u1f78 \u1f1d\u03bd), the Source, or Monad.\nAs is specified in the writings of Plotinus on henology, one can reach a state of tabula rasa, blank state where the individual may grasp or merge with The One. This absolute simplicity means that the nous or the person is then dissolved, completely absorbed back into the Monad. Here within the \"Enneads\" of Plotinus the Monad can be referred to as the Good above the demiurge. The Monad or dunamis (force) is of one singular expression (the will or the one which is the good); all is contained in the Monad and the Monad is all (pantheism). All division is reconciled in the one; the final stage before reaching singularity, called duality (dyad), is completely reconciled in the Monad, Source or One (see monism). As the one source or substance of all things, the Monad is all encompassing. As infinite and indeterminate all is reconciled in the dunamis or one. It is the demiurge or second emanation that is the nous in Plotinus. It is the demiurge (creator, action, energy) or nous that \"perceives\" and therefore causes the force (potential or One) to manifest as energy, or the dyad called the material world. Nous as being; being and perception (intellect) manifest what is called soul (World Soul).\nHenosis for Plotinus was defined in his works as a reversing of the ontological process of consciousness via meditation (in the Western mind to uncontemplate) toward no thought (Nous or demiurge) and no division (dyad) within the individual (being). Plotinus words his teachings to reconcile not only Plato with Aristotle but also various World religions that he had personal contact with during his various travels. Plotinus' works have an ascetic character in that they reject matter as an illusion (non-existent). Matter was strictly treated as immanent, with matter as essential to its being, having no true or transcendential character or essence, substance or ousia (\u03bf\u1f50\u03c3\u03af\u03b1). This approach is called philosophical Idealism.\nRelation with contemporary philosophy and religion.\nPlotinus's Relation to Plato.\nFor several centuries after the Protestant Reformation, neoplatonism was condemned as a decadent and 'oriental' distortion of Platonism. In a 1929 essay, E. R. Dodds showed that key conceptions of neoplatonism could be traced from their origin in Plato's dialogues, through his immediate followers (e.g., Speusippus) and the neopythagoreans, to Plotinus and the neoplatonists. Thus Plotinus' philosophy was, he argued, 'not the starting-point of neoplatonism but its intellectual culmination.' Further research reinforced this view and by 1954 Merlan could say 'The present tendency is toward bridging rather than widening the gap separating Platonism from neoplatonism.'\nSince the 1950s, the T\u00fcbingen School of Plato interpretation has argued that the so-called 'unwritten doctrines' of Plato debated by Aristotle and the Old Academy strongly resemble Plotinus's metaphysics. In this case, the neoplatonic reading of Plato would be, at least in this central area, historically justified. This implies that neoplatonism is less of an innovation than it appears without the recognition of Plato's unwritten doctrines. Advocates of the T\u00fcbingen School emphasize this advantage of their interpretation. They see Plotinus as advancing a tradition of thought begun by Plato himself. Plotinus's metaphysics, at least in broad outline, was therefore already familiar to the first generation of Plato's students. This confirms Plotinus' own view, for he considered himself not the inventor of a system but the faithful interpreter of Plato's doctrines.\nPlotinus and the Gnostics.\nAt least two modern conferences within Hellenic philosophy fields of study have been held in order to address what Plotinus stated in his tract \"Against the Gnostics\" and to whom he was addressing it, in order to separate and clarify the events and persons involved in the origin of the term \"Gnostic\". From the dialogue, it appears that the word had an origin in the Platonic and Hellenistic tradition long before the group calling themselves \"Gnostics\"\u2014or the group covered under the modern term \"Gnosticism\"\u2014ever appeared. It would seem that this shift from Platonic to Gnostic usage has led many people to confusion. The strategy of sectarians taking Greek terms from philosophical contexts and re-applying them to religious contexts was popular in Christianity, the Cult of Isis and other ancient religious contexts including Hermetic ones (see Alexander of Abonutichus for an example).\nAccording to A. H. Armstrong, Plotinus and the neoplatonists viewed Gnosticism as a form of heresy or sectarianism to the Pythagorean and Platonic philosophy of the Mediterranean and Middle East. Also according to Armstrong, Plotinus accused them of using senseless jargon and being overly dramatic and insolent in their distortion of Plato's ontology.\"\nArmstrong argues that Plotinus attacks his opponents as untraditional, irrational and immoral and arrogant. Armstrong believed that Plotinus also attacks them as elitist and blasphemous to Plato for the Gnostics despising the material world and its maker.\nFor decades, Armstrong's was the only translation available of Plotinus. For this reason, his claims were authoritative. However, a modern translation by Lloyd P. Gerson doesn't necessarily support all of Armstrong's views. Unlike Armstrong, Gerson didn't find Plotinus to be so vitriolic against the Gnostics. According to Gerson:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As Plotinus himself tells us, at the time of this treatise\u2019s composition some of his friends were \u2018attached\u2019 to Gnostic doctrine, and he believed that this attachment was harmful. So he sets out here a number of objections and corrections. Some of these are directed at very specific tenets of Gnosticism, e.g. the introduction of a \u2018new earth\u2019 or a principle of \u2018Wisdom\u2019, but the general thrust of this treatise has a much broader scope. The Gnostics are very critical of the sensible universe and its contents, and as a Platonist, Plotinus must share this critical attitude to some extent. But here he makes his case that the proper understanding of the highest principles and emanation forces us to respect the sensible world as the best possible imitation of the intelligible world.\nPlotinus seems to direct his attacks at a very specific sect of Gnostics, most notably a sect of Gnostics that held anti-polytheistic and anti-daemon views, and that preached salvation was possible without struggle. At one point, Plotinus makes clear that his major grudge is the way Gnostics 'misused' Plato's teachings, and not their own teachings themselves:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are no hard feelings if they tell us in which respects they intend to disagree with Plato [...] Rather, whatever strikes them as their own distinct views in comparison with the Greeks\u2019, these views \u2013 as well as the views that contradict them \u2013 should be forthrightly set out on their own in a considerate and philosophical manner.\nThe neoplatonic movement (though Plotinus would have simply referred to himself as a philosopher of Plato) seems to be motivated by the desire of Plotinus to revive the pagan philosophical tradition. Plotinus was not claiming to innovate with the \"Enneads\", but to clarify aspects of the works of Plato that he considered misrepresented or misunderstood. Plotinus does not claim to be an innovator, but rather a communicator of a tradition. Plotinus referred to tradition as a way to interpret Plato's intentions. Because the teachings of Plato were for members of the academy rather than the general public, it was easy for outsiders to misunderstand Plato's meaning. However, Plotinus attempted to clarify how the philosophers of the academy had not arrived at the same conclusions (such as misotheism or dystheism of the creator God as an answer to the problem of evil) as the targets of his criticism.\nAgainst causal astrology.\nPlotinus seems to be one of the first to have argued against the then popular notion of causal astrology. In the late tractate 2.3, \"Are the stars causes?\", Plotinus makes the argument that specific stars influencing one's fortune (a common Hellenistic theme) attributes irrationality to a perfect universe, and invites moral depravity. He does, however, claim the stars and planets are ensouled, as witnessed by their movement.\nFilm studies.\nPlotinian concepts have been discussed in a cinematic context and relate Plotinus' theory of time as a transitory intelligible movement of the soul to Bergson\u2019s and Deleuze\u2019s time-image.\nInfluence.\nAncient world.\nThe emperor Julian the Apostate was deeply influenced by neoplatonism, as was Hypatia of Alexandria. Neoplatonism influenced many Christians as well, including Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite. St. Augustine, though often referred to as a \"Platonist\", acquired his Platonist philosophy through the mediation of the Neoplatonist teachings of Plotinus.\nChristianity.\nPlotinus' philosophy had an influence on the development of Christian theology. In \"A History of Western Philosophy\", philosopher Bertrand Russell wrote that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To the Christian, the Other World was the Kingdom of Heaven, to be enjoyed after death; to the Platonist, it was the eternal world of ideas, the real world as opposed to that of illusory appearance. Christian theologians combined these points of view, and embodied much of the philosophy of Plotinus. [...] Plotinus, accordingly, is historically important as an influence in moulding the Christianity of the Middle Ages and of theology.\nThe Eastern Orthodox position on \"energy,\" for example, is often contrasted with the position of the Roman Catholic Church, and in part this is attributed to varying interpretations of Aristotle and Plotinus, either through Thomas Aquinas for the Roman Catholics or Gregory Palamas for the Orthodox Christians.\nIslam.\nNeoplatonism and the ideas of Plotinus influenced medieval Islam as well, since the Mutazilite Abbasids fused Greek concepts into sponsored state texts, and found great influence amongst the Ismaili Shia and Persian philosophers as well, such as Muhammad al-Nasafi and Abu Yaqub Sijistani. By the 11th century, neoplatonism was adopted by the Fatimid state of Egypt, and taught by their da'i. Neoplatonism was brought to the Fatimid court by Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani, although his teachings differed from Nasafi and Sijistani, who were more aligned with the original teachings of Plotinus. The teachings of Kirmani in turn influenced philosophers such as Nasir Khusraw of Persia.\nJudaism.\nAs with Islam and Christianity, neoplatonism in general and Plotinus in particular influenced speculative thought. Notable thinkers expressing neoplatonist themes are Solomon ibn Gabirol (Latin: Avicebron) and Moses ben Maimon (Latin: Maimonides). As with Islam and Christianity, apophatic theology and the privative nature of evil are two prominent themes that such thinkers picked up from either Plotinus or his successors.\nRenaissance.\nIn the Renaissance the philosopher Marsilio Ficino set up an Academy under the patronage of Cosimo de Medici in Florence, mirroring that of Plato. His work was of great importance in reconciling the philosophy of Plato directly with Christianity. One of his most distinguished pupils was Pico della Mirandola, author of \"An Oration on the Dignity of Man\".\nEngland.\nIn England, Plotinus was the cardinal influence on the 17th-century school of the Cambridge Platonists, and on numerous writers from Samuel Taylor Coleridge to W. B. Yeats and Kathleen Raine.\nIndia.\nSarvepalli Radhakrishnan and Ananda Coomaraswamy used the writing of Plotinus in their own texts as a superlative elaboration upon Indian monism, specifically Upanishadic and Advaita Vedantic thought. Coomaraswamy has compared Plotinus' teachings to the Hindu school of Advaita Vedanta (\"advaita\" meaning \"not two\" or \"non-dual\"). M. Vasudevacharya says, \"Though Plotinus never managed to reach India, his method shows an affinity to the 'method of negation' as taught in some of the Upanishads, such as the Brhadaranyaka Upanishad, and also to the practice of yoga.\"\nAdvaita Vedanta and neoplatonism have been compared by J. F. Staal, Frederick Copleston, Aldo Magris and Mario Piantelli, Radhakrishnan, Gwen Griffith-Dickson, and John Y. Fenton.\nThe joint influence of Advaitin and neoplatonic ideas on Ralph Waldo Emerson was considered by Dale Riepe in 1967.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38424", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38424", "title": "Bikram Yoga", "text": "System of yoga in a heated room\nBikram Yoga is a system of hot yoga, a type of yoga as exercise, spread by Bikram Choudhury and based on the teachings of B. C. Ghosh, that became popular in the early 1970s. Classes consist of a fixed sequence of 26 postures, practised in a room heated to with a humidity of 40%, intended to replicate the climate of India. The room is fitted with carpets and the walls are covered in mirrors. The instructor may adjust the students' yoga postures. Choudhury's teaching style was abrasive.\nBikram Yoga spread rapidly across America and the Western world, reaching a peak of some 1,650 studios in at least 40 countries in 2006. Choudhury attempted to copyright the Bikram Yoga sequence from 2011, but was ultimately unsuccessful. In 2016, facing lawsuits and accusations of sexual assault, Choudhury fled to India, leaving Bikram Yoga, Inc. to be run by others.\nOrigins.\nBikram Choudhury was born in Calcutta in 1944. He began studying yoga in 1969. He arrived in America in 1971, and soon began to teach yoga in health resorts in California. In 1974, two pupils, Shirley MacLaine and Anne Marie Bennstrom, helped him to open his own school at 9441 Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles. He attracted celebrity pupils including the Hollywood dancer Marge Champion and the actors Keir Dullea, Martin Sheen, Susan Sarandon, and Raquel Welch. Yoga classes were initially free, with a donation box. Maclaine told Choudhury he could not run an American yoga school like one in India, and he began to charge $5 for classes; attendance started to grow at once.\nChoudhury later devised the 26-posture sequence of Bikram Yoga, based on the teachings of B. C. Ghosh.\nStyle.\nBikram Yoga Beginning Series classes run for 90 minutes and always consist of 26 postures, namely a fixed sequence of 24 asanas and two pranayama (breathing exercise). It starts with a standing pranayama, followed by a standing sequence of asanas, a first savasana, floor asanas, the last pranayama named Kapalabhati which is a shatkarma (a purification), and a final savasana that ends the sequence. The room is fitted with mirrors and carpets, and the yoga postures of students may be adjusted by the teacher, who can also adjust themselves using the mirrors.\nThe hot yoga style is practised in a room heated to with a humidity of 40%, intended to replicate the climate of India where it was created. Bikram Yoga trains its own teachers. They are taught a standardized dialogue to run the class, but are encouraged to develop their own delivery style.\nThe author Brigid Delaney described seeing Choudhury in his first yoga studio in Australia, and was \"shocked\" by the environment and by Choudhury's bragging and abrasive manner; she noted also the docility of his students and the \"fawning\" atmosphere, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGrowth.\nChoudhury was extremely charismatic and persuasive, and this contributed to his success according to principal Bikram teacher Emmy Cleaves. He also had a philosophy of making pupils work through pain, and a \"highly entertaining in-class patter,\" being happy to tell pupils \"I am a butcher and I try to kill you ... but don't worry, yoga is the best death.\" By 1984, classes were priced at $20 (about $50 in 2019 terms). That year, sports journalist Jack McCallum watched a class respond to Choudhury's verbal abuse \"like eager cadets.\" Practice was so intense that it demanded \"an entire identity\" based on commitment to hard work, a regular yoga schedule, and verbal castigation. In short, \"a complete religion of bodily purification\" rewarded by \"a feeling of pure energy.\" The franchise grew rapidly and spread to other countries. By 2006, there were 1,650 Bikram Yoga studios around the world. The franchise then declined somewhat, and by 2012, there were 330 studios in the United States and 600 worldwide. In Africa, there were studios in Morocco and South Africa; in America, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, 39 U.S. states, and Canada; in Asia, China, India, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Thailand, and the UAE; in Europe, Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, and the United Kingdom; and Australia and New Zealand.\nAdverse health effects.\nA 2013 review of 76 yoga-related adverse events included 3 in Bikram Yoga. The three case reports consisted of one case of rosacea, one psychotic episode, and one of hyponatremia (low salt level).\nCopyright Claims.\nChoudhury claimed, starting in 2011, that Bikram Yoga was under copyright and that it could not be taught or presented by anyone whom he had not authorized. In that year, Choudhury started a lawsuit against Yoga to the People, a competing yoga studio founded by a former student of Choudhury's and with a location near one of the Bikram Yoga studios in New York, and later started another against the Florida-based Evolation Yoga. \nIn the case \"Bikram's Yoga College of India v. Evolation Yoga\", filed in 2011, Choudhury claimed exclusive copyright over his sequence of 26 yoga poses and two breathing exercises. The U.S. District Court initially ruled against Choudhury in December 2012, finding that the yoga sequence constituted \"a collection of facts and ideas\" not entitled to copyright protection. \nWhen Choudhury appealed, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit unanimously affirmed the lower court's decision in October 2015. Writing for the court, Judge Kim McLane Wardlaw explained that \"copyright protects only the expression of this idea \u2014 the words and pictures used to describe the Sequence \u2014 and not the idea of the Sequence itself.\" The appellate court found that Choudhury's yoga sequence constituted an uncopyrightable \"system\" or \"method\" designed to yield physical benefits, falling under copyright law's exclusion of ideas, processes, and systems from protection.\nAs a result of these lawsuits, the United States Copyright Office issued a clarification that yoga postures (\"asanas\") could not be copyrighted in the way claimed by Choudhury, and that other studios could continue to freely teach these exercises.\nSexual Abuse by Choudhury.\nChoudhury has faced multiple lawsuits alleging sexual harassment, assault, racism and homophobia. In 2016 he fled to India, where he continued to teach yoga. His former lawyer, Minakshi Jafa-Bodden, took over the running of Bikram, Inc. in America, after she successfully sued Choudhury for $7M in damages and he fled the country to avoid payment.\nThe accusations against Choudhury were the subject of a 2019 Netflix true crime documentary, \"\". The documentary also gave an exploration of Choudhury's early life in India, mostly told by Choudhury himself, in juxtaposition with the allegations and testimonies of various women who claim to have been assaulted and bullied by him. They argue that Choudhury was a charismatic but abusive and rude narcissist who took pleasure in mocking the physical appearances of his students, while holding financial and emotional power over many of them. \"Bikram: Yogi, Guru, Predator\" has since been challenged by Choudhury's lawyer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38428", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38428", "title": "Deer", "text": "Family of mammals\nA deer (pl.: deer) or true deer is a hoofed ruminant ungulate of the family Cervidae (informally the deer family). Cervidae is divided into subfamilies Cervinae (which includes, among others, muntjac, elk (wapiti), red deer, and fallow deer) and Capreolinae (which includes, among others reindeer (caribou), white-tailed deer, roe deer, and moose). Male deer of almost all species (except the water deer), as well as female reindeer, grow and shed new antlers each year. These antlers are bony extensions of the skull and are often used for combat between males.\nThe musk deer (Moschidae) of Asia and chevrotains (Tragulidae) of tropical African and Asian forests are separate families that are also in the ruminant clade Ruminantia; they are not especially closely related to Cervidae.\nDeer appear in art from Paleolithic cave paintings onwards, and they have played a role in mythology, religion, and literature throughout history, as well as in heraldry, such as red deer that appear in the coat of arms of \u00c5land. Their economic importance includes the use of their meat as venison, their skins as soft, strong buckskin, and their antlers as handles for knives. Deer hunting has been a popular activity since the Middle Ages and remains a resource for many families today.\nEtymology and terminology.\nThe word \"deer\" was originally broad in meaning, becoming more specific with time. Old English and Middle English meant a wild animal of any kind. Cognates of Old English in other dead Germanic languages have the general sense of \"animal\", such as Old High German \"tior\", Old Norse or , Gothic \"dius\", Old Saxon \"dier\", and Old Frisian \"diar\". This general sense gave way to the modern English sense by the end of the Middle English period, around 1500. All modern Germanic languages save English and Scots retain the more general sense: for example, Dutch/Frisian , German , and Norwegian \"dyr\" mean 'animal'.\nFor many types of deer in modern English usage, the male is a \"buck\" and the female a \"doe\", but the terms vary with dialect, and according to the size of the species. The male red deer is a \"stag\", while for other large species the male is a \"bull\", the female a \"cow\", as in cattle. In older usage, the male of any species is a \"hart\", especially if over five years old, and the female is a \"hind\", especially if three or more years old. The young of small species is a \"fawn\" and of large species a \"calf\"; a very small young may be a \"kid\". A castrated male is a \"havier\". A group of any species is a \"herd\". The adjective of relation is \"\"; like the family name \"Cervidae\", this is from , meaning 'stag' or 'deer'.\nDistribution.\nDeer live in a variety of biomes, ranging from tundra to the tropical rainforest. While often associated with forests, many deer are ecotone species that live in transitional areas between forests and thickets (for cover) and prairie and savanna (open space). The majority of large deer species inhabit temperate mixed deciduous forest, mountain mixed coniferous forest, tropical seasonal/dry forest, and savanna habitats around the world. Clearing open areas within forests to some extent may actually benefit deer populations by exposing the understory and allowing the types of grasses, weeds, and herbs to grow that deer like to eat. Access to adjacent croplands may also benefit deer. Adequate forest or brush cover must still be provided for populations to grow and thrive.\nDeer are widely distributed, with indigenous representatives in all continents except Antarctica and Australia, though Africa has only one native deer, the Barbary stag, a subspecies of red deer that is confined to the Atlas Mountains in the northwest of the continent. Another extinct species of deer, \"Megaceroides algericus,\" was present in North Africa until 6000 years ago. Fallow deer have been introduced to South Africa. Small species of brocket deer and pud\u00fas of Central and South America, and muntjacs of Asia generally occupy dense forests and are less often seen in open spaces, with the possible exception of the Indian muntjac. There are also several species of deer that are highly specialized and live almost exclusively in mountains, grasslands, swamps, and \"wet\" savannas, or riparian corridors surrounded by deserts. Some deer have a circumpolar distribution in both North America and Eurasia. Examples include the caribou that live in Arctic tundra and taiga (boreal forests) and moose that inhabit taiga and adjacent areas. Huemul deer (taruca and Chilean huemul) of South America's Andes fill the ecological niches of the ibex and wild goat, with the fawns behaving more like goat kids.\nThe highest concentration of large deer species in temperate North America lies in the Canadian Rocky Mountain and Columbia Mountain regions between Alberta and British Columbia where all five North American deer species (white-tailed deer, mule deer, caribou, elk, and moose) can be found. This region has several clusters of national parks including Mount Revelstoke National Park, Glacier National Park (Canada), Yoho National Park, and Kootenay National Park on the British Columbia side, and Banff National Park, Jasper National Park, and Glacier National Park (U.S.) on the Alberta and Montana sides. Mountain slope habitats vary from moist coniferous/mixed forested habitats to dry subalpine/pine forests with alpine meadows higher up. The foothills and river valleys between the mountain ranges provide a mosaic of cropland and deciduous parklands. The rare woodland caribou have the most restricted range living at higher altitudes in the subalpine meadows and alpine tundra areas of some of the mountain ranges. Elk and mule deer both migrate between the alpine meadows and lower coniferous forests and tend to be most common in this region. Elk also inhabit river valley bottomlands, which they share with White-tailed deer. The White-tailed deer have recently expanded their range within the foothills and river valley bottoms of the Canadian Rockies owing to conversion of land to cropland and the clearing of coniferous forests allowing more deciduous vegetation to grow up the mountain slopes. They also live in the aspen parklands north of Calgary and Edmonton, where they share habitat with the moose. The adjacent Great Plains grassland habitats are left to herds of elk, American bison, and pronghorn.\nThe Eurasian Continent (including the Indian Subcontinent) boasts the most species of deer in the world, with most species being found in Asia. Europe, in comparison, has lower diversity in plant and animal species. Many national parks and protected reserves in Europe have populations of red deer, roe deer, and fallow deer. These species have long been associated with the continent of Europe, but also inhabit Asia Minor, the Caucasus Mountains, and Northwestern Iran. \"European\" fallow deer historically lived over much of Europe during the Ice Ages, but afterwards became restricted primarily to the Anatolian Peninsula, in present-day Turkey.\nPresent-day fallow deer populations in Europe are a result of historic man-made introductions of this species, first to the Mediterranean regions of Europe, then eventually to the rest of Europe. They were initially park animals that later escaped and reestablished themselves in the wild. Historically, Europe's deer species shared their deciduous forest habitat with other herbivores, such as the extinct tarpan (forest horse), extinct aurochs (forest ox), and the endangered wisent (European bison). Good places to see deer in Europe include the Scottish Highlands, the Austrian Alps, the wetlands between Austria, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, and some National Parks, including Do\u00f1ana National Park in Spain, the Veluwe in the Netherlands, the Ardennes in Belgium, and Bia\u0142owie\u017ca National Park in Poland. Spain, Eastern Europe, and the Caucasus Mountains have forest areas that are not only home to sizable deer populations but also other animals that were once abundant such as the wisent, Eurasian lynx, Iberian lynx, wolves, and brown bears.\nThe highest concentration of large deer species in temperate Asia occurs in the mixed deciduous forests, mountain coniferous forests, and taiga bordering North Korea, Manchuria (Northeastern China), and the Ussuri Region (Russia). These are among some of the richest deciduous and coniferous forests in the world where one can find Siberian roe deer, sika deer, elk, and moose. Asian caribou occupy the northern fringes of this region along the Sino-Russian border.\nDeer such as the sika deer, Thorold's deer, Central Asian red deer, and elk have historically been farmed for their antlers by Han Chinese, Turkic peoples, Tungusic peoples, Mongolians, and Koreans. Like the Sami people of Finland and Scandinavia, the Tungusic peoples, Mongolians, and Turkic peoples of Southern Siberia, Northern Mongolia, and the Ussuri Region have also taken to raising semi-domesticated herds of Asian caribou.\nThe highest concentration of large deer species in the tropics occurs in Southern Asia in India's Indo-Gangetic Plain Region and Nepal's Terai Region. These fertile plains consist of tropical seasonal moist deciduous, dry deciduous forests, and both dry and wet savannas that are home to chital, hog deer, barasingha, Indian sambar, and Indian muntjac. Grazing species such as the endangered barasingha and very common chital are gregarious and live in large herds. Indian sambar can be gregarious but are usually solitary or live in smaller herds. Hog deer are solitary and have lower densities than Indian muntjac. Deer can be seen in several national parks in India, Nepal, and Sri Lanka of which Kanha National Park, Dudhwa National Park, and Chitwan National Park are most famous. Sri Lanka's Wilpattu National Park and Yala National Park have large herds of Indian sambar and chital. The Indian sambar are more gregarious in Sri Lanka than other parts of their range and tend to form larger herds than elsewhere.\nThe Chao Praya River Valley of Thailand was once primarily tropical seasonal moist deciduous forest and wet savanna that hosted populations of hog deer, the now-extinct Schomburgk's deer, Eld's deer, Indian sambar, and Indian muntjac. Both the hog deer and Eld's deer are rare, whereas Indian sambar and Indian muntjac thrive in protected national parks, such as Khao Yai. Many of these South Asian and Southeast Asian deer species also share their habitat with other herbivores, such as Asian elephants, the various Asian rhinoceros species, various antelope species (such as nilgai, four-horned antelope, blackbuck, and Indian gazelle in India), and wild oxen (such as wild Asian water buffalo, gaur, banteng, and kouprey). One way that different herbivores can survive together in a given area is for each species to have different food preferences, although there may be some overlap.\nAs a result of acclimatisation society releases in the 19th century, Australia has six introduced species of deer that have established sustainable wild populations. They are fallow deer, red deer, sambar, hog deer, rusa, and chital. Red deer were introduced into New Zealand in 1851 from English and Scottish stock. Many have been domesticated in deer farms since the late 1960s and are common farm animals there now. Seven other species of deer were introduced into New Zealand but none are as widespread as red deer.\nDescription.\nDeer constitute the second most diverse family of artiodactyla after bovids. Though of a similar build, deer are strongly distinguished from antelopes by their antlers, which are temporary and regularly regrown unlike the permanent horns of bovids. Characteristics typical of deer include long, powerful legs, a diminutive tail and long ears. Deer exhibit a broad variation in physical proportions. The largest extant deer is the moose, which is nearly tall and weighs up to . The elk stands at the shoulder and weighs . The northern pudu is the smallest deer in the world; it reaches merely at the shoulder and weighs . The southern pudu is only slightly taller and heavier. Sexual dimorphism is quite pronounced \u2013 in most species males tend to be larger than females, and, except for the reindeer, only males have antlers.\nCoat colour generally varies between red and brown, though it can be as dark as chocolate brown in the tufted deer or have a grayish tinge as in elk. Different species of brocket deer vary from gray to reddish brown in coat colour. Several species such as the chital, the fallow deer and the sika deer feature white spots on a brown coat. Coat of reindeer shows notable geographical variation. Deer undergo two moults in a year; for instance, in red deer the red, thin-haired summer coat is gradually replaced by the dense, greyish brown winter coat in autumn, which in turn gives way to the summer coat in the following spring. Moulting is affected by the photoperiod.\nDeer are also excellent jumpers and swimmers. Deer are ruminants, or cud-chewers, and have a four-chambered stomach. Some deer, such as those on the island of R\u00f9m, do consume meat when it is available.\nNearly all deer have a facial gland in front of each eye. The gland contains a strongly scented pheromone, used to mark its home range. Bucks of a wide range of species open these glands wide when angry or excited. All deer have a liver without a gallbladder. Deer also have a tapetum lucidum, which gives them sufficiently good night vision.\nAntlers.\nAll male deer have antlers, with the exception of the water deer, in which males have long tusk-like canines that reach below the lower jaw. Females generally lack antlers, though female reindeer bear antlers smaller and less branched than those of the males. Occasionally females in other species may develop antlers, especially in telemetacarpal deer such as European roe deer, red deer, white-tailed deer and mule deer and less often in plesiometacarpal deer. A study of antlered female white-tailed deer noted that antlers tend to be small and malformed, and are shed frequently around the time of parturition.\nThe fallow deer and the various subspecies of the reindeer have the largest as well as the heaviest antlers, both in absolute terms as well as in proportion to body mass (an average of eight grams per kilogram of body mass); the tufted deer, on the other hand, has the smallest antlers of all deer, while the pud\u00fa has the lightest antlers with respect to body mass (0.6\u00a0g per kilogram of body mass). The structure of antlers show considerable variation; while fallow deer and elk antlers are palmate (with a broad central portion), white-tailed deer antlers include a series of tines sprouting upward from a forward-curving main beam, and those of the pud\u00fa are mere spikes. Antler development begins from the pedicel, a bony structure that appears on the top of the skull by the time the animal is a year old. The pedicel gives rise to a spiky antler the following year, that is replaced by a branched antler in the third year. This process of losing a set of antlers to develop a larger and more branched set continues for the rest of the life. The antlers emerge as soft tissues (known as velvet antlers) and progressively harden into bony structures (known as hard antlers), following mineralisation and blockage of blood vessels in the tissue, from the tip to the base.\nAntlers might be one of the most exaggerated male secondary sexual characteristics, and are intended primarily for reproductive success through sexual selection and for combat. The tines (forks) on the antlers create grooves that allow another male's antlers to lock into place. This allows the males to wrestle without risking injury to the face. Antlers are correlated to an individual's position in the social hierarchy and its behaviour. For instance, the heavier the antlers, the higher the individual's status in the social hierarchy, and the greater the delay in shedding the antlers; males with larger antlers tend to be more aggressive and dominant over others. Antlers can be an honest signal of genetic quality; males with larger antlers relative to body size tend to have increased resistance to pathogens and higher reproductive capacity.\nIn elk in Yellowstone National Park, antlers also provide protection against predation by wolves.\nHomology of tines, that is, the branching structure of antlers among species, have been discussed before the 1900s. Recently, a new method to describe the branching structure of antlers and determining homology of tines was developed.\nTeeth.\nMost deer bear 32 teeth; the corresponding dental formula is: 0.0.3.33.1.3.3. The elk and the reindeer may be exceptions, as they may retain their upper canines and thus have 34 teeth (dental formula: 0.1.3.33.1.3.3). The Chinese water deer, tufted deer, and muntjac have enlarged upper canine teeth forming sharp tusks, while other species often lack upper canines altogether. The cheek teeth of deer have crescent ridges of enamel, which enable them to grind a wide variety of vegetation. The teeth of deer are adapted to feeding on vegetation, and like other ruminants, they lack upper incisors, instead having a tough pad at the front of their upper jaw.\nBiology.\nDiet.\nDeer are browsers, and feed primarily on foliage of grasses, sedges, forbs, shrubs and trees, secondarily on lichens in northern latitudes during winter. They have small, unspecialized stomachs by ruminant standards, and high nutrition requirements. Rather than eating and digesting vast quantities of low-grade fibrous food as, for example, sheep and cattle do, deer select easily digestible shoots, young leaves, fresh grasses, soft twigs, fruit, fungi, and lichens. The low-fibered food, after minimal fermentation and shredding, passes rapidly through the alimentary canal. The deer require a large amount of minerals such as calcium and phosphate in order to support antler growth, and this further necessitates a nutrient-rich diet. There are some reports of deer engaging in carnivorous activity, such as eating dead alewives along lakeshores or depredating the nests of northern bobwhites.\nReproduction.\nNearly all cervids are so-called uniparental species: the young, known in most species as fawns, are only cared for by the mother, most often called a doe. A doe generally has one or two fawns at a time (triplets, while not unknown, are uncommon). Mating season typically begins in later August and lasts until December. Some species mate until early March. The gestation period is anywhere up to ten months for the European roe deer. Most fawns are born with their fur covered with white spots, though in many species they lose these spots by the end of their first winter. In the first twenty minutes of a fawn's life, the fawn begins to take its first steps. Its mother licks it clean until it is almost free of scent, so predators will not find it. Its mother leaves often to graze, and the fawn does not like to be left behind. Sometimes its mother must gently push it down with her foot. The fawn stays hidden in the grass for one week until it is strong enough to walk with its mother. The fawn and its mother stay together for about one year. A male usually leaves and never sees his mother again, but females sometimes come back with their own fawns and form small herds.\nDisease.\nIn some areas of the UK, deer (especially fallow deer due to their gregarious behaviour) have been implicated as a possible reservoir for transmission of bovine tuberculosis, a disease which in the UK in 2005 cost \u00a390\u00a0million in attempts to eradicate. In New Zealand, deer are thought to be important as vectors picking up \"M. bovis\" in areas where brushtail possums \"Trichosurus vulpecula\" are infected, and transferring it to previously uninfected possums when their carcasses are scavenged elsewhere. The white-tailed deer \"Odocoileus virginianus\" has been confirmed as the sole maintenance host in the Michigan outbreak of bovine tuberculosis which remains a significant barrier to the US nationwide eradication of the disease in livestock. Moose and deer can carry rabies.\nDocile moose may suffer from brain worm (\"Parelaphostrongylus tenuis\"), a helminth which drills holes through the brain in its search for a suitable place to lay its eggs. White-tailed deer are generally asymptomatic carriers and are the definitive host of the nematode, whose adult form resides in the meninges of the deer's central nervous system. The larvae pass through the digestive system and are excreted in the feces after being coughed up out of the lungs. The parasite does not develop normally in moose and elk who ingest snails and slugs\u2014the nematode's intermediate host\u2014and instead passes into the brain where damage is done that is externally apparent, both in behaviour and in gait.\nDeer, elk and moose in North America may suffer from chronic wasting disease, which was identified at a Colorado laboratory in the 1960s and is believed to be a prion disease. Out of an abundance of caution hunters are advised to avoid contact with specified risk material (SRM) such as the brain, spinal column or lymph nodes. Deboning the meat when butchering and sanitizing the knives and other tools used to butcher are amongst other government recommendations.\nEvolution.\nDeer are believed to have evolved from antlerless, tusked ancestors that resembled modern duikers and diminutive deer in the early Eocene, and gradually developed into the first antlered cervoids (the superfamily of cervids and related extinct families) in the Miocene. Eventually, with the development of antlers, the tusks as well as the upper incisors disappeared. Thus, evolution of deer took nearly 30 million years. Biologist Valerius Geist suggests evolution to have occurred in stages. There are not many prominent fossils to trace this evolution, but only fragments of skeletons and antlers that might be easily confused with false antlers of non-cervid species.\nEocene.\nThe ruminants, ancestors of the Cervidae, are believed to have evolved from \"Diacodexis\", the earliest known artiodactyl (even-toed ungulate), 50\u201355 Mya in the Eocene. \"Diacodexis\", nearly the size of a rabbit, featured the talus bone characteristic of all modern even-toed ungulates. This ancestor and its relatives occurred throughout North America and Eurasia, but were on the decline by at least 46 Mya. Analysis of a nearly complete skeleton of \"Diacodexis\" discovered in 1982 gave rise to speculation that this ancestor could be closer to the non-ruminants than the ruminants. \"Andromeryx\" is another prominent prehistoric ruminant, but appears to be closer to the tragulids.\nOligocene.\nThe formation of the Himalayas and the Alps brought about significant geographic changes. This was the chief reason behind the extensive diversification of deer-like forms and the emergence of cervids from the Oligocene to the early Pliocene. The latter half of the Oligocene (28\u201334 Mya) saw the appearance of the European \"Eumeryx\" and the North American \"Leptomeryx\". The latter resembled modern-day bovids and cervids in dental morphology (for instance, it had brachyodont molars), while the former was more advanced. Other deer-like forms included the North American \"Blastomeryx\" and the European \"Dremotherium\"; these sabre-toothed animals are believed to have been the direct ancestors of all modern antlered deer, though they themselves lacked antlers. Another contemporaneous form was the four-horned protoceratid \"Protoceras\", that was replaced by \"Syndyoceras\" in the Miocene; these animals were unique in having a horn on the nose. Late Eocene fossils dated approximately 35 million years ago, which were found in North America, show that \"Syndyoceras\" had bony skull outgrowths that resembled non-deciduous antlers.\nMiocene.\nFossil evidence suggests that the earliest members of the superfamily Cervoidea appeared in Eurasia in the Miocene. \"Dicrocerus\", \"Euprox\" and \"Heteroprox\" were probably the first antlered cervids. \"Dicrocerus\" featured single-forked antlers that were shed regularly. \"Stephanocemas\" had more developed and diffuse (\"crowned\") antlers. \"Procervulus\" (Palaeomerycidae) also had antlers that were not shed. Contemporary forms such as the merycodontines eventually gave rise to the modern pronghorn.\nThe Cervinae emerged as the first group of extant cervids around 7\u20139 Mya, during the late Miocene in central Asia. The tribe Muntiacini made its appearance as \u2020 \"Muntiacus leilaoensis\" around 7\u20138 Mya; The early muntjacs varied in size\u2013as small as hares or as large as fallow deer. They had tusks for fighting and antlers for defence. Capreolinae followed soon after; Alceini appeared 6.4\u20138.4 Mya. Around this period, the Tethys Ocean disappeared to give way to vast stretches of grassland; these provided the deer with abundant protein-rich vegetation that led to the development of ornamental antlers and allowed populations to flourish and colonise areas. As antlers had become pronounced, the canines were either lost or became poorly represented (as in elk), probably because diet was no longer browse-dominated and antlers were better display organs. In muntjac and tufted deer, the antlers as well as the canines are small. The tragulids have long canines to this day.\nPliocene.\nWith the onset of the Pliocene, the global climate became cooler. A fall in the sea-level led to massive glaciation; consequently, grasslands abounded in nutritious forage. Thus a new spurt in deer populations ensued. The oldest member of Cervini, \u2020 \"Cervocerus novorossiae\", appeared around the transition from Miocene to Pliocene (4.2\u20136 Mya) in Eurasia; cervine fossils from early Pliocene to as late as the Pleistocene have been excavated in China and the Himalayas. While \"Cervus\" and \"Dama\" appeared nearly 3 Mya, \"Axis\" emerged during the late Pliocene\u2013Pleistocene. The tribes Capreolini and Rangiferini appeared around 4\u20137 Mya.\nAround 5 Mya, the rangiferina \u2020 \"Bretzia\" and \u2020 \"Eocoileus\" were the first cervids to reach North America. This implies the Bering Strait could be crossed during the late Miocene\u2013Pliocene; this appears highly probable as the camelids migrated into Asia from North America around the same time. Deer invaded South America in the late Pliocene (2.5\u20133 Mya) as part of the Great American Interchange, thanks to the recently formed Isthmus of Panama, and emerged successful due to the small number of competing ruminants in the continent.\nPleistocene.\nLarge deer with impressive antlers evolved during the early Pleistocene, probably as a result of abundant resources to drive evolution. The early Pleistocene cervid \u2020 \"Eucladoceros\" was comparable in size to the modern elk. \u2020 \"Megaloceros\" (Pliocene\u2013Pleistocene) featured the Irish elk (\"M. giganteus\"), one of the largest known cervids. The Irish elk reached at the shoulder and had heavy antlers that spanned from tip to tip. These large animals were traditionally thought to have faced extinction due to conflict between sexual selection for large antlers and body and natural selection for a smaller form, but a combination of anthropogenic and climatic pressures is now thought to be the most likely culprit. Meanwhile, the moose and reindeer radiated into North America from Siberia.\nTaxonomy and classification.\nDeer constitute the artiodactyl family Cervidae. This family was first described by German zoologist Georg August Goldfuss in \"Handbuch der Zoologie\" (1820). Three subfamilies were recognised: Capreolinae (first described by the English zoologist Joshua Brookes in 1828), Cervinae (described by Goldfuss) and Hydropotinae (first described by French zoologist \u00c9douard Louis Trouessart in 1898).\nOther attempts at the classification of deer have been based on morphological and genetic differences. The Anglo-Irish naturalist Victor Brooke suggested in 1878 that deer could be bifurcated into two classes on the according to the features of the second and fifth metacarpal bones of their forelimbs: Plesiometacarpalia (most Old World deer) and Telemetacarpalia (most New World deer). He treated the musk deer as a cervid, placing it under Telemetacarpalia. While the telemetacarpal deer showed only those elements located far from the joint, the plesiometacarpal deer retained the elements closer to the joint as well. Differentiation on the basis of diploid number of chromosomes in the late 20th century has been flawed by several inconsistencies.\nIn 1987, the zoologists Colin Groves and Peter Grubb identified three subfamilies: Cervinae, Hydropotinae and Odocoileinae; they noted that the hydropotines lack antlers, and the other two subfamilies differ in their skeletal morphology. They reverted from this classification in 2000.\nMolecular phylogenetic analyses since the latter half of the 2000s all show that \"hydropotes\" is a sister taxon of \"Capreolus\", and \u201cHydropotinae\u201d became outdated subfamily.\nExternal relationships.\nUntil 2003, it was understood that the family Moschidae (musk deer) was sister to Cervidae. Then a phylogenetic study by Alexandre Hassanin (of National Museum of Natural History, France) and colleagues, based on mitochondrial and nuclear analyses, revealed that Moschidae and Bovidae form a clade sister to Cervidae. According to the study, Cervidae diverged from the Bovidae-Moschidae clade 27 to 28 million years ago. The following cladogram is based on the 2003 study.\nInternal relationships.\nA 2006 phylogenetic study of the internal relationships in Cervidae by Cl\u00e9ment Gilbert and colleagues divided the family into two major clades: Capreolinae (telemetacarpal or New World deer) and Cervinae (plesiometacarpal or Old World deer). Studies in the late 20th century suggested a similar bifurcation in the family. This as well as previous studies support monophyly in Cervinae, while Capreolinae appears paraphyletic. The 2006 study identified two lineages in Cervinae, Cervini (comprising the genera \"Axis\", \"Cervus\", \"Dama\" and \"Rucervus\") and Muntiacini (\"Muntiacus\" and \"Elaphodus\"). Capreolinae featured three lineages, Alceini (\"Alces\" species), Capreolini (\"Capreolus\" and the subfamily Hydropotinae) and Rangiferini (\"Blastocerus\", \"Hippocamelus\", \"Mazama\", \"Odocoileus\", \"Pudu\" and \"Rangifer\" species). The following cladogram is based on the 2006 study.\nHuman interaction.\nPrehistoric.\nDeer were an important source of food for early hominids. In China, \"Homo erectus\" fed upon the sika deer, while the red deer was hunted in Germany. In the Upper Palaeolithic, the reindeer was the staple food for Cro-Magnon people, while the cave paintings at Lascaux in southwestern France include some 90 images of stags. In China, deer continued to be a main source of food for millennia even after people began farming, and it is possible that sika and other deer benefited from the frequently abandoned field sites.\nHistoric.\nDeer had a central role in the ancient art, culture and mythology of various peoples including the Hittites, the ancient Egyptians, the Celts, the ancient Greeks, and certain East Asian cultures. For instance, the Stag Hunt Mosaic of ancient Pella, under the Kingdom of Macedonia (4th century BC), possibly depicts Alexander the Great hunting a deer with Hephaestion. In Japanese Shintoism, the sika deer is believed to be a messenger to the gods. In China, deer are associated with great medicinal significance; deer penis is thought by some in China to have aphrodisiac properties. Spotted deer are believed in China to accompany the god of longevity. Deer was the principal sacrificial animal for the Huichal Indians of Mexico. In medieval Europe, deer appeared in hunting scenes and coats-of-arms. Deer are depicted in many materials by various pre-Hispanic civilizations in the Andes.\nThe common male given name \"Oscar\" is taken from the Irish Language, where it is derived from two elements: the first, \"os\", means \"deer\"; the second element, \"cara\", means \"friend\". The name is borne by a famous hero of Irish mythology\u2014Oscar, grandson of Fionn Mac Cumhail. The name was popularised in the 18th century by James Macpherson, creator of 'Ossianic poetry'.\nLiterary.\nDeer have been an integral part of fables and other literary works since the inception of writing. Stags were used as symbols in the latter Sumerian writings. For instance, the boat of Sumerian god Enki is named the \"Stag of Azbu\". There are several mentions of the animal in the Rigveda as well as the Bible. In the Indian epic Ramayana, Sita is lured by a golden deer which Rama tries to catch. In the absence of both Rama and Lakshman, Ravana kidnaps Sita. Many of the allegorical Aesop's fables, such as \"The Stag at the Pool\", \"The One-Eyed Doe\" and \"The Stag and a Lion\", personify deer to give moral lessons. For instance, \"The Sick Stag\" gives the message that uncaring friends can do more harm than good. The Yaqui deer song accompanies the deer dance which is performed by a pascola [from the Spanish 'pascua', Easter] dancer (also known as a deer dancer). Pascolas would perform at religious and social functions many times of the year, especially during Lent and Easter.\nIn one of Rudolf Erich Raspe's 1785 stories of \"Baron Munchausen's Narrative of his Marvellous Travels and Campaigns in Russia\", the baron encounters a stag while eating cherries and, without ammunition, fires the cherry-pits at the stag with his musket, but it escapes. The next year, the baron encounters a stag with a cherry tree growing from its head; presumably this is the animal he had shot at the previous year. In Christmas lore (such as in the narrative poem \"A Visit from St. Nicholas\"), reindeer are often depicted pulling the sleigh of Santa Claus. Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings's Pulitzer Prize-winning 1938 novel \"The Yearling\" was about a boy's relationship with a baby deer. The fiction book \"Fire Bringer\" is about a young fawn who goes on a quest to save the Herla, the deer kind. In the 1942 Walt Disney Pictures film, \"Bambi\" is a white-tailed deer, while in Felix Salten's original 1923 book \"Bambi, a Life in the Woods\", he is a roe deer. In C. S. Lewis's 1950 fantasy novel \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" the adult Pevensies, now kings and queens of Narnia, chase the White Stag on a hunt, as the Stag is said to grant its captor a wish. The hunt is key in returning the Pevensies to their home in England. In the 1979 book \"The Animals of Farthing Wood\", The Great White Stag is the leader of all the animals.\nHeraldic.\nDeer of various types appear frequently in European heraldry. In the British armory, the term \"stag\" is typically used to refer to antlered male red deer, while \"buck\" indicates an antlered male fallow deer. Stags and bucks appear in a number of attitudes, referred to as \"lodged\" when the deer is lying down, \"trippant\" when it has one leg raised, \"courant\" when it is running, \"springing\" when in the act of leaping, \"statant\" when it is standing with all hooves on the ground and looking ahead, and \"at gaze\" when otherwise statant but looking at the viewer. Stags' heads are also frequently used; these are typically portrayed without an attached neck and as facing the viewer, in which case they are termed \"caboshed\".\nExamples of deer in coats of arms can be found in the arms of Hertfordshire, England, and its county town of Hertford; both are examples of canting arms. A deer appears on the arms of the Israeli Postal Authority. Coats of arms featuring deer include those of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Dotternhausen, Thierachern, Friolzheim, Bauen, Albstadt, and Dassel in Germany; of the Earls Bathurst in England; of Balakhna, Gusev, Nizhny Novgorod, Odintsovo, Slavsk and Yamalo-Nenets in Russia; of Berezhany, Sambir in Ukraine; of \u00c5land, Finland; of Gjemnes, Hitra, Hjartdal and Rendalen in Norway; of Jelenia G\u00f3ra, Poland; of Ume\u00e5, Sweden; of Queensland, Australia; of Cervera, Catalonia; of Selonia and Semigallia in Latvia; and of Chile.\nOther types of deer used in heraldry include the hind, portrayed much like the stag or buck but without antlers, as well as the reindeer and winged stags. Winged stags are used as supporters in the arms of the de Carteret family. The sea-stag, having the antlers, head, forelegs and upper body of a stag and the tail of a mermaid, is often found in German heraldry.\nEconomic.\nDeer have long had economic significance to humans. Deer meat, known as venison, is highly nutritious. It can be obtained responsibly through the process of hunting deer in their natural habitat. Domestically, it is produced in small amounts compared to beef, but still represents a significant trade. Deer hunting is a popular activity in the U.S. that can provide the hunter's family with high quality meat and generates revenue for states and the federal government from the sales of licenses, permits and tags. The 2006 survey by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that license sales generate approximately $700 million annually. This revenue generally goes to support conservation efforts in the states where the licenses are purchased. Overall, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that big game hunting for deer and elk generates approximately $11.8 billion annually in hunting-related travel, equipment and related expenditures. Conservation laws prevent the sale of unlicensed wild game meat, although it may be donated.\nDeer have often been bred in captivity as ornaments for parks, but only in the case of reindeer has thorough domestication succeeded. By 2012, some 25,000 tons of red deer were raised on farms in North America. The Sami of Scandinavia and the Kola Peninsula of Russia and other nomadic peoples of northern Asia use reindeer for food, clothing, and transport. Others are bred for hunting are selected based on the size of the antlers. The major deer-producing countries are New Zealand, the market leader, with Ireland, Great Britain and Germany. The trade earns over $100 million annually for these countries.\nAutomobile collisions with deer can impose a significant cost on the economy. In the U.S., about 1.5\u00a0million deer-vehicle collisions occur each year, according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Those accidents cause about 150 human deaths and $1.1\u00a0billion in property damage annually. In Scotland, several roads including the A82, the A87 and the A835 have had significant enough problems with \"deer vehicle collisions\" (DVCs) that sets of vehicle activated automatic warning signs have been installed along these roads.\nThe skins make a peculiarly strong, soft leather, known as buckskin. There is nothing special about skins with the fur still on since the hair is brittle and soon falls off. The hooves and antlers are used for ornamental purposes, especially the antlers of the roe deer, which are utilized for making umbrella handles, and for similar purposes; elk antlers is often employed in making knife handles. Among the Inuit, the traditional \"ulu\" women's knife was made with an antler or ivory handle. In China, a traditional chinese medicine is made from stag antler, and the antlers of certain species are eaten when \"in the velvet\". Antlers can also be boiled down to release the protein gelatin, which is used as a topical treatment for skin irritation and is also used in cooking.\nSince the early 20th century, deer have become commonly thought of as pests in New Zealand due to a lack of predators on the island causing population numbers to increase and begin encroaching on more populated areas. They compete with livestock for resources, as well as cause excess erosion and wreak havoc on wild plant species and agriculture alike. They can also have an effect on the conservation efforts of other plant and animal species, as they can critically offset the balance within an environment by drastically depleting diversity within forests.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38431", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38431", "title": "Wool", "text": "Textile fiber from the hair of sheep or other mammals\nWool is the textile fiber obtained from sheep and other mammals, especially goats, rabbits, and camelids. The term may also refer to inorganic materials, such as mineral wool and glass wool, that have some properties similar to animal wool.\nWool is an animal fiber and consists of protein together with a small percentage of lipids. This makes it chemically quite distinct from cotton and other plant fibers, which are mainly cellulose, and akin to silk, another animal fiber composed primarily of protein. Like silk, the proteinaceous nature of wool requires special detergents when being cleaned because laundry detergents made to clean cellulose-based fabrics often contain stain-removing enzymes that digest protein.\nCharacteristics.\nWool is produced by follicles which are small cells located in the skin. These follicles are located in the upper layer of the skin called the epidermis and push down into the second skin layer called the dermis as the wool fibers grow. Follicles can be classed as either primary or secondary follicles. Primary follicles produce three types of fiber: kemp, medullated fibers, and true wool fibers. Secondary follicles only produce true wool fibers. Medullated fibers share nearly identical characteristics to hair and are long but lack crimp and elasticity. Kemp fibers are very coarse and shed out. \nWool's crimp refers to the strong natural wave present in each wool fiber as it is presented on the animal. Wool's crimp, and to a lesser degree scales, make it easier to spin the fleece by helping the individual fibers attach, so they stay together. Because of the crimp, wool fabrics have greater bulk than other textiles, and they hold air, which causes the fabric to retain heat. Wool has a high specific thermal resistance, so it impedes heat transfer in general. This effect has benefited desert peoples, as Bedouins and Tuaregs use wool clothes for insulation.\nThe felting of wool occurs upon hammering or other mechanical agitation as the microscopic barbs on the surface of wool fibers hook together. Felting generally comes under two main areas, dry felting and wet felting. Wet felting occurs when water and a lubricant (especially an alkali such as soap) are applied to the wool which is then agitated until the fibers mix and bond together. Temperature shock while damp or wet accentuates the felting process. Some natural felting can occur on the animal's back.\nWool has several qualities that distinguish it from hair or fur: it is crimped and elastic. \nThe amount of crimp corresponds to the fineness of the wool fibers. A fine wool like Merino may have up to 40 crimps per centimetre (100 crimps per inch), while coarser wool like karakul may have less than one (one or two crimps per inch). In contrast, hair has little if any scale and no crimp, and little ability to bind into yarn. On sheep, the hair part of the fleece is called kemp. The relative amounts of kemp to wool vary from breed to breed and make some fleeces more desirable for spinning, felting, or carding into batts for quilts or other insulating products, including the famous tweed cloth of Scotland.\nWool fibers readily absorb moisture, but are not hollow. Wool can absorb almost one-third of its own weight in water.\nWool absorbs sound like many other fabrics. It is generally a creamy white color, although some breeds of sheep produce natural colors, such as black, brown, silver, and random mixes.\nWool ignites at a higher temperature than cotton and some synthetic fibers. It has a lower rate of flame spread, a lower rate of heat release, a lower heat of combustion, and does not melt or drip; it forms a char that is insulating and self-extinguishing, and it contributes less to toxic gases and smoke than other flooring products when used in carpets. Wool carpets are specified for high safety environments, such as trains and aircraft. Wool is usually specified for garments for firefighters, soldiers, and others in occupations where they are exposed to the likelihood of fire.\nWool causes an allergic reaction in some people.\nProcessing.\nShearing.\nSheep shearing is the process in which a worker (a shearer) cuts off the woollen fleece of a sheep. After shearing, wool-classers separate the wool into four main categories:\nThe quality of fleeces is determined by a technique known as wool classing, whereby a qualified person, called a wool classer, groups wools of similar grading together to maximize the return for the farmer or sheep owner. In Australia, before being auctioned, all Merino fleece wool is objectively measured for average diameter (micron), yield (including the amount of vegetable matter), staple length, staple strength, and sometimes color and comfort factor.\nScouring.\nWool straight off a sheep is known as \"raw wool\", \"greasy wool\" or \"wool in the grease\". This wool contains a high level of valuable lanolin, as well as the sheep's dead skin and sweat residue, and generally also contains pesticides and vegetable matter from the animal's environment. Before the wool can be used for commercial purposes, it must be scoured, a process of cleaning the greasy wool. Scouring may be as simple as a bath in warm water or as complicated as an industrial process using detergent and alkali in specialized equipment.\nIn north west England, special potash pits were constructed to produce potash used in the manufacture of a soft soap for scouring locally produced white wool.\nVegetable matter in commercial wool is often removed by chemical carbonization.\nIn less-processed wools, vegetable matter may be removed by hand and some of the lanolin left intact through the use of gentler detergents. This semigrease wool can be worked into yarn and knitted into particularly water-resistant mittens or sweaters, such as those of the Aran Island fishermen. Lanolin removed from wool is widely used in cosmetic products such as hand creams.\nFineness and yield.\nRaw wool has many impurities; vegetable matter, sand, dirt and yolk which is a mixture of suint (sweat), grease, urine stains and dung locks. The sheep's body yields many types of wool with differing strengths, thicknesses, length of staple and impurities. The raw wool (greasy) is processed into 'top'. 'Worsted top' requires strong straight and parallel fibres.\nThe quality of wool is determined by its fiber diameter, crimp, yield, color, and staple strength. Fiber diameter is the single most important wool characteristic determining quality and price.\nMerino wool is typically in length and is very fine (between 12 and 24 microns). The finest and most valuable wool comes from Merino hoggets. Wool taken from sheep produced for meat is typically coarser, and has fibers in length. Damage or breaks in the wool can occur if the sheep is stressed while it is growing its fleece, resulting in a thin spot where the fleece is likely to break.\nWool is also separated into grades based on the measurement of the wool's diameter in microns and also its style. These grades may vary depending on the breed or purpose of the wool. For example:\nAny wool finer than 25 microns can be used for garments, while coarser grades are used for outerwear or rugs. The finer the wool, the softer it is, while coarser grades are more durable and less prone to pilling.\nThe finest Australian and New Zealand Merino wools are known as 1PP, which is the industry benchmark of excellence for Merino wool 16.9 microns and finer. This style represents the top level of fineness, character, color, and style as determined on the basis of a series of parameters in accordance with the original dictates of British wool as applied by the Australian Wool Exchange (AWEX) Council. Only a few dozen of the millions of bales auctioned every year can be classified and marked 1PP.\nIn the United States, three classifications of wool are named in the Wool Products Labeling Act of 1939. Wool is \"the fiber from the fleece of the sheep or lamb or hair of the Angora or Cashmere goat (and may include the so-called specialty fibers from the hair of the camel, alpaca, llama, and vicuna) which has never been reclaimed from any woven or felted wool product\". \"Virgin wool\" and \"new wool\" are also used to refer to such never used wool. There are two categories of recycled wool (also called reclaimed or shoddy wool). \"Reprocessed wool\" identifies \"wool which has been woven or felted into a wool product and subsequently reduced to a fibrous state without having been used by the ultimate consumer\". \"Reused wool\" refers to such wool that \"has\" been used by the ultimate consumer.\nHistory.\nWild sheep were more hairy than woolly. Although sheep were domesticated some 9,000 to 11,000 years ago, archaeological evidence from statuary found at sites in Iran suggests selection for woolly sheep may have begun around 6000\u00a0BC, with the earliest known woven wool garments having only been dated to two to three thousand years later. Woolly sheep were introduced into Europe from the Near East in the early part of the 4th millennium BC. The oldest known European wool textile, c.\u20091500 BC, was preserved in a Danish bog. Prior to the invention of shears\u2014probably in the Iron Age \u2014 wool was plucked out by hand or with bronze combs. In Roman times, wool, linen, and leather clothed the European population; cotton from India was a curiosity of which only naturalists had heard, and silks, imported along the Silk Road from China, were extravagant luxury-goods. Pliny the Elder records in his \"Natural History\" that the reputation for producing the finest wool was enjoyed by Tarentum, where selective breeding had produced sheep with superior fleeces, but which required special care.\nIn medieval times, as trade connections expanded, the Champagne fairs revolved around the production of wool cloth in small centers such as Provins. The network developed by the annual fairs meant that the woolens of Provins might find their way to Naples, Sicily, Cyprus, Mallorca, Spain, and even Constantinople. The wool trade developed into serious undertaking, a generator of capital. In the 13th century, the wool trade became the economic engine of the Low Countries and central Italy. By the end of the 14th century, Italy predominated. The Florentine wool guild, Arte della Lana, sent imported English wool to the San Martino convent for processing. Italian wool from Abruzzo and Spanish merino wools were processed at Garbo workshops. Abruzzo wool had once been the most accessible for the Florentine guild, until improved relations with merchants in Iberia made merino wool more available. In the 15th century Pisa established a factory \"which would export its cloths to the Crimea in exchange for Russian furs\".\nBy the 16th century Italian wool exports to the Levant had declined, eventually replaced by silk production.\nThe value of exports of English raw wool were rivaled only by the 15th-century sheepwalks of Castile and were a significant source of income to the English crown, which in 1275 had imposed an export tax on wool called the \"Great Custom\". The importance of wool to the English economy can be seen in the fact that since the 14th century, the presiding officer of the House of Lords has sat on the \"Woolsack\", a chair stuffed with wool.\nEconomies of scale were instituted in the Cistercian houses, which had accumulated great tracts of land during the 12th and early 13th centuries, when land prices were low and labor still scarce. Raw wool was baled and shipped from North Sea ports to the textile cities of Flanders, notably Ypres and Ghent, where it was dyed and worked up as cloth. At the time of the Black Death (1346-1353), English textile industries consumed about 10% of English wool production. The English textile trade grew during the 15th century, to the point where the export of wool was discouraged. Over the centuries, various British laws controlled the wool trade or required the use of wool even in burials. The smuggling of wool out of the country, known as owling, was at one time punishable by the cutting off of a hand. After the Restoration of 1660, fine English woolens began to compete with silks in the international market, partly aided by the Navigation Acts; in 1699, the English Crown forbade its American colonies to trade wool with anyone but England herself.\nA great deal of the value of woollen textiles was in the dyeing and finishing of the woven product. In each of the centers of the textile trade, the manufacturing process came to be subdivided into a collection of trades, overseen by an entrepreneur in a system called by the English the \"putting-out\" system, or \"cottage industry\", and the by the Germans. In this system of producing wool cloth, once perpetuated in the production of Harris tweeds, the entrepreneur provides the raw materials and an advance, the remainder being paid upon delivery of the product. Written contracts bound the artisans to specified terms. Fernand Braudel traces the appearance of the system in the 13th-century economic boom, quoting a document of 1275. The system effectively bypassed the guilds' restrictions.\nBefore the flowering of the Renaissance, the Medici and other great banking houses of Florence had built their wealth and banking system on their textile industry based on wool, overseen by the Arte della Lana, the wool guild: wool-textile interests guided Florentine policies. Francesco Datini, the \"merchant of Prato\", established in 1383 an \"Arte della Lana\" for that small Tuscan city. The sheepwalks of Castile were controlled by the Mesta union of sheep-owners.\nThey shaped the landscape and the fortunes of the that lies in the heart of the Iberian peninsula; in the 16th century, a unified Spain allowed export of merino lambs only with royal permission. The German wool-market \u2013 based on sheep of Spanish origin \u2013 did not overtake British wool until comparatively late. Later, the Industrial Revolution introduced mass-production technology into wool- and wool-cloth-manufacturing. Australia's colonial economy came to depend on sheep-raising, and the Australian wool trade eventually overtook that of the Germans by 1845, furnishing wool for Bradford, which developed as the heart of industrialized woolens production.\nDue to decreasing demand for wool with increased use of synthetic fibers, wool production is much less than what it was in the past. The collapse in the price of wool began in late 1966 with a 40% drop; with occasional interruptions, the price has tended down. The result has been sharply reduced production and the movement of resources into production of other commodities, in the case of sheep growers, to production of meat.\nSuperwash wool (or washable wool) technology first appeared in the early 1970s, producing wool that has been specially treated so it is machine washable and may be tumble-dried. This wool is produced using an acid bath that removes the \"scales\" from the fiber, or by coating the fiber with a polymer that prevents the scales from attaching to each other and causing shrinkage. This process results in a fiber that holds longevity and durability better than synthetic materials, while retaining garment shape.\nIn December 2004, a bale of the then world's finest wool, averaging 11.8 microns, sold for AU$3,000 per kilogram at auction in Melbourne. This fleece wool tested with an average yield of 74.5%, long, and had 40 newtons per kilotex strength. The result was A$279,000 for the bale.\nThe finest bale of wool ever auctioned was sold for a seasonal record of AU$2690 per kilo during June 2008. This bale was produced by the Hillcreston Pinehill Partnership and measured 11.6 microns, 72.1% yield, and had a 43 newtons per kilotex strength measurement. The bale realized $247,480 and was exported to India.\nIn 2007, a new wool suit was developed and sold in Japan which can be washed in the shower, and which dries off ready to wear within hours with no ironing required. The suit, developed using Australian merino wool, enables woven products made from wool, such as suits, trousers, and skirts, to be cleaned using a domestic shower.\nIn December 2006, the General Assembly of the United Nations proclaimed 2009 to be the International Year of Natural Fibres, so as to raise the profile of wool and of other natural fibers.\nProduction.\nGlobal wool production is about per year, of which 60% goes into apparel. Wool comprises ca 3% of the global textile market, but its value is higher owing to dyeing and other modifications of the material. Australia is a leading producer of wool which is mostly from Merino sheep but has been eclipsed by China in terms of total weight. New Zealand (2016) is the third-largest producer of wool, and the largest producer of crossbred wool. Breeds such as Lincoln, Romney, Drysdale, and Elliotdale produce coarser fibers, and wool from these sheep is usually used for making carpets.\nIn the United States, Texas, New Mexico, and Colorado have large commercial sheep flocks and their mainstay is the Rambouillet (or French Merino). Also, a thriving home-flock contingent of small-scale farmers raise small hobby flocks of specialty sheep for the hand-spinning market. These small-scale farmers offer a wide selection of fleece. \nGlobal woolclip (total amount of wool shorn) 2020\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrganic wool has gained in popularity. This wool is limited in supply and much of it comes from New Zealand and Australia. Organic wool has become easier to find in clothing and other products, but these products often carry a higher price.\nWool is environmentally preferable (as compared to petroleum-based nylon or polypropylene) as a material for carpets, as well, in particular when combined with a natural binding and the use of formaldehyde-free glues.\nAnimal rights groups have noted issues with the production of wool, such as mulesing.\nMarketing.\nAustralia.\nAbout 85% of wool sold in Australia is sold by open cry auction. \nOther countries.\nThe British Wool Marketing Board operates a central marketing system for UK fleece wool with the aim of achieving the best possible net returns for farmers.\nLess than half of New Zealand's wool is sold at auction, while around 45% of farmers sell wool directly to private buyers and end-users.\nUnited States sheep producers market wool with private or cooperative wool warehouses, but wool pools are common in many states. In some cases, wool is pooled in a local market area, but sold through a wool warehouse. Wool offered with objective measurement test results is preferred. Imported apparel wool and carpet wool goes directly to central markets, where it is handled by the large merchants and manufacturers.\nYarn.\nShoddy or recycled wool is made by cutting or tearing apart existing wool fabric and respinning the resulting fibers. As this process makes the wool fibers shorter, the remanufactured fabric is inferior to the original. The recycled wool may be mixed with raw wool, wool noil, or another fiber such as cotton to increase the average fiber length. Such yarns are typically used as weft yarns with a cotton warp. This process was invented in the Heavy Woollen District of West Yorkshire and created a microeconomy in this area for many years.\nWorsted is a strong, long-staple, combed wool yarn with a hard surface.\nWoolen is a soft, short-staple, carded wool yarn typically used for knitting. In traditional weaving, woolen weft yarn (for softness and warmth) is frequently combined with a worsted warp yarn for strength on the loom.\nUses.\nIn addition to clothing, wool has been used for blankets, suits, horse rugs, saddle cloths, carpeting, insulation and upholstery. Dyed wool can be used to create other forms of art such as wet and needle felting. Wool felt covers piano hammers, and it is used to absorb odors and noise in heavy machinery and stereo speakers. Ancient Greeks lined their helmets with felt, and Roman legionnaires used breastplates made of wool felt.\nWool as well as cotton has also been traditionally used for cloth diapers. Wool fiber exteriors are hydrophobic (repel water) and the interior of the wool fiber is hygroscopic (attracts water); this makes a wool garment suitable cover for a wet diaper by inhibiting wicking, so outer garments remain dry. Wool felted and treated with lanolin is water resistant, air permeable, and slightly antibacterial, so it resists the buildup of odor. Some modern cloth diapers use felted wool fabric for covers, and there are several modern commercial knitting patterns for wool diaper covers.\nInitial studies of woollen underwear have found it prevented heat and sweat rashes because it more readily absorbs the moisture than other fibers.\nAs an animal protein, wool can be used as a soil fertilizer, being a slow-release source of nitrogen.\nResearchers at the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology school of fashion and textiles have discovered a blend of wool and Kevlar, the synthetic fiber widely used in body armor, was lighter, cheaper and worked better in damp conditions than Kevlar alone. Kevlar, when used alone, loses about 20% of its effectiveness when wet, so required an expensive waterproofing process. Wool increased friction in a vest with 28\u201330 layers of fabric, to provide the same level of bullet resistance as 36 layers of Kevlar alone.\nEvents.\nA buyer of Merino wool, Ermenegildo Zegna, has offered awards for Australian wool producers. In 1963, the first Ermenegildo Zegna Perpetual Trophy was presented in Tasmania for growers of \"Superfine skirted Merino fleece\". In 1980, a national award, the Ermenegildo Zegna Trophy for Extrafine Wool Production, was launched. In 2004, this award became known as the Ermenegildo Zegna Unprotected Wool Trophy. In 1998, an Ermenegildo Zegna Protected Wool Trophy was launched for fleece from sheep coated for around nine months of the year.\nIn 2002, the Ermenegildo Zegna Vellus Aureum Trophy was launched for wool that is 13.9 microns or finer. Wool from Australia, New Zealand, Argentina, and South Africa may enter, and a winner is named from each country. In April 2008, New Zealand won the Ermenegildo Zegna Vellus Aureum Trophy for the first time with a fleece that measured 10.8 microns. This contest awards the winning fleece weight with the same weight in gold as a prize, hence the name.\nIn 2010, an ultrafine, 10-micron fleece, from Windradeen, near Pyramul, New South Wales, won the Ermenegildo Zegna Vellus Aureum International Trophy.\nSince 2000, Loro Piana has awarded a cup for the world's finest bale of wool that produces just enough fabric for 50 tailor-made suits. The prize is awarded to an Australian or New Zealand wool grower who produces the year's finest bale.\nThe New England Merino Field days which display local studs, wool, and sheep are held during January, in even numbered years around the Walcha, New South Wales district. The Annual Wool Fashion Awards, which showcase the use of Merino wool by fashion designers, are hosted by the city of Armidale, New South Wales, in March each year. This event encourages young and established fashion designers to display their talents. During each May, Armidale hosts the annual New England Wool Expo to display wool fashions, handicrafts, demonstrations, shearing competitions, yard dog trials, and more.\nIn July, the annual Australian Sheep and Wool Show is held in Bendigo, Victoria. This is the largest sheep and wool show in the world, with goats and alpacas, as well as woolcraft competitions and displays, fleece competitions, sheepdog trials, shearing, and wool handling. The largest competition in the world for objectively measured fleeces is the Australian Fleece Competition, which is held annually at Bendigo. In 2008, 475 entries came from all states of Australia, with first and second prizes going to the Northern Tablelands fleeces.\nSee also.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProcessing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRefined products.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOrganizations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMiscellaneous wool and animal textiles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInorganic wool.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38432", "revid": "29237824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38432", "title": "1103", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1103 (MCIII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38433", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38433", "title": "Emperor Toba", "text": "Emperor of Japan from 1107 to 1123\n was the 74th Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nToba's reign spanned the years from 1107 through 1123.\nGenealogy.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (his \"imina\") was Munehito\"-shinn\u014d\" (\u5b97\u4ec1\u89aa\u738b).\nHe was the son of Emperor Horikawa. His mother was Empress Dowager Fujiwara no Ishi (\u85e4\u539f\u82e1\u5b50)\nToba had three Empresses, some consort ladies and 14 imperial sons and daughters.\nEvents of Toba's life.\nWhen his mother died, his grandfather, former-Emperor Shirakawa, took him under his care and raised him.\nDuring the initial years of Toba's reign, the actual power was held by his grandfather, the \"retired\" Emperor Shirakawa, in a process known as cloistered rule.\nKugy\u014d.\n\"Kugy\u014d\" (\u516c\u537f) is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Even during those years in which the court's actual influence outside the palace walls was minimal, the hierarchic organization persisted.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Toba's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of Toba's reign.\nThe years of Toba's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38434", "revid": "1893265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38434", "title": "Emperor Sutoku", "text": "Emperor of Japan from 1123 to 1142\n was the 75th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nSutoku's reign spanned the years from 1123 through 1142.\nGenealogy.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (his \"imina\") was Akihito (\u9855\u4ec1). Sutoku was the eldest son of Emperor Toba. Some old texts say he was instead the son of Toba's grandfather, Emperor Shirakawa.\nEvents of Sutoku's life.\nIn 1151, Sutoku ordered Waka imperial anthology \"Shika Wakash\u016b\".\nIn 1156, after being defeated by forces loyal to Emperor Go-Shirakawa in the H\u014dgen Rebellion, he was exiled to Sanuki Province (modern-day Kagawa prefecture on the island of Shikoku).\nEmperor Sutoku's reign lasted for 19 years: 2 years in the \"neng\u014d\" \"Tenji\", 5 years in \"Daiji\", 1 year in \"'Tensh\u014d\", 3 years in \"Ch\u014dsh\u014d\", 6 years in H\u014den, and 1 year in \"Eiji\".\nThe site of Sutoku's grave is settled. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") in Sakaide, Kagawa. He was also enshrined (or sealed away ...) in Shiramine Shrine in Kyoto and Kotohira-g\u016b in Kagawa Prefecture. The former is also associated with the god of football, worshipped by Kuge clan Asukai in times of yore, while the latter enshrined \u014c-mono-nushi-no-mikoto, a god known to have restored harmony in Yamato (or blackmailed Emperor Sujin ...) in exchange for worship and nepotism.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Sutoku's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Shiramine no misasagi\".\n\"Kugy\u014d\".\n\"Kugy\u014d\" (\u516c\u537f) is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Sutoku's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included: \nEras of Sutoku's reign.\nThe years of Sutoku's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nLegends.\nAfter Sutoku's abdication and exile, he devoted himself to monastic life. He copied numerous scriptures and offered them to the court. Fearing that the scriptures were cursed, the court refused to accept them. Snubbed, Sutoku was said to have resented the court and, upon his death, became an . Everything from the subsequent fall in fortune of the Imperial court, the rise of the samurai powers, droughts and internal unrests were blamed on his haunting.\nAlong with Sugawara no Michizane and Taira no Masakado, he is often called one of the \u201cThree Great Onry\u014d of Japan\u201d.\nLiterary works from the Edo period such as and and ukiyo-e paintings by Utagawa Yoshitsuya depict Emperor Sutoku as an .\nIn 2023, the heavy metal band Onmyo-Za produced the song , about Emperor Sutoku as a .\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38435", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38435", "title": "1164", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1164 (MCLXIV) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38436", "revid": "3488865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38436", "title": "Half-reaction", "text": "Redox reaction component\nIn chemistry, a half reaction (or half-cell reaction) is either the oxidation or reduction reaction component of a redox reaction. A half reaction is obtained by considering the change in oxidation states of individual substances involved in the redox reaction.\nOften, the concept of half reactions is used to describe what occurs in an electrochemical cell, such as a Galvanic cell battery at one of the two electrodes.\nIn the case of metal plating and metal stripping the same half reaction can be written to describe both the metal undergoing oxidation (known as the anode) and the metal undergoing reduction (known as the cathode).\nHalf reactions are often used as a method of balancing redox reactions. For oxidation-reduction reactions in acidic conditions, after balancing the atoms and oxidation numbers, one will need to add ions to balance the hydrogen ions in the half reaction. For oxidation-reduction reactions in basic conditions, after balancing the atoms and oxidation numbers, first treat it as an acidic solution and then add ions to balance the ions in the half reactions (which would give ).\nExample: Zn and Cu galvanic cell.\nConsider the Galvanic cell shown in the adjacent image: it is constructed with a piece of zinc (Zn) submerged in a solution of zinc sulfate () and a piece of copper (Cu) submerged in a solution of copper(II) sulfate (). The overall reaction is:\nAt the Zn anode, oxidation takes place (the metal loses electrons). This is represented in the following oxidation half reaction (note that the electrons are on the products side):\nAt the Cu cathode, reduction takes place (electrons are accepted). This is represented in the following reduction half reaction (note that the electrons are on the reactants side):\nExample: oxidation of magnesium.\nConsider the example burning of magnesium ribbon (Mg). When magnesium burns, it combines with oxygen () from the air to form magnesium oxide (MgO) according to the following equation:\nMagnesium oxide is an ionic compound containing and ions whereas Mg(s) and are elements with no charges. \nThe Mg(s) with zero charge gains a +2 charge going from the reactant side to product side, and the with zero charge gains a \u22122 charge. This is because when Mg(s) becomes , it loses 2 electrons. Since there are 2 Mg on left side, a total of 4 electrons are lost according to the following oxidation half reaction:\nOn the other hand, was reduced: its oxidation state goes from 0 to \u22122. Thus, a reduction half reaction can be written for the as it gains 4 electrons:\nThe overall reaction is the sum of both half reactions:\nWhen chemical reaction, especially, redox reaction takes place, we do not see the electrons as they appear and disappear during the course of the reaction. What we see is the reactants (starting material) and end products. Due to this, electrons appearing on both sides of the equation are canceled. After canceling, the equation is re-written as\nTwo ions, positive () and negative () exist on product side and they combine immediately to form a compound magnesium oxide (MgO) due to their opposite charges (electrostatic attraction). In any given oxidation-reduction reaction, there are two half reactions\u2014oxidation half reaction and reduction half reaction. The sum of these two half reactions is the oxidation\u2013reduction reaction.\nHalf-reaction balancing method.\nConsider the reaction below:\nThe two elements involved, iron and chlorine, each change oxidation state; iron from +2 to +3, chlorine from 0 to \u22121. There are then effectively two \"half\" reactions occurring. These changes can be represented in formulas by inserting appropriate electrons into each half reaction:\n\nGiven two half reactions it is possible, with knowledge of appropriate electrode potentials, to arrive at the complete (original) reaction the same way. The decomposition of a reaction into half reactions is key to understanding a variety of chemical processes. For example, in the above reaction, it can be shown that this is a redox reaction in which Fe is oxidised, and Cl is reduced. Note the transfer of electrons from Fe to Cl. Decomposition is also a way to simplify the balancing of a chemical equation. A chemist can atom balance and charge balance one piece of an equation at a time.\nFor example:\nIt is also possible and sometimes necessary to consider a half reaction in either basic or acidic conditions, as there may be an acidic or basic electrolyte in the redox reaction. Due to this electrolyte it may be more difficult to satisfy the balance of both the atoms and charges. This is done by adding , and/or to either side of the reaction until both atoms and charges are balanced.\nConsider the half reaction below:\n, and can be used to balance the charges and atoms in basic conditions, as long as it is assumed that the reaction is in water.\nAgain consider the half reaction below:\n, and can be used to balance the charges and atoms in acidic conditions, as long as it is assumed that the reaction is in water.\nNotice that both sides are both charge balanced and atom balanced.\nOften there will be both and present in acidic and basic conditions but that the resulting reaction of the two ions will yield water.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38441", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38441", "title": "Type XXI submarine", "text": "German World War II submarine class\nType XXI submarines were a class of German diesel\u2013electric \"Elektroboot\" (German: \"electric boat\") submarines designed during the Second World War. One hundred eighteen were completed, with four being combat-ready. During the war only two were put into active service and went on patrols, but these were not used in combat.\nThey were the first submarines designed to operate primarily submerged, rather than spending most of their time as surface ships that could submerge for brief periods as a means of escaping detection. They incorporated many batteries to increase the time they could spend submerged, to as much as several days, and they only needed to surface to periscope depth for recharging via a snorkel. The design included many general improvements as well: much greater underwater speed by an improved hull design, greatly improved diving times, power-assisted torpedo reloading and greatly improved crew accommodations. However, the design was also flawed in many ways, with the submarines being mechanically unreliable and, according to post-war analysis, vulnerable to combat damage. The Type XXI submarines were also rushed into production before design work was complete, and the inexperienced facilities which constructed the boats were unable to meet necessary quality standards.\nAfter the war, several navies obtained Type XXIs and operated them for decades in various roles, while large navies introduced new submarine designs based on them. These include the Soviet , American , British \"Porpoise\", and Swedish classes, all based on the Type XXI design to some extent.\nDescription.\nThe main features of the Type XXI were the hydrodynamically streamlined hull and conning tower and the large number of battery cells, roughly triple that of the Type VII submarine. This gave these boats great underwater range and dramatically reduced the time spent on or near the surface. They could travel submerged at about for about 75 hours before recharging batteries, which took less than five hours using the snorkel due to the new super-charged diesel engines. Being designed primarily for submerged use, the Type XXI's maximum surface speed (15.6 knots) was lower than that of the Type IX (18.2 knots) but its submerged speed was more than twice that of the Type IX (17.2 knots versus 7.7 knots) because they were equipped with much more powerful electric drive motors and had less drag.\nThe Type XXI was also much quieter than the VIIC, making it more difficult to detect when submerged, and the design eliminated protruding components that had created drag in earlier models. The new, streamlined hull design allowed submerged speed of , versus for the Type VIIC. The ability to outrun many surface ships while submerged, combined with improved dive times (also a product of the new hull form), made the Type XXI much more difficult to pursue and destroy. It also provided a sprint ability when positioning itself for an attack. Older boats had to surface to sprint into position. This often revealed a boat's location, especially after aircraft became available for convoy escort. The Type XXI was also equipped with a pair of electric \"creep motors\" for silent running.\nThe Type XXI was equipped with six bow torpedo tubes (instead of the more common four in German submarines) and carried 23 torpedoes. \nIt featured an electric torpedo-reloading system that allowed all six bow torpedo tubes to be reloaded faster than a Type VIIC could reload one tube. The Type XXI could fire 18 torpedoes in less than 20 minutes. The class also featured a very sensitive passive sonar for the time, housed in the \"chin\" of the hull.\nThe Type XXIs also had better facilities than previous U-boat classes, with much roomier crew berths, and a freezer to prevent food spoilage. The increased capacity allowed for a crew of 57.\nA post-war assessment of the Type XXI by the United States Navy concluded that while the design had some admirable features, it was seriously flawed. The submarines' engines were underpowered, which limited the surface speed and increased the time required to charge the batteries. The hydraulic system was unduly complex, and its main elements were located outside the pressure hull. This made the system highly vulnerable to corrosion and damage. The snorkel was also badly designed, and difficult to use in practice.\nConstruction.\nThis was the first U-boat to be constructed of modular components to allow for the manufacture of the various components in different factories and subsequent assembly at the shipyard.\nBetween 1943 and 1945, 118 boats were assembled by Blohm &amp; Voss of Hamburg, AG Weser of Bremen and Schichau-Werke of Danzig. Each hull was constructed from nine prefabricated sections with final assembly at the shipyards. This new method allowed for a hypothetical construction time of less than six months per vessel, but in practice all the assembled U-boats were plagued with severe quality problems that required extensive post-production work and time to rectify. One of the reasons for these shortcomings was that sections were made by companies having little experience with shipbuilding, after a decision by Albert Speer. As a result, of 118 Type XXIs constructed, only four were fit for combat before the Second World War ended in Europe. Of these, only two conducted combat patrols and neither sank any Allied ships. Post-war assessments by the US Navy and British Royal Navy also found that the completed submarines had poor structural integrity due to the manufacturing problems. This rendered the submarines highly vulnerable to depth charges, and gave them a lesser maximum diving depth than earlier U-boat designs.\nIt was planned that final assembly of Type XXI boats would eventually be carried out in the Valentin submarine pens, a massive, bomb\u2013hardened concrete bunker built at the small port of Farge, near Bremen. The pens were constructed between 1943 and 1945, using about 10,000 concentration camp prisoners and prisoners of war as forced labour. The facility was 90% completed when, during March 1945, it was heavily damaged by Allied bombing with Grand Slam \"earthquake\" bombs and abandoned. A few weeks later the area was captured by the British Army.\nDue to the combination of design and construction problems, historian Clay Blair judged that \"the XXI could not have made a big difference in the Battle of the Atlantic.\nSensors.\nRadar detector.\nThe FuMB Ant 3 \"Bali\" radar detector and antenna was located on top of the snorkel head.\nRadar transmitter.\nThe Type XXI boats were fitted with the FuMO 65 \"Hohentwiel\" U1 with the Type F432 D2 radar transmitter.\nWartime and post-war service.\nGermany.\n and were the only Type XXIs used for war patrols, and neither sank any ships. The commander of \"U-2511\" claimed the U-boat had a British cruiser in his sights on 4 May when news of the German cease-fire was received. He further claimed he made a practice attack before leaving the scene undetected.\nDuring 1957, , which had been scuttled at the end of the war, was raised and refitted as research vessel \"Wilhelm Bauer\" of the \"Bundesmarine\". It was operated by both military and civilian crews for research purposes until 1982. During 1984, it was made available for display to the public by the \"Deutsches Schiffahrtsmuseum\" (German Maritime Museum) in Bremerhaven, Germany.\nFrance.\n became . It was used for active service during the Suez Crisis in 1956, and remained in commission until 1967. It was scrapped in 1969.\nSoviet Union.\nFour Type XXI boats were assigned to the USSR by the Potsdam Agreement; these were , , , and , which were commissioned into the Soviet Navy as , , \"B-29\", and (later \"B-100\") respectively. However, Western intelligence believed the Soviets had acquired several more Type XXI boats; a review by the U.S. Joint Intelligence Committee for the Joint Chiefs of Staff during January 1948 estimated the Soviet Navy then had 15 Type XXIs operational, could complete construction of 6 more within 2 months, and could build another 39 within a year and a half from prefabricated sections, since several factories producing Type XXI components and the assembly yard at Danzig had been captured by the Soviets at the end of World War II. \"U-3538\" \u2014 \"U-3557\" (respectively \"TS-5\" \u2013 \"TS-19\" and \"TS-32\" \u2013 \"TS-38\") remained incomplete at Danzig and were scrapped or sunk during 1947. The four boats assigned by Potsdam were used in trials and tests until 1955, then scuttled or used for weapon testing between 1958 and 1973. The Type XXI design formed the basis for several Soviet design projects, Projects 611, 613, 614, 633, and 644. These became the submarine classes known by their NATO codes as , and submarine classes.\nUnited Kingdom.\n was commissioned into the Royal Navy as . It was used for tests until being scrapped during November 1949.\nUnited States.\nThe United States Navy acquired and , operating them both in the Atlantic Ocean. During November 1946 President Harry S. Truman visited \"U-2513\"; the submarine dived to with the President aboard. \"U-2513\" was sunk as a target on 7 October 1951; \"U-3008\" was sold for scrap on 15 September 1955.\nSurvivor.\nThe only boat to survive intact is (ex-\"U-2540\"), at the German Maritime Museum in Bremerhaven. Records indicate that this sub was scuttled by her crew in 1945, salvaged in 1957 and refurbished for use by the West German \"Bundesmarine\" until retirement in 1982. She was then modified to appear in wartime configuration for exhibition purposes.\nNotable wrecks.\nThe wrecks of several Type XXI boats are known to exist. During 1985, it was discovered that the partially scrapped remains of , , and were still in the partially demolished \"Elbe II\" U-boat bunker in Hamburg. The bunker has since been filled in with gravel, although even that did not initially deter many souvenir hunters who measured the position of open hatches and dug down to them to allow the removal of artifacts. The wrecks now lie beneath a car park (parking lot), making them inaccessible.\n lies in of water west of Key West, Florida. The boat has been visited by divers, but the depth makes this very difficult and the site is considered suitable for only advanced divers. Four other boats lie off the coast of Northern Ireland, where they were sunk during 1946 as part of Operation Deadlight. Both and were found by nautical archaeologist Innes McCartney during his \"Operation Deadlight\" expeditions between 2001 and 2003. Both were found to be in good condition. In April 2018 the wreck of was found north of Skagen in Denmark.\nInfluences.\nThe Type XXI design directly influenced advanced post-war submarines, the Greater Underwater Propulsion Power Program (GUPPY) improvements to the United States , , and -class submarines, and the Soviet submarine projects designated , , and by NATO. The Chinese-built Romeo-class submarines, and the subsequent , were based on Soviet blueprints.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38445", "revid": "47476206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38445", "title": "Tae kwon do", "text": ""}
{"id": "38446", "revid": "18745235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38446", "title": "Albert I of Germany", "text": "King of Germany from 1298 to 1308\nAlbert I of Habsburg () (July 1255\u00a0\u2013 1 May 1308) was a Duke of Austria and Styria from 1282 and King of Germany from 1298 until his assassination. He was the eldest son of King Rudolf I of Germany and his first wife Gertrude of Hohenberg. Sometimes referred to as 'Albert the One-eyed' because of a battle injury that left him with a hollow eye socket and a permanent snarl.\nBiography.\nFrom 1273 Albert ruled as a landgrave over his father's Swabian (Further Austrian) possessions in Alsace. In 1282 his father, the first German monarch from the House of Habsburg, invested him and his younger brother Rudolf II with the duchies of Austria and Styria, which he had seized from late King Ottokar II of Bohemia and defended in the 1278 Battle on the Marchfeld. By the 1283 Treaty of Rheinfelden his father entrusted Albert with their sole government, while Rudolf II ought to be compensated by the Further Austrian Habsburg home territories \u2013 which, however, never happened until his death in 1290. Albert and his Swabian appear to have ruled the Austrian and Styrian duchies with conspicuous success, overcoming the resistance by local nobles.\nKing Rudolf I was unable to secure the succession to the German throne for his son, especially due to the objections raised by Ottokar's son King Wenceslaus II of Bohemia, and the plans to install Albert as successor of the assassinated King Ladislaus IV of Hungary in 1290 also failed. Upon Rudolf's death in 1291, the Prince-electors, fearing Albert's power and the implementation of a hereditary monarchy, chose Count Adolf of Nassau-Weilburg as King of the Romans. An uprising among his Styrian dependents compelled Albert to recognize the sovereignty of his rival and to confine himself for a time to the government of the Habsburg lands at Vienna.\nHe did not abandon his hopes of the throne, however, which were eventually realised: In 1298, he was chosen German king by some of the princes, who were bothered about Adolf's attempts to gain his own power bases in the lands of Thuringia and Meissen, again led by the Bohemian king Wenceslaus II. The armies of the rival kings met at the Battle of G\u00f6llheim near Worms, where Adolf was defeated and slain.\nSubmitting to a new election but securing the support of several influential princes by making extensive promises, he was chosen at the Imperial City of Frankfurt on 27 July 1298, and crowned at Aachen Cathedral on 24 August.\nAlthough a hard, stern man, Albert had a keen sense of justice when his own interests were not involved, and few of the German kings possessed so practical an intelligence. He encouraged the cities, and not content with issuing proclamations against private war, formed alliances with the princes in order to enforce his decrees. The serfs, whose wrongs seldom attracted notice in an age indifferent to the claims of common humanity, found a friend in this severe monarch, and he protected even the despised and persecuted Jews. Stories of his cruelty and oppression in the Swiss cantons (cf. William Tell) did not appear until the 16th century, and are now regarded as legendary.\nAlbert sought to play an important part in European affairs. He seemed at first inclined to press a quarrel with the Kingdom of France over the Burgundian frontier, but the refusal of Pope Boniface VIII to recognize his election led him to change his policy, and, in 1299, he made a treaty with King Philip IV, by which his son Rudolph was to marry Blanche, the King's half-sister. He afterwards became estranged from Philip, but in 1303, Boniface recognized him as German king and future emperor; in return, Albert recognized the authority of the pope alone to bestow the Imperial crown, and promised that none of his sons should be elected German king without papal consent.\nAlbert had failed in his attempt to seize the counties of Holland and Zeeland, as vacant fiefs of the Holy Roman Empire, on the death of Count John I in 1299, but in 1306 he secured the crown of Bohemia for his son Rudolph III on the death of King Wenceslaus III. He also renewed the claim made by his predecessor, Adolf, on Thuringia, and interfered in a quarrel over the succession to the Hungarian throne. The Thuringian attack ended in Albert's defeat at the Battle of Lucka in 1307 and, in the same year, the death of his son Rudolph weakened his position in eastern Europe. His action in abolishing all tolls established on the Rhine since 1250 led the Rhenish prince-archbishops and the Elector of the Palatinate to form a league against him. Aided by the Imperial cities, however, he soon crushed the rising.\nDeath.\nAlbert was on the way to suppress a revolt in Swabia when he was murdered on 1 May 1308, at Windisch on the Reuss, by his nephew Duke John, afterwards called \"the Parricide\" or \"John Parricida\".\nTitles.\nHis full name and titles were: \"Albert, by the grace of God, King of the Romans, Duke of Austria and Styria, Lord of Carniola, over the Wendish Mark and of Port Naon, Count of Habsburg and Kyburg, Landgrave of Alsace\".\nMarriage and children.\nIn 1274, Albert had married Elizabeth, daughter of Count Meinhard II of Tyrol, who was a descendant of the Babenberg margraves of Austria who predated the Habsburgs' rule. The baptismal name Leopold, patron saint margrave of Austria, was given to one of their sons. Queen Elizabeth was in fact better connected to mighty German rulers than her husband: she was a descendant of earlier German kings, including Emperor Henry IV; she was also a niece of the Wittelsbach dukes of Bavaria, Austria's important neighbor.\nAlbert and Elizabeth had twelve children:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nThe poem ., by Felicia Hemans recalls the scene of Albert's death, where he was supposedly comforted by a passing peasant woman. From Friendship's Offering annual, 1826."}
{"id": "38447", "revid": "50450040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38447", "title": "Albert II of Germany", "text": "King of the Romans from 1438 to 1439\nAlbert the Magnanimous , elected King of the Romans as Albert II (10 August 1397\u00a0\u2013 27 October 1439), was a member of the House of Habsburg. By inheritance he became Albert V, Duke of Austria. Through his wife (\"jure uxoris\") he also became King of Hungary, Croatia, Bohemia, and inherited a claim to the Duchy of Luxembourg.\nHe played a significant role in the Hussite Wars, assisting his father-in-law Sigismund and suffering defeats like the Battle of Doma\u017elice in 1431. Crowned King of Hungary in 1438, he struggled to control Bohemia and fought against Polish-Bohemian forces. He later became King of the Romans but died in 1439 while defending Hungary from the Ottomans. His reign saw anti-Hussite and anti-Jewish persecutions, continuing medieval crusades against perceived heretics. Austrian Jews faced increased taxation and expulsions, culminating in the 1420 Vienna pogrom, partly driven by accusations of aiding the Hussites.\nBiography.\nAlbert was born in Vienna as the son of Albert IV, Duke of Austria, and Joanna Sophia of Bavaria.\nHe succeeded to the Duchy of Austria at the age of seven on his father's death in 1404. His uncle Duke William of Inner Austria, then head of the rivaling Leopoldinian line, served as regent for his nephew, followed by his brothers Leopold IV and Ernest the Iron in 1406. The quarrels between the brothers and their continued attempts to gain control over the Albertinian territories led to civil war-like conditions. Nevertheless, Albert, having received a good education, undertook the government of Austria proper on the occasion of Leopold's death in 1411 and succeeded, with the aid of his advisers, in ridding the duchy of the evils which had arisen during his minority.\nIn 1422 Albert married Elisabeth of Luxemburg, the daughter and heiress of the King Sigismund of Hungary (later also Holy Roman Emperor and King of Bohemia), and his second wife, the Slovenian noblewoman Barbara of Celje. Besides Hungary, Albert's marriage brought him claims to several Slavic kingdoms and principalities as well.\nAlbert assisted his father-in-law Sigismund in his campaigns against the Hussites, involving the Austrian duchy in the Hussite Wars. In return Sigismund designated him as his successor and granted him the title of Margrave of Moravia in 1423. The Austrian lands were devastated several times and Albert also participated in the 1431 Battle of Doma\u017elice where the Imperial troops suffered an embarrassing defeat. While his lands were harmed it was a show of loyalty to the church as the church was trying to consolidate its influence and power.\nWhen Sigismund died in 1437, Albert was crowned king of Hungary on 1 January 1438, and just as his predecessor did, he moved his court to the Hungarian Kingdom from where he later oversaw his other domains. Although crowned king of Bohemia six months after ascending to the Hungarian throne, he was unable to obtain possession of the country. He was engaged in warfare with the Bohemians and their Polish allies, when on 17 March 1438, he was elected as \"King of the Romans\" at Frankfurt. Albert was never crowned as Holy Roman Emperor.\nAfterwards engaged in defending Hungary against the attacks of the Turks, he died on 27 October 1439 at Neszm\u00e9ly and was buried at Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r. Albert was an energetic and warlike prince, whose short reign as a triple king gave great promise of usefulness for the Holy Roman Empire.\nHussite Wars and persecution.\nBeginning with the First Crusade in the year 1095, those who were not adherents to the Catholic faith were deemed by the religious authorities to be heretics, and were to be persecuted, destroyed or converted. While the papal call for violence against non-Christians applied to Muslims originally, it was applied against other religious and social groups. Jews and lepers were the main targets along with Muslims in the crusade to destroy \"devilry.\" The persecution of Jews came as no surprise in connection with the Hussite Wars. The call to arms against heretics meant the call to arms against all who are not Christian, with the hopes of their destruction or conversion. If the heretics did not convert to Christianity they were massacred, usually burned.\nJewish persecution.\nBeginning in the 11th century, Jews began to migrate from rural areas to the cities of Western Europe, where they came to assume an important economic role in commercial activity and especially as moneylenders. This economic transformation was accompanied by a deterioration of relations between Jewish and Christian populations, with an increase of violent persecutions (Pogrom) by the latter towards the former. The first major instance of Jewish persecution coincided with the call of the First Crusade in the fall of 1095. Summoned by Pope Urban II with the aim of conquering the Holy Land, crusaders interpreted the papal call to use violence against non Christians as a command to attack and destroy Jewish communities in France and the Rhineland. These German-Austrian massacres were arguably a great influence on Albert V and his Jewish persecutions and expulsions. \nThough the Jews in the Austrian duchy had been subject to local persecutions during the 13th and 14th century, their position remained relatively safe. Jewish communities prospered in several towns like Krems or the area around the \"Judenplatz\" at Vienna. During the confusion after the death of Duke Albert IV in 1404 their situation worsened sharply, culminating in the blaze of the Vienna synagogue on 5 November 1406, followed by riots and lootings.\nWith the ordering of campaign preparations against the Hussites by King Sigismund in the beginning of the 15th century, taxes were used to fund a crusade army. Albert V of Austria followed suit, keeping his good standing with the Catholic Church while he was in power. When Albert V came of age in 1411 and interfered in the Hussite Wars, he repeatedly established new taxes on the Jewish community to finance his campaigns, to destroy \"devilry\" and \"imprudence\". Like the Hussites, Jews were seen as an enemy to Christendom. After the Hussites had devastated the duchy, the Austrian Jews were accused of collaboration and arms trade in favor of the enemies. The accusations of a host desecration at Enns in 1420 gave Albert pretext for the destruction of the Jewish community.\nAccording to the 1463 \"Chronica Austriae\" by chronicler Thomas Ebendorfer, the duke on 23 May 1420, at the behest of the Church, ordered the imprisonment and forcible conversion of the Jews. Those that had not converted or escaped were sent off in boats down the Danube, while wealthy Jews remained under arrest, several of them tortured and stripped of their property. The forced baptism of Jewish children was stopped on intervention by Pope Martin V. On 12 March 1421 Albert sentenced the remaining Jews to death. Ninety-two men and 120 women were burned at the stake south of the Vienna city walls on 12 March 1421. The Jews were placed under an \"eternal ban\" and their synagogue was demolished. The persecutions in several Austrian towns are explicitly described in a 16th-century script called \"Vienna Gesera\".\nFull title.\nFull titulature Albert possessed went as follows: \"Albert, by the grace of God elected King of the Romans, always August, King of Hungary, Dalmatia, Croatia, Rama, Serbia, Galicia, Lodomeria, Cumania and Bulgaria, elected King of Bohemia, duke of Austria, Styria, Carinthia and Carniola, margrave of Moravia, Lord of the Wendish March and Port Naon, Count of Habsburg, Tyrol, Ferrete and Kyburg, etc. Margrave of Burgau and landgrave of Alsace.\"\nIn practise he often used a shorter version: \"Albert, by the grace of God elected King of the Romans, always August, King of Hungary, Dalmatia and Croatia, etc. elected King of Bohemia, duke of Austria, Styria, Carinthia and Carniola, Margrave of Moravia and Count of Tyrol, etc.\"\nFamily.\nHis children with Elizabeth of Luxembourg were:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38448", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38448", "title": "Super NES", "text": ""}
{"id": "38449", "revid": "47224843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38449", "title": "Affine transformation", "text": "Geometric transformation that preserves lines but not angles nor the origin\nIn Euclidean geometry, an affine transformation or affinity (from the Latin, \"affinis\", \"connected with\") is a geometric transformation that preserves lines and parallelism, but not necessarily Euclidean distances and angles.\nMore generally, an affine transformation is an automorphism of an affine space (Euclidean spaces are specific affine spaces), that is, a function which maps an affine space onto itself while preserving both the dimension of any affine subspaces (meaning that it sends points to points, lines to lines, planes to planes, and so on) and the ratios of the lengths of parallel line segments. Consequently, sets of parallel affine subspaces remain parallel after an affine transformation. An affine transformation does not necessarily preserve angles between lines or distances between points, though it does preserve ratios of distances between points lying on a straight line.\nIf X is the point set of an affine space, then every affine transformation on X can be represented as the composition of a linear transformation on X and a translation of X. Unlike a purely linear transformation, an affine transformation need not preserve the origin of the affine space. Thus, every linear transformation is affine, but not every affine transformation is linear.\nExamples of affine transformations include translation, scaling, homothety, similarity, reflection, rotation, hyperbolic rotation, shear mapping, and compositions of them in any combination and sequence.\nViewing an affine space as the complement of a hyperplane at infinity of a projective space, the affine transformations are the projective transformations of that projective space that leave the hyperplane at infinity invariant, restricted to the complement of that hyperplane.\nA generalization of an affine transformation is an affine map (or affine homomorphism or affine mapping) between two (potentially different) affine spaces over the same field k. Let (\"X\", \"V\", \"k\") and (\"Z\", \"W\", \"k\") be two affine spaces with X and Z the point sets and V and W the respective associated vector spaces over the field k. A map \"f\" : \"X\" \u2192 \"Z\" is an affine map if there exists a linear map \"m\"\"f\" : \"V\" \u2192 \"W\" such that \"m\"\"f\" (\"x\" \u2212 \"y\") = \"f\" (\"x\") \u2212 \"f\" (\"y\") for all x, y in X.\nDefinition.\nLet X be an affine space over a field k, and V be its associated vector space. An affine transformation is a bijection f from X onto itself that is an affine map; this means that a linear map g from V to V is well defined by the equation formula_1 here, as usual, the subtraction of two points denotes the free vector from the second point to the first one, and \"well-defined\" means that formula_2 implies that formula_3\nIf the dimension of X is at least two, a \"semiaffine transformation\" f of X is a bijection from X onto itself satisfying:\nThese two conditions are satisfied by affine transformations, and express what is precisely meant by the expression that \"f preserves parallelism\".\nThese conditions are not independent as the second follows from the first. Furthermore, if the field k has at least three elements, the first condition can be simplified to: f is a collineation, that is, it maps lines to lines.\nStructure.\nBy the definition of an affine space, V acts on X, so that, for every pair formula_4 in \"X\" \u00d7 \"V\" there is associated a point y in X. We can denote this action by formula_5. Here we use the convention that formula_6 are two interchangeable notations for an element of V. By fixing a point c in X one can define a function \"m\"\"c\" : \"X\" \u2192 \"V\" by \"m\"\"c\"(\"x\") = \"cx\". For any c, this function is one-to-one, and so, has an inverse function \"m\"\"c\"\u22121 : \"V\" \u2192 \"X\" given by formula_7. These functions can be used to turn X into a vector space (with respect to the point c) by defining:\n* formula_8 and\n* formula_9\nThis vector space has origin c and formally needs to be distinguished from the affine space X, but common practice is to denote it by the same symbol and mention that it is a vector space \"after\" an origin has been specified. This identification permits points to be viewed as vectors and vice versa.\nFor any linear transformation \u03bb of V, we can define the function \"L\"(\"c\", \"\u03bb\") : \"X\" \u2192 \"X\" by\nformula_10\nThen \"L\"(\"c\", \"\u03bb\") is an affine transformation of X which leaves the point c fixed. It is a linear transformation of X, viewed as a vector space with origin c.\nLet \u03c3 be any affine transformation of X. Pick a point c in X and consider the translation of X by the vector formula_11, denoted by \"T\"w. Translations are affine transformations and the composition of affine transformations is an affine transformation. For this choice of c, there exists a unique linear transformation \u03bb of V such that \nformula_12\nThat is, an arbitrary affine transformation of X is the composition of a linear transformation of X (viewed as a vector space) and a translation of X.\nThis representation of affine transformations is often taken as the definition of an affine transformation (with the choice of origin being implicit).\nRepresentation.\nAs shown above, an affine map is the composition of two functions: a translation and a linear map. Ordinary vector algebra uses matrix multiplication to represent linear maps, and vector addition to represent translations. Formally, in the finite-dimensional case, if the linear map is represented as a multiplication by an invertible matrix formula_13 and the translation as the addition of a vector formula_14, an affine map formula_15 acting on a vector formula_16 can be represented as\nformula_17\nAugmented matrix.\nUsing an augmented matrix and an augmented vector, it is possible to represent both the translation and the linear map using a single matrix multiplication. The technique requires that all vectors be augmented with a \"1\" at the end, and all matrices be augmented with an extra row of zeros at the bottom, an extra column\u2014the translation vector\u2014to the right, and a \"1\" in the lower right corner. If formula_13 is a matrix,\nformula_19\nis equivalent to the following\nformula_20\nThe above-mentioned augmented matrix is called an \"affine transformation matrix\". In the general case, when the last row vector is not restricted to be formula_21, the matrix becomes a \"projective transformation matrix\" (as it can also be used to perform projective transformations).\nThis representation exhibits the set of all invertible affine transformations as the semidirect product of formula_22 and formula_23. This is a group under the operation of composition of functions, called the affine group.\nOrdinary matrix-vector multiplication always maps the origin to the origin, and could therefore never represent a translation, in which the origin must necessarily be mapped to some other point. By appending the additional coordinate \"1\" to every vector, one essentially considers the space to be mapped as a subset of a space with an additional dimension. In that space, the original space occupies the subset in which the additional coordinate is 1. Thus the origin of the original space can be found at formula_24. A translation within the original space by means of a linear transformation of the higher-dimensional space is then possible (specifically, a shear transformation). The coordinates in the higher-dimensional space are an example of homogeneous coordinates. If the original space is Euclidean, the higher dimensional space is a real projective space.\nThe advantage of using homogeneous coordinates is that one can combine any number of affine transformations into one by multiplying the respective matrices. This property is used extensively in computer graphics, computer vision and robotics.\nExample augmented matrix.\nSuppose you have three points that define a non-degenerate triangle in a plane, or four points that define a non-degenerate tetrahedron in 3-dimensional space, or generally \"n\" + 1 points x1, ..., x\"n\"+1 that define a non-degenerate simplex in n-dimensional space. Suppose you have corresponding destination points y1, ..., y\"n\"+1, where these new points can lie in a space with any number of dimensions. (Furthermore, the new points need not form a non-degenerate simplex, nor even be distinct from each other.) The unique augmented matrix M that achieves the affine transformation\nformula_25\nfor every i is\nformula_26\nProperties.\nProperties preserved.\nAn affine transformation preserves:\nGroups.\nAs an affine transformation is invertible, the square matrix formula_13 appearing in its matrix representation is invertible. The matrix representation of the inverse transformation is thus\nformula_36\nThe invertible affine transformations (of an affine space onto itself) form the affine group, which has the general linear group of degree formula_37 as subgroup and is itself a subgroup of the general linear group of degree formula_38.\nThe similarity transformations form the subgroup where formula_13 is a scalar times an orthogonal matrix. For example, if the affine transformation acts on the plane and if the determinant of formula_13 is 1 or \u22121 then the transformation is an equiareal mapping. Such transformations form a subgroup called the \"equi-affine group\". A transformation that is both equi-affine and a similarity is an isometry of the plane taken with Euclidean distance.\nEach of these groups has a subgroup of \"orientation-preserving\" or \"positive\" affine transformations: those where the determinant of formula_13 is positive. In the last case this is in 3D the group of rigid transformations (proper rotations and pure translations).\nIf there is a fixed point, we can take that as the origin, and the affine transformation reduces to a linear transformation. This may make it easier to classify and understand the transformation. For example, describing a transformation as a rotation by a certain angle with respect to a certain axis may give a clearer idea of the overall behavior of the transformation than describing it as a combination of a translation and a rotation. However, this depends on application and context.\nAffine maps.\nAn affine map formula_42 between two affine spaces is a map on the points that acts linearly on the vectors (that is, the vectors between points of the space). In symbols, \"formula_15\" determines a linear transformation \"formula_44\" such that, for any pair of points formula_45:\nformula_46\nor\nformula_47\nWe can interpret this definition in a few other ways, as follows.\nIf an origin formula_48 is chosen, and formula_49 denotes its image formula_50, then this means that for any vector formula_51:\nformula_52\nIf an origin formula_53 is also chosen, this can be decomposed as an affine transformation formula_54 that sends formula_55, namely\nformula_56\nfollowed by the translation by a vector formula_57.\nThe conclusion is that, intuitively, formula_15 consists of a translation and a linear map.\nAlternative definition.\nGiven two affine spaces formula_59 and formula_60, over the same field, a function formula_61 is an affine map if and only if for every family formula_62 of weighted points in formula_59 such that \nformula_64\nwe have\nformula_65\nIn other words, formula_15 preserves barycenters.\nExample.\nLet formula_59 be the three-dimensional Euclidean space, formula_68 a plane, and both be equipped with a Cartesian coordinate system. If formula_69 is a parallel projection or, more generally, is generated by an axonometry, then formula_15 is affine and surjective. Hence it can be represented by\nformula_71\nwith a matrix formula_72 of rank 2 and a column vector formula_73 In case formula_74 this is treated in more detail in the section Coordinate calculation at Axonometry.\nHistory.\nThe word \"affine\" as a mathematical term is defined in connection with tangents to curves in Euler's 1748 Introductio in analysin infinitorum. Felix Klein attributes the term \"affine transformation\" to M\u00f6bius and Gauss.\nImage transformation.\nIn their applications to digital image processing, the affine transformations are analogous to printing on a sheet of rubber and stretching the sheet's edges parallel to the plane. This transform relocates pixels requiring intensity interpolation to approximate the value of moved pixels, bicubic interpolation is the standard for image transformations in image processing applications. Affine transformations scale, rotate, translate, mirror and shear images as shown in the following examples:\nThe affine transforms are applicable to the registration process where two or more images are aligned (registered). An example of image registration is the generation of panoramic images that are the product of multiple images stitched together.\nAffine warping.\nThe affine transform preserves parallel lines. However, the stretching and shearing transformations warp shapes, as the following example shows:\nThis is an example of image warping. However, the affine transformations do not facilitate projection onto a curved surface or radial distortions.\nIn the plane.\nEvery affine transformations in a Euclidean plane is the composition of a translation and an affine transformation that fixes a point; the latter may be \nGiven two non-degenerate triangles \"ABC\" and \"A\u2032B\u2032C\u2032\" in a Euclidean plane, there is a unique affine transformation \"T\" that maps \"A\" to \"A\u2032\", \"B\" to \"B\u2032\" and \"C\" to \"C\u2032\". Each of \"ABC\" and \"A\u2032B\u2032C\u2032\" defines an affine coordinate system and a barycentric coordinate system. Given a point \"P\", the point \"T\"(P) is the point that has the same coordinates on the second system as the coordinates of \"P\" on the first system. \nAffine transformations do not respect lengths or angles; they multiply areas by the constant factor\narea of \"A\u2032B\u2032C\u2032\" / area of \"ABC\".\nA given \"T\" may either be \"direct\" (respect orientation), or \"indirect\" (reverse orientation), and this may be determined by comparing the orientations of the triangles.\nExamples.\nOver the real numbers.\nThe functions formula_75 with formula_76 and formula_77 in formula_78 and formula_79, are precisely the affine transformations of the real line.\nIn plane geometry.\nIn formula_80, the transformation shown at left is accomplished using the map given by:\nformula_81\nTransforming the three corner points of the original triangle (in red) gives three new points which form the new triangle (in blue). This transformation skews and translates the original triangle.\nIn fact, all triangles are related to one another by affine transformations. This is also true for all parallelograms, but not for all quadrilaterals.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38451", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38451", "title": "Distances", "text": ""}
{"id": "38452", "revid": "29861514", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38452", "title": "Oxidation state", "text": "Hypothetical charge of an atom if all its bonds to different atoms were fully ionic\nIn chemistry, the oxidation state, or oxidation number, is the hypothetical charge of an atom if all of its bonds to other atoms are fully ionic. It describes the degree of oxidation (loss of electrons) of an atom in a chemical compound. Conceptually, the oxidation state may be positive, negative or zero. Beside nearly-pure ionic bonding, many covalent bonds exhibit a strong ionicity, making oxidation state a useful predictor of charge.\nThe oxidation state of an atom does not represent the \"real\" charge on that atom, or any other actual atomic property. This is particularly true of high oxidation states, where the ionization energy required to produce a multiply positive ion is far greater than the energies available in chemical reactions. Additionally, the oxidation states of atoms in a given compound may vary depending on the choice of electronegativity scale used in their calculation. Thus, the oxidation state of an atom in a compound is purely a formalism. It is nevertheless important in understanding the nomenclature conventions of inorganic compounds. Also, several observations regarding chemical reactions may be explained at a basic level in terms of oxidation states.\nOxidation states are typically represented by integers which may be positive, zero, or negative. In some cases, the average oxidation state of an element is a fraction, such as for iron in magnetite (see below). The highest known oxidation state is reported to be +9, displayed by iridium in the tetroxoiridium(IX) cation (). It is predicted that even a +10 oxidation state may be achieved by platinum in tetroxoplatinum(X), . The lowest oxidation state is \u22125, as for boron in and gallium in pentamagnesium digallide ().\nIn Stock nomenclature, which is commonly used for inorganic compounds, the oxidation state is represented by a Roman numeral placed after the element name inside parentheses or as a superscript after the element symbol, e.g. Iron(III) oxide. The term \"oxidation\" was first used by Antoine Lavoisier to signify the reaction of a substance with oxygen. Much later, it was realized that the substance, upon being oxidized, loses electrons, and the meaning was extended to include other reactions in which electrons are lost, regardless of whether oxygen was involved.\nThe increase in the oxidation state of an atom, through a chemical reaction, is known as oxidation; a decrease in oxidation state is known as a reduction. Such reactions involve the formal transfer of electrons: a net gain in electrons being a reduction, and a net loss of electrons being oxidation. For pure elements, the oxidation state is zero.\nOverview.\nOxidation numbers are assigned to elements in a molecule such that the overall sum is zero in a neutral molecule. The number indicates the degree of oxidation of each element caused by molecular bonding. In ionic compounds, the oxidation numbers are the same as the element's ionic charge. Thus for KCl, potassium is assigned +1 and chlorine is assigned \u22121. The complete set of rules for assigning oxidation numbers are discussed in the following sections.\nOxidation numbers are fundamental to the chemical nomenclature of ionic compounds. For example, Cu compounds with Cu oxidation state +2 are called \"cupric\" and those with state +1 are \"cuprous\". \nThe oxidation numbers of elements allow predictions of chemical formula and reactions, especially oxidation-reduction reactions.\nThe oxidation numbers of the most stable chemical compounds follow trends in the periodic table.\nIUPAC definition.\nInternational Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has published a \"Comprehensive definition of oxidation state (IUPAC Recommendations 2016)\".&lt;ref name=\"10.1515/pac-2015-1204\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It is a distillation of an IUPAC technical report: \"Toward a comprehensive definition of oxidation state\".&lt;ref name=\"10.1515/pac-2013-0505\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; According to the IUPAC \"Gold Book\": \"The oxidation state of an atom is the charge of this atom after ionic approximation of its heteronuclear bonds.\" The term \"oxidation number\" is nearly synonymous.\nThe ionic approximation means extrapolating bonds to ionic. Several criteria&lt;ref name=\"10.1002/anie.201407561\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; were considered for the ionic approximation:\nIn a bond between two different elements, the bond's electrons are assigned to its main atomic contributor typically of higher electronegativity; in a bond between two atoms of the same element, the electrons are divided equally. Most electronegativity scales depend on the atom's bonding state, which makes the assignment of the oxidation state a somewhat circular argument. For example, some scales may turn out unusual oxidation states, such as \u22126 for platinum in , for Pauling and Mulliken scales. The dipole moments would sometimes also turn out abnormal oxidation numbers, such as in CO and NO, which\nare oriented with their positive end towards oxygen. Therefore, this leaves the atom's contribution to the\nbonding MO, the atomic-orbital energy, and from quantum-chemical calculations of charges, as the only viable criteria with cogent values for ionic approximation. However, for a simple estimate for the ionic approximation, we can use Allen electronegativities, as only that electronegativity scale is truly independent of the oxidation state, as it relates to the average valence\u2010electron energy of the free atom:\nDetermination.\nWhile introductory levels of chemistry teaching use postulated oxidation states, the IUPAC recommendation and the \"Gold Book\" entry list two entirely general algorithms for the calculation of the oxidation states of elements in chemical compounds.\nSimple approach without bonding considerations.\nIntroductory chemistry uses postulates: the oxidation state for an element in a chemical formula is calculated from the overall charge and postulated oxidation states for all the other atoms.\nA simple example is based on two postulates,\nwhere OS stands for oxidation state. This approach yields correct oxidation states in oxides and hydroxides of any single element, and in acids such as sulfuric acid () or dichromic acid (). Its coverage can be extended either by a list of exceptions or by assigning priority to the postulates. The latter works for hydrogen peroxide () where the priority of rule 1 leaves both oxygens with oxidation state \u22121.\nAdditional postulates and their ranking may expand the range of compounds to fit a textbook's scope. As an example, one postulatory algorithm from many possible; in a sequence of decreasing priority:\nThis set of postulates covers oxidation states of fluorides, chlorides, bromides, oxides, hydroxides, and hydrides of any single element. It covers all oxoacids of any central atom (and all their fluoro-, chloro-, and bromo-relatives), as well as salts of such acids with group 1 and 2 metals. It also covers iodides, sulfides, and similar simple salts of these metals.\nAlgorithm of assigning bonds.\nThis algorithm is performed on a Lewis structure (a diagram that shows all valence electrons). Oxidation state equals the charge of an atom after each of its heteronuclear bonds has been assigned to the more electronegative partner of the bond (except when that partner is a reversibly bonded Lewis-acid ligand) and homonuclear bonds have been divided equally:\nwhere each \"\u2014\" represents an electron pair (either shared between two atoms or solely on one atom), and \"OS\" is the oxidation state as a numerical variable.\nAfter the electrons have been assigned according to the vertical red lines on the formula, the total number of valence electrons that now \"belong\" to each atom is subtracted from the number N of valence electrons of the neutral atom (such as 5 for nitrogen in group 15) to yield that atom's oxidation state.\nThis example shows the importance of describing the bonding. Its summary formula, , corresponds to two structural isomers; the peroxynitrous acid in the above figure and the more stable nitric acid. With the formula , the simple approach without bonding considerations yields \u22122 for all three oxygens and +5 for nitrogen, which is correct for nitric acid. For the peroxynitrous acid, however, both oxygens in the O\u2013O bond have OS = \u22121, and the nitrogen has OS = +3, which requires a structure to understand.\nOrganic compounds are treated in a similar manner; exemplified here on functional groups occurring in between methane () and carbon dioxide ():\nAnalogously for transition-metal compounds; on the left has a total of 36 valence electrons (18 pairs to be distributed), and hexacarbonylchromium () on the right has 66 valence electrons (33 pairs):\nA key step is drawing the Lewis structure of the molecule (neutral, cationic, anionic): Atom symbols are arranged so that pairs of atoms can be joined by single two-electron bonds as in the molecule (a sort of \"skeletal\" structure), and the remaining valence electrons are distributed such that sp atoms obtain an octet (duet for hydrogen) with a priority that increases in proportion with electronegativity. In some cases, this leads to alternative formulae that differ in bond orders (the full set of which is called the resonance formulas). Consider the sulfate anion () with 32 valence electrons; 24 from oxygens, 6 from sulfur, 2 of the anion charge obtained from the implied cation. The bond orders to the terminal oxygens do not affect the oxidation state so long as the oxygens have octets. Already the skeletal structure, top left, yields the correct oxidation states, as does the Lewis structure, top right (one of the resonance formulas):\nThe bond-order formula at the bottom is closest to the reality of four equivalent oxygens each having a total bond order of 2. That total includes the bond of order to the implied cation and follows the 8\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"N\" rule requiring that the main-group atom's bond-order total equals 8\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"N\" valence electrons of the neutral atom, enforced with a priority that proportionately increases with electronegativity.\nThis algorithm works equally for molecular cations composed of several atoms. An example is the ammonium cation of 8 valence electrons (5 from nitrogen, 4 from hydrogens, minus 1 electron for the cation's positive charge):\nDrawing Lewis structures with electron pairs as dashes emphasizes the essential equivalence of bond pairs and lone pairs when counting electrons and moving bonds onto atoms. Structures drawn with electron dot pairs are of course identical in every way:\nThe algorithm's caveat.\nThe algorithm contains a caveat, which concerns rare cases of transition-metal complexes with a type of ligand that is reversibly bonded as a Lewis acid (as an acceptor of the electron pair from the transition metal); termed a \"Z-type\" ligand in Green's covalent bond classification method. The caveat originates from the simplifying use of electronegativity instead of the MO-based electron allegiance to decide the ionic sign. One early example is the complex with sulfur dioxide () as the reversibly-bonded acceptor ligand (released upon heating). The Rh\u2212S bond is therefore extrapolated ionic against Allen electronegativities of rhodium and sulfur, yielding oxidation state +1 for rhodium:\nAlgorithm of summing bond orders.\nThis algorithm works on Lewis structures and bond graphs of extended (non-molecular) solids:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oxidation state is obtained by summing the heteronuclear-bond orders at the atom as positive if that atom is the electropositive partner in a particular bond and as negative if not, and the atom\u2019s formal charge (if any) is added to that sum. The same caveat as above applies.\nApplied to a Lewis structure.\nAn example of a Lewis structure with no formal charge,\nillustrates that, in this algorithm, homonuclear bonds are simply ignored (the bond orders are in blue).\nCarbon monoxide exemplifies a Lewis structure with formal charges:\nTo obtain the oxidation states, the formal charges are summed with the bond-order value taken positively at the carbon and negatively at the oxygen.\nApplied to molecular ions, this algorithm considers the actual location of the formal (ionic) charge, as drawn in the Lewis structure. As an example, summing bond orders in the ammonium cation yields \u22124 at the nitrogen of formal charge +1, with the two numbers adding to the oxidation state of \u22123:\nThe sum of oxidation states in the ion equals its charge (as it equals zero for a neutral molecule).\nAlso in anions, the formal (ionic) charges have to be considered when nonzero. For sulfate this is exemplified with the skeletal or Lewis structures (top), compared with the bond-order formula of all oxygens equivalent and fulfilling the octet and 8\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"N\" rules (bottom):\nApplied to bond graph.\nA bond graph in solid-state chemistry is a chemical formula of an extended structure, in which direct bonding connectivities are shown. An example is the perovskite, the unit cell of which is drawn on the left and the bond graph (with added numerical values) on the right:\nWe see that the oxygen atom bonds to the six nearest rubidium cations, each of which has 4 bonds to the auride anion. The bond graph summarizes these connectivities. The bond orders (also called bond valences) sum up to oxidation states according to the attached sign of the bond's ionic approximation (there are no formal charges in bond graphs).\nDetermination of oxidation states from a bond graph can be illustrated on ilmenite, . We may ask whether the mineral contains and , or and . Its crystal structure has each metal atom bonded to six oxygens and each of the equivalent oxygens to two irons and two titaniums, as in the bond graph below. Experimental data show that three metal-oxygen bonds in the octahedron are short and three are long (the metals are off-center). The bond orders (valences), obtained from the bond lengths by the bond valence method, sum up to 2.01 at Fe and 3.99 at Ti; which can be rounded off to oxidation states +2 and +4, respectively:\nBalancing redox.\nOxidation states can be useful for balancing chemical equations for oxidation-reduction (or redox) reactions, because the changes in the oxidized atoms have to be balanced by the changes in the reduced atoms. For example, in the reaction of acetaldehyde with Tollens' reagent to form acetic acid (shown below), the carbonyl carbon atom changes its oxidation state from +1 to +3 (loses two electrons). This oxidation is balanced by reducing two cations to (gaining two electrons in total).\nAn inorganic example is the Bettendorf reaction using tin dichloride () to prove the presence of arsenite ions in a concentrated HCl extract. When arsenic(III) is present, a brown coloration appears forming a dark precipitate of arsenic, according to the following simplified reaction:\nHere three tin atoms are oxidized from oxidation state +2 to +4, yielding six electrons that reduce two arsenic atoms from oxidation state +3 to 0. The simple one-line balancing goes as follows: the two redox couples are written down as they react;\nOne tin is oxidized from oxidation state +2 to +4, a two-electron step, hence 2 is written in front of the two arsenic partners. One arsenic is reduced from +3 to 0, a three-electron step, hence 3 goes in front of the two tin partners. An alternative three-line procedure is to write separately the half-reactions for oxidation and reduction, each balanced with electrons, and then to sum them up such that the electrons cross out. In general, these redox balances (the one-line balance or each half-reaction) need to be checked for the ionic and electron charge sums on both sides of the equation being indeed equal. If they are not equal, suitable ions are added to balance the charges and the non-redox elemental balance.\nAppearances.\nNominal oxidation states.\nA nominal oxidation state is a general term with two different definitions:\nBoth alternative oxidation numbers for phosphorus make chemical sense, depending on which chemical property or reaction is emphasized. By contrast, a calculated alternative, such as the average (+4) does not.\nAmbiguous oxidation states.\nLewis formulae are rule-based approximations of chemical reality, as are Allen electronegativities. Still, oxidation states may seem ambiguous when their determination is not straightforward. If only an experiment can determine the oxidation state, the rule-based determination is ambiguous (insufficient). There are also truly dichotomous values that are decided arbitrarily.\nOxidation-state determination from resonance formulas.\nSeemingly ambiguous oxidation states are derived from a set of resonance formulas of equal weights for a molecule having heteronuclear bonds where the atom connectivity does not correspond to the number of two-electron bonds dictated by the 8\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"N\" rule. An example is S2N2 where four resonance formulas featuring one S=N double bond have oxidation states +2 and +4 for the two sulfur atoms, which average to +3 because the two sulfur atoms are equivalent in this square-shaped molecule.\nThe S\u2013S distance measurement in thiosulfate is needed to reveal that this bond order is very close to 1, as in the formula on the left.\nThe typical oxidation state of nitrogen in N2O is +1, which also obtains for both nitrogens by a molecular orbital approach. The formal charges on the right comply with electronegativities, which implies an added ionic bonding contribution. Indeed, the estimated N\u2212N and N\u2212O bond orders are 2.76 and 1.9, respectively, approaching the formula of integer bond orders that would include the ionic contribution explicitly as a bond (in green):\nConversely, formal charges against electronegativities in a Lewis structure decrease the bond order of the corresponding bond. An example is carbon monoxide with a bond-order estimate of 2.6.\nFractional oxidation states.\nFractional oxidation states are often used to represent the average oxidation state of several atoms of the same element in a structure. For example, the formula of magnetite is Fe3O4, implying an average oxidation state for iron of +. However, this average value may not be representative if the atoms are not equivalent. In a Fe3O4 crystal below , two-thirds of the cations are Fe3+ and one-third are Fe2+, and the formula may be more clearly represented as FeO\u00b7Fe2O3.\nLikewise, propane, C3H8, has been described as having a carbon oxidation state of \u2212. Again, this is an average value since the structure of the molecule is H3C\u2212CH2\u2212CH3, with the first and third carbon atoms each having an oxidation state of \u22123 and the central one \u22122.\nAn example with true fractional oxidation states for equivalent atoms is potassium superoxide, KO2. The diatomic superoxide ion O2\u2212 has an overall charge of \u22121, so each of its two equivalent oxygen atoms is assigned an oxidation state of \u2212. This ion can be described as a resonance hybrid of two Lewis structures, where each oxygen has an oxidation state of 0 in one structure and \u22121 in the other.\nFor the cyclopentadienyl anion C5H5\u2212, the oxidation state of C is \u22121 + \u2212 = \u2212. The \u22121 occurs because each carbon is bonded to one hydrogen atom (a less electronegative element), and the \u2212 because the total ionic charge of \u22121 is divided among five equivalent carbons. Again this can be described as a resonance hybrid of five equivalent structures, each having four carbons with oxidation state \u22121 and one with \u22122.\nFinally, fractional oxidation numbers are not used in the chemical nomenclature. For example the red lead Pb3O4 is represented as lead(II,IV) oxide, showing the oxidation states of the two nonequivalent lead atoms.\nElements with multiple oxidation states.\nMost elements have more than one possible oxidation state. For example, carbon has nine possible integer oxidation states from \u22124 to +4:\nOxidation state in metals.\nMany compounds with luster and electrical conductivity maintain a simple stoichiometric formula, such as the golden TiO, blue-black RuO2 or coppery ReO3, all of obvious oxidation state. Ultimately, assigning the free metallic electrons to one of the bonded atoms is not comprehensive and can yield unusual oxidation states. Examples are the LiPb and Cu3Au ordered alloys, the composition and structure of which are largely determined by atomic size and packing factors. Should oxidation state be needed for redox balancing, it is best set to 0 for all atoms of such an alloy.\nList of oxidation states of the elements.\nThis is a list of known oxidation states of the chemical elements, excluding nonintegral values. The most common states appear in bold. The table is based on that of Greenwood and Earnshaw, with additions noted. Every element exists in oxidation state 0 when it is the pure non-ionized element in any phase, whether monatomic or polyatomic allotrope. The column for oxidation state 0 only shows elements known to exist in oxidation state 0 in compounds.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Noble gas\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0Bold values are main oxidation states\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEarly forms (octet rule).\nA figure with a similar format was used by Irving Langmuir in 1919 in one of the early papers about the octet rule. The periodicity of the oxidation states was one of the pieces of evidence that led Langmuir to adopt the rule.\nUse in nomenclature.\nThe oxidation state in compound naming for transition metals and lanthanides and actinides is placed either as a right superscript to the element symbol in a chemical formula, such as FeIII or in parentheses after the name of the element in chemical names, such as iron(III). For example, Fe2(SO4)3 is named iron(III) sulfate and its formula can be shown as Fe(SO4)3. This is because a sulfate ion has a charge of \u22122, so each iron atom takes a charge of +3.\nHistory of the oxidation state concept.\nEarly days.\nOxidation itself was first studied by Antoine Lavoisier, who defined it as the result of reactions with oxygen (hence the name). The term has since been generalized to imply a \"formal\" loss of electrons. Oxidation states, called \"oxidation grades\" by Friedrich W\u00f6hler in 1835, were one of the intellectual stepping stones that Dmitri Mendeleev used to derive the periodic table. William B. Jensen gives an overview of the history up to 1938.\nUse in nomenclature.\nWhen it was realized that some metals form two different binary compounds with the same nonmetal, the two compounds were often distinguished by using the ending \"-ic\" for the higher metal oxidation state and the ending \"-ous\" for the lower. For example, FeCl3 is ferric chloride and FeCl2 is ferrous chloride. This system is not very satisfactory (although sometimes still used) because different metals have different oxidation states which have to be learned: ferric and ferrous are +3 and +2 respectively, but cupric and cuprous are +2 and +1, and stannic and stannous are +4 and +2. Also, there was no allowance for metals with more than two oxidation states, such as vanadium with oxidation states +2, +3, +4, and +5.\nThis system has been largely replaced by one suggested by Alfred Stock in 1919 and adopted by IUPAC in 1940. Thus, FeCl2 was written as iron(II) chloride rather than ferrous chloride. The Roman numeral II at the central atom came to be called the \"Stock number\" (now an obsolete term), and its value was obtained as a charge at the central atom after removing its ligands along with the electron pairs they shared with it.\nDevelopment towards the current concept.\nThe term \"oxidation state\" in English chemical literature was popularized by Wendell Mitchell Latimer in his 1938 book about electrochemical potentials. He used it for the value (synonymous with the German term \"Wertigkeit\") previously termed \"valence\", \"polar valence\" or \"polar number\" in English, or \"oxidation stage\" or indeed the \"state of oxidation\". Since 1938, the term \"oxidation state\" has been connected with electrochemical potentials and electrons exchanged in redox couples participating in redox reactions. By 1948, IUPAC used the 1940 nomenclature rules with the term \"oxidation state\", instead of the original \"valency\". In 1948 Linus Pauling proposed that oxidation number could be determined by extrapolating bonds to being completely ionic in the direction of electronegativity. A full acceptance of this suggestion was complicated by the fact that the Pauling electronegativities as such depend on the oxidation state and that they may lead to unusual values of oxidation states for some transition metals. In 1990 IUPAC resorted to a postulatory (rule-based) method to determine the oxidation state. This was complemented by the synonymous term oxidation number as a descendant of the Stock number introduced in 1940 into the nomenclature. However, the terminology using \"ligands\" gave the impression that oxidation number might be something specific to coordination complexes. This situation and the lack of a real single definition generated numerous debates about the meaning of oxidation state, suggestions about methods to obtain it and definitions of it. To resolve the issue, an IUPAC project (2008-040-1-200) was started in 2008 on the \"Comprehensive Definition of Oxidation State\", and was concluded by two reports and by the revised entries \"Oxidation State\" and \"Oxidation Number\" in the IUPAC Gold Book. The outcomes were a single definition of oxidation state and two algorithms to calculate it in molecular and extended-solid compounds, guided by Allen electronegativities that are independent of oxidation state.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38454", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38454", "title": "Gravitational constant", "text": "Physical constant relating the gravitational force between objects to their mass and distance\nThe gravitational constant is an empirical physical constant that gives the strength of the gravitational field induced by a mass. It is involved in the calculation of gravitational effects in Sir Isaac Newton's law of universal gravitation and in Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity. It is also known as the universal gravitational constant, the Newtonian constant of gravitation, or the Cavendish gravitational constant, denoted by the capital letter\u00a0\"G\".\nIn Newton's law, it is the proportionality constant connecting the gravitational force between two bodies with the product of their masses and the inverse square of their distance. In the Einstein field equations, it quantifies the relation between the geometry of spacetime and the stress\u2013energy tensor.\nThe measured value of the constant is known with some certainty to four significant digits. In SI units, its value is approximately .\nThe modern notation of Newton's law involving \"G\" was introduced in the 1890s by C. V. Boys. The first implicit measurement with an accuracy within about 1% is attributed to Henry Cavendish in a 1798 experiment.\nDefinition.\nAccording to Newton's law of universal gravitation, the magnitude of the attractive force (\"F\") between two bodies each with a spherically symmetric density distribution is directly proportional to the product of their masses, \"m\"1 and \"m\"2, and inversely proportional to the square of the distance, \"r\", directed along the line connecting their centres of mass:\nformula_1\nThe constant of proportionality, \"G\", in this non-relativistic formulation is the gravitational constant. Colloquially, the gravitational constant is also called \"Big G\", distinct from \"small g\" (\"g\"), which is the local gravitational field of Earth (also referred to as free-fall acceleration). Where formula_2 is the mass of Earth and formula_3 is the radius of Earth, the two quantities are related by:\nformula_4\nThe gravitational constant is a constant term in the Einstein field equations of general relativity,\nformula_5\nwhere \"G\"\"\u03bc\u03bd\" is the Einstein tensor (not the gravitational constant despite the use of G), \u039b is the cosmological constant, g\u03bc\u03bd is the metric tensor, T\u03bc\u03bd is the stress\u2013energy tensor, and \"\u03ba\" is the Einstein gravitational constant, a constant originally introduced by Einstein that is directly related to the Newtonian constant of gravitation:\nformula_6\nMeaning.\nThe units of \"G\", m3 kg\u22121 s\u22122 (in SI), can be arranged for meaning in more than one way, to indicate the meaning of \"G\" as the strength of gravity in the universe. One arrangement is N/(kg2/m2) to indicate the force between two masses at a distance according to the inverse-square law. Another, cancelling a common mass unit, is (m/s2)/(kg/m2) to indicate the acceleration due to gravity due to a mass at a distance, or the acceleration resulting at a point in space due to the amount of influence there from a distant mass. \nValue and uncertainty.\nThe gravitational constant is a physical constant that is difficult to measure with high accuracy. This is because the gravitational force is an extremely weak force as compared to other fundamental forces at the laboratory scale.\nIn SI units, the CODATA-recommended value of the gravitational constant is:\n formula_7 = \nThe relative standard uncertainty is .\nNatural units.\nDue to its use as a defining constant in some systems of natural units, particularly geometrized unit systems such as Planck units and Stoney units, the value of the gravitational constant will generally have a numeric value of 1 or a value close to it when expressed in terms of those units. Due to the significant uncertainty in the measured value of \"G\" in terms of other known fundamental constants, a similar level of uncertainty will show up in the value of many quantities when expressed in such a unit system.\nOrbital mechanics.\nIn astrophysics, it is convenient to measure distances in parsecs (pc), velocities in kilometres per second (km/s) and masses in solar units \"M\"\u2299. In these units, the gravitational constant is:\nformula_8\nFor situations where tides are important, the relevant length scales are solar radii rather than parsecs. In these units, the gravitational constant is:\nformula_9\nIn orbital mechanics, the period \"P\" of an object in circular orbit around a spherical object obeys\nformula_10\nwhere \"V\" is the volume inside the radius of the orbit, and \"M\" is the total mass of the two objects. It follows that\n formula_11\nThis way of expressing \"G\" shows the relationship between the average density of a planet and the period of a satellite orbiting just above its surface.\nFor elliptical orbits, applying Kepler's third law, expressed in units characteristic of Earth's orbit:\n formula_12\nwhere distance is measured in terms of the semi-major axis of Earth's orbit (the astronomical unit, au), time in years, and mass in the total mass of the orbiting system (\"M\" = M\u2609 + M\ud83d\udf28 + M\u263e).\nThe above equation is exact only within the approximation of the Earth's orbit around the Sun as a two-body problem in Newtonian mechanics, the measured quantities contain corrections from the perturbations from other bodies in the Solar System and from general relativity.\nFrom 1964 until 2012, however, it was used as the definition of the astronomical unit and thus held by definition:\nformula_13 \nSince 2012, the au is defined as exactly, and the equation can no longer be taken as holding precisely.\nThe quantity \"GM\"\u2014the product of the gravitational constant and the mass of a given astronomical body such as the Sun or Earth\u2014is known as the standard gravitational parameter (also denoted \"\u03bc\"). The standard gravitational parameter \"GM\" appears as above in Newton's law of universal gravitation, as well as in formulas for the deflection of light caused by gravitational lensing, in Kepler's laws of planetary motion, and in the formula for escape velocity.\nThis quantity gives a convenient simplification of various gravity-related formulas. The product \"GM\" is known much more accurately than either factor is.\nCalculations in celestial mechanics can also be carried out using the units of solar masses, mean solar days and astronomical units rather than standard SI units. For this purpose, the Gaussian gravitational constant was historically in widespread use, \"k\" \n radians per day, expressing the mean angular velocity of the Sun\u2013Earth system. The use of this constant, and the implied definition of the astronomical unit discussed above, has been deprecated by the IAU since 2012.\nHistory of measurement.\nEarly history.\nThe existence of the constant is implied in Newton's law of universal gravitation as published in the 1680s (although its notation as \"G\" dates to the 1890s), but is not calculated in his \"Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica\" where it postulates the inverse-square law of gravitation. In the \"Principia\", Newton considered the possibility of measuring gravity's strength by measuring the deflection of a pendulum in the vicinity of a large hill, but thought that the effect would be too small to be measurable. Nevertheless, he had the opportunity to estimate the order of magnitude of the constant when he surmised that \"the mean density of the earth might be five or six times as great as the density of water\", which is equivalent to a gravitational constant of the order:\n \"G\" \u2248 \nA measurement was attempted in 1738 by Pierre Bouguer and Charles Marie de La Condamine in their \"Peruvian expedition\". Bouguer downplayed the significance of their results in 1740, suggesting that the experiment had at least proved that the Earth could not be a hollow shell, as some thinkers of the day, including Edmond Halley, had suggested.\nThe Schiehallion experiment, proposed in 1772 and completed in 1776, was the first successful measurement of the mean density of the Earth, and thus indirectly of the gravitational constant. The result reported by Charles Hutton (1778) suggested a density of (4.5 times the density of water), about 20% below the modern value. This immediately led to estimates on the densities and masses of the Sun, Moon and planets, sent by Hutton to J\u00e9r\u00f4me Lalande for inclusion in his planetary tables. As discussed above, establishing the average density of Earth is equivalent to measuring the gravitational constant, given Earth's mean radius and the mean gravitational acceleration at Earth's surface, by setting\nformula_14\nBased on this, Hutton's 1778 result is equivalent to .\nThe first direct measurement of gravitational attraction between two bodies in the laboratory was performed in 1798, seventy-one years after Newton's death, by Henry Cavendish. He determined a value for \"G\" implicitly, using a torsion balance invented by the geologist Rev. John Michell (1753). He used a horizontal torsion beam with lead balls whose inertia (in relation to the torsion constant) he could tell by timing the beam's oscillation. Their faint attraction to other balls placed alongside the beam was detectable by the deflection it caused. In spite of the experimental design being due to Michell, the experiment is now known as the Cavendish experiment for its first successful execution by Cavendish.\nCavendish's stated aim was the \"weighing of Earth\", that is, determining the average density of Earth and the Earth's mass. His result, \"\u03c1\"\ud83d\udf28 =, corresponds to value of \"G\" =. It is remarkably accurate, being about 1% above the modern CODATA recommended value , consistent with the claimed relative standard uncertainty of 0.6%.\n19th century.\nThe accuracy of the measured value of \"G\" has increased only modestly since the original Cavendish experiment. \"G\" is quite difficult to measure because gravity is much weaker than other fundamental forces, and an experimental apparatus cannot be separated from the gravitational influence of other bodies.\nMeasurements with pendulums were made by Francesco Carlini (1821, ), Edward Sabine (1827, ), Carlo Ignazio Giulio (1841, ) and George Biddell Airy (1854, ).\nCavendish's experiment was first repeated by Ferdinand Reich (1838, 1842, 1853), who found a value of , less accurate than Cavendish's result, differing from the modern value by 1.5%. Cornu and Baille (1873), found .\nCavendish's experiment proved to result in more reliable measurements than pendulum experiments of the \"Schiehallion\" (deflection) type or \"Peruvian\" (period as a function of altitude) type. Pendulum experiments still continued to be performed, by Robert von Sterneck (1883, results between ) and Thomas Corwin Mendenhall (1880, ).\nCavendish's result was first improved upon by John Henry Poynting (1891), who published a value of , differing from the modern value by 0.2%, but compatible with the modern value within the cited relative standard uncertainty of 0.55%. In addition to Poynting, measurements were made by C. V. Boys (1895) and Carl Braun (1897), with compatible results suggesting \"G\" = . The modern notation involving the constant \"G\" was introduced by Boys in 1894 and becomes standard by the end of the 1890s, with values usually cited in the cgs system. Richarz and Krigar-Menzel (1898) attempted a repetition of the Cavendish experiment using 100,000\u00a0kg of lead for the attracting mass. The precision of their result of was, however, of the same order of magnitude as the other results at the time.\nArthur Stanley Mackenzie in \"The Laws of Gravitation\" (1899) reviews the work done in the 19th century. Poynting is the author of the article \"Gravitation\" in the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" Eleventh Edition (1911). Here, he cites a value of \"G\" = with a relative uncertainty of 0.2%.\nModern value.\nPaul R. Heyl (1930) published the value of (relative uncertainty 0.1%), improved to (relative uncertainty 0.045% = 450\u00a0ppm) in 1942.\nHowever, Heyl used the statistical spread as his standard deviation, and he admitted himself that measurements using the same material yielded very similar results while measurements using different materials yielded vastly different results. He spent the next 12 years after his 1930 paper to do more precise measurements, hoping that the composition-dependent effect would go away, but it did not, as he noted in his final paper from the year 1942.\nPublished values of G derived from high-precision measurements since the 1950s have remained compatible with Heyl (1930), but within the relative uncertainty of about 0.1% (or 1000\u00a0ppm) have varied rather broadly, and it is not entirely clear whether the uncertainty has been reduced at all since the 1942 measurement. Some measurements published in the 1980s to 2000s were, in fact, mutually exclusive. Establishing a standard value for G with a relative standard uncertainty better than 0.1% has therefore remained rather speculative.\nBy 1969, the value recommended by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) was cited with a relative standard uncertainty of 0.046% (460\u00a0ppm), lowered to 0.012% (120\u00a0ppm) by 1986. But the continued publication of conflicting measurements led NIST to considerably increase the standard uncertainty in the 1998 recommended value, by a factor of 12, to a standard uncertainty of 0.15%, larger than the one given by Heyl (1930).\nThe uncertainty was again lowered in 2002 and 2006, but once again raised, by a more conservative 20%, in 2010, matching the relative standard uncertainty of 120\u00a0ppm published in 1986. For the 2014 update, CODATA reduced the uncertainty to 46\u00a0ppm, less than half the 2010 value, and one order of magnitude below the 1969 recommendation.\nThe following table shows the NIST recommended values published since 1969:\nIn the January 2007 issue of \"Science\", Fixler et al. described a measurement of the gravitational constant by a new technique, atom interferometry, reporting a value of \"G\" =, 0.28% (2800\u00a0ppm) higher than the 2006 CODATA value. An improved cold atom measurement by Rosi et al. was published in 2014 of \"G\" =. Although much closer to the accepted value (suggesting that the Fixler \"et al.\" measurement was erroneous), this result was 325\u00a0ppm below the recommended 2014 CODATA value, with non-overlapping standard uncertainty intervals.\nAs of 2018, efforts to re-evaluate the conflicting results of measurements are underway, coordinated by NIST, notably a repetition of the experiments reported by Quinn et al. (2013).\nIn August 2018, a Chinese research group announced new measurements based on torsion balances, and based on two different methods. These are claimed as the most accurate measurements ever made, with standard uncertainties cited as low as 12\u00a0ppm. The difference of 2.7\u200a\"\u03c3\" between the two results suggests there could be sources of error unaccounted for.\nConstancy.\nAnalysis of observations of 580 type Ia supernovae shows that the gravitational constant has varied by less than one part in ten billion per year over the last nine billion years.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38455", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38455", "title": "Imre Lakatos", "text": "Hungarian philosopher of mathematics and science (1922\u20131974)\nImre Lakatos (, ; ; 9 November 1922 \u2013 2 February 1974) was a Hungarian philosopher of mathematics and science, known for his thesis of the fallibility of mathematics and its \"methodology of proofs and refutations\" in its pre-axiomatic stages of development, and also for introducing the concept of the \"research programme\" in his methodology of scientific research programmes.\nLife.\nLakatos was born Imre (Avrum) Lipsitz to a Jewish family in Debrecen, Hungary, in 1922. He received a degree in mathematics, physics, and philosophy from the University of Debrecen in 1944. In March 1944, the Germans invaded Hungary, and Lakatos, along with \u00c9va R\u00e9v\u00e9sz, his then-girlfriend and subsequent wife, formed a Marxist resistance group. In May of that year, the group was joined by \u00c9va Izs\u00e1k, a 19-year-old Jewish antifascist activist. Lakatos, considering that there was a risk that she would be captured and forced to betray them, decided that her duty to the group was to commit suicide. Subsequently, a member of the group took her to Debrecen and gave her cyanide.\nDuring the occupation, Lakatos avoided Nazi persecution of Jews by changing his surname to Moln\u00e1r. His mother and grandmother were murdered in Auschwitz. He changed his surname once again to \"Lakatos\" (Locksmith) in honor of G\u00e9za Lakatos.\nAfter the war, from 1947, he worked as a senior official in the Hungarian Ministry of Education. He also continued his education with a PhD at Debrecen University, awarded in 1948 and also attended Gy\u00f6rgy Luk\u00e1cs's weekly Wednesday afternoon private seminars. He also studied at the Moscow State University under the supervision of Sofya Yanovskaya in 1949. When he returned, however, he found himself on the losing side of internal arguments within the Hungarian communist party and was imprisoned on charges of revisionism from 1950 to 1953. More of Lakatos's activities in Hungary after World War II have recently become known. In fact, Lakatos was a hardline Stalinist and, despite his young age, had an important role between 1945 and 1950 (his own arrest and jailing) in building up the Communist rule, especially in cultural life and academia, in Hungary.\nAfter his release, Lakatos returned to academic life, doing mathematical research and translating George P\u00f3lya's \"How to Solve It\" into Hungarian. Still nominally a communist, his political views had shifted markedly, and he was involved with at least one dissident student group in the lead-up to the 1956 Hungarian Revolution.\nAfter the Soviet Union invaded Hungary in November 1956, Lakatos fled to Vienna and later reached England. He lived there for the rest of his life, however, he never achieved British citizenship. He received a PhD in philosophy in 1961 from the University of Cambridge; his doctoral thesis was entitled \"Essays in the Logic of Mathematical Discovery\", and his doctoral advisor was R. B. Braithwaite. The book \"Proofs and Refutations: The Logic of Mathematical Discovery\", published after his death, is based on this work.\nIn 1960, he was appointed to a position in the London School of Economics (LSE), where he wrote on the philosophy of mathematics and the philosophy of science. The LSE philosophy of science department at that time included Karl Popper, Joseph Agassi and J. O. Wisdom. It was Agassi who first introduced Lakatos to Popper under the rubric of his applying a fallibilist methodology of conjectures and refutations to mathematics in his Cambridge PhD thesis.\nWith co-editor Alan Musgrave, he edited the often cited \"Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge\", the \"Proceedings\" of the International Colloquium in the Philosophy of Science, London, 1965. Published in 1970, the 1965 Colloquium included well-known speakers delivering papers in response to Thomas Kuhn's \"The Structure of Scientific Revolutions\".\nIn January 1971, he became editor of the \"British Journal for the Philosophy of Science\", which J.\u00a0O. Wisdom had built up before departing in 1965, and he continued as editor until his death in 1974, after which it was then edited jointly for many years by his LSE colleagues John W.\u00a0N. Watkins and John Worrall, Lakatos's ex-research assistant. \nLakatos and his colleague Spiro Latsis organized an international conference in Greece in 1975, and went ahead despite his death. It was devoted entirely to historical case studies in Lakatos's methodology of research programmes in the physical sciences and economics. These case studies in such as Einstein's relativity programme, Fresnel's wave theory of light and neoclassical economics, were published by Cambridge University Press in two separate volumes in 1976, one devoted to physical sciences and Lakatos's general programme for rewriting the history of science, with a concluding critique by his great friend Paul Feyerabend, and the other devoted to economics.\nHe remained at LSE until his sudden death in 1974 of a heart attack at the age of 51. The Lakatos Award was set up by the school in his memory. His last lectures along with parts of his correspondence with Paul Feyerabend have been published in \"For and Against Method\".\nPhilosophical work.\nPhilosophy of mathematics.\nLakatos's philosophy of mathematics was inspired by both Hegel's and Marx's dialectic, by Karl Popper's theory of knowledge, and by the work of mathematician George P\u00f3lya.\nThe 1976 book \"Proofs and Refutations\" is based on the first three chapters of his 1961 four-chapter doctoral thesis \"Essays in the Logic of Mathematical Discovery\". But its first chapter is Lakatos's own revision of its chapter\u00a01 that was first published as \"Proofs and Refutations\" in four parts in 1963\u201364 in the \"British Journal for the Philosophy of Science\". It is largely taken up by a fictional dialogue set in a mathematics class. The students are attempting to prove the formula for the Euler characteristic in algebraic topology, which is a theorem about the properties of polyhedra, namely that for all polyhedra the number of their vertices \"V\" minus the number of their edges \"E\" plus the number of their faces \"F\" is 2 (\"V\" \u2212 \"E\" + \"F\" \n 2). The dialogue is meant to represent the actual series of attempted proofs that mathematicians historically offered for the conjecture, only to be repeatedly refuted by counterexamples. Often, the students paraphrase famous mathematicians such as Cauchy, as noted in Lakatos's extensive footnotes.\nLakatos termed the polyhedral counterexamples to Euler's formula \"monsters\" and distinguished three ways of handling these objects: Firstly, \"monster-barring\", by which means the theorem in question could not be applied to such objects. Secondly, \"monster-adjustment\", whereby by making a re-appraisal of the \"monster\" it could be \"made\" to obey the proposed theorem. Thirdly, \"exception handling\", a further distinct process. These distinct strategies have been taken up in qualitative physics, where the terminology of \"monsters\" has been applied to apparent counterexamples, and the techniques of \"monster-barring\" and \"monster-adjustment\" recognized as approaches to the refinement of the analysis of a physical issue.\nWhat Lakatos tried to establish was that no theorem of informal mathematics is final or perfect. This means that we should not think that a theorem is ultimately true, only that no counterexample has yet been found. Once a counterexample is found, we adjust the theorem, possibly extending the domain of its validity. This is a continuous way our knowledge accumulates, through the logic and process of proofs and refutations. (If axioms are given for a branch of mathematics, however, Lakatos claimed that proofs from those axioms were tautological, i.e. logically true.)\nLakatos proposed an account of mathematical knowledge based on the idea of heuristics. In \"Proofs and Refutations\" the concept of \"heuristic\" was not well developed, although Lakatos gave several basic rules for finding proofs and counterexamples to conjectures. He thought that mathematical \"thought experiments\" are a valid way to discover mathematical conjectures and proofs, and sometimes called his philosophy \"quasi-empiricism\".\nHowever, he also conceived of the mathematical community as carrying on a kind of dialectic to decide which mathematical proofs are valid and which are not. Therefore, he fundamentally disagreed with the \"formalist\" conception of proof that prevailed in Frege's and Russell's logicism, which defines proof simply in terms of \"formal\" validity.\nOn its first publication as an article in the \"British Journal for the Philosophy of Science\" in 1963\u201364, \"Proofs and Refutations\" became highly influential on new work in the philosophy of mathematics, although few agreed with Lakatos's strong disapproval of formal proof. Before his death, he had been planning to return to the philosophy of mathematics and apply his theory of research programmes to it. Lakatos, Worrall and Zahar use Poincar\u00e9 (1893) to answer one of the major problems perceived by critics, namely that the pattern of mathematical research depicted in \"Proofs and Refutations\" does not faithfully represent most of the actual activity of contemporary mathematicians.\nCauchy and uniform convergence.\nIn a 1966 text \"Cauchy and the continuum\", Lakatos re-examines the history of the calculus, with special regard to Augustin-Louis Cauchy and the concept of uniform convergence, in the light of non-standard analysis. Lakatos is concerned that historians of mathematics should not judge the evolution of mathematics in terms of currently fashionable theories. As an illustration, he examines Cauchy's proof that the sum of a series of continuous functions is itself continuous. Lakatos is critical of those who would see Cauchy's proof, with its failure to make explicit a suitable convergence hypothesis, merely as an inadequate approach to Weierstrassian analysis. Lakatos sees in such an approach a failure to realize that Cauchy's concept of the continuum differed from currently dominant views.\nResearch programmes.\nLakatos's second major contribution to the philosophy of science was his model of the \"research programme\", which he formulated in an attempt to resolve the perceived conflict between Popper's falsificationism and the revolutionary structure of science described by Kuhn. Popper's standard of falsificationism was widely taken to imply that a theory should be abandoned as soon as any evidence appears to challenge it, while Kuhn's descriptions of scientific activity were taken to imply that science is most fruitful during periods in which popular, or \"normal\", theories are supported despite known anomalies. Lakatos's model of the research programme aims to combine Popper's adherence to empirical validity with Kuhn's appreciation for conventional consistency.\nA Lakatosian research programme is based on a \"hard core\" of theoretical assumptions that cannot be abandoned or altered without abandoning the programme altogether. More modest and specific theories that are formulated in order to explain evidence that threatens the \"hard core\" are termed \"auxiliary hypotheses\". Auxiliary hypotheses are considered expendable by the adherents of the research programme\u2014they may be altered or abandoned as empirical discoveries require in order to \"protect\" the \"hard core\". Whereas Popper was generally read as hostile toward such theoretical amendments, Lakatos argued that they can be \"progressive\", i.e. productive, when they enhance the programme's explanatory and/or predictive power, and that they are at least permissible until some better system of theories is devised and the research programme is replaced entirely. The difference between a \"progressive\" and a \"degenerative\" research programme lies, for Lakatos, in whether the recent changes to its auxiliary hypotheses have achieved this greater explanatory/predictive power or whether they have been made simply out of the necessity of offering some response in the face of new and troublesome evidence. A degenerative research programme indicates that a new and more progressive system of theories should be sought to replace the currently prevailing one, but until such a system of theories can be conceived of and agreed upon, abandonment of the current one would only further weaken our explanatory power and would therefore be unacceptable for Lakatos. Lakatos's primary example of a research programme that had been successful in its time and then progressively replaced is that founded by Isaac Newton, with his three laws of motion forming the \"hard core\".\nThe Lakatosian research programme deliberately provides a framework within which research can be conducted on the basis of \"first principles\" (the \"hard core\"), which are shared by those involved in the research programme and accepted for the purpose of that research without further proof or debate. In this regard, it is similar to Kuhn's notion of a paradigm. Lakatos sought to replace Kuhn's paradigm, guided by an irrational \"psychology of discovery\", with a research programme no less coherent or consistent, yet guided by Popper's objectively valid logic of discovery.\nLakatos was following Pierre Duhem's idea that one can always protect a cherished theory (or part of one) from hostile evidence by redirecting the criticism toward other theories or parts thereof. (See \"Confirmation holism\" and Duhem\u2013Quine thesis). This aspect of falsification had been acknowledged by Popper.\nPopper's theory, falsificationism, proposed that scientists put forward theories and that nature \"shouts NO\" in the form of an inconsistent observation. According to Popper, it is irrational for scientists to maintain their theories in the face of nature's rejection, as Kuhn had described them doing. For Lakatos, however, \"It is not that we propose a theory and Nature may shout NO; rather, we propose a maze of theories, and nature may shout INCONSISTENT\". The continued adherence to a programme's \"hard core\", augmented with adaptable auxiliary hypotheses, reflects Lakatos's less strict standard of falsificationism.\nLakatos saw himself as merely extending Popper's ideas, which changed over time and were interpreted by many in conflicting ways. In his 1968 article \"Criticism and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes\", Lakatos contrasted \"Popper0\", the \"naive falsificationist\" who demanded unconditional rejection of any theory in the face of any anomaly (an interpretation Lakatos saw as erroneous but that he nevertheless referred to often); \"Popper1\", the more nuanced and conservatively interpreted philosopher; and \"Popper2\", the \"sophisticated methodological falsificationist\" that Lakatos claims is the logical extension of the correctly interpreted ideas of \"Popper1\" (and who is therefore essentially Lakatos himself). It is, therefore, very difficult to determine which ideas and arguments concerning the research programme should be credited to whom.\nWhile Lakatos dubbed his theory \"sophisticated methodological falsificationism\", it is not \"methodological\" in the strict sense of asserting universal methodological rules by which all scientific research must abide. Rather, it is methodological only in that theories are only abandoned according to a methodical progression from worse theories to better theories\u2014a stipulation overlooked by what Lakatos terms \"dogmatic falsificationism\". Methodological assertions in the strict sense, pertaining to which methods are valid and which are invalid, are themselves contained within the research programmes that choose to adhere to them, and should be judged according to whether the research programmes that adhere to them prove progressive or degenerative. Lakatos divided these \"methodological rules\" within a research programme into its \"negative heuristics\", i.e., what research methods and approaches to avoid, and its \"positive heuristics\", i.e., what research methods and approaches to prefer. While the \"negative heuristic\" protects the hard core, the \"positive heuristic\" directs the modification of the hard core and auxiliary hypotheses in a general direction.\nLakatos claimed that not all changes of the auxiliary hypotheses of a research programme (which he calls \"problem shifts\") are equally productive or acceptable. He took the view that these \"problem shifts\" should be evaluated not just by their ability to defend the \"hard core\" by explaining apparent anomalies, but also by their ability to produce new facts, in the form of predictions or additional explanations. Adjustments that accomplish nothing more than the maintenance of the \"hard core\" mark the research programme as degenerative.\nLakatos's model provides for the possibility of a research programme that is not only continued in the presence of troublesome anomalies but that remains progressive despite them. For Lakatos, it is essentially necessary to continue on with a theory that we basically know cannot be completely true, and it is even possible to make scientific progress in doing so, as long as we remain receptive to a better research programme that may eventually be conceived of. In this sense, it is, for Lakatos, an acknowledged misnomer to refer to \"falsification\" or \"refutation\", when it is not the truth or falsity of a theory that is solely determining whether we consider it \"falsified\" but also the availability of a \"less false\" theory. A theory cannot be rightfully \"falsified\", according to Lakatos, until it is superseded by a better (i.e. more progressive) research programme. This is what he says is happening in the historical periods Kuhn describes as revolutions and what makes them rational as opposed to mere leaps of faith or periods of deranged social psychology, as Kuhn argued.\nPseudoscience.\nAccording to the demarcation criterion of pseudoscience proposed by Lakatos, a theory is pseudoscientific if it fails to make any novel predictions of previously unknown phenomena or its predictions were mostly falsified, in contrast with scientific theories, which predict novel fact(s). Progressive scientific theories are those that have their novel facts confirmed, and degenerate scientific theories, which can degenerate so much that they become pseudo-science, are those whose predictions of novel facts are refuted. As he put it:\n \"A given fact is explained scientifically only if a new fact is predicted with it\u00a0... The idea of growth and the concept of empirical character are soldered into one.\" See pages 34\u201335 of \"The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes\", 1978.\nLakatos's own key examples of pseudoscience were Ptolemaic astronomy, Immanuel Velikovsky's planetary cosmogony, Freudian psychoanalysis, 20th-century \"Soviet\" Marxism, Lysenko's biology, Niels Bohr's quantum mechanics post-1924, astrology, psychiatry, and neoclassical economics.\nDarwin's theory.\nIn his 1973 Scientific Method Lecture 1 at the London School of Economics, he also claimed that \"nobody to date has yet found a demarcation criterion according to which Darwin can be described as scientific\".\nAlmost 20 years after Lakatos's 1973 challenge to the scientificity of Darwin, in her 1991 \"The Ant and the Peacock\", LSE lecturer and ex-colleague of Lakatos, Helena Cronin, attempted to establish that Darwinian theory was empirically scientific in respect of at least being supported by evidence of likeness in the diversity of life forms in the world, explained by descent with modification. She wrote that\nour usual idea of corroboration as requiring the successful prediction of novel facts\u00a0... Darwinian theory was not strong on temporally novel predictions.\u00a0... however familiar the evidence and whatever role it played in the construction of the theory, it still confirms the theory.\nRational reconstructions of the history of science.\nIn his 1970 article \"History of Science and Its Rational Reconstructions\" Lakatos proposed a dialectical historiographical meta-method for evaluating different theories of scientific method, namely by means of their comparative success in explaining the actual history of science and scientific revolutions on the one hand, whilst on the other providing a historiographical framework for rationally reconstructing the history of science as anything more than merely inconsequential rambling. The article started with his now renowned dictum \"Philosophy of science without history of science is empty; history of science without philosophy of science is blind\".\nHowever, neither Lakatos himself nor his collaborators ever completed the first part of this dictum by showing that in any scientific revolution the great majority of the relevant scientific community converted just when Lakatos's criterion \u2013 one programme successfully predicting some novel facts whilst its competitor degenerated \u2013 was satisfied. Indeed, for the historical case studies in his 1968 article \"Criticism and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes\" he had openly admitted as much, commenting: \"In this paper it is not my purpose to go on seriously to the second stage of comparing rational reconstructions with actual history for any lack of historicity.\"\nCriticism.\nFeyerabend.\nPaul Feyerabend argued that Lakatos's methodology was not a methodology at all, but merely \"words that \"sound\" like the elements of a methodology\". He argued that Lakatos's methodology was no different in practice from epistemological anarchism, Feyerabend's own position. He wrote in \"Science in a Free Society\" (after Lakatos's death) that:\nLakatos realized and admitted that the existing standards of rationality, standards of logic included, were too restrictive and would have hindered science had they been applied with determination. He therefore permitted the scientist to violate them (he admits that science is not \"rational\" in the sense of \"these\" standards). However, he demanded that research programmes show certain features \"in the long run\" \u2014 they must be progressive... I have argued that this demand no longer restricts scientific practice. Any development agrees with it.\nLakatos and Feyerabend planned to produce a joint work in which Lakatos would develop a rationalist description of science, and Feyerabend would attack it. The correspondence between Lakatos and Feyerabend, where the two discussed the project, has since been reproduced, with commentary, by Matteo Motterlini.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nArchives"}
{"id": "38456", "revid": "45710782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38456", "title": "Crude oil", "text": ""}
{"id": "38458", "revid": "45032710", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38458", "title": "Space Shuttle program", "text": "1972\u20132011 United States human spaceflight program\nThe Space Shuttle program was the fourth human spaceflight program carried out by the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), which accomplished routine transportation for Earth-to-orbit crew and cargo from 1981 to 2011. Its official program name was Space Transportation System (STS), taken from a 1969 plan for a system of reusable spacecraft where it was the only item funded for development, as a proposed nuclear shuttle in the plan was cancelled in 1972. It flew 135 missions and carried 355 astronauts from 16 countries, many on multiple trips. \nThe Space Shuttle, composed of an orbiter launched with two reusable solid rocket boosters and a disposable external fuel tank, carried up to eight astronauts and up to of payload into low Earth orbit (LEO). When its mission was complete, the orbiter would reenter the Earth's atmosphere and land like a glider at either the Kennedy Space Center or Edwards Air Force Base.\nThe Shuttle is the only winged crewed spacecraft to have achieved orbit and landing, and the first reusable crewed space vehicle that made multiple flights into orbit. Its missions involved carrying large payloads to various orbits including the International Space Station (ISS), providing crew rotation for the space station, and performing service missions on the Hubble Space Telescope. The orbiter also recovered satellites and other payloads (e.g., from the ISS) from orbit and returned them to Earth, though its use in this capacity was rare. Each vehicle was designed with a projected lifespan of 100 launches, or 10 years' operational life. Original selling points on the shuttles were over 150 launches over a 15-year operational span with a 'launch per month' expected at the peak of the program, but extensive delays in the development of the International Space Station never created such a peak demand for frequent flights.\nBackground.\nVarious shuttle concepts had been explored since the late 1960s. The program formally commenced in 1972, becoming the sole focus of NASA's human spaceflight operations after the Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo\u2013Soyuz programs in 1975. The Shuttle was originally conceived of and presented to the public in 1972 as a 'Space Truck' which would, among other things, be used to build a United States space station in low Earth orbit during the 1980s and then be replaced by a new vehicle by the early 1990s. The stalled plans for a U.S. space station evolved into the International Space Station and were formally initiated in 1983 by President Ronald Reagan, but the ISS suffered from long delays, design changes and cost over-runs and forced the service life of the Space Shuttle to be extended several times until 2011 when it was finally retired\u2014serving twice as long as it was originally designed to do. In 2004, according to President George W. Bush's Vision for Space Exploration, use of the Space Shuttle was to be focused almost exclusively on completing assembly of the ISS, which was far behind schedule at that point.\nThe first experimental orbiter, \"Enterprise\", was a high-altitude glider, launched from the back of a specially modified Boeing 747, only for initial atmospheric landing tests (ALT). \"Enterprise\"'s first test flight was on February 18, 1977, only five years after the Shuttle program was formally initiated; leading to the launch of the first space-worthy shuttle \"Columbia\" on April 12, 1981, on STS-1. The Space Shuttle program finished with its last mission, STS-135 flown by \"Atlantis\", in July 2011, retiring the final Shuttle in the fleet. The Space Shuttle program formally ended on August 31, 2011.\nProgram history.\nAll Space Shuttle missions were launched from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. Some civilian and military circumpolar space shuttle missions were planned for Vandenberg AFB in California. However, the use of Vandenberg AFB for space shuttle missions was canceled after the \"Challenger\" disaster in 1986. The weather criteria used for launch included, but were not limited to: precipitation, temperatures, cloud cover, lightning forecast, wind, and humidity. The Shuttle was not launched under conditions where it could have been struck by lightning.\nThe first fully functional orbiter was \"Columbia\" (designated OV-102), built in Palmdale, California. It was delivered to Kennedy Space Center (KSC) on March 25, 1979, and was first launched on April 12, 1981\u2014the 20th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin's space flight\u2014with a crew of two.\n\"Challenger\" (OV-099) was delivered to KSC in July 1982, \"Discovery\" (OV-103) in November 1983, \"Atlantis\" (OV-104) in April 1985 and \"Endeavour\" (OV-105) in May 1991. \"Challenger\" was originally built and used as a Structural Test Article (STA-099), but was converted to a complete orbiter when this was found to be less expensive than converting \"Enterprise\" from its Approach and Landing Test configuration into a spaceworthy vehicle.\nOn April 24, 1990, \"Discovery\" carried the Hubble Space Telescope into space during STS-31.\nIn the course of 135 missions flown, two orbiters (\"Columbia\" and \"Challenger\") suffered catastrophic accidents, with the loss of all crew members, totaling 14 astronauts.\nThe accidents led to national level inquiries, detailed analysis of why the accidents occurred, and significant pauses where changes were made before the Shuttles returned to flight. After the \"Challenger\" disaster in January 1986, there was a delay of 32 months before the next Shuttle launch. A similar delay of 29 months occurred after the \"Columbia\" disaster in February 2003.\nThe longest Shuttle mission was STS-80 lasting 17 days, 15 hours. The final flight of the Space Shuttle program was STS-135 on July 8, 2011.\nSince the Shuttle's retirement in 2011, many of its original duties are performed by an assortment of government and private vessels. The European ATV Automated Transfer Vehicle supplied the ISS between 2008 and 2015. Classified military missions are being flown by the US Air Force's uncrewed spaceplane, the X-37B. By 2012, cargo to the International Space Station was already being delivered commercially under NASA's Commercial Resupply Services by SpaceX's partially reusable Dragon spacecraft, followed by Orbital Sciences' Cygnus spacecraft in late 2013. Crew service to the ISS is currently provided by the Russian Soyuz and, since 2020, the SpaceX Dragon 2 crew capsule, launched on the company's reusable Falcon 9 rocket as part of NASA's Commercial Crew Development program. Boeing's Starliner capsule is scheduled to start ISS crew service from 2025. For missions beyond low Earth orbit, NASA is building the Space Launch System and the Orion spacecraft, part of the Artemis program.\nAccomplishments.\nSpace Shuttle missions have included:\nBudget.\nEarly during development of the Space Shuttle, NASA had estimated that the program would cost $7.45\u00a0billion ($43\u00a0billion in 2011 dollars, adjusting for inflation) in development/non-recurring costs, and $9.3M ($54M in 2011 dollars) per flight. Early estimates for the cost to deliver payload to low-Earth orbit were as low as $118 per pound ($260/kg) of payload ($635/lb or $1,400/kg in 2011 dollars), based on marginal or incremental launch costs, and assuming a 65,000 pound (30\u00a0000\u00a0kg) payload capacity and 50 launches per year. A more realistic projection of 12 flights per year for the 15-year service life combined with the initial development costs would have resulted in a total cost projection for the program of roughly $54\u00a0billion (in 2011 dollars).\nThe total cost of the actual 30-year service life of the Shuttle program through 2011, adjusted for inflation, was $196\u00a0billion. In 2010, the incremental cost per flight of the Space Shuttle was $409 million, or to low Earth orbit (LEO). In contrast, the comparable Proton launch vehicle cost was $141 million, or to LEO and the Soyuz 2.1 was $55 million, or , despite these launch vehicles not being reusable.\nNASA's budget for 2005 allocated 30%, or $5\u00a0billion, to space shuttle operations; this was decreased in 2006 to a request of $4.3\u00a0billion. Non-launch costs account for a significant part of the program budget: for example, during fiscal years 2004 to 2006, NASA spent around $13 billion on the Space Shuttle program, even though the fleet was grounded in the aftermath of the \"Columbia\" disaster and there were a total of three launches during this period of time. In fiscal year 2009, NASA budget allocated $2.98\u00a0billion for 5 launches to the program, including $490\u00a0million for \"program integration\", $1.03\u00a0billion for \"flight and ground operations\", and $1.46\u00a0billion for \"flight hardware\" (which includes maintenance of orbiters, engines, and the external tank between flights.)\nPer-launch costs can be measured by dividing the total cost over the life of the program (including buildings, facilities, training, salaries, etc.) by the number of launches. With 135 missions, and the total cost of US$192\u00a0billion (in 2010 dollars), this gives approximately $1.5\u00a0billion per launch over the life of the Shuttle program. A 2017 study found that carrying one kilogram of cargo to the ISS on the Shuttle cost $272,000 in 2017 dollars, twice the cost of Cygnus and three times that of Dragon.\nNASA used a management philosophy known as success-oriented management during the Space Shuttle program which historian Alex Roland described in the aftermath of the \"Columbia\" disaster as \"hoping for the best\". Success-oriented management has since been studied by several analysts in the area.\nAccidents.\nIn the course of 135 missions flown, two orbiters were destroyed, with loss of crew totalling 14 astronauts:\nThere was also one abort-to-orbit and some fatal accidents on the ground during launch preparations.\nSTS-51-L (\"Challenger\", 1986).\nClose-up video footage of \"Challenger\" during its final launch on January 28, 1986, clearly shows that the problems began due to an O-ring failure on the right solid rocket booster (SRB). The hot plume of gas leaking from the failed joint caused the collapse of the external tank, which then resulted in the orbiter's disintegration due to high aerodynamic stress. The accident resulted in the loss of all seven astronauts on board. \"Endeavour\" (OV-105) was built to replace \"Challenger\" (using structural spare parts originally intended for the other orbiters) and delivered in May 1991; it was first launched a year later.\nAfter the loss of \"Challenger\", NASA grounded the Space Shuttle program for over two years, making numerous safety changes recommended by the Rogers Commission Report, which included a redesign of the SRB joint that failed in the \"Challenger\" accident. Other safety changes included a new escape system for use when the orbiter was in controlled flight, improved landing gear tires and brakes, and the reintroduction of pressure suits for Shuttle astronauts (these had been discontinued after STS-4; astronauts wore only coveralls and oxygen helmets from that point on until the \"Challenger\" accident). The Shuttle program continued in September 1988 with the launch of \"Discovery\" on STS-26.\nThe accidents did not just affect the technical design of the orbiter, but also NASA.\nQuoting some recommendations made by the post-\"Challenger\" Rogers commission:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nRecommendation I \u2013 The faulty Solid Rocket Motor joint and seal must be changed. This could be a new design eliminating the joint or a redesign of the current joint and seal. ... the Administrator of NASA should request the National Research Council to form an independent Solid Rocket Motor design oversight committee to implement the Commission's design recommendations and oversee the design effort.\nRecommendation II \u2013 The Shuttle Program Structure should be reviewed. ... NASA should encourage the transition of qualified astronauts into agency management Positions.\nRecommendation III \u2013 NASA and the primary shuttle contractors should review all Criticality 1, 1R, 2, and 2R items and hazard analyses.\nRecommendation IV \u2013 NASA should establish an Office of Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance to be headed by an Associate Administrator, reporting directly to the NASA Administrator.\nRecommendation VI \u2013 NASA must take actions to improve landing safety. The tire, brake and nosewheel system must be improved.\nRecommendation VII \u2013 Make all efforts to provide a crew escape system for use during controlled gliding flight.\nRecommendation VIII \u2013 The nation's reliance on the shuttle as its principal space launch capability created a relentless pressure on NASA to increase the flight rate ... NASA must establish a flight rate that is consistent with its resources.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nSTS-107 (\"Columbia\", 2003).\nThe Shuttle program operated accident-free for seventeen years and 88 missions after the \"Challenger\" disaster, until \"Columbia\" broke up on reentry, killing all seven crew members, on February 1, 2003. The ultimate cause of the accident was a piece of foam separating from the external tank moments after liftoff and striking the leading edge of the orbiter's left wing, puncturing one of the reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC) panels that covered the wing edge and protected it during reentry. As \"Columbia\" reentered the atmosphere at the end of an otherwise normal mission, hot gas penetrated the wing and destroyed it from the inside out, causing the orbiter to lose control and disintegrate.\nAfter the \"Columbia\" disaster, the International Space Station operated on a skeleton crew of two for more than two years and was serviced primarily by Russian spacecraft. While the \"Return to Flight\" mission STS-114 in 2005 was successful, a similar piece of foam from a different portion of the tank was shed. Although the debris did not strike \"Discovery\", the program was grounded once again for this reason.\nThe second \"Return to Flight\" mission, STS-121 launched on July 4, 2006, at 14:37 (EDT). Two previous launches were scrubbed because of lingering thunderstorms and high winds around the launch pad, and the launch took place despite objections from its chief engineer and safety head. A five-inch (13\u00a0cm) crack in the foam insulation of the external tank gave cause for concern; however, the Mission Management Team gave the go for launch. This mission increased the ISS crew to three. \"Discovery\" touched down successfully on July 17, 2006, at 09:14 (EDT) on Runway 15 at Kennedy Space Center.\nFollowing the success of STS-121, all subsequent missions were completed without major foam problems, and the construction of the ISS was completed (during the STS-118 mission in August 2007, the orbiter was again struck by a foam fragment on liftoff, but this damage was minimal compared to the damage sustained by \"Columbia\").\nThe \"Columbia\" Accident Investigation Board, in its report, noted the reduced risk to the crew when a Shuttle flew to the International Space Station (ISS), as the station could be used as a safe haven for the crew awaiting rescue in the event that damage to the orbiter on ascent made it unsafe for reentry. The board recommended that for the remaining flights, the Shuttle always orbit with the station. Prior to STS-114, NASA Administrator Sean O'Keefe declared that all future flights of the Space Shuttle would go to the ISS, precluding the possibility of executing the final Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission which had been scheduled before the \"Columbia\" accident, despite the fact that millions of dollars' worth of upgrade equipment for Hubble were ready and waiting in NASA warehouses. Many dissenters, including astronauts , asked NASA management to reconsider allowing the mission, but initially the director stood firm. On October 31, 2006, NASA announced approval of the launch of \"Atlantis\" for the fifth and final shuttle servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope, scheduled for August 28, 2008. However SM4/STS-125 eventually launched in May 2009.\nOne impact of \"Columbia\" was that future crewed launch vehicles, namely the Ares I, had a special emphasis on crew safety compared to other considerations.\nPreservation.\nOut of the five fully functional shuttle orbiters built, three remain. \"Enterprise\", which was used for atmospheric test flights but not for orbital flight, had many parts taken out for use on the other orbiters. It was later visually restored and was on display at the National Air and Space Museum's Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center until April 19, 2012. \"Enterprise\" was moved to New York City in April 2012 to be displayed at the \"Intrepid\" Museum, whose Space Shuttle Pavilion opened on July 19, 2012. \"Discovery\" replaced \"Enterprise\" at the National Air and Space Museum's Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center. \"Atlantis\" formed part of the Space Shuttle Exhibit at the Kennedy Space Center visitor complex and has been on display there since June 29, 2013, following its refurbishment.\nOn October 14, 2012, \"Endeavour\" completed an unprecedented drive on city streets from Los Angeles International Airport to the California Science Center, where it has been on display in a temporary hangar since late 2012. The transport from the airport took two days and required major street closures, the removal of over 400 city trees, and extensive work to raise power lines, level the street, and temporarily remove street signs, lamp posts, and other obstacles. Hundreds of volunteers, and fire and police personnel, helped with the transport. Large crowds of spectators waited on the streets to see the shuttle as it passed through the city. \"Endeavour\", along with the last flight-qualified external tank (ET-94), is currently on display at the Science Center's Samuel Oschin Pavilion (in a horizontal orientation) until the completion of the \"Samuel Oschin Air and Space Center\" (a planned addition to the California Science Center). Once moved, it will be permanently displayed in launch configuration, complete with genuine solid rocket boosters and external tank.\nCrew modules.\nOne area of Space Shuttle applications is an expanded crew. Crews of up to eight have been flown in the Orbiter, but it could have held at least a crew of ten. Various proposals for filling the payload bay with additional passengers were also made as early as 1979. One proposal by Rockwell provided seating for 74 passengers in the Orbiter payload bay, with support for three days in Earth orbit. With a smaller 64 seat orbiter, costs for the late 1980s would be around US$1.5\u00a0million per seat per launch. The Rockwell passenger module had two decks, four seats across on top and two on the bottom, including a 25-inch (63.5\u00a0cm) wide aisle and extra storage space.\nAnother design was Space Habitation Design Associates 1983 proposal for 72 passengers in the Space Shuttle Payload bay. Passengers were located in 6 sections, each with windows and its own loading ramp at launch, and with seats in different configurations for launch and landing. Another proposal was based on the Spacelab habitation modules, which provided 32 seats in the payload bay in addition to those in the cockpit area.\nThere were some efforts to analyze commercial operation of STS. Using the NASA figure for average cost to launch a Space Shuttle as of 2011 at about $450\u00a0million per mission, a cost per seat for a 74 seat module envisioned by Rockwell came to less than $6\u00a0million, not including the regular crew. Some passenger modules used hardware similar to existing equipment, such as the tunnel, which was also needed for Spacehab and Spacelab\nSuccessors.\nDuring the three decades of operation, various follow-on and replacements for the STS Space Shuttle were partially developed but not finished.\nExamples of possible future space vehicles to supplement or supplant STS:\nOne effort in the direction of space transportation was the Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV) program, initiated in 1994 by NASA. This led to work on the X-33 and X-34 vehicles. NASA spent about US$1\u00a0billion on developing the X-33 hoping for it be in operation by 2005. Another program around the turn of the millennium was the Space Launch Initiative, which was a next generation launch initiative.\nThe Space Launch Initiative program was started in 2001, and in late 2002 it was evolved into two programs, the Orbital Space Plane Program and the Next Generation Launch Technology program. OSP was oriented towards provided access to the International Space Station.\nOther vehicles that would have taken over some of the Shuttles responsibilities were the HL-20 Personnel Launch System or the NASA X-38 of the Crew Return Vehicle program, which were primarily for getting people down from ISS. The X-38 was cancelled in 2002, and the HL-20 was cancelled in 1993. Several other programs in this existed such as the Station Crew Return Alternative Module (SCRAM) and Assured Crew Return Vehicle (ACRV)\nAccording to the 2004 Vision for Space Exploration, the next human NASA program was to be Constellation program with its Ares I and Ares V launch vehicles and the Orion spacecraft; however, the Constellation program was never fully funded, and in early 2010 the Obama administration asked Congress to instead endorse a plan with heavy reliance on the private sector for delivering cargo and crew to LEO.\nThe Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS) program began in 2006 with the purpose of creating commercially operated uncrewed cargo vehicles to service the ISS. The first of these vehicles, SpaceX Dragon 1, became operational in 2012, and the second, Orbital Sciences's Cygnus did so in 2014.\nThe Commercial Crew Development (CCDev) program was initiated in 2010 with the purpose of creating commercially operated crewed spacecraft capable of delivering at least four crew members to the ISS, staying docked for 180 days and then returning them back to Earth. These spacecraft, like SpaceX's Dragon 2 and Boeing CST-100 Starliner were expected to become operational around 2020. On the Crew Dragon Demo-2 mission, SpaceX's Dragon 2 sent astronauts to the ISS, restoring America's human launch capability. The first operational SpaceX mission launched on November 15, 2020, at 7:27:17\u00a0p.m. ET, carrying four astronauts to the ISS.\nAlthough the Constellation program was canceled, it has been replaced with a very similar Artemis program. The Orion spacecraft has been left virtually unchanged from its previous design. The planned Ares V rocket has been replaced with the smaller Space Launch System (SLS), which is planned to launch both Orion and other necessary hardware. Exploration Flight Test-1 (EFT-1), an uncrewed test flight of the Orion spacecraft, launched on December 5, 2014, on a Delta IV Heavy rocket.\nArtemis 1 is the first flight of the SLS and was launched as a test of the completed Orion and SLS system. During the mission, an uncrewed Orion capsule spent 10 days in a distant retrograde orbit around the Moon before returning to Earth. Artemis 2, the first crewed mission of the program, will launch four astronauts in 2024 on a free-return flyby of the Moon at a distance of . After Artemis 2, the Power and Propulsion Element of the Lunar Gateway and three components of an expendable lunar lander are planned to be delivered on multiple launches from commercial launch service providers. Artemis 3 is planned to launch in 2025 aboard a SLS Block 1 rocket and will use the minimalist Gateway and expendable lander to achieve the first crewed lunar landing of the program. The flight is planned to touch down on the lunar south pole region, with two astronauts staying there for about one week.\nFor many Artemis missions, the Space Launch System's two solid rocket boosters' engines and casings and four main engines and the Orion spacecraft's main engine will all be previously flown Space Shuttle main engines, solid rocket boosters, and Orbital Maneuvering System engines. They are refurbished legacy engines from the Space Shuttle program, some of which even date back to the early 1980s. For example, Artemis I had components that flew on 83 of the 135 Space Shuttle missions. From Artemis I to Artemis IV recycled Shuttle main engines will be used before manufacturing new engines. From Artemis I to Artemis III recycled Shuttle solid rocket boosters' engines and steel casings will be used before manufacturing new ones. From Artemis I to Artemis VI the Orion main engine will use six previously flown Space Shuttle OMS engines.\nAssets and transition plan.\nThe Space Shuttle program occupied over 654 facilities, used over 1.2\u00a0million line items of equipment, and employed over 5,000 people. The total value of equipment was over $12\u00a0billion. Shuttle-related facilities represented over a quarter of NASA's inventory. There were over 1,200 active suppliers to the program throughout the United States. NASA's transition plan had the program operating through 2010 with a transition and retirement phase lasting through 2015. During this time, the Ares I and Orion as well as the Altair Lunar Lander were to be under development, although these programs have since been canceled.\nIn the 2010s, two major programs for human spaceflight are Commercial Crew Program and the Artemis program. Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39A is, for example, used to launch Falcon Heavy and Falcon 9.\nSupport vehicles.\nMany other vehicles were used in support of the Space Shuttle program, mainly terrestrial transportation vehicles.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38459", "revid": "44261988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38459", "title": "Natalie Portman", "text": "Israeli and American actress (born 1981)\nNatalie Hershlag (born (1981--) 9, 1981), known professionally as Natalie Portman, is an actress, film producer and director with dual Israeli and American citizenship. She has had a prolific screen career from her teenage years and has starred in various blockbusters and independent films, receiving multiple accolades, including an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, and two Golden Globe Awards.\nPortman was born in Jerusalem and raised on Long Island, New York, where she began her acting career at twelve, starring as the young prot\u00e9g\u00e9e of a hitman in ' (1994). While still in high school, she made her Broadway debut in \"The Diary of Anne Frank\" (1997) and gained international recognition for her role as Padm\u00e9 Amidala in ' (1999). From 1999 to 2003, Portman attended Harvard University, earning a bachelor's degree in psychology. During this time, she took fewer acting roles but continued to appear in the \"Star Wars\" prequel trilogy (2002 and 2005) and performed in a 2001 revival of Anton Chekhov's \"The Seagull\" at The Public Theater.\nHer career gained further momentum in 2004 when she won a Golden Globe and received an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress for \"Closer\". She then played Evey Hammond in \"V for Vendetta\" (2005), Anne Boleyn in \"The Other Boleyn Girl\" (2008), and a troubled ballerina in \"Black Swan\" (2010), for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress. In the following years, Portman starred in the romantic comedy \"No Strings Attached\" (2011) and portrayed Jacqueline Kennedy in \"Jackie\" (2016), which earned her a third Academy Award nomination. She also became a prominent figure in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, playing Jane Foster in \"Thor\" (2011), ' (2013), and ' (2022), which established her as one of the world's highest-paid actresses.\nPortman has also directed the short film \"Eve\" (2008) and the biographical drama \"A Tale of Love and Darkness\" (2015), in which she also starred. In 2021, she co-founded the production company MountainA, under which she produced and starred in the film \"May December\" (2023) and the miniseries \"Lady in the Lake\" (2024). Portman is an advocate for various causes, including women\u2019s rights, environmental issues, and animal welfare, supporting organizations like the Human Rights Foundation and the Jane Goodall Institute.\nEarly life.\nNatalie Hershlag was born on June 9, 1981, in Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, at Hadassah Medical Center to Jewish parents. She is the only child of Shelley Stevens, an Ohio-born artist, and Avner Hershlag, an Israeli-born gynecologist. Portman\u2019s maternal grandparents were Jewish immigrants from Russia and Austria who settled in the United States, while her paternal grandparents emigrated from Poland to Israel in the late 1930s. Her grandfather had led a Jewish youth movement in Poland and went to Israel expecting to send for his family later, but they were killed in the gas chambers of Auschwitz. Her paternal grandmother, originally from Romania, worked as a spy for the British during World War II. Portman is a dual citizen of Israel and the United States.\nPortman and her family migrated to the United States when she was 3, first living in Washington, D.C., but relocating to Connecticut in 1988 and then settling in Syosset, Long Island. While living in Washington, Portman attended Charles E. Smith Jewish Day School in Rockville, Maryland. Her native language is Hebrew. While living on Long Island, she attended a Jewish elementary school, the Solomon Schechter Day School of Nassau County. She studied ballet and modern dance at the American Theater Dance Workshop, and regularly attended the Usdan Center for the Creative and Performing Arts. Describing her early life, Portman has said that she was \"different from the other kids. I was more ambitious. I knew what I liked and what I wanted, and I worked very hard. I was a very serious kid\".\nWhen Portman was ten years old, a Revlon agent spotted her at a pizza restaurant and asked her to become a child model. She turned down the offer but used the opportunity to get an acting agent. She auditioned for the 1992 off-Broadway \"Ruthless!\", a musical about a girl who is prepared to commit murder to get the lead in a school play. Portman and Britney Spears were chosen as understudies for star Laura Bell Bundy.\nCareer.\n1994\u20131998: Early work.\nSix months after \"Ruthless!\" ended, she auditioned for and secured a leading role in Luc Besson's action drama \"\" (1994). She adopted her paternal grandmother's maiden name, Portman, as her stage name. She played Mathilda, an orphan child who befriends a middle-aged hitman (played by Jean Reno). Her parents were reluctant to let her do the part due to the explicit sexual and violent nature of the script, but agreed after Besson took out the Mathilda character's nudity and killings that she committed. Portman herself said that after those scenes were removed, she found nothing objectionable about the content. Even so, her mother was displeased with some of the \"sexual twists and turns\" in the finished film, which were not part of the script. Hal Hinson of \"The Washington Post\" commended Portman for bringing a \"genuine sense of tragedy\" to her part, but Peter Rainer of the \"Los Angeles Times\" believed that she wasn't \"enough of an actress to unfold Mathilda's pain\" and criticized Besson's sexualization of her character.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"[T]here's a surprising preponderance of that kind of role for young girls. Sort of being fantasy objects for men, and especially this idealised purity combined with the fertility of youth, and all this in one. ... It was definitely interesting to think about \u2013 why men write the female characters they do. Just like the way they write the male character. How much is wish-fulfilment fantasy, and why.\"\n\u2014Portman on playing sexualized youngsters as a child, 2007\nAfter filming \"The Professional\", Portman went back to school and during the summer break of 1994, she filmed a part in Marya Cohn's short film \"Developing\". In it she played a young girl coping with her mother's (played by Frances Conroy) cancer. She also enrolled at the Stagedoor Manor performing arts camp, where she played Anne Shirley in a staging of \"Anne of Green Gables\". Michael Mann offered her the small part of the suicidal stepdaughter of Al Pacino's character in the action film \"Heat\" (1995) for her ability to portray dysfunction without hysteria. Impressed by her performance in \"The Professional\", the director Ted Demme cast her as a precocious teenager who flirts with her much-older neighbor (played by Timothy Hutton) in the ensemble comedy-drama \"Beautiful Girls\" (1996). Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"Portman, a budding knockout, is scene-stealingly good even in an overly showy role.\" She subsequently went back to Stagedoor Manor to appear in a production of the musical \"Cabaret\". Also in 1996, Portman had brief roles in Woody Allen's musical \"Everyone Says I Love You\" and Tim Burton's comic science fiction film \"Mars Attacks!\"\nPortman was cast opposite Leonardo DiCaprio in Baz Luhrmann's \"Romeo + Juliet\" (1996), but she dropped out during rehearsals when studio executives found her too young for the role. Luhrmann said \"Natalie was amazing in the footage, but it was too much of a burden for her at that age\". She was also offered Adrian Lyne's \"Lolita\", based on the novel of the same name, but she turned down the part due to its excessive sexual content. She later bemoaned that her parts in \"The Professional\" and \"Beautiful Girls\" prompted a series of offers to play a sexualized youngster, adding that it \"dictated a lot of my choices afterwards 'cos it scared me ... it made me reluctant to do sexy stuff\".\nPortman instead signed on to star as Anne Frank in a Broadway revival of \"The Diary of Anne Frank\", which was staged at the Music Box Theatre from December 1997 to May 1998. In preparation, she twice visited the Anne Frank House in Amsterdam and interacted with Miep Gies, who had preserved Anne's diary after the family was captured; she found a connection with Frank's story, given her own family's history with the Holocaust. Reviewing the production for \"Variety\", Greg Evans disliked her portrayal, which he thought had \"little of the charm, budding genius or even brittle intelligence that the diary itself reveals\". Conversely, Ben Brantley found an \"ineffable grace in her awkwardness\". The experience of performing the play was emotionally draining for her, as she attended high school during the day and performed at night; she wrote personal essays in \"Time\" and \"Seventeen\" magazines about her experience.\n1999\u20132006: \"Star Wars\", education, and transition to mature roles.\nPortman began filming the part of Padm\u00e9 Amidala in the \"Star Wars\" prequel trilogy in 1997, which marked her first big-budget production. The first film of the series, \"\" was released in 1999, when she was in her senior year of high school. Portman was unfamiliar with the franchise when she was cast, and watched the original \"Star Wars\" trilogy before filming began. She worked closely with the director George Lucas on her character's accent and mannerisms, and watched the films of Lauren Bacall, Audrey Hepburn, and Katharine Hepburn to draw inspiration from their voice and stature. Filming in arduous locations in Algeria proved challenging for Portman. She did not attend the film's premiere so she could study for her high school finals. The critical response to the film was mixed, but with earnings of $924\u00a0million worldwide it was the second highest-grossing film of all time to that point, and it established Portman as a global star.\nPortman graduated from Syosset High School in 1999. Her high school paper, \"A Simple Method to Demonstrate the Enzymatic Production of Hydrogen from Sugar\", co-authored with scientists Ian Hurley and Jonathan Woodward, was entered in the Intel Science Talent Search. Following production on \"The Phantom Menace\", Portman initially turned down a lead role in the coming-of-age film \"Anywhere but Here\" (1999) after learning it would involve a sex scene, but the director Wayne Wang and actress Susan Sarandon (who played Portman's mother in the film) demanded a rewrite of the script. She was shown a new draft, and decided to accept the part. Mary Elizabeth Williams of \"Salon\" called Portman's performance \"astonishing\" and added that \"unlike any number of actresses her age, she's neither too maudlin nor too plucky\". She received a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress nomination for it.\nPortman's sole screen appearance in 2000 was in \"Where the Heart Is\", a romantic drama filmed in Texas, in which she played a pregnant teenager. After finishing work on the film, she began attending Harvard University to pursue her bachelor's degree in psychology, and significantly reduced her acting roles over the next few years. At Harvard she served as Alan Dershowitz's research assistant for his book \"The Case for Israel.\" Both spoke highly of each other and described themselves as close friends, with Dershowitz calling her a \"terrific student.\" She then studied advanced Hebrew literature and neurobiology, In the summer of 2001, she returned to Broadway (at the Delacorte Theater) to perform Chekhov's drama \"The Seagull\", which was directed by Mike Nichols and co-starred Meryl Streep and Philip Seymour Hoffman. Linda Winer of \"Newsday\" wrote that the \"major surprises come from Portman, whose Nina transforms with astonishing lyricism from the girl with ambition to Chekhov's most difficult symbol of destruction\". Also in 2001, Portman was among several celebrities who made cameo appearances in the comedy \"Zoolander\". The following year she reprised her role of Amidala in \"\", which she had filmed in Sydney and London during her summer break of 2000. She was excited by the opportunity to play a confident young woman who did not depend on the male lead. When asked about balancing her career and education, she said, \"I don't care if [college] ruins my career. I'd rather be smart than a movie star.\" In 2002, she contributed to a study on memory called \"Frontal lobe activation during object permanence: data from near-infrared spectroscopy\". Portman graduated from Harvard in 2003 and her sole screen appearance that year was in the brief part of a young mother in the war film \"Cold Mountain\". She described this period as the \"most difficult time\" in her life, noting that she wasn't getting work and felt criticized for her performances in \"Star Wars\". After taking time off, she begged for the \"Cold Mountain\" role, which Mike Nichols helped secure, offering her a letter of support that helped her regain confidence.\nPortman began 2004 by featuring in the romantic comedy \"Garden State\", which was written and directed by its star Zach Braff. She was the first actor to sign on to the film after finding a connection with her part: a spirited young girl suffering from epilepsy. Her role in it was described by Nathan Rabin of \"The A.V. Club\". as a prime example of the Manic Pixie Dream Girl character type \u2013 a stereotypical female role designed to spiritually help a male protagonist. Portman later said she found it upsetting to have contributed to the trope. She followed it by playing a mysterious stripper in \"Closer\", a romantic drama directed by Mike Nichols based on the play of the same name, and co-starring Julia Roberts, Jude Law, and Clive Owen. Portman agreed to her first sexually explicit adult role after turning down such parts in the past, saying it reflected her own maturity as a person. She had also performed her first nude scenes for the film, but they were deleted from the final cut when she insisted that they were inessential to the story. \"Closer\" grossed over $115 million worldwide against a $27\u00a0million budget, and the critic Peter Travers took note of Portman's \"blazing, breakthrough performance\", writing that she \"digs so deep into the bruised core of her character that they seem to wear the same skin.\" She won the Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actress and received an Academy Award nomination in the same category.\n\"\", the final installment of the \"Star Wars\" prequel trilogy, was Portman's first film release of 2005. It earned over $848\u00a0million to rank as the second-highest-grossing film of the year. She next played a Jewish-American girl in \"Free Zone\" (2005), a drama from Israeli filmmaker Amos Gitai. During the project, which was shot in Israel \u2014particularly in the spring of 2004\u2014she spent six months taking graduate courses at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, studying subjects such as the anthropology of violence and Middle Eastern studies. In 2005, she read the memoirs of Yitzhak Rabin and a novel by David Grossman, which she said helped her explore both the role and her own heritage, and remarked that, \"living in Israel is really beautiful. One of the most shocking things is how peaceful it feels.\" Critics disliked the film for its heavy-handed approach to the conflicts in the Middle East.\nPortman's final film role in 2005 was that of Evey Hammond in the political thriller \"V for Vendetta\", based on the comics of the same name, about an alternative future where a neo-fascist regime has subjugated the United Kingdom. She was drawn to the provocative nature of the script, and worked with a dialect coach to speak in an English accent. In a scene in which her character is tortured, her head was shaved on camera; she considered it an opportunity to rid herself of vanity. Ruthe Stein of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" deemed it Portman's strongest performance to that point, and remarked that she \"keeps you focused on her words and actions instead of her bald head.\" She was awarded the Saturn Award for Best Actress.\nPortman began 2006 by hosting an episode of the television sketch comedy show \"Saturday Night Live\". One of her sketches, a song named \"Natalie's Rap\", was released later in 2009 on \"Incredibad\", an album by the Lonely Island. In the anthology film \"Paris, je t'aime\", consisting of eighteen short films, she had a role in the segment named \"Faubourg Saint-Denis\" from director Tom Tykwer. Later that year, she starred in Milo\u0161 Forman's \"Goya's Ghosts\", about the painter Francisco Goya. Forman cast her in the film after finding a resemblance between her and Goya's portrait \"The Milkmaid of Bordeaux\". She insisted on using a body double for her nude scenes after discovering on set that she had to perform them when they were not originally in the script. It received predominantly negative reviews, but Roger Ebert was appreciative of Portman for playing her dual role \"with fearless conviction\".\n2007\u20132015: Career expansion and \"Black Swan\".\nPortman began 2007 by replacing Jodie Foster in Wong Kar-wai's romantic drama \"My Blueberry Nights\", which was his first English-language film. For her role as a gambler, she trained with a poker coach. Richard Corliss of \"Time\" magazine believed that \"for once she's not playing a waif or a child princess but a mature, full-bodied woman\" and commended her \"vibrancy, grittiness and ache, all performed with a virtuosa's easy assurance\". Her next appearance was in \"Hotel Chevalier\", a short film from Wes Anderson, which served as a prolog to his feature \"The Darjeeling Limited\" (in which Portman had a cameo). In the short, she and Jason Schwartzman play former lovers who reunite in a Paris hotel room. For the first time, Portman performed an extended nude scene; she was later disappointed at the undue focus on it and she subsequently swore off appearing nude again. Keen to work in different genres, Portman accepted a role in the children's film \"Mr. Magorium's Wonder Emporium\", playing an employee of a magical toy store. She also appeared in Paul McCartney's music video \"Dance Tonight\" from his album \"Memory Almost Full\", directed by Michel Gondry.\nScarlett Johansson and Portman portrayed rival sisters Mary and Anne Boleyn, respectively, in the period film \"The Other Boleyn Girl\" (2008). She was excited by the opportunity to work opposite another actress her age, bemoaning that such casting was rare in film. Derek Elley of \"Variety\" was critical of Portman's English accent and wrote that she \"doesn't quite bring the necessary heft to make Anne a truly dominant power player\". The film had modest box-office earnings. She served as a jury member of the 2008 Cannes Film Festival and also launched her own production company, named handsomecharlie films, after her late dog. Portman's directorial debut, the short film \"Eve\", opened the short-film screenings at the 65th Venice International Film Festival. It is about a young woman who goes to her grandmother's romantic date, and Portman drew inspiration for the older character (played by Lauren Bacall) from her own grandmother.\nA poorly received adaptation of Ayelet Waldman's novel \"Love and Other Impossible Pursuits\", entitled \"The Other Woman\", marked Portman's first film role of 2009. She appeared in a faux perfume commercial called \"Greed\", directed by Roman Polanski, and in the anthology film \"New York, I Love You\", she directed a segment and also starred in a different segment directed by Mira Nair. Portman next took on a role opposite Tobey Maguire and Jake Gyllenhaal in the drama film \"Brothers\", a remake of the 2004 Danish film of the same name. Her role was that of a war widow, for which she spoke with military wives to prepare. The film was shot during the 2007\u201308 Writers Guild of America strike, and Portman found it challenging to shoot certain scenes without a written script. Claudia Puig of \"USA Today\" found her to be \"subdued and reactive in a part that doesn't call for her to do much else\".\nAfter producing and co-starring alongside Joseph Gordon-Levitt in the black comedy \"Hesher\" (2010), Portman played a ballerina overwhelmed with the prospect of performing \"Swan Lake\" in Darren Aronofsky's psychological horror film \"Black Swan\". She was trained by the professional ballerina Mary Helen Bowers, and in preparation, she trained for five to eight hours daily for six months and lost . Her performance was acclaimed; writing for \"Empire\", Dan Jolin found her to be \"simultaneously at her most vulnerable and her most predatory, at once frostily brittle and raunchily malleable [...] before peaking at the film's denouement with a raw, alluring showstopper of a performance.\" \"Black Swan\" emerged as a sleeper hit, grossing over $329\u00a0million worldwide against a $13\u00a0million budget, and earned Portman several awards, including the Academy Award for Best Actress. Following her Oscar win, controversy arose over who performed the bulk of the on-screen dancing in the film. Sarah Lane, one of Portman's dancing doubles in the film, claimed that the actress performed only about five percent of the full-body shots, adding that she was asked by the film's producers not to speak publicly about it during awards season. Aronofsky defended Portman by insisting that she had performed 80 percent of the on-screen dancing.\nPortman next served as an executive producer for \"No Strings Attached\" (2011), a romantic comedy in which she starred with Ashton Kutcher as a young couple in a casual sex relationship. She described the experience of making it as a \"palate cleanser\" from the intensity of \"Black Swan\". It received unfavorable reviews but was a commercial success. She next agreed to the film \"Your Highness\" for the opportunity of playing an athletic and foul-mouthed character, which she believed was rare for actresses. Critics were dismissive of the film's reliance on scatological humor and it proved to be a box-office bomb. In her final film release of 2011, Portman took on the part of Jane Foster, a scientist and love-interest of the titular character (played by Chris Hemsworth) in the Marvel Cinematic Universe superhero film \"Thor\". She liked the idea of Kenneth Branagh directing a big-budget film that emphasized character; she signed on to it before receiving a script, and helped develop her part by reading the biography of scientists such as Rosalind Franklin. Richard Kuipers of \"Variety\" commended Portman's \"sterling work in a thinly written role\" for adding dimension to the film's romantic subplot. \"Thor\" earned $449.3\u00a0million worldwide to emerge as the 15th highest-grossing film of 2011.\nIn 2012, Portman topped \"Forbes\"' listing of the most bankable stars in Hollywood. Her sole screen appearance that year was in Paul McCartney's music video \"My Valentine\", alongside Johnny Depp. The following year, she reprised the role of Jane Foster in \"\", which earned over $644\u00a0million worldwide to emerge as the 10th highest-grossing film of 2013. \"Forbes\" featured her in their Celebrity 100 listing of 2014, and estimated her income from the previous year to be $13\u00a0million.\nIn 2015, Portman appeared alongside an ensemble cast, including Christian Bale, in Terrence Malick's experimental drama film \"Knight of Cups\", which marked her first project after giving birth. She shot for it within a week of returning to work and she did not receive a traditional script or dialogues, improvising most of her scenes with Bale. She said that shooting with Malick influenced her own directorial venture, \"A Tale of Love and Darkness\" which was released in the same year. Based on Israeli author Amos Oz's autobiographical novel of the same name which is set in Jerusalem during the last years of the British Mandate of Palestine, the Hebrew-language film starred Portman who also produced and co-wrote it. She had wanted to adapt the book since she first read it a decade ago, but postponed it until she was old enough to play the leading role of a mother herself. She collaborated closely with Amos, showing him drafts of her script as she adapted the book. The film received partial funding from the rightist Israeli government, She later remarked that it was easier to be a female director in Israel than in the U.S., \"thanks to the IDF\". She explained that Israeli men are accustomed to female officers and commanders, \"making it easier for them to accept female authority.\" Critics gave the film generally positive reviews. A. O. Scott of \"The New York Times\" found it to be a \"conscientious adaptation of a difficult book\" and was appreciative of Portman's potential as a filmmaker.\nShe next produced and starred in the western film \"Jane Got a Gun\" about a young mother seeking vengeance. Initially scheduled to be directed by Lynne Ramsay, the production was plagued with numerous difficulties. Ramsay did not turn up on set for the first day of filming and was eventually replaced with Gavin O'Connor. Michael Fassbender, Jude Law, and Bradley Cooper were all cast as the male lead, before Ewan McGregor played the part. Peter Bradshaw of \"The Guardian\" reviewed that Portman's \"stately performance\" was not enough to save the \"laborious and solemn western\", and it grossed less than $4\u00a0million against its $25\u00a0million budget.\n2016\u2013present: \"Jackie\" and production ventures.\nPortman portrayed Jacqueline Kennedy in the Pablo Larra\u00edn-directed biopic \"Jackie\" (2016), about Kennedy's life immediately after the 1963 assassination of her husband. She was initially intimidated to take on the part of a well-known public figure, and eventually researched Kennedy extensively by watching videos of her, reading books, and listening to audiotapes of her interviews. She also worked with a dialect coach to adopt Kennedy's unique speaking style. David Rooney of \"The Hollywood Reporter\" termed it an \"incandescent performance\" and added that \"her Jackie is both inscrutable and naked, broken but unquestionably resilient, a mess and yet fiercely dignified\". She won the Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress and received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress. She also served as producer for the comedy horror film \"Pride and Prejudice and Zombies\", directed by Burr Steers, and starred in Rebecca Zlotowski's French-Belgian drama \"Planetarium\". The 2017 experimental romance \"Song to Song\" marked Portman's second collaboration with Terrence Malick, which like their previous film polarized critics. That year, Portman revealed that she has experienced sexual harassment or discrimination in almost every project she has worked on, despite initially believing she had avoided such experiences.\nIn 2018, Portman starred in the science fiction film \"Annihilation\", based on Jeff VanderMeer's novel. She played a biologist and former soldier who studies a mysterious quarantined zone of mutating organisms. She was pleased to headline a rare female-led science fiction film, and she moved her family near Pinewood Studios during filming. For the action sequences, she underwent movement training with the dancer Bobbi Jene Smith. Benjamin Lee of \"The Guardian\" took note of Portman's \"strong, fiercely compelling presence\" and commended her for playing the part without unnecessary sentimentality. It only received a limited theatrical release and was distributed on Netflix internationally. Her next appearance was in Xavier Dolan's first English-language film, the ensemble drama \"The Death &amp; Life of John F. Donovan\" (2018), which was termed a \"shocking misfire\" by Eric Kohn of IndieWire. She then starred as a troubled pop singer in \"Vox Lux\", sharing the part with Raffey Cassidy. She was drawn to the idea of showcasing the negative effects of fame, and in preparation, she watched documentaries on musicians and listened to the music of Sia, who wrote her songs in the film. For the climactic dance routines, she trained with her then-husband, Benjamin Millepied, who choreographed the sequence. It received mixed reviews from critics, but Portman's performance earned praise. Comparing it to her performances in \"Black Swan\" and \"Jackie\", Robbie Collin of \"The Daily Telegraph\" wrote that \"this role has a similar audacity and extravagance that few actresses would dare attempt, let alone be allowed to get away with\".\nUnused footage from \"Thor: The Dark World\" and a new voice-over were used for Portman's brief appearance in the 2019 superhero film '. She then portrayed a psychologically troubled astronaut (based on Lisa Nowak) in the drama \"Lucy in the Sky\", directed by Noah Hawley. She replaced the film's producer Reese Witherspoon, who backed out due to a scheduling conflict. The film was poorly received, though Portman's performance was praised. The following year, she narrated the Disney+ nature documentary \"Dolphin Reef\" and voiced Jane Foster in the animated series \"What If...?\". In 2022, Portman reprised her role as Foster in the sequel ', in which her character becomes Mighty Thor. She agreed to return to the franchise after meeting with director Taika Waititi, who offered to portray her character in an \"adventurous and fun and funny\" way. In preparation, Portman took the Mjolnir prop home to practice using it for her stunts. Nick Allen at RogerEbert.com opined, \"In both her human and her heroic state, Portman\u2019s performance conveys why it's great to see Jane again.\" Portman received a nomination for the Critics' Choice Super Award for Best Actress in a Superhero Movie. In a 2022 readers' poll by \"Empire\" magazine, Portman was voted one of the 50 greatest actors of all time.\nPortman and her producing partner, Sophie Mas, founded the production company MountainA in 2021, and signed a first-look television deal with Apple TV+. The company's first project was \"May December\", a drama from filmmaker Todd Haynes, starring Portman and Julianne Moore, which premiered at the 2023 Cannes Film Festival. Portman played an actress researching for her role as a woman (played by Moore) whose marriage to a much younger man was highly controversial. She was pleased to work with Haynes, whose work she admired, and to play a morally ambiguous character. Geoffrey Macnab of \"The Independent\" believed that the film had been \"galvanised by the tremendous performances from Portman and Moore\". Portman received another Golden Globe nomination for her performance. The company next produced the HBO documentary series \"Angel City\", about the inaugural season of Angel City FC, which was co-founded by Portman.\nMountainA's third project was \"Lady in the Lake\" (2024), an Apple TV+ miniseries adaptation of Laura Lippman's thriller novel. Portman played a 1960s housewife in Baltimore who turns into an investigative journalist following an unsolved murder. Production in Baltimore was briefly paused when the crew received threats of violence. Continuing her collaboration with Apple TV+, Portman will next star in \"Fountain of Youth\", an adventure film directed by Guy Ritchie. She will also star alongside Jenna Ortega in Cathy Yan's thriller film \"The Gallerist\".\nEndorsements.\nBeyond her acting career, Portman has been a longtime ambassador for Dior. She signed with the brand in 2010 and has starred in multiple advertising campaigns. In March 2011, Portman began voluntarily promoting a fundraising campaign for Hadassah Medical Center in Jerusalem. The campaign was aimed at raising funds for the construction of the Sarah Wetsman Davidson Tower, a new hospitalization tower at the hospital's Ein Kerem campus, which was open in 2012. The campaign was a joint effort with the Hadassah Women's Zionist Organization of America, which owns the hospital. Later in October 2012, Britain's Advertising Standards Authority banned a Dior advertisement that featured Portman wearing Dior mascara after a complaint from Dior's competitor, L'Oreal, saying that the advert \"misleadingly exaggerated the likely effects of the product\". The ASA ruled that \"the ad was likely to mislead\". Portman is the face of one of the company's fragrances, Miss Dior, inspired by Catherine Dior. She has starred in campaign videos for the fragrance, and promoted a new version of the fragrance, Rose N'Roses, in 2021.\nIn July 2020, she became one of the leaders of the creation of NWSL soccer team Angel City FC and also became one of the owners of the team.\nActivism.\nAnimal and human rights.\nPortman has long been an advocate for various causes, including animal rights, where she became a vegetarian at age eight after witnessing a demonstration of laser surgery on a chicken during a medical conference with her father. This experience deeply influenced her decision and has been a key part of her commitment to animal welfare. She became a vegan in 2009 after reading Jonathan Safran Foer's \"Eating Animals\" and later produced a documentary on factory farming systems in the U.S. by the same title. In September 2017, she was recognized for her work on the film by the Environmental Media Association Awards with the Ongoing Commitment Award. She does not wear animal products and has praised animal-friendly products designed by Stella McCartney and Target. In 2007, she launched her own brand of animal-friendly footwear. In 2007, Portman traveled to Rwanda with Jack Hanna to film the documentary \"Gorillas on the Brink\". Portman has been an advocate of environmental causes since childhood, when she joined an environmental song and dance troupe known as World Patrol Kids.\nPortman has also supported anti-poverty causes. In 2004 and 2005, she traveled to Uganda, Guatemala, and Ecuador as the Ambassador of Hope for FINCA International, an organization that promotes micro-lending to help finance women-owned businesses in developing countries. In an interview appearing on the PBS program \"Foreign Exchange with Fareed Zakaria\", she discussed microfinance. Host Fareed Zakaria said that he was \"generally wary of celebrities with fashionable causes\", but included the segment with Portman because \"she really knew her stuff\". On \"This Week with George Stephanopoulos\" in April 2007, Portman discussed her work with FINCA and how it can benefit women and children in Third World countries. In fall-2007, she visited several university campuses, including Harvard, USC, UCLA, UC Berkeley, Stanford, Princeton, New York University, and Columbia, to inspire students with the power of microfinance and to encourage them to join the Village Banking Campaign to help families and communities lift themselves out of poverty.\nPortman is a supporter of the Democratic Party, and for the 2004 presidential election she campaigned for Senator John Kerry. Prior to the 2008 presidential election, she supported Senator Hillary Clinton of New York in the Democratic primaries. Portman later campaigned for Senator Barack Obama of Illinois. In a 2008 interview, she also stated: \"I even like John McCain. I disagree with his war stance \u2013 which is a really big deal \u2013 but I think he's a very moral person.\" In 2010, her activist work and popularity with young people earned her a nomination for VH1's Do Something Awards, which is dedicated to honoring individuals who do good. In 2011, Portman and her then-fianc\u00e9 Benjamin Millepied were among the signers of a petition to President Obama in support of same-sex marriage. She supported Obama's re-election campaign in 2012.\nIn 2009, Portman signed a petition that defended Roman Polanski, who was charged with drugging and raping a thirteen-year-old girl in 1977, and has been a fugitive for decades. In February 2018, she expressed regret over signing the petition.\nIn January 2011, Portman was appointed an ambassador of WE Charity (formerly known as Free The Children), an international charity and educational partner, spearheading their Power of a Girl campaign. She hosted a contest challenging girls in North America to fundraise for one of WE Charity's all-girl schools in Kenya. As incentives for the contest winner, Portman offered the designer Rodarte dress she wore to the premiere of \"Black Swan\", along with tickets to her next film premiere. It was announced in May 2012 that Portman would be working with watch designer Richard Mille to develop a limited-edition timepiece with proceeds supporting WE Charity. During WE Day California 2019 Portman gave a pro vegan speech in front of the student audience, linking vegan lifestyle and feminism. In December 2019, she visited Kenya a second time with WE Charity and spoke with young girls determined to improve their lives through access to education.\nIn 2006, Portman served as a guest lecturer at Columbia University for a course in terrorism and counterterrorism, where she spoke about her film \"V for Vendetta\". In February 2015, Portman was among other alumni of Harvard University including Robert F. Kennedy Jr., Darren Aronofsky and Susan Faludi who wrote an open letter to the school demanding it divest its $35,900,000,000 endowment from coal, gas, and oil companies. Later that year in May, she spoke at the annual Harvard Class Day to the graduating class of 2015.\nIn January 2018, she donated $50,000 to the Time's Up initiative. Portman took part in the 2018 Women's March in Los Angeles, where she spoke about the \"sexual terrorism\" she experienced at age thirteen after the release of her film \"L\u00e9on: The Professional\". She told the crowd, \"I understood very quickly, even as a 13-year-old, that if I were to express myself sexually I would feel unsafe and that men would feel entitled to discuss and objectify my body to my great discomfort.\" She drew attention to the MeToo movement, revealing that her first fan letter was a \"rape fantasy\" from a man and that her local radio station created a countdown until her eighteenth birthday (when she would reach legal age to consent to have intercourse). In September 2023, Portman spoke at an event for the United Nations Spotlight Initiative to eliminate violence against women and girls, where she urged member states to reinvest in the Initiative and ending gender-based violence.\nIn 2020, Portman endorsed the \"defund the police\" movement. In 2020, Portman collaborated with JusticeLA to create a public service announcement #SuingToSaveLives about the health of people in L.A. County jails amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Later in 2020, Portman was announced as one of the co-founders and investors in an almost all-female group that was awarded a new franchise in the National Women's Soccer League, the top level of the women's sport in the U.S. The new team, since unveiled as Angel City FC, began play in the 2022 NWSL season.\nViews on Israel.\n\"Haaretz\" has described Portman as \"one of Israel's outspoken supporters\"; even when global public opinion has turned against Israel, she has remained steadfast in her support for \"the Holy Land,\" advocating through academic articles, lectures, and public declarations. \"Haaretz\" cited Portman raising funds for the reconstruction of northern Israel after the 2006 Lebanon War as a notable example of her support. However, Portman herself has described her relationship with Israel as complex, \"like family\u2014you love it more than anything else in the world, and you are also more critical of it than anything else in the world.\"\nIn 2002, at Harvard, Portman wrote a letter to \"The Harvard Crimson\" in response to an essay critical of Israeli actions toward Palestinians, arguing that it misleadingly compared the situation to racial apartheid and that instead \"most Israelis and Palestinians are indistinguishable physically\". She has criticized the Israeli government, specifically Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, being critical of his re-election in 2015, saying she was \"disappointed\" and found his comments racist. In November 2017, Portman was announced as the Genesis Prize recipient for 2018, which includes $2,000,000 in prize money. The following April, Portman announced that she did not plan to attend the awards ceremony scheduled for June, citing \"recent events in Israel\" that left her feeling uncomfortable attending public events there, leading to the ceremony being canceled.\nThe statement did not specify which events, but was suggested as referencing the killings and wounding of Palestinian protestors by Israeli fire during the 2018\u20132019 Gaza border protests. Portman\u2019s decision sparked backlash from Israeli politicians, including Culture Minister Miri Regev, Minister of Public Security and Strategic Affairs Gilad Erdan and American rabbi Shmuley Boteach, who accused the actress of being influenced by the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement. The Likud party condemned Portman\u2019s position, with Knesset member Oren Hazan calling for her Israeli citizenship to be revoked.\nPortman clarified that she was not boycotting Israel, stating, \"I am not part of the BDS movement and do not endorse it. Like many Israelis and Jews, I can be critical of Israel's leadership without wanting to boycott the nation.\" She explained that she did not want to \"appear as endorsing\" Prime Minister Netanyahu, who was scheduled to speak at the ceremony, and emphasized that \"the mistreatment of those suffering from today\u2019s atrocities is not in line with my Jewish values.\" She added, \"Because I care about Israel, I must stand up against violence, corruption, inequality, and abuse of power\". Later in 2018, Portman criticized the passing of the highly controversial and widely criticized , describing the law as \"racist, and there\u2019s nothing else to say about that.\" She is also a member of the One Voice movement.\nOn October 18, 2023, Portman called for the release of hostages held by Hamas and condemned their actions. She also advocated for Israeli children who have been kidnapped, urging support for their release. Additionally, she publicized information about Dror Israel on Instagram to raise funds for children near the Gaza border and called on the Red Cross to address ongoing breaches of International Humanitarian Law within Israel. On November 12, 2023, she took part in the \"March for the Republic and Against Antisemitism\" in Paris in response to the rise in antisemitism since the start of the Gaza war.\nPersonal life.\nPortman speaks English, Hebrew, French, German, Japanese and Arabic, to various degrees. In 2005, she bought an apartment in Richard Meier's glass tower in the West Village for $5.7 million. In 2008, she listed it for sale at $6.55 million. In 2006, Portman expressed a strong connection to her Jewish identity, particularly in Israel, and shared her desire to raise her children Jewish: \"A priority for me is definitely that I'd like to raise my kids Jewish, but the ultimate thing is to have someone who is a good person and who is a partner.\" \nPortman has discreetly dated Zach Braff, Jake Gyllenhaal, and Devendra Banhart. She married French dancer and choreographer Benjamin Millepied, with whom she shares two children. The couple met in 2009 while working together on \"Black Swan\", and wed on August 4, 2012, in a Jewish ceremony in Big Sur, California.\nIn 2013, she was living in Los Angeles. After Millepied was appointed director of dance at the Paris Opera Ballet, the family relocated to Paris in the autumn of 2014, where Portman also expressed interest in obtaining French citizenship. In January 2014, Millepied announced that he was in the process of converting to Judaism. In 2017, Portman bought a Montecito mansion, which she sold in 2021 for $8 million. She still owns a home in the Los Feliz neighborhood of Los Angeles. In early 2023, reports surfaced alleging an extramarital affair by Millepied. The couple never publicly addressed the claims. On March 8, 2024, it was announced that Portman and Millepied had divorced.\nFilmography and awards.\nPortman's most acclaimed and highest-grossing films, according to the online portal Box Office Mojo and the review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, include ' (1999), ' (2002), \"Closer\" (2004), ' (2005), \"V for Vendetta\" (2005), \"Black Swan\" (2010), \"No Strings Attached\" (2011), \"Thor\" (2011), ' (2013), \"Jackie\" (2016), \"Annihilation\" (2018), and \"\" (2022).\nPortman has received numerous accolades for her work, including an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, two Golden Globe Awards and a Screen Actors Guild Award.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38461", "revid": "18916437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38461", "title": "Isoroku Yamamoto's sleeping giant quote", "text": "Famous quote regarding the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor\nIsoroku Yamamoto's sleeping giant quote is a film quote attributed to Japanese Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto regarding the 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor by forces of Imperial Japan. The quotation is portrayed at the very end of the 1970 film \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" as \"I fear all we have done is to awaken a sleeping giant and fill him with a terrible resolve.\"\nVermont C. Royster offers a possible origin to the phrase attributed to Napoleon, \"China is a sickly, sleeping giant. But when she awakes the world will tremble.\" An abridged version of the quotation is also featured in the 2001 film \"Pearl Harbor\". The 2019 film \"Midway\" also features Yamamoto speaking aloud the sleeping giant quote.\nOverview.\nThe director of \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\", Richard Fleischer, stated that while Yamamoto may never have said those words, the film's producer, Elmo Williams, had found the line written in Yamamoto's diary. Williams, in turn, has stated that Larry Forrester, the screenwriter, found a 1943 letter from Yamamoto to the Admiralty in Tokyo containing the quotation. However, Forrester cannot produce the letter, nor can anyone else, American or Japanese, recall it or find it. Randall Wallace, the screenwriter of the 2001 film \"Pearl Harbor\", readily admitted that he copied the line from \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\"\nYamamoto believed that Japan could not win a protracted war with the United States. Moreover, he seemed later to have believed that the Pearl Harbor attack had been a blunder strategically, morally, and politically, even though he was the person who originated the idea of a surprise attack on the military installation. It is recorded that while all his staff members were celebrating, \"Yamamoto alone\" spent the day after Pearl Harbor \"sunk in apparent depression\". Yamamoto was upset by the bungling of the Foreign Ministry, which led to the attack happening while the countries were still at peace, thus, along with other factors, making the incident an unprovoked surprise attack that enraged American public opinion.\nSimilar sayings.\nOn December 8, 1941, the day after the attack on Pearl Harbor, an inspirational statement was made by Don McNeill during the NBC radio broadcast of \"Don McNeill's Breakfast Club\". His statement ended with \"...\u00a0and also don\u2019t forget, sometimes you can strike a giant who is dozing momentarily, when the giant is awakened, look out.\" A portion of the broadcast was replayed on the Pearl Harbor attack-themed debut episode of the Smithsonian Channel documentary program \"The Lost Tapes\".\nIn \"The Reluctant Admiral\", Hiroyuki Agawa gives a quotation from a reply by Yamamoto to Ogata Taketora on January 9, 1942, which is similar to the famous version: \"A military man can scarcely pride himself on having 'smitten a sleeping enemy'; it is more a matter of shame, simply, for the one smitten. I would rather you made your appraisal after seeing what the enemy does, since it is certain that, angered and outraged, he will soon launch a determined counterattack.\"\nThe other common quotation attributed to Yamamoto predicting the future outcome of a naval war against the United States is, \"I can run wild for six months... after that, I have no expectation of success\". As it happened, the Battle of Midway, the critical naval battle considered to be the turning point of the War in the Pacific, concluded exactly six months after the Pearl Harbor attack. Similar to the above quotation was another quotation: Yamamoto, when once asked his opinion on the war, pessimistically said that the only way for Japan to win the war was to dictate terms in the White House.\nYamamoto's meaning was that military victory, in a protracted war against an opponent with as much of a population and industrial advantage as the United States possessed, was completely impossible, a rebuff to the \"Kantai Kessen\" Decisive Battle Doctrine of those who thought that winning a single major battle against the United States Navy would end the war, just as the Japanese victory in the Battle of Tsushima had ended the Russo-Japanese War in 1905. Yamamoto's quote about peace terms in the White House was abridged by Japanese propaganda to make it seem like an optimistic prediction; this version was promptly picked up by American propaganda to look even more boastful (see illustration).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38463", "revid": "10044298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38463", "title": "Fall back and forward", "text": "Modem protocol for efficient management of connectivity\nFall back is a feature of a modem protocol in data communication whereby two communicating modems which experience data corruption (due to line noise, for example) can renegotiate with each other to use a lower-speed connection. Fall forward is a corresponding feature whereby two modems which have \"fallen back\" to a lower speed can later return to the higher speed if the connection improves.\nA common feature modems was the concept of fallback, allowing them to talk to less-capable modems. During the call initiation the modem would play a series of signals into the line and wait for the remote modem to \"answer\" them. They would start at high speeds and progressively get slower and slower until they heard an answer. Thus, two USR modems would be able to connect at 9600 bit/s, but, when a user with a 2400-bit/s modem called in, the USR would \"fall back\" to the common 2400-bit/s speed. This would also happen if a V.32 modem and a HST modem were connected. Because they used a different standard at 9600 bit/s, they would fall back to their highest commonly supported standard at 2400 bit/s. The same applies to V.32bis and 14400 bit/s HST modem, which would still be able to communicate with each other at only 2400 bit/s.\nA modem that can fall back in order to communicate with an older, slower modem is an example of backward compatibility, while one that can fall back in order to communicate when the line becomes noisy is an example of graceful degradation.\nAttribution.\n\"Article based on http:// and http:// at http://, used with .\""}
{"id": "38464", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38464", "title": "Fall forward", "text": ""}
{"id": "38465", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38465", "title": "Fall back", "text": ""}
{"id": "38468", "revid": "21678789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38468", "title": "Psilocybin", "text": "Chemical compound found in some species of mushrooms\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPsilocybin, also known as 4-phosphoryloxy-\"N\",\"N\"-dimethyltryptamine (4-PO-DMT), is a naturally occurring tryptamine alkaloid and investigational drug found in more than 200 species of mushrooms, with hallucinogenic and serotonergic effects. Effects include euphoria, changes in perception, a distorted sense of time (via brain desynchronization), and perceived spiritual experiences. It can also cause adverse reactions such as nausea and panic attacks.\nPsilocybin is a prodrug of psilocin. That is, the compound itself is biologically inactive but quickly converted by the body to psilocin. Psilocybin is transformed into psilocin by dephosphorylation mediated via phosphatase enzymes. Psilocin is chemically related to the neurotransmitter serotonin and acts as a non-selective agonist of the serotonin receptors. Activation of one serotonin receptor, the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor, is specifically responsible for the hallucinogenic effects of psilocin and other serotonergic psychedelics. Psilocybin is usually taken orally. By this route, its onset is about 20 to 50minutes, peak effects occur after about 1 to 2hours, and its duration is about 4 to 6hours.\nPsilocybin mushrooms were used ritualistically in pre-Columbian Mexico, but claims of their widespread ancient use are largely exaggerated and shaped by modern idealization and ideology. In 1958, the Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann isolated psilocybin and psilocin from the mushroom \"Psilocybe mexicana\". His employer, Sandoz, marketed and sold pure psilocybin to physicians and clinicians worldwide for use in psychedelic therapy. Increasingly restrictive drug laws of the 1960s and the 1970s curbed scientific research into the effects of psilocybin and other hallucinogens, but its popularity as an entheogen grew in the next decade, owing largely to the increased availability of information on how to cultivate psilocybin mushrooms.\nPossession of psilocybin-containing mushrooms has been outlawed in most countries, and psilocybin has been classified as a Schedule I controlled substance under the 1971 United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances. Psilocybin is being studied as a possible medicine in the treatment of psychiatric disorders such as depression, substance use disorders, obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder, and other conditions such as cluster headaches. Psilocybin was approved for treatment-resistant depression in Australia in 2023. It is in late-stage clinical trials in the United States for treatment-resistant depression. Especially at higher doses and combined with psychological support, psilocybin can produce rapid and sometimes lasting antidepressant effects that generally outperform placebo but show only modest advantages over conventional SSRIs; evidence quality is generally low and trial bias is common.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUses.\nPsilocybin is used recreationally, spiritually (as an entheogen), and medically. It is primarily taken orally, but other routes of administration, such as intravenous injection, are sometimes employed by licensed medical researchers using pharmaceutical-grade psilocybin powder designed for injection. Injection should never be attempted by unlicensed people.\nMedical.\nIn 2023, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) approved psilocybin for treatment of treatment-resistant depression in Australia. It is also under development for the treatment of depression and for various other indications elsewhere, such as the United States and Europe, but has not yet been approved in other countries (see below).\nDosing.\nPsilocybin is used as a psychedelic at doses of 5 to 40mg orally. Low doses are 5 to 10mg, an intermediate or \"good effect\" dose is 20mg, and high or ego-dissolution doses are 30 to 40mg. Psilocybin's effects can be subjectively perceived at a dose as low as 3mg per 70kg body weight. Microdosing involves the use of subthreshold psilocybin doses of less than 2.5mg.\nWhen psilocybin is used in the form of psilocybin-containing mushrooms, microdoses are 0.1g to 0.3g and psychedelic doses are 1.0g to 3.5\u20135.0g in the case of dried mushrooms. The preceding 1.0 to 5.0g range corresponds to psilocybin doses of about 10 to 50mg. Psilocybin-containing mushrooms vary in their psilocybin and psilocin content, but are typically around 1% of the dried weight of the mushrooms (in terms of total or combined psilocybin and psilocin content). Psilocin is about 1.4 times as potent as psilocybin because of the two compounds' difference in molecular weight.\nAvailable forms.\nPsilocybin is most commonly consumed in the form of psilocybin-containing mushrooms, such as \"Psilocybe\" species like \"Psilocybe cubensis\". It may also be prepared synthetically, but outside of research settings it is not typically used in this form. Regardless of form, psilocybin is usually taken orally. The psilocybin present in certain species of mushrooms can be ingested in several ways: by consuming fresh or dried fruit bodies, by preparing an herbal tea, or by combining with other foods to mask the bitter taste. In rare cases people have intravenously injected mushroom extracts, with serious medical complications such as systemic mycological infection and hospitalization. Another form of psilocybin (as well as of related psychedelics like 4-AcO-DMT) is mushroom edibles such as chocolate bars and gummies, which may be purchased at psychedelic mushroom stores.\nEffects.\nPsilocybin produces a variety of psychological, perceptual, interpersonal, and physical effects.\nPsychological and perceptual effects.\nAfter ingesting psilocybin, the user may experience a wide range of emotional effects, which can include disorientation, lethargy, giddiness, euphoria, joy, and depression. In one study, 31% of volunteers given a high dose reported feelings of significant fear and 17% experienced transient paranoia. In studies at Johns Hopkins, among those given a moderate dose (but enough to \"give a high probability of a profound and beneficial experience\"), negative experiences were rare, whereas one-third of those given a high dose experienced anxiety or paranoia. Low doses can induce hallucinatory effects. Closed-eye hallucinations may occur, where the affected person sees multicolored geometric shapes and vivid imaginative sequences. Some people report synesthesia, such as tactile sensations when viewing colors. At higher doses, psilocybin can lead to \"intensification of affective responses, enhanced ability for introspection, regression to primitive and childlike thinking, and activation of vivid memory traces with pronounced emotional undertones\". Open-eye visual hallucinations are common and may be very detailed, although rarely confused with reality.\nPsilocybin is known to strongly affect the subjective experience of the passage of time. Users often feel as if time is slowed down, resulting in the perception that \"minutes appear to be hours\" or \"time is standing still\". Studies have demonstrated that psilocybin significantly impairs subjects' ability to gauge time intervals longer than 2.5 seconds, impairs their ability to synchronize to inter-beat intervals longer than 2 seconds, and reduces their preferred tapping rate. These results are consistent with the drug's role in affecting prefrontal cortex activity and the role that the prefrontal cortex plays in time perception, but the neurochemical basis of psilocybin's effects on perception of time is not known with certainty.\nUsers having a pleasant experience can feel a sense of connection to others, nature, and the universe; other perceptions and emotions are also often intensified. Users having an unpleasant experience (a \"bad trip\") describe a reaction accompanied by fear, other unpleasant feelings, and occasionally by dangerous behavior. The term \"bad trip\" is generally used to describe a reaction characterized primarily by fear or other unpleasant emotions, not just a transitory experience of such feelings. A variety of factors may contribute to a bad trip, including \"tripping\" during an emotional or physical low or in a non-supportive environment (see: set and setting). Ingesting psilocybin in combination with other drugs, including alcohol, can also increase the likelihood of a bad trip. Other than the duration of the experience, the effects of psilocybin are similar to comparable doses of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) or mescaline. But in the \"Psychedelics Encyclopedia\", author Peter Stafford writes: \"The psilocybin experience seems to be warmer, not as forceful and less isolating. It tends to build connections between people, who are generally much more in communication than when they use LSD.\"\nSet and setting and moderating factors.\nThe effects of psilocybin are highly variable and depend on the mindset and environment in which the user has the experience, factors commonly called set and setting. In the early 1960s, Timothy Leary and his Harvard colleagues investigated the role of set and setting in psilocybin's effects. They administered the drug to 175 volunteers (from various backgrounds) in an environment intended to be similar to a comfortable living room. 98 of the subjects were given questionnaires to assess their experiences and the contribution of background and situational factors. Those who had prior experience with psilocybin reported more pleasant experiences than those for whom the drug was novel. Group size, dose, preparation, and expectancy were important determinants of the drug response. In general, those in groups of more than eight felt that the groups were less supportive and their experiences less pleasant. Conversely, smaller groups (fewer than six) were seen as more supportive and reported more positive reactions to the drug in those groups. Leary and colleagues proposed that psilocybin heightens suggestibility, making a user more receptive to interpersonal interactions and environmental stimuli. These findings were affirmed in a later review by Jos ten Berge (1999), who concluded that dose, set, and setting are fundamental factors in determining the outcome of experiments that tested the effects of psychedelic drugs on artists' creativity.\nFurther studies demonstrate that supportive settings significantly reduce the likelihood of adverse reactions, including panic, paranoia, or psychological distress. Positive therapeutic outcomes are strongly correlated with the participant's trust in the environment and the facilitators.\nTheory of mind network and default mode network.\nPsychedelics, including psilocybin, have been shown to affect different clusters of brain regions known as the \"theory of mind network\" (ToMN) and the default mode network (DMN). The ToMN involves making inferences and understanding social situations based on patterns, whereas the DMN relates more to introspection and one's sense of self. The DMN, in particular, is related to increased rumination and worsening self-image in patients with major depressive disorder (MDD). In studies done with single use psilocybin, areas of the DMN showed decreased functional connectivity (communication between areas of the brain). This provides functional insight into the work of psilocybin in increasing one's sense of connection to one's surroundings, as the areas of the brain involved in introspection decrease in functionality under the effects of the drug. Conversely, areas of the brain involved in the ToMN showed increased activity and functional activation in response to psychedelics. These results were not unique to psilocybin and there was no significant difference in brain activation found in similar trials of mescaline and LSD. Information and studies into the DMN and ToMN are relatively sparse and their connections to other psychiatric illnesses and the use of psychedelics is still largely unknown.\nGroup perceptions.\nThrough further anthropological studies regarding \"personal insights\" and the psychosocial effects of psilocybin, it can be seen in many traditional societies that powerful mind-active substances such as psilocybin are regularly \"consumed ritually for therapeutic purposes or for transcending normal, everyday reality\". Positive effects that psilocybin has on individuals can be observed by taking on an anthropological approach and moving away from the Western biomedical view; this is aided by the studies done by Leary. Within certain traditional societies, where the use of psilocybin is frequent for shamanic healing rituals, group collectives praise their guide, healer and shaman for helping alleviate their pains, aches and hurt. They do this through a group ritual practice where the group, or just the guide, ingests psilocybin to help extract any \"toxic psychic residues or sorcerous implants\" found in one's body.\nGroup therapies using \"classic\" psychedelics are becoming more commonly used in the Western world in clinical practice. This is speculated to grow, provided the evidence remains indicative of their safety and efficacy. In social sense, the group is shaped by their experiences surrounding psilocybin and how they view the fungus collectively. As mentioned in the anthropology article, the group partakes in a \"journey\" together, thus adding to the spiritual, social body where roles, hierarchies and gender are subjectively understood.\nCultural significance and \"mystical\" experiences.\nPsilocybin mushrooms have been and continue to be used in Indigenous American cultures in religious, divinatory, or spiritual contexts. Reflecting the meaning of the word \"entheogen\" (\"the god within\"), the mushrooms are revered as powerful spiritual sacraments that provide access to sacred worlds. Typically used in small group community settings, they enhance group cohesion and reaffirm traditional values. Terence McKenna documented the worldwide practices of psilocybin mushroom usage as part of a cultural ethos relating to the Earth and mysteries of nature, and suggested that mushrooms enhanced self-awareness and a sense of contact with a \"Transcendent Other\"\u2014reflecting a deeper understanding of our connectedness with nature.\nPsychedelic drugs can induce states of consciousness that have lasting personal meaning and spiritual significance in religious or spiritually inclined people; these states are called mystical experiences. Some scholars have proposed that many of the qualities of a drug-induced mystical experience are indistinguishable from mystical experiences achieved through non-drug techniques such as meditation or holotropic breathwork. In the 1960s, Walter Pahnke and colleagues systematically evaluated mystical experiences (which they called \"mystical consciousness\") by categorizing their common features. According to Pahnke, these categories \"describe the core of a universal psychological experience, free from culturally determined philosophical or theological interpretations\", and allow researchers to assess mystical experiences on a qualitative, numerical scale.\nIn the 1962 Marsh Chapel Experiment, run by Pahnke at the Harvard Divinity School under Leary's supervision, almost all the graduate degree divinity student volunteers who received psilocybin reported profound religious experiences. One of the participants was religious scholar Huston Smith, author of several textbooks on comparative religion; he called his experience \"the most powerful cosmic homecoming I have ever experienced.\" In a 25-year followup to the experiment, all the subjects given psilocybin said their experience had elements of \"a genuine mystical nature and characterized it as one of the high points of their spiritual life\". Psychedelic researcher Rick Doblin considered the study partially flawed due to incorrect implementation of the double-blind procedure and several imprecise questions in the mystical experience questionnaire. Nevertheless, he said that the study cast \"considerable doubt on the assertion that mystical experiences catalyzed by drugs are in any way inferior to non-drug mystical experiences in both their immediate content and long-term effects\". Psychiatrist William A. Richards echoed this sentiment, writing in a 2007 review, \"[psychedelic] mushroom use may constitute one technology for evoking revelatory experiences that are similar, if not identical, to those that occur through so-called spontaneous alterations of brain chemistry.\"\nA group of researchers from Johns Hopkins School of Medicine led by Roland Griffiths conducted a study to assess the immediate and long-term psychological effects of the psilocybin experience, using a modified version of the mystical experience questionnaire and a rigorous double-blind procedure. When asked in an interview about the similarity of his work to Leary's, Griffiths explained the difference: \"We are conducting rigorous, systematic research with psilocybin under carefully monitored conditions, a route which Dr. Leary abandoned in the early 1960s.\" Experts have praised the National Institute of Drug Abuse-funded study, published in 2006, for the soundness of its experimental design. In the experiment, 36 volunteers with no experience with hallucinogens were given psilocybin and methylphenidate (Ritalin) in separate sessions; the methylphenidate sessions served as a control and psychoactive placebo. The degree of mystical experience was measured using a questionnaire developed by Ralph W. Hood; 61% of subjects reported a \"complete mystical experience\" after their psilocybin session, while only 13% reported such an outcome after their experience with methylphenidate. Two months after taking psilocybin, 79% of the participants reported moderately to greatly increased life satisfaction and sense of well-being. About 36% of participants also had a strong to extreme \"experience of fear\" or dysphoria (i.e., a \"bad trip\") at some point during the psilocybin session (which was not reported by any subject during the methylphenidate session); about one-third of these (13% of the total) reported that this dysphoria dominated the entire session. These negative effects were reported to be easily managed by the researchers and did not have a lasting negative effect on the subject's sense of well-being.\nA follow-up study 14months later confirmed that participants continued to attribute deep personal meaning to the experience. Almost a third of the subjects reported that the experience was the single most meaningful or spiritually significant event of their lives, and over two-thirds reported it was among their five most spiritually significant events. About two-thirds said the experience increased their sense of well-being or life satisfaction. Even after 14 months, those who reported mystical experiences scored on average 4 percentage points higher on the personality trait of Openness/Intellect; personality traits are normally stable across the lifespan for adults. Likewise, in a 2010 web-based questionnaire study designed to investigate user perceptions of the benefits and harms of hallucinogenic drug use, 60% of the 503 psilocybin users reported that their use of psilocybin had a long-term positive impact on their sense of well-being.\nPhysical effects.\nCommon responses include pupil dilation (93%); changes in heart rate (100%), including increases (56%), decreases (13%), and variable responses (31%); changes in blood pressure (84%), including hypotension (34%), hypertension (28%), and general instability (22%); changes in stretch reflex (86%), including increases (80%) and decreases (6%); nausea (44%); tremor (25%); and dysmetria (16%) (inability to properly direct or limit motions). Psilocybin's sympathomimetic or cardiovascular effects, including increased heart rate and blood pressure, are usually mild. On average, peak heart rate is increased by 5bpm, peak systolic blood pressure by 10 to 15mmHg, and peak diastolic blood pressure by 5 to 10mmHg. But temporary increases in blood pressure can be a risk factor for users with preexisting hypertension. Psilocybin's somatic effects have been corroborated by several early clinical studies. A 2005 magazine survey of clubgoers in the UK found that over a quarter of those who had used psilocybin mushrooms in the preceding year experienced nausea or vomiting, although this was caused by the mushroom rather than psilocybin itself. In one study, administration of gradually increasing doses of psilocybin daily for 21 days had no measurable effect on electrolyte levels, blood sugar levels, or liver toxicity tests.\nOnset and duration.\nThe onset of action of psilocybin taken orally is 0.5 to 0.8hours (30\u201350minutes) on average, with a range of 0.1 to 1.5hours (5\u201390minutes). Peak psychoactive effects occur at about 1.0 to 2.2hours (60\u2013130minutes). The time to offset of psilocybin orally is about 6 to 7hours on average. The duration of action of psilocybin is about 4 to 6hours (range 3\u201312hours) orally. A small dose of 1mg by intravenous injection had a duration of 15 to 30minutes. In another study, 2mg psilocybin by intravenous injection given over 60seconds had an immediate onset, reached a sustained peak after 4minutes, and subsided completely after 45 to 60minutes.\nContraindications.\nContraindications of psilocybin are mostly psychiatric conditions that increase the risk of psychological distress, including the rare adverse effect of psychosis during or after the psychedelic experience. These conditions may include history of psychosis, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or borderline personality disorder. Further research may provide more safety information about the use of psilocybin in people with such conditions. It is notable in this regard that psilocybin and other psychedelics are being studied for the potential treatment of all the preceding conditions.\nPsilocybin is also considered to be contraindicated in women who are pregnant or breastfeeding due to insufficient research in this population. There are transient increases in heart rate and blood pressure with psilocybin, and hence uncontrolled cardiovascular conditions are a relative contraindication for psilocybin. Serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists such as atypical antipsychotics and certain antidepressants may block psilocybin's hallucinogenic effects and hence may be considered contraindicated in this sense. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) may potentiate psilocybin's effects and augment its risks.\nAdverse effects.\nMost of the comparatively few fatal incidents associated with psychedelic mushroom usage involve the simultaneous use of other drugs, especially alcohol. A common adverse effect resulting from psilocybin mushroom use involves \"bad trips\" or panic reactions, in which people become anxious, confused, agitated, or disoriented. Accidents, self-injury, or suicide attempts can result from serious cases of acute psychotic episodes. No studies have linked psilocybin with birth defects, but it is recommended that pregnant women avoid its usage.\nPsychiatric adverse effects.\nPanic reactions can occur after consumption of psilocybin-containing mushrooms, especially if the ingestion is accidental or otherwise unexpected. Reactions characterized by violent behavior, suicidal thoughts, schizophrenia-like psychosis, and convulsions have been reported in the literature. A 2005 survey conducted in the United Kingdom found that almost a quarter of those who had used psilocybin mushrooms in the past year had experienced a panic attack. Less frequently reported adverse effects include paranoia, confusion, prolonged derealization (disconnection from reality), and mania. Psilocybin usage can temporarily induce a state of depersonalization disorder. Usage by those with schizophrenia can induce acute psychotic states requiring hospitalization.\nThe similarity of psilocybin-induced symptoms to those of schizophrenia has made the drug a useful research tool in behavioral and neuroimaging studies of schizophrenia. In both cases, psychotic symptoms are thought to arise from a \"deficient gating of sensory and cognitive information\" in the brain that leads to \"cognitive fragmentation and psychosis\". Flashbacks (spontaneous recurrences of a previous psilocybin experience) can occur long after psilocybin use. Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (HPPD) is characterized by a continual presence of visual disturbances similar to those generated by psychedelic substances. Neither flashbacks nor HPPD are commonly associated with psilocybin usage, and correlations between HPPD and psychedelics are further obscured by polydrug use and other variables.\nTolerance and dependence.\nTolerance to psilocybin builds and dissipates quickly; ingesting it more than about once a week can lead to diminished effects. Tolerance dissipates after a few days, so doses can be spaced several days apart to avoid the effect. A cross-tolerance can develop between psilocybin and LSD, and between psilocybin and phenethylamines such as mescaline and DOM.\nRepeated use of psilocybin does not lead to physical dependence. A 2008 study concluded that, based on U.S. data from 2000 to 2002, adolescent-onset (defined here as ages 11\u201317) usage of hallucinogenic drugs (including psilocybin) did not increase the risk of drug dependence in adulthood; this was in contrast to adolescent usage of cannabis, cocaine, inhalants, anxiolytic medicines, and stimulants, all of which were associated with \"an excess risk of developing clinical features associated with drug dependence\". Likewise, a 2010 Dutch study ranked the relative harm of psilocybin mushrooms compared to a selection of 19 recreational drugs, including alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, ecstasy, heroin, and tobacco. Psilocybin mushrooms were ranked as the illicit drug with the lowest harm, corroborating conclusions reached earlier by expert groups in the United Kingdom.\nLong-term effects.\nA potential risk of frequent repeated use of psilocybin and other psychedelics is cardiac fibrosis and valvulopathy caused by serotonin 5-HT2B receptor activation. But single high doses or widely spaced doses (e.g., months apart) are thought to be safe, and concerns about cardiac toxicity apply more to chronic psychedelic microdosing or very frequent intermittent use (e.g., weekly).\nOverdose.\nPsilocybin has low toxicity, meaning that it has a low risk of inducing life-threatening events like breathing or heart problems. Research shows that health risks may develop with use of psilocybin. Nonetheless, hospitalizations from it are rare, and overdoses are generally mild and self-limiting. The lethal dose of psilocybin in humans is unknown, but has been estimated to be approximately 200times a typical recreational dose.\nA review of the management of psychedelic overdoses suggested that psilocybin-related overdose management should prioritize managing the immediate adverse effects, such as anxiety and paranoia, rather than specific pharmacological interventions, as psilocybin's physiological toxicity tends to be rather limited. One analysis of people hospitalized for psilocybin poisoning found high urine concentrations of phenethylamine (PEA), suggesting that PEA might contribute to the effects of psilocybin poisoning.\nDespite acting as non-selective serotonin receptor agonists, psilocybin and other major serotonergic psychedelics like lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) do not cause serotonin syndrome even in the context of extreme overdose. This is thought to be because they act as partial agonists of serotonin receptors like the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor, in contrast to serotonin itself, which is a full agonist.\nIn rats, the median lethal dose (LD50) of psilocybin when administered orally is 280mg/kg, approximately 1.5times that of caffeine. The lethal dose of psilocybin when administered intravenously in mice is 285mg/kg, in rats is 280mg/kg, and in rabbits is 12.5mg/kg. Psilocybin comprises approximately 1% of the weight of \"Psilocybe cubensis\" mushrooms, and so nearly of dried mushrooms, or of fresh mushrooms, would be required for a person to reach the 280mg/kg LD50 value of rats. Based on the results of animal studies and limited human case reports, the human lethal dose of psilocybin has been extrapolated to be 2,000 to 6,000mg, which is around 1,000 times greater than its effective dose of 6mg and 200times the typical recreational dose of 10 to 30mg. The Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances assigns psilocybin a relatively high therapeutic index of 641 (higher values correspond to a better safety profile); for comparison, the therapeutic indices of aspirin and nicotine are 199 and 21, respectively. The lethal dose from psilocybin toxicity alone is unknown, and has rarely been documented\u2014as of 2011[ [update]], only two cases attributed to overdosing on hallucinogenic mushrooms (without concurrent use of other drugs) have been reported in the scientific literature, and those may involve factors other than psilocybin.\nInteractions.\nSerotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists can block the hallucinogenic effects of serotonergic psychedelics like psilocybin. Numerous drugs act as serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists, including antidepressants like trazodone and mirtazapine, antipsychotics like quetiapine, olanzapine, and risperidone, and other agents like ketanserin, pimavanserin, cyproheptadine, and pizotifen. Such drugs are sometimes called \"trip killers\" because they can prevent or abort psychedelics' hallucinogenic effects. Serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists that have been specifically shown in clinical studies to diminish or abolish psilocybin's effects include ketanserin, risperidone, and chlorpromazine.\nThe serotonin 5-HT1A receptor partial agonist buspirone has been found to markedly reduce psilocybin's hallucinogenic effects in humans. Conversely, the serotonin 5-HT1A receptor antagonist pindolol has been found to potentiate the hallucinogenic effects of the related psychedelic dimethyltryptamine (DMT) by 2- to 3-fold in humans. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) may modify psilocybin's effects. One clinical trial found that psilocybin's hallucinogenic and \"good drug\" effects were not modified by the SSRI escitalopram, but that its \"bad drug effects\" such as anxiety, as well as ego dissolution, were reduced, among other changes.\nBenzodiazepines such as diazepam, alprazolam, clonazepam, and lorazepam, as well as alcohol, which act as GABAA receptor positive allosteric modulators, have been limitedly studied in combination with psilocybin and other psychedelics and are not known to directly interact with them. But these GABAergic drugs produce effects such as anxiolysis, sedation, and amnesia, and may therefore diminish or otherwise oppose psychedelics' effects. Because of this, recreational users often use benzodiazepines and alcohol as \"trip killers\" to manage difficult hallucinogenic experiences with psychedelics, such as experiences with prominent anxiety. This strategy's safety is not entirely clear and might have risks, but benzodiazepines have been used to manage psychedelics' adverse psychological effects in clinical studies and in Emergency Rooms. A clinical trial of psilocybin and midazolam coadministration found that midazolam clouded psilocybin's effects and impaired memory of the experience. Benzodiazepines might interfere with the therapeutic effects of psychedelics like psilocybin, such as sustained antidepressant effects.\nPsilocin, the active form of psilocybin, is a substrate of the monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzyme MAO-A. The exact extent to which psilocin (and by extension psilocybin) is metabolized by MAO-A is not fully clear, but has ranged from 4% to 33% in different studies based on metabolite excretion. Circulating levels of psilocin's deaminated metabolite are far higher than those of free unmetabolized psilocin with psilocybin administration. Combination of MAO-substrate psychedelics with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) can result in overdose and toxicity. Examples of MAOIs that may potentiate psychedelics behaving as MAO-A substrates, such as psilocin, include phenelzine, tranylcypromine, isocarboxazid, and moclobemide, as well as harmala alkaloids like harmine and harmaline and chronic tobacco smoking. An early clinical study of psilocybin in combination with short-term tranylcypromine pretreatment found that tranylcypromine marginally potentiated psilocybin's peripheral effects, including pressor effects and mydriasis, but overall did not significantly modify its psychoactive and hallucinogenic effects, although some of its emotional effects were said to be reduced and some of its perceptual effects were said to be amplified.\nPsilocin may be metabolized to a minor extent by the cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes CYP2D6 and/or CYP3A4 and appears unlikely to be metabolized by other CYP450 enzymes. The role of CYP450 enzymes in psilocin's metabolism seems to be small, and so considerable drug interactions with CYP450 inhibitors and/or inducers may not be expected. Psilocin's major metabolic pathway is glucuronidation by UDP-glucuronosyltransferase enzymes including UGT1A10 and UGT1A9. Diclofenac and probenecid are inhibitors of these enzymes that theoretically might inhibit the metabolism of and thereby potentiate psilocybin's effects, but no clinical research or evidence on this possible interaction exists. Few other drugs are known to influence UGT1A10 or UGT1A9 function.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nPsilocybin is a serotonergic psychedelic that acts as a prodrug of psilocin, the active form of the drug. Psilocin is a close analogue of the monoamine neurotransmitter serotonin and, like serotonin, acts as a non-selective agonist of the serotonin receptors, including behaving as a partial agonist of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. It shows high affinity for most of the serotonin receptors, with the notable exception of the serotonin 5-HT3 receptor. Psilocin's affinity for the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor is 15-fold higher in humans than in rats due to species differences. In addition to interacting with the serotonin receptors, psilocin is a partial serotonin releasing agent with lower potency. Unlike certain other psychedelics such as LSD, it appears to show little affinity for many other targets, such as dopamine receptors. Psilocin is an agonist of the mouse and rat but not human trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1).\nPsilocybin's and psilocin's psychedelic effects are mediated specifically by agonism of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. Selective serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists like volinanserin block the head-twitch response (HTR), a behavioral proxy of psychedelic-like effects, induced by psilocybin in rodents, and the HTR is similarly absent in serotonin 5-HT2A receptor knockout mice. There is a significant relationship between psilocybin's hallucinogenic effects and serotonin 5-HT2A receptor occupancy in humans. Psilocybin's psychedelic effects can be blocked by serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists like ketanserin and risperidone in humans. Activation of serotonin 5-HT2A receptors in layer V of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and consequent glutamate release in this area has been especially implicated in the hallucinogenic effects of psilocybin and other serotonergic psychedelics. In addition, region-dependent alterations in brain glutamate levels may be related to the experience of ego dissolution. The cryo-EM structures of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor with psilocin, as well as with various other psychedelics and serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists, have been solved and published by Bryan L. Roth and colleagues.\nAlthough serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonism mediates the hallucinogenic effects of psilocybin and psilocin, activation of other serotonin receptors also appears to contribute to these compounds' psychoactive and behavioral effects. Serotonin 5-HT1A receptor activation seems to inhibit the hallucinogenic effects of psilocybin and other psychedelics. Some of psilocybin's non-hallucinogenic behavioral effects in animals can be reversed by antagonists of the serotonin 5-HT1A, 5-HT2B, and 5-HT2C receptors. Psilocybin produces profoundly decreased locomotor and investigatory behavior in rodents, and this appears to be dependent on serotonin 5-HT1A receptor activation but not on activation of the serotonin 5-HT2A or 5-HT2C receptors. In addition, the serotonin 5-HT1B receptor has been found to be required for psilocybin's persisting antidepressant- and anxiolytic-like effects as well as acute hypolocomotion in animals. In humans, ketanserin blocked psilocybin's hallucinogenic effects but not all of its cognitive and behavioral effects. Serotonin 5-HT2C receptor activation and downstream inhibition of the mesolimbic dopamine pathway may be involved in the limited addictive potential of serotonergic psychedelics like psilocybin. The drug shows pronounced biased agonism at the serotonin 5-HT2C receptor.\nIn addition to its psychedelic effects, psilocin has been found to produce psychoplastogenic effects in animals, including dendritogenesis, spinogenesis, and synaptogenesis. It has been found to promote neuroplasticity in the brain in a rapid, robust, and sustained manner with a single dose. These effects appear to be mediated by intracellular serotonin 5-HT2A receptor activation. The psychoplastogenic effects of psilocybin and other serotonergic psychedelics may be involved in their potential therapeutic benefits in the treatment of psychiatric disorders such as depression. They may also be involved in the effects of microdosing. Psilocin was also reported to act as a highly potent positive allosteric modulator of the tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB), one of the receptors of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), but subsequent studies failed to reproduce these findings and instead found no interaction of psilocin with TrkB. Relatedly, psilocybin has been found not to enhance but rather to inhibit hippocampal neurogenesis in rodents.\nPsilocybin produces profound anti-inflammatory effects mediated by serotonin 5-HT2A receptor activation in preclinical studies. These effects have a potency similar to that of (\"R\")-DOI, and its anti-inflammatory effects occur at far lower doses than those that produce hallucinogen-like effects in animals. Psilocybin's anti-inflammatory effects might be involved in its potential antidepressant benefits and might also have other therapeutic applications, such as treatment of asthma and neuroinflammation. They may also be involved in microdosing effects. But psychedelics have been found to have anti-inflammatory effects only in the setting of preexisting inflammation and may be pro-inflammatory outside that context. Psilocybin has been found to have a large, long-lasting impact on the intestinal microbiome and to influence the gut\u2013brain axis in animals. These effects are partially but not fully dependent on its activation of the serotonin 5-HT2A and/or 5-HT2C receptors. Some of psilocybin's behavioral and potential therapeutic effects may be mediated by changes to the gut microbiome. Transplantation of intestinal contents of psilocybin-treated rodents to untreated rodents resulted in behavioral changes consistent with those of psilocybin administration.\nPsilocybin and other psychedelics produce sympathomimetic effects, such as increased heart rate and blood pressure, by activating the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. Long-term repeated use of psilocybin may result in risk of cardiac valvulopathy and other complications by activating serotonin 5-HT2B receptors.\nThere is little or no acute tolerance with psilocybin, and hence its duration is dictated by pharmacokinetics rather than by pharmacodynamics. Conversely, tolerance and tachyphylaxis rapidly develop to psilocybin's psychedelic effects with repeated administration in humans. In addition, there is cross-tolerance with the hallucinogenic effects of other psychedelics such as LSD. Psilocybin produces downregulation of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor in the brain in animals, an effect thought to be responsible for the development of tolerance to its psychedelic effects. Serotonin 5-HT2A receptors appear to slowly return over the course of days to weeks after psilocybin administration.\nPharmacokinetics.\nAbsorption.\nThere has been little research on psilocybin's bioavailability. Its oral bioavailability, as its active form psilocin, was about 55.0% (\u00b1 ~20%) relative to intravenous administration in one small older study (n=3). After oral administration, psilocybin is detectable in the blood circulation within 20 to 40minutes, and psilocin is detectable after 30minutes. The mean time to peak levels for psilocin is 1.05 to 3.71hours in different studies, with most around 2hours and the upper limit of 3.71hours being an outlier.\nPsilocybin, in terms of psilocin, shows clear linear or dose-dependent pharmacokinetics. Maximal concentrations of psilocin were 11ng/mL, 17ng/mL, and 21ng/mL with oral psilocybin doses of 15, 25, and 30mg psilocybin, respectively. The maximal levels of psilocin have been found to range from 8.2ng/mL to 37.6ng/mL across a dose range of 14 to 42mg. The dose-normalized peak concentration of psilocin is about 0.8ng/mL/mg. The interindividual variability in the pharmacokinetics of psilocybin is relatively small. There is a very strong positive correlation between dose and psilocin peak levels (R2 = 0.95). The effects of food on the pharmacokinetics of psilocybin have not been reported and are unknown, but no clear sign of food effects has been observed in preliminary analyses. It has also been said that food might delay absorption, reduce peak levels, and reduce bioavailability.\nDistribution.\nPsilocin, the active form of psilocybin, is extensively distributed to all tissues through the bloodstream. Its volume of distribution is 505 to 1,267L. Psilocybin itself is hydrophilic due to its phosphate group and cannot easily cross the blood\u2013brain barrier. Conversely, psilocin is lipophilic and readily crosses the blood\u2013brain barrier to exert effects in the central nervous system. The plasma protein binding of psilocybin is 66% and hence it is moderately plasma protein-bound.\nPsilocin (4-HO-DMT) is a close positional isomer of bufotenin (5-HO-DMT), which shows peripheral selectivity, and might be expected to have similarly restricted lipophilicity and blood\u2013brain barrier permeability. But psilocin appears to form a tricyclic pseudo-ring system wherein its hydroxyl group and amine interact through hydrogen bonding. This in turn makes psilocin much less polar, more lipophilic, and more able to cross the blood\u2013brain barrier and exert central actions than it would be otherwise. It may also protect psilocin from metabolism by monoamine oxidase (MAO). In contrast, bufotenin is not able to achieve this pseudo-ring system. Accordingly, bufotenin is less lipophilic than psilocin in terms of partition coefficient. But bufotenin does still show significant central permeability and, like psilocybin, can produce robust hallucinogenic effects in humans.\nMetabolism.\nPsilocybin is dephosphorylated into its active form psilocin in the body and hence is a prodrug. Psilocybin is metabolized in the intestines, liver, kidneys, blood, and other tissues and bodily fluids. There is significant first-pass metabolism of psilocybin and psilocin with oral administration. No psilocybin has been detected in the blood in humans after oral administration, suggesting virtually complete dephosphorylation into psilocin with the first pass. It is also said to be converted 90% to 97% into psilocin. The competitive phosphatase inhibitor \u03b2-glycerolphosphate, which inhibits psilocybin dephosphorylation, greatly attenuates the behavioral effects of psilocybin in rodents. Psilocybin undergoes dephosphorylation into psilocin via the acidic environment of the stomach or the actions of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and non-specific esterases in tissues and fluids.\nPsilocin is demethylated and oxidatively deaminated by monoamine oxidase (MAO), specifically monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A), into 4-hydroxyindole-3-acetaldehyde (4-HIAL or 4-HIA). 4-HIAL is then further oxidated into 4-hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid (4-HIAA) by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) or into 4-hydroxytryptophol (4-HTOL or 4-HTP) by alcohol dehydrogenase (ALD). Deamination of psilocin by MAO-A appears to be responsible for about 4% or 33% of its metabolism in different studies. In contrast to psilocin, its metabolites 4-HIAA and 4-HTP showed no affinity for or activation of multiple serotonin receptors and are considered inactive. Based on \"in vitro\" studies, it has been estimated that MAO-A is responsible for about 81% of psilocin's phase I hepatic metabolism. Psilocin and its metabolites are also glucuronidated by UDP-glucuronyltransferases (UGTs). UGT1A10 and UGT1A9 appear to be the most involved. Psilocybin's glucuronidated metabolites include psilocin-\"O\"-glucuronide and 4-HIAA-\"O\"-glucuronide. Approximately 80% of psilocin in blood plasma is in conjugated form, and conjugated psilocin levels are about fourfold higher than levels of free psilocin. Plasma 4-HIAA levels are also much higher than those of free psilocin.\nNorpsilocin (4-HO-NMT), formed from psilocin via demethylation mediated by the cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP2D6, is known to occur in mice \"in vivo\" and with human recombinant CYP2D6 \"in vitro\" but was not detected in humans \"in vivo\". An oxidized psilocin metabolite of unknown chemical structure is also formed by hydroxyindole oxidase activity of CYP2D6. Oxidized psilocin is possibly a quinone-type structure like psilocin iminoquinone (4-hydroxy-5-oxo-\"N\",\"N\"-DMT) or psilocin hydroquinone (4,5-dihydroxy-\"N\",\"N\"-DMT). Additional metabolites formed by CYP2D6 may also be present. Besides CYP2D6, CYP3A4 showed minor activity in metabolizing psilocin, though the produced metabolite is unknown. Other cytochrome P450 enzymes besides CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 appear unlikely to be involved in psilocin metabolism. CYP2D6 metabolizer phenotypes do not modify psilocin exposure in humans, suggesting that CYP2D6 is not critically involved in psilocin metabolism and is unlikely to result in interindividual differences in psilocin kinetics or effects. Psilocybin and psilocin might inhibit CYP3A4 and CYP2A6 to some extent, respectively.\nElimination.\nPsilocybin is eliminated 80% to 85% in urine and 15 to 20% in bile. It is excreted mainly in urine as psilocin-\"O\"-glucuronide. The drug was eliminated approximately 20% and 80% as psilocin \"O\"-glucuronide in different studies. The amount excreted as unchanged psilocin in urine is 1.5 to 3.4%. Studies conflict on the deaminated metabolites of psilocin, with one study finding that only 4% of psilocin is metabolized into 4-HIAA, 4-HIAL, and 4-HTOL and another that psilocybin is excreted 33% in urine as 4-HIAA. Findings also conflict on whether psilocybin can be detected in urine, with either no psilocybin excreted or 3% to 10% excreted as unchanged psilocybin. A majority of psilocybin and its metabolites is excreted within three hours with oral administration and elimination is almost complete within 24hours.\nThe elimination half-life of psilocybin, as psilocin, is 2.1 to 4.7hours on average (range 1.2\u201318.6hours) orally and 1.2hours (range 1.8\u20134.5hours) intravenously. Psilocin's elimination half-life in mice is 0.9hours, much faster than in humans. Psilocin \"O\"-glucuronide's half-life is about 4hours in humans and approximately 1hour in mice.\nNo dose adjustment of psilocin is thought to be required as psilocin is inactivated mainly via metabolism as opposed to renal elimination. Accordingly, glomerular filtration rate (GFR) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of psilocybin.\nMiscellaneous.\nThe pharmacokinetics of administered psilocybin and psilocin in rodents, for instance in terms of psilocin tissue distribution kinetics, are described as very similar or identical, suggesting very rapid or near-immediate cleavage of psilocybin into psilocin.\nPsilocybin's psychoactive effects and duration are strongly correlated with psilocin levels.\nSingle doses of psilocybin of 3 to 30mg have been found to dose-dependently occupy the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor in humans as assessed by imaging studies. The EC50Tooltip half-maximal effective concentration for occupancy of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor by psilocin in terms of circulating levels has been found to be 1.97ng/mL.\nBody weight and body mass index do not appear to affect psilocybin's pharmacokinetics. This suggests that body weight-adjusted dosing of psilocybin is unnecessary and may actually be counterproductive, and that fixed-dosing should be preferred. Similarly, age does not affect psilocybin's pharmacokinetics. The influence of sex on psilocybin's pharmacokinetics has not been tested.\nChemistry.\nPhysical properties.\nPsilocybin is a naturally occurring substituted tryptamine that features an indole ring linked to an aminoethyl substituent. It is structurally related to serotonin, a monoamine neurotransmitter that is a derivative of the amino acid tryptophan. Psilocybin is a member of the general class of tryptophan-based compounds that originally functioned as antioxidants in earlier life forms before assuming more complex functions in multicellular organisms, including humans. Other related indole-containing psychedelic compounds include dimethyltryptamine, found in many plant species and in trace amounts in some mammals, and bufotenin, found in the skin of certain amphibians, especially the Colorado River toad.\nPsilocybin is a white, crystalline solid that is soluble in water, methanol and ethanol but insoluble in nonpolar organic solvents such as chloroform and petroleum ether. It has a melting point between , and an ammonia-like taste. Its pKa values are estimated to be 1.3 and 6.5 for the two successive phosphate hydroxy groups and 10.4 for the dimethylamine nitrogen, so it typically exists as a zwitterionic structure. There are two known crystalline polymorphs of psilocybin, as well as reported hydrated phases. Psilocybin rapidly oxidizes upon exposure to light\u2014an important consideration when using it as an analytical standard.\nStructural analogues.\nStructural analogues of psilocybin (4-PO-DMT; \"O\"-phosphorylpsilocin) and psilocin (4-HO-DMT) include dimethyltryptamine (DMT), 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), bufotenin (5-HO-DMT), 6-hydroxy-DMT, 4-AcO-DMT (psilacetin; \"O\"-acetylpsilocin), 4-PrO-DMT (\"O\"-propionylpsilocin), psilomethoxin (4-HO-5-MeO-DMT; 5-methoxypsilocin), ethocybin (4-PO-DET), baeocystin (4-PO-NMT), aeruginascin (4-PO-TMT), and norbaeocystin (4-PO-T), among others.\nLaboratory synthesis.\nAlbert Hofmann et al. were the first to synthesize psilocybin, in 1958. Since then, various chemists have improved the methods for laboratory synthesis and purification of psilocybin. In particular, Shirota et al. reported a novel method in 2003 for the synthesis of psilocybin at the gram scale from 4-hydroxyindole that does not require chromatographic purification. Fricke et al. described an enzymatic pathway for the synthesis of psilocybin and psilocin, publishing their results in 2017. Sherwood et al. significantly improved upon Shirota's method (producing at the kilogram scale while employing less expensive reagents), publishing their results in 2020.\nAnalytical methods.\nSeveral relatively simple chemical tests\u2014commercially available as reagent testing kits\u2014can be used to assess the presence of psilocybin in extracts prepared from mushrooms. The drug produces a yellow color in the Marquis test and a green color in the Mandelin reagent. Neither of these tests is specific for psilocybin; for example, the Marquis test will react with many classes of controlled drugs, such as those containing primary amino groups and unsubstituted benzene rings, including amphetamine and methamphetamine. Ehrlich's reagent and DMACA reagent are used as chemical sprays to detect the drug after thin layer chromatography. Many modern techniques of analytical chemistry have been used to quantify psilocybin levels in mushroom samples. Although the earliest methods commonly used gas chromatography, the high temperature required to vaporize the psilocybin sample before analysis causes it to spontaneously lose its phosphoryl group and become psilocin, making it difficult to chemically discriminate between the two drugs. In forensic toxicology, techniques involving gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (GC\u2013MS) are the most widely used due to their high sensitivity and ability to separate compounds in complex biological mixtures. These techniques include ion mobility spectrometry, capillary zone electrophoresis, ultraviolet spectroscopy, and infrared spectroscopy. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is used with ultraviolet, fluorescence, electrochemical, and electrospray mass spectrometric detection methods.\nVarious chromatographic methods have been developed to detect psilocin in body fluids: the rapid emergency drug identification system (REMEDi HS), a drug screening method based on HPLC; HPLC with electrochemical detection; GC\u2013MS; and liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. Although the determination of psilocin levels in urine can be performed without sample cleanup (i.e., removing potential contaminants that make it difficult to accurately assess concentration), the analysis in plasma or serum requires preliminary extraction followed by derivatization of the extracts in the case of GC\u2013MS. A specific immunoassay has also been developed to detect psilocin in whole blood samples. A 2009 publication reported using HPLC to quickly separate forensically important illicit drugs including psilocybin and psilocin, which were identifiable within about 30 seconds of analysis time. But these analytical techniques to determine psilocybin concentrations in body fluids are not routinely available and not typically used in clinical settings.\nNatural occurrence.\nPsilocybin is present in varying concentrations in over 200 species of Basidiomycota mushrooms. In a 2000 review on the worldwide distribution of hallucinogenic mushrooms, Gast\u00f3n Guzm\u00e1n and colleagues considered these to be distributed amongst the following genera: \"Psilocybe\" (116\u00a0species), \"Gymnopilus\" (14), \"Panaeolus\" (13), \"Copelandia\" (12), \"Hypholoma\" (6), \"Pluteus\" (6), \"Inocybe\" (6), \"Conocybe\" (4), \"Panaeolina\" (4), \"Gerronema\" (2), and \"Galerina\" (1\u00a0species). Guzm\u00e1n increased his estimate of the number of psilocybin-containing \"Psilocybe\" to 144 species in a 2005 review. The majority of these are found in Mexico (53 species), with the remainder distributed in the United States and Canada (22), Europe (16), Asia (15), Africa (4), and Australia and associated islands (19). The diversity of psilocybin mushrooms is reported to have been increased by horizontal transfer of the psilocybin gene cluster between unrelated mushroom species. In general, psilocybin-containing species are dark-spored, gilled mushrooms that grow in meadows and woods of the subtropics and tropics, usually in soils rich in humus and plant debris. Psilocybin mushrooms occur on all continents, but the majority of species are found in subtropical humid forests. \"Psilocybe\" species commonly found in the tropics include \"P.\u00a0cubensis\" and \"P.\u00a0subcubensis\". \"P.\u00a0semilanceata\"\u2014considered by Guzm\u00e1n to be the world's most widely distributed psilocybin mushroom\u2014is found in Europe, North America, Asia, South America, Australia and New Zealand, but is entirely absent from Mexico. Although the presence or absence of psilocybin is not of much use as a chemotaxonomical marker at the familial level or higher, it is used to classify taxa of lower taxonomic groups.\nBoth the caps and the stems contain psychoactive compounds, although the caps consistently contain more. The spores of these mushrooms do not contain psilocybin or psilocin. The total potency varies greatly between species and even between specimens of a species collected or grown from the same strain. Because most psilocybin biosynthesis occurs early in the formation of fruit bodies or sclerotia, younger, smaller mushrooms tend to have a higher concentration of the drug than larger, mature mushrooms. In general, the psilocybin content of mushrooms is quite variable (ranging from almost nothing to 2.5% of the dry weight) and depends on species, strain, growth and drying conditions, and mushroom size. Cultivated mushrooms have less variability in psilocybin content than wild mushrooms. The drug is more stable in dried than fresh mushrooms; dried mushrooms retain their potency for months or even years, while mushrooms stored fresh for four weeks contain only traces of the original psilocybin.\nThe psilocybin contents of dried herbarium specimens of \"Psilocybe semilanceata\" in one study were shown to decrease with the increasing age of the sample: collections dated 11, 33, or 118 years old contained 0.84%, 0.67%, and 0.014% (all dry weight), respectively. Mature mycelia contain some psilocybin, while young mycelia (recently germinated from spores) lack appreciable amounts. Many species of mushrooms containing psilocybin also contain lesser amounts of the analog compounds baeocystin and norbaeocystin, chemicals thought to be biogenic precursors. Although most species of psilocybin-containing mushrooms bruise blue when handled or damaged due to the oxidization of phenolic compounds, this reaction is not a definitive method of identification or determining a mushroom's potency.\nBiosynthesis.\nIsotopic labeling experiments from the 1960s suggested that the biosynthesis of psilocybin was a four-step process:\nThis process can be seen in the following diagram:\nMore recent research has demonstrated that\u2014at least in \"P. cubensis\"\u2014\"O\"-phosphorylation is in fact the third step, and that neither dimethyltryptamine nor psilocin are intermediates. The sequence of the intermediate steps has been shown to involve four enzymes (PsiD, PsiH, PsiK, and PsiM) in \"P. cubensis\" and \"P. cyanescens\", although it is possible that the biosynthetic pathway differs between species. These enzymes are encoded in gene clusters in \"Psilocybe, Panaeolus,\" and \"Gymnopilus\".\n\"Escherichia coli\" has been genetically modified to manufacture large amounts of psilocybin. Psilocybin can be produced \"de novo\" in GM yeast.\nHistory.\nEarly.\nThe use of psilocybin mushrooms in religious ceremonies dating back thousands of years is contested. Despite popular narratives portraying psychedelics as ancient, widespread, and primarily used by shamans for therapeutic healing, anthropological and historical research shows their traditional use was often limited, recent, and culturally specific, with modern Western interpretations largely shaped by idealization, tourism, and ideological agendas. Reliable evidence shows that psilocybin mushrooms were used ritualistically in pre-Columbian Mexico but were otherwise rare, with most claims of ancient widespread use exaggerated or misinterpreted.\nIt has been argued that the Tassili Mushroom Figure, discovered in Tassili, Algeria, is evidence of an early psilocybin-containing mushroom cult. 6,000-year-old pictographs discovered near Villar del Humo, Spain, illustrate several mushrooms that have been argued to be \"Psilocybe hispanica\", a hallucinogenic species native to the area. Some scholars have also interpreted archaeological artifacts from Mexico and the so-called Mayan \"mushroom stones\" of Guatemala as evidence of ritual and ceremonial use of psychoactive mushrooms in the Mayan and Aztec cultures.\nAfter Spanish conquistadors of the New World arrived in the 16th century, chroniclers reported mushroom use by the natives for ceremonial and religious purposes. According to the Dominican friar Diego Dur\u00e1n in \"The History of the Indies of New Spain\" (published c.\u00a01581), mushrooms were eaten in festivities conducted on the occasion of Aztec emperor Moctezuma II's accession to the throne in 1502. The Franciscan friar Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan wrote of witnessing mushroom use in the Florentine Codex (published 1545\u20131590), saying that some merchants celebrated upon returning from a successful business trip by consuming mushrooms to evoke revelatory visions. After the defeat of the Aztecs, the Spanish forbade traditional religious practices and rituals they considered \"pagan idolatry\", including ceremonial mushroom use. For the next four centuries, the Indians of Mesoamerica hid their use of entheogens from the Spanish authorities.\nDozens of species of psychedelic mushrooms are found in Europe, but there is little documented usage of them in Old World history besides the use of \"Amanita muscaria\" among Siberian peoples. The few existing accounts that mention psilocybin mushrooms typically lack sufficient information to allow species identification, focusing on their effects. For example, Flemish botanist Carolus Clusius (1526\u20131609) described the \"bolond gomba\" (\"crazy mushroom\"), used in rural Hungary to prepare love potions. English botanist John Parkinson included details about a \"foolish mushroom\" in his 1640 herbal \"Theatricum Botanicum\". The first reliably documented report of intoxication with \"Psilocybe semilanceata\"\u2014Europe's most common and widespread psychedelic mushroom\u2014involved a British family in 1799, who prepared a meal with mushrooms they had picked in London's Green Park.\nModern.\nAmerican banker and amateur ethnomycologist R. Gordon Wasson and his wife, Valentina P. Wasson, a physician, studied the ritual use of psychoactive mushrooms by the native population in the Mazatec village Huautla de Jim\u00e9nez, Mexico. In 1957, Wasson described the psychedelic visions he experienced during these rituals in \"Seeking the Magic Mushroom\", an article published in the American weekly \"Life\" magazine. Later the same year they were accompanied on a follow-up expedition by French mycologist Roger Heim, who identified several of the mushrooms as \"Psilocybe\" species.\nHeim cultivated the mushrooms in France and sent samples for analysis to Albert Hofmann, a chemist employed by the Swiss pharmaceutical company Sandoz. Hofmann\u2014who had synthesized lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) in 1938\u2014led a research group that isolated and identified the psychoactive alkaloids psilocybin and psilocin from \"Psilocybe mexicana\", publishing their results in 1958. The team was aided in the discovery process by Hofmann's willingness to ingest mushroom extracts to help verify the presence of the active compounds.\nNext, Hofmann's team synthesized several structural analogs of these compounds to examine how these structural changes affect psychoactivity. This research led to the development of ethocybin and CZ-74. Because these compounds' physiological effects last only about three and a half hours (about half as long as psilocybin's), they proved more manageable for use in psycholytic therapy. Sandoz also marketed and sold pure psilocybin under the name Indocybin to clinicians and researchers worldwide. There were no reports of serious complications when psilocybin was used in this way.\nIn the early 1960s, Harvard University became a testing ground for psilocybin through the efforts of Timothy Leary and his associates Ralph Metzner and Richard Alpert (who later changed his name to Ram Dass). Leary obtained synthesized psilocybin from Hofmann through Sandoz Pharmaceuticals. Some studies, such as the Concord Prison Experiment, suggested promising results using psilocybin in clinical psychiatry. But according to a 2008 review of safety guidelines in human hallucinogenic research, Leary's and Alpert's well-publicized termination from Harvard and later advocacy of hallucinogen use \"further undermined an objective scientific approach to studying these compounds\". In response to concerns about the increase in unauthorized use of psychedelic drugs by the general public, psilocybin and other hallucinogenic drugs were unfavorably covered in the press and faced increasingly restrictive laws. In the U.S., laws passed in 1966 that prohibited the production, trade, or ingestion of hallucinogenic drugs; Sandoz stopped producing LSD and psilocybin the same year. In 1970, Congress passed \"The Federal Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act\" that made LSD, peyote, psilocybin, and other hallucinogens illegal to use for any purpose, including scientific research. United States politicians' agenda against LSD usage had swept psilocybin along with it into the Schedule\u00a0I category of illicit drugs. Such restrictions on the use of these drugs in human research made funding for such projects difficult to obtain, and scientists who worked with psychedelic drugs faced being \"professionally marginalized\". Although Hofmann tested these compounds on himself, he never advocated their legalization or medical use. In his 1979 book \"LSD\u2014mein Sorgenkind\" (\"LSD\u2014My Problem Child\"), he described the problematic use of these hallucinogens as inebriants.\nDespite the legal restrictions on psilocybin use, the 1970s witnessed the emergence of psilocybin as the \"entheogen of choice\". This was due in large part to wide dissemination of information on the topic, which included works such as those by Carlos Castaneda and several books that taught the technique of growing psilocybin mushrooms. One of the most popular of the latter group, \"Psilocybin: Magic Mushroom Grower's Guide\", was published in 1976 under the pseudonyms O. T. Oss and O. N. Oeric by Jeremy Bigwood, Dennis J. McKenna, K. Harrison McKenna, and Terence McKenna. Over 100,000 copies were sold by 1981. As ethnobiologist Jonathan Ott explains, \"These authors adapted San Antonio's technique (for producing edible mushrooms by casing mycelial cultures on a rye grain substrate; San Antonio 1971) to the production of \"Psilocybe [Stropharia] cubensis\". The new technique involved the use of ordinary kitchen implements, and for the first time the layperson was able to produce a potent entheogen in his own home, without access to sophisticated technology, equipment or chemical supplies.\" San Antonio's technique describes a method to grow the common edible mushroom \"Agaricus bisporus\".\nBecause of lack of clarity about laws concerning psilocybin mushrooms, specifically in the form of sclerotia (also known as \"truffles\"), in the late 1990s and early 2000s European retailers commercialized and marketed them in smartshops in the Netherlands, the UK, and online. Several websites emerged that contributed to the accessibility of information on the mushrooms' description, use, and effects, and users exchanged mushroom experiences. Since 2001, six EU countries have tightened their legislation on psilocybin mushrooms in response to concerns about their prevalence and increasing usage. In the 1990s, hallucinogens and their effects on human consciousness were again the subject of scientific study, particularly in Europe. Advances in neuropharmacology and neuropsychology and the availability of brain imaging techniques have provided impetus for using drugs like psilocybin to probe the \"neural underpinnings of psychotic symptom formation including ego disorders and hallucinations\". Recent studies in the U.S. have attracted attention from the popular press and brought psilocybin back into the limelight.\nSociety and culture.\nUsage.\nA 2009 national survey of drug use by the US Department of Health and Human Services concluded that the number of first-time psilocybin mushroom users in the United States was roughly equivalent to the number of first-time users of cannabis. A June 2024 report by the RAND Corporation suggests the total number of use days for psychedelics is two orders of magnitude smaller than it is for cannabis, and unlike people who use cannabis and many other drugs, infrequent users of psychedelics account for most of the total days of use. The RAND Corporation report suggests psilocybin mushrooms may be the most prevalent psychedelic drug among U.S. adults.\nIn European countries, the lifetime prevalence estimates of psychedelic mushroom usage among young adults (15\u201334 years) range from 0.3% to 14.1%.\nIn modern Mexico, traditional ceremonial use survives among several indigenous groups, including the Nahuas, the Matlatzinca, the Totonacs, the Mazatecs, Mixes, Zapotecs, and the Chatino. Although hallucinogenic \"Psilocybe\" species are abundant in Mexico's low-lying areas, most ceremonial use takes places in mountainous areas of elevations greater than . Guzm\u00e1n suggests this is a vestige of Spanish colonial influence from several hundred years earlier, when mushroom use was persecuted by the Catholic Church.\nLegal status.\nAdvocacy for tolerance.\nDespite being illegal to possess without authorization in many Western countries, such as the UK, Australia, and some U.S. states, less conservative governments nurture the legal possession and supply of psilocybin and other psychedelic drugs. In Amsterdam, authorities provide education on and promote the safe use of psychedelic drugs, such as psilocybin, to reduce public harm. Similarly, religious groups like America's Uniao do Vegetal (UDV) use psychedelics in traditional ceremonies. A report from the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) notes that people may petition the DEA for exemptions to use psilocybin for religious purposes.\nFrom 1 July 2023, the Australian medicines regulator has permitted psychiatrists to prescribe psilocybin for the therapeutic treatment of treatment-resistant depression.\nAdvocates of legalization argue there is a lack of evidence of harm, and potential use in treating certain mental health conditions. Research is difficult to conduct because of the legal status of psychoactive substances. Advocates of legalization also promote the utility of \"ego dissolution\" and argue bans are cultural discrimination against traditional users.\nIn 2024, after calls for regulatory and legal change to expand terminally ill populations' access to controlled substances, two legal cases related to expanded access began moving through the federal courts under right-to-try law. The Advanced Integrative Medicine Science (AIMS) Institute in concert with the NPA filed a series of lawsuits seeking both the rescheduling of and expanded right-to-try access to psilocybin.\nResearch.\nPsychiatric and other disorders.\nPsilocybin has been a subject of clinical research since the early 1960s, when the Harvard Psilocybin Project evaluated the potential value of psilocybin as a treatment for certain personality disorders. Beginning in the 2000s, psilocybin has been investigated for its possible role in the treatment of nicotine dependence, alcohol dependence, obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD), cluster headache, cancer-related existential distress, anxiety disorders, and certain mood disorders. It is also being studied in people with Parkinson's disease. In 2018, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted breakthrough therapy designation for psilocybin-assisted therapy for treatment-resistant depression. A systematic review published in 2021 found that the use of psilocybin as a pharmaceutical substance was associated with reduced intensity of depression symptoms. The role of psilocybin as a possible psychoplastogen is also being examined. It is under development by Compass Pathways, Cybin, and several other companies.\nDepression.\nClinical trials, including both open-label trials and double-blind randomized controlled trials (RCTs), have found that single doses of psilocybin produce rapid and long-lasting antidepressant effects outperforming placebo in people with major depressive disorder and treatment-resistant depression. Combined with brief psychological support in a Phase II trial, it has been found to produce dose-dependent improvements in depressive symptoms, with 25mg (a moderate dose) more effective than 10mg (a low dose), and 10mg more effective than 1mg (non-psychoactive and equivalent to placebo). The antidepressant effects of psilocybin with psychological support have been found to last at least 6weeks following a single dose.\nHowever, some trials have not found psilocybin to significantly outperform placebo in the treatment of depression. In addition, a Phase II trial found that two 25mg doses of psilocybin 3weeks apart versus daily treatment with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) escitalopram (Lexapro) for 6weeks (plus two putatively non-psychoactive 1mg doses of psilocybin 3weeks apart) did not show a statistically significant difference in reduction of depressive symptoms between groups. However, reductions in depressive symptoms were numerically greater with psilocybin, some secondary measures favored psilocybin, and the rate of remission was statistically higher with psilocybin (57% with psilocybin vs. 28% with escitalopram). In any case, the antidepressant effect size of psilocybin over escitalopram appears to be small.\nFunctional unblinding by their psychoactive effects and positive psychological expectancy effects (i.e., the placebo effect) are major limitations and sources of bias of clinical trials of psilocybin and other psychedelics for treatment of depression. Relatedly, most of the therapeutic benefit of conventional antidepressants like the SSRIs for depression appears to be attributable to the placebo response. It has been proposed that psychedelics like psilocybin may in fact act as active \"super placebos\" when used for therapeutic purposes. Psilocybin has not received regulatory approval for medical use in the United States.\nIn a 2024 meta-analysis of RCTs of psychedelics and escitalopram for treatment of depression, only \"high-dose\" psilocybin (\u226520mg) significantly outperformed escitalopram in improving depressive symptoms. It showed a large effect size over placebo, but a small effect size over escitalopram. A 2025 meta-analysis found a moderate effect size advantage of psilocybin relative to placebo. A 2024 network meta-analysis of RCTs of therapies for treatment-resistant depression, with effectiveness measures being response and remission rates, likewise found that psilocybin was more effective than placebo and, considering both effectiveness and tolerability or safety, recommended it as a first-line therapy, along with ketamine, esketamine, and electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). However, the quality of evidence was generally rated as low or very low. Meta-analyses of psychedelics for depression and other psychiatric conditions have found that psilocybin has the greatest number of studies and the most evidence of benefit, relative to other psychedelics like ayahuasca and LSD.\nPreliminary meta-analyses suggest that improvements in depressive symptoms with psilocybin are dose-dependent and that higher doses may result in greater improvements than lower doses. One meta-analysis found that the highest assessed dose in clinical trials, 30 to 35mg per 70kg body weight, was the most effective, with an effect size (Hedges' g) of 3.1 (relative to 1.3 overall), but based on only one study for that dosing subgroup. This meta-analysis included both RCTs and prospective open-label studies, and calculated effect sizes by comparing to the placebo group or by using pre-treatment (baseline) values. Another meta-analysis, which included only RCTs, found that 25mg was the most effective dose, relative to lower doses like 10mg and 0.215mg/kg body weight (~15mg for a 70-kg person). A third meta-analysis found that half of psilocybin's maximal antidepressant effect occurred with a dose of about 10mg per 70kg body weight, while 95% of the maximal effect occurred at a dose of about 41mg per 70kg body weight, and that higher doses might especially be better for treatment-resistant depression. The risk of adverse effects was also greater with higher doses.\nA 2025 network meta-analysis of RCTs of psilocybin for depression found that it did not significantly improve depression scores relative to placebo on day 2 post-dose but did improve them day 8 and day 15 post-dose. Depressive symptoms were improved only slightly more with psilocybin than with placebo. Another 2024 meta-analysis found that depressive symptoms were improved on days 2, 14, and 42, with similar effect sizes. In the previously described dose-ranging Phase II trial of psilocybin for depression, the time to median depressive event after administration of psilocybin was 92 to 189days for 25mg, 43 to 83days for 10mg, and 21 to 62days for 1mg, depending on the analysis. Repeated dosing of psilocybin is being explored for maximization and maintenance of depressive symptom improvement, with preliminary effectiveness observed.\nIn June 2025, Compass Pathways, which is developing psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression, announced the results of a Phase III clinical trial of single-dose 25mg psilocybin (COMP360) versus placebo. Psilocybin met the primary endpoint of a significant reduction in depressive scores on the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) relative to placebo. At the 6-week point, there was a 3.6-point reduction in depressive symptoms on the scale compared to placebo. The degree of improvement over placebo was small and below expectations: a minimum advantage of at least 5 points over placebo had been expected and deemed acceptable, for instance by the company's investors. After Compass Pathways's announcement, the company's stock price fell by 36%. Since October 2024, upon initially delaying the announcement of the results, Compass Pathways has laid off 30% of its staff and stopped all preclinical work unrelated to COMP360. A second Phase III trial by Compass Pathways involving multiple different doses of psilocybin is also underway, with results expected next year. Questions remain concerning the durability of psilocybin's antidepressant effects, the scalability of its treatment delivery, and regulatory uncertainty.\nMost clinical trials of psilocybin for depression have had financial conflicts of interest and significant risk of bias. The British critical psychiatrist Joanna Moncrieff has critiqued the use and study of psychedelics like psilocybin for treatment of psychiatric disorders, highlighting concerns including excessive hype around these drugs, questionable biologically-based theories of benefit, blurred lines between medical and recreational use, flawed clinical trial findings, financial conflicts of interest, strong expectancy effects and large placebo responses, small and short-term benefits over placebo, and their potential for difficult and potentially destabilizing experiences and adverse effects, among others.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38469", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38469", "title": "The speed of light in vacuum", "text": ""}
{"id": "38472", "revid": "1313642473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38472", "title": "Shakespearean tragedy", "text": "Tragedies written by William Shakespeare\nShakespearean tragedy is the designation given to most tragedies written by William Shakespeare. Many of his history plays share the qualifiers of a Shakespearean tragedy, but because they are based on real figures throughout the history of England, they were classified as \"histories\" in the First Folio. The Roman tragedies\u2014\"Julius Caesar\", \"Antony and Cleopatra\" and \"Coriolanus\"\u2014are also based on historical figures, but because their sources were foreign and ancient, they are almost always classified as tragedies rather than histories. Shakespeare's romances (tragicomic plays) were written late in his career and published originally as either tragedy or comedy. They share some elements of tragedy, insofar as they feature a high-status central character, but they end happily like Shakespearean comedies. Almost three centuries after Shakespeare's death, English scholar Frederick S. Boas also coined a fifth category, the \"problem play,\" for plays that do not fit neatly into a single classification because of their subject matter, setting, or ending. Scholars continue to disagree on how to categorize some Shakespearean plays.\nChronology.\nBelow is the list of Shakespeare's plays listed as tragedies in the First Folio, along with the date range in which each play is believed to have been written.\nInfluences and sources.\nThe English Renaissance, when Shakespeare was writing, was fueled by a renewed interest in Roman and Greek classics and neighboring renaissance literature written years earlier in Italy, France, and Spain. Shakespeare wrote the majority of his tragedies under the rule of James I, and their darker contents may reflect the general mood of the country following the death of Elizabeth I, as well as James's theatrical preferences. Shakespeare, as was customary for other playwrights in his day, used history, other plays, and non-dramatic literature as sources for his plays. Additionally, tragedy was a new and exciting theatrical phenomenon in the late 16th century, rather than an established and self-evident dramatic form; because of this, Shakespeare and his contemporaries' plays did not necessary fit into a single genre. In Elizabethan England there was no copyright law or protections against plagiarism, so characters, plots, and even whole phrases of poetry were considered common property. The majority of Shakespeare's tragedies are based on historical figures, with the exception of \"Measure for Measure\" and \"Othello\", which are based on narrative fictions by Giraldi Cintio. The historical basis for Shakespeare's Roman plays comes from \"The Lives of Noble Grecians and Romans\" by Plutarch, whereas the source of Shakespeare's Britain-based plays and \"Hamlet\" (based on the Danish Prince Amleth) derive from \"Holinshed's Chronicles\". Furthermore, the French author Belleforest published \"The Hystorie of Hamblet, Prince of Denmarke\" in 1582, which includes specifics from how the prince pretended madness, to how the prince stabbed and killed the King's counsellor who was eavesdropping on Hamlet and his mother behind the arras in the Queen's chamber. The story of Lear appears in Geoffrey of Monmouth's \"Historia regium Britanniae\" c.\u20091135, and then in John Higgins' poem \"The Mirror for Magistrates\" in 1574, as well as appearing in Holinshed's \"Chronicles\" in 1587. Some events that happen in Shakespeare's \"King Lear\" were inspired by various episodes of Philip Sidney's \"Arcadia\" from 1590, while the nonsensical musings of Edgar's \"poor Tom\" heavily reference Samuel Harsnett's 1603 book, \"A Declaration of Egregious Popish Impostures\".\nContemporary tragedy.\nTragedies from these eras traced their philosophical essence back to the Senecan tragedy, grounded in nobles who have a tragic flaw or commit a grave error (\"hamartia\") which leads to their reversal of fortune (\"peripeteia\"). (However, some critics have argued that the \"pseudo-Aristotelian\" concept of the tragic flaw does not apply to Shakespeare's tragic figures.) Revenge tragedy was another increasingly popular genre in this age; Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\" is one example of this. Plays of this age were also decidedly secular, in contrast to the religious morality plays which, by this time, were outlawed by Elizabeth I. One marked difference between English renaissance tragedies and the classics that inspired them was the use and popularity of violence and murder on stage.\nSelect exemplary (non-Shakespearean) Elizabethan and Jacobean tragedies:\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "38473", "revid": "1248300744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38473", "title": "Singer", "text": ""}
{"id": "38474", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38474", "title": "De Facto", "text": ""}
{"id": "38475", "revid": "46791144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38475", "title": "Fidelio", "text": "Only opera by Ludwig van Beethoven\nFidelio (; ), originally titled (\"Leonore, or The Triumph of Marital Love\"), Op. 72, is the sole opera by German composer Ludwig van Beethoven. The libretto was originally prepared by Joseph Sonnleithner from the French of Jean-Nicolas Bouilly. The opera premiered at Vienna's Theater an der Wien on 20 November 1805. The following year, Beethoven's friend Stephan von Breuning rewrote the libretto, shortening the work from three acts to two. After further work on the libretto by Georg Friedrich Treitschke, a final version was performed at the K\u00e4rntnertortheater on 23 May 1814. As these libretto revisions were going on, Beethoven was also revising some of the music. By convention, only the final version is called \"Fidelio\", and the others are referred to as \"Leonore\".\nThe libretto tells how Leonore, disguised as a prison guard named \"Fidelio\", rescues her husband Florestan from death in a political prison. Bouilly's scenario fits Beethoven's aesthetic and political outlook: a story of personal sacrifice, heroism, and eventual triumph. With its underlying struggle for liberty and justice mirroring contemporary political movements in Europe, such topics are typical of Beethoven's \"middle period\". Notable moments in the opera include the \"Prisoners' Chorus\" (\"O welche Lust\"\u2014\"O what a joy\"), an ode to freedom sung by a chorus of political prisoners, Florestan's vision of Leonore who comes as an angel to rescue him, and the scene in which the rescue finally takes place. The finale celebrates Leonore's bravery with alternating contributions of soloists and chorus.\nBackdrop.\nIn its time, \"Fidelio\" was Beethoven's contribution to an ongoing and successful tradition of operatic composition; a tradition harder to discern today because none of the operas involved, other than Beethoven's, has survived into the modern repertory. The tradition was imported to Beethoven's Vienna from Revolutionary France and involved work of many composers, most notably Luigi Cherubini, whose work Beethoven (unusually) strongly admired. The new French school arrived in Vienna in 1802 with the performance of Cherubini's Lodo\u00efska, and led, per Dean, to \"an avalanche of French operas, many of which became more popular in Vienna than in Paris.\" Many of these operas were so-called \"rescue operas\", which Dean describes thus:\nThe ... singspiel form, the background of domestic realism tinged with comedy, the superposition of a heroic or patriotic story involving violence and often a spectacular catastrophe, a happy end produced not by a \"deus ex machina\" but by an act of superhuman courage, a strong ethical content tending to divide the characters into sheep and goats: this was the pattern of rescue opera ... Beethoven adopted it lock, stock, and barrel.\nThis new kind of heroic opera appealed far more to Beethoven than the (to him) frivolous-seeming dramas of character that had impelled Mozart's earlier work. Beethoven, who heard Cherubini's work in Vienna, joined the new trend with enthusiasm; and indeed \"Fidelio\" borrows its plot, characters, and (according to Dean) even certain musical devices from the work of Beethoven's predecessors in the French rescue-opera tradition. These include Pierre Gaveaux's opera \"L\u00e9onore, ou L'amour conjugal\" (1798) and Ferdinando Paer's \"Leonora\" (1804).\nComposition and 19th century performance history.\n\"Fidelio\" had a long and complicated history of composition. Beethoven revised \"Fidelio\" three times; the work caused Beethoven so much vexation that he vowed never to compose another opera.\nThe distant origin of \"Fidelio\" dates from 1803, when the librettist and impresario Emanuel Schikaneder worked out a contract with Beethoven to write an opera. The contract included free lodging for Beethoven in the apartment complex that was part of Schikaneder's large suburban theater, the Theater an der Wien. Beethoven was to set a new libretto by Schikaneder, entitled \"Vestas Feuer\"; however, this libretto was not to Beethoven's liking. He spent about a month composing music for it, then abandoned it when the possibility presented itself of joining the new, to Beethoven more meaningful, French heroic tradition.\nThe time Beethoven spent on \"Vestas Feuer\" was not entirely wasted, as two important numbers from \"Fidelio\", Pizarro's \"'Ha! Welch' ein Augenblick!\" and the duet \"O namenlose Freude\" for Leonore and Florestan, both originated as music for \"Vestas Feuer\". Beethoven continued to live at the Theater an der Wien for some time after he had abandoned \"Vestas Feuer\" for \"Fidelio\", and was eventually freed from his obligations to Schikaneder after the latter was fired from his post as theater director in 1804.\n\"Fidelio\" itself, which Beethoven began in 1804 immediately after giving up on \"Vestas Feuer\", was first performed in 1805 and was extensively revised by the composer for subsequent performances in 1806 and 1814. Although Beethoven used the title \"\" (\"Leonore, or The Triumph of Married Love\"), the 1805 performances were billed as \"Fidelio\" at the theatre's insistence, to avoid confusion with the operas by Gaveaux and Paer mentioned above. \nBeethoven published the 1806 libretto and, in 1810, a vocal score under the title \"Leonore\". The current convention is to use the name \"Leonore\" for both the 1805 (three-act) and 1806 (two-act) versions and \"Fidelio\" only for the final 1814 revision.\nThe first version, with a three-act German libretto adapted by Joseph Sonnleithner from the French of Jean-Nicolas Bouilly, premiered at the Theater an der Wien on 20 November 1805, with additional performances the following two nights. The success of these performances was hindered by the fact that Vienna was under French military occupation, and most of the audience were French military officers who had little interest in German opera.\nAfter this premiere, Beethoven's friends suggested he revise and shorten the opera into just two acts, and he did so with the help of his close friend, Stephan von Breuning. The composer also wrote a new overture (now known as \"Leonore No.3\"; see below). In this form, the opera was first performed on 29 March and 10 April 1806, with greater success. Further performances were prevented by a disagreement between Beethoven and the theatre management.\nIn 1814, Beethoven revised his opera yet again, with additional work on the libretto by Georg Friedrich Treitschke. This version was first performed at the K\u00e4rntnertortheater on 23 May 1814, again under the title \"Fidelio\". The 17-year-old Franz Schubert was in the audience, having sold his school books to obtain a ticket. The increasingly deaf Beethoven conducted the performance, \"assisted\" by Michael Umlauf, who later performed the same task for Beethoven at the premiere of the Ninth Symphony. The role of Pizarro was taken by Johann Michael Vogl, who later became known for his collaborations with Schubert. This version of the opera was a great success, and \"Fidelio\" has been part of the operatic repertory ever since.\nAlthough critics have noted the similarity in plot with Gluck's opera \"Orfeo ed Euridice\" (1762) \u2014 another underground rescue mission in which the protagonist must control, or conceal, his emotions in order to retrieve his spouse \u2014 it is not known whether Beethoven or any of the librettists had this in mind while constructing the opera.\nNo other work of Beethoven's caused him so much frustration and disappointment. He found the difficulties posed by writing and producing an opera so disagreeable, he vowed never to compose another. In a letter to Treitschke he said, \"I assure you, dear Treitschke, that this opera will win me a martyr's crown. You have by your co-operation saved what is best from the shipwreck. For all this I shall be eternally grateful to you.\"\nThe full score was not published until 1826, and all three versions are known as Beethoven's Opus 72.\nThe first performance outside Vienna took place in Prague on 21 November 1814, with a revival in Vienna on 3 November 1822. In its two-act version, the opera was staged in London on 18 May 1832 at the King's Theatre, and in New York on 9 September 1839 at the Park Theatre.\n20th-century performance history.\n\"Fidelio\" was Arturo Toscanini's first complete opera performance given in the United States since 1915 and the first to be broadcast on radio, over the NBC network, in December 1944. Toscanini conducted the NBC Symphony Orchestra, featuring soloists Rose Bampton, Jan Peerce and Eleanor Steber, with the performance divided into two consecutive broadcasts. The recording of the opera was later issued by RCA Victor on LP and CD.\n\"Fidelio\" was the first opera performed in Berlin after the end of World War II, with the Deutsche Oper staging it under the baton of Robert Heger at the only undamaged theatre, the Theater des Westens, in September 1945. At the time, Thomas Mann remarked: \"What amount of apathy was needed [by musicians and audiences] to listen to \"Fidelio\" in Himmler's Germany without covering their faces and rushing out of the hall!\"\nNot long after the end of World War II and the fall of Nazism, conductor Wilhelm Furtw\u00e4ngler remarked in Salzburg in 1948:\n[T]he conjugal love of Leonore appears, to the modern individual armed with realism and psychology, irremediably abstract and theoretical... Now that political events in Germany have restored to the concepts of human dignity and liberty their original significance, this is the opera which, thanks to the music of Beethoven, gives us comfort and courage... Certainly, \"Fidelio\" is not an opera in the sense we are used to, nor is Beethoven a musician for the theater, or a dramaturgist. He is quite a bit more, a whole musician, and beyond that, a saint and a visionary. That which disturbs us is not a material effect, nor the fact of the 'imprisonment'; any film could create the same effect. No, it is the music, it is Beethoven himself. It is this 'nostalgia of liberty' he feels, or better, makes us feel; this is what moves us to tears. His \"Fidelio\" has more of the Mass than of the Opera to it; the sentiments it expresses come from the sphere of the sacred, and preach a 'religion of humanity' which we never found so beautiful or necessary as we do today, after all we have lived through. Herein lies the singular power of this unique opera... Independent of any historical consideration ... the flaming message of \"Fidelio\" touches deeply.\nWe realize that for us Europeans, as for all men, this music will always represent an appeal to our conscience.\nOn 5 November 1955, the Vienna State Opera was re-opened with \"Fidelio\", conducted by Karl B\u00f6hm. This performance was the first live television broadcast by ORF at a time when there were about 800 television sets in Austria.\nThe first night of \"Fidelio\" at the Semperoper in Dresden on 7 October 1989 on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the DDR (East Germany) coincided with violent demonstrations at the city's main train station. The applause after the \"Prisoners' Chorus\" interrupted the performance for considerable time, and the production by Christine Mielitz had the chorus appear in normal street clothes at the end, signifying their role as representatives of the audience. Nearly five weeks later, on 9 November 1989, the fall of the Berlin Wall signalled the end of East Germany's regime.\nOvertures.\nBeethoven struggled to produce an appropriate overture for \"Fidelio\", and ultimately went through four versions. His first attempt, for the 1805 premiere, is believed to have been the overture now known as \"Leonore No.\u00a02\" in C major. Beethoven then focused this version for the performances of 1806, creating \"Leonore No.\u00a03\", also in C major. The latter is considered by many listeners as the greatest of the four overtures, and indeed it is often performed outside the context of the opera, as a concert piece. But as an intensely dramatic, full-scale symphonic movement it had the effect of overwhelming the (rather light) initial scenes of the opera. Beethoven accordingly experimented with cutting it back somewhat, for a planned 1808 performance in Prague; this is believed to be the version now called \"Leonore No.\u00a01\". Finally, for the 1814 revival Beethoven began anew, and with fresh musical material wrote what is now known as the \"Fidelio\" overture, in E major. As this somewhat lighter overture seems to work best of the four as a start to the opera, Beethoven's final intentions are generally respected in contemporary productions.\nThe two scenes of the last act require a major scene change, and it has long been a temptation for conductors to integrate the acclaimed \"Leonore No.\u00a03\" overture into the opera by performing it during this interval. According to David Cairns, the practice goes back to the middle of the 19th century. Gustav Mahler is particularly remembered for adhering to this practice when he led a performance. When performed at this point in the opera, the overture acts as a kind of musical reprise of the rescue scene that has just taken place.\nSynopsis.\nTwo years prior to the opening scene, the Spanish nobleman Florestan has exposed or attempted to expose certain crimes of a rival nobleman, Pizarro. In revenge, Pizarro has secretly imprisoned Florestan in the prison over which he is governor. Simultaneously, Pizarro has spread false rumors about Florestan's death.\nThe warden of the prison, Rocco, has a daughter, Marzelline, and an assistant, Jaquino, who is in love with Marzelline. The faithful wife of Florestan, Leonore, suspects that her husband is still alive. Disguised as a boy, under the alias \"Fidelio\", she gains employment working for Rocco. As the boy Fidelio, she earns the favor of her employer, Rocco, and also the affections of his daughter Marzelline, much to Jaquino's chagrin.\nOn orders, Rocco has been giving the imprisoned Florestan diminishing rations until he is nearly starved to death.\nPlace: A Spanish state prison, a few miles from Seville\nTime: Late 17th century\nAct 1.\nJaquino and Marzelline are alone in Rocco's house. Jaquino asks Marzelline when she will agree to marry him, but she says that she will never marry him now that she has fallen in love with Fidelio, unaware that Fidelio is actually Leonore in disguise (\"Jetzt, Sch\u00e4tzchen, jetzt sind wir allein\"\u2014\"Now, darling, now we are alone\"). Jaquino leaves, and Marzelline expresses her desire to become Fidelio's wife (\"O w\u00e4r ich schon mit dir vereint\"\u2014\"If only I were already united with thee\"). Rocco enters, looking for Fidelio, who then enters carrying a heavy load of newly repaired chains. Rocco compliments Fidelio, and misinterprets her modest reply as hidden attraction to his daughter. Marzelline, Fidelio, Rocco, and Jaquino sing a quartet about the love Marzelline has for Fidelio (\"Mir ist so wunderbar\"\u2014\"A wondrous feeling fills me\", also known as the Canon Quartet).\nRocco tells Fidelio that as soon as the governor has left for Seville, Marzelline and Fidelio can be married. He tells them, however, that unless they have money, they will not be happy (\"Hat man nicht auch Gold beineben\"\u2014\"If you don't have any money\"). Fidelio demands to know why Rocco will not allow for help in the dungeons, especially as he always seems to return short of breath. Rocco says that there is a dungeon down there where he can never take Fidelio, which houses a man who has been wasting away for two years. Marzelline begs her father to keep Fidelio away from such a terrible sight, but Fidelio claims courage sufficient to cope with it. Rocco and Fidelio sing of courage (\"Gut, S\u00f6hnchen, gut\"\u2014\"All right, sonny, all right\"), and Marzelline joins in their acclamations.\nAll but Rocco leave. A march is played as Pizarro enters with his guards. Rocco warns Pizarro that the minister plans a surprise visit tomorrow to investigate accusations of Pizarro's cruelty. Pizarro exclaims that he cannot let the minister discover the imprisoned Florestan, who has been thought dead. Instead, Pizarro will have Florestan murdered (\"Ha, welch ein Augenblick\"\u2014\"Hah! What a moment!\"). As a signal, Pizarro orders that a trumpet be sounded at the minister's arrival. He offers Rocco money to kill Florestan, but Rocco refuses (\"Jetzt, Alter, jetzt hat es Eile!\"\u2014\"Now, old man, we must hurry!\"). Pizarro says he will kill Florestan himself instead, and orders Rocco to dig a grave for him in the floor of the dungeon. Once the grave is ready, Rocco is to sound the alarm, upon which Pizarro will come into the dungeon and kill Florestan. Fidelio, hearing Pizarro's plot, is agitated, but hopes to rescue Florestan (\"Abscheulicher! Wo eilst du hin?\" and\" Komm, Hoffnung, lass den letzten Stern\"\u2014\"Monster! Where are you off to so fast?\" and \"Come, hope, let the last star\").\nJaquino once again begs Marzelline to marry him, but she continues to refuse. Fidelio, hoping to discover Florestan, asks Rocco to let the poor prisoners roam in the garden and enjoy the beautiful weather. Marzelline similarly begs him, and Rocco agrees to distract Pizarro while the prisoners are set free. The prisoners, ecstatic at their temporary freedom, sing joyfully (\"O welche Lust\"\u2014\"O what a joy\"), but remembering that they might be caught by the prison's governor Pizarro, are soon quiet.\nAfter meeting with Pizarro, Rocco reenters and tells Fidelio that Pizarro will allow the marriage, and Fidelio will also be permitted to join Rocco on his rounds in the dungeon (\"Nun sprecht, wie ging's?\"\u2014\"Speak, how did it go?\"). Rocco and Fidelio prepare to go to Florestan's cell, with the knowledge that he must be killed and buried within the hour. Fidelio is shaken; Rocco tries to discourage Fidelio from coming, but Fidelio insists. As they prepare to leave, Jaquino and Marzelline rush in and tell Rocco to run, as Pizarro has learned that the prisoners have been allowed to roam, and is furious (\"Ach, Vater, Vater, eilt!\"\u2014\"O, father, father, hurry!\").\nBefore they can leave, Pizarro enters and demands an explanation. Rocco, thinking quickly, answers that the prisoners were given a little freedom in honor of the Spanish king's name day, and quietly suggests that Pizarro should save his anger for the prisoner in the dungeon below. Pizarro tells him to hurry and dig the grave, and then announces that the prisoners will be locked up again. Rocco, Leonore, Jacquino, and Marzelline reluctantly usher the prisoners back to their cells (\"Leb wohl, du warmes Sonnenlicht\"\u2014\"Farewell, you warm sunshine\").\nAct 2.\nFlorestan is alone in his cell, deep inside the dungeons. He sings first of his trust in God, and then has a vision of his wife Leonore coming to save him (\"Gott! Welch Dunkel hier!\"\u2014\"God! What darkness here\" and \"In des Lebens Fr\u00fchlingstagen\"\u2014\"In the spring days of life\"). Florestan collapses and falls asleep, while Rocco and Fidelio come to dig his grave. As they dig, Rocco urges Fidelio to hurry (\"Wie kalt ist es in diesem unterirdischen Gew\u00f6lbe!\"\u2014\"How cold it is in this underground chamber\" and \"Nur hurtig fort, nur frisch gegraben\"\u2014\"Come get to work and dig\", the \"Gravedigging Duet\").\nFlorestan awakes and Fidelio recognizes him. When Florestan learns that the prison he is in belongs to Pizarro, he asks that a message be sent to his wife, Leonore, but Rocco says that it is impossible. Florestan begs for a drop to drink, and Rocco tells Fidelio to give him one. Florestan does not recognize Fidelio, his wife Leonore in disguise, but tells Fidelio that there will be reward for the good deed in Heaven (\"Euch werde Lohn in bessern Welten\"\u2014\"You shall be rewarded in better worlds\"). Fidelio further begs Rocco to be allowed to give Florestan a crust of bread, and Rocco consents.\nRocco obeys his orders and sounds the alarm for Pizarro, who appears and asks if all is ready. Rocco says that it is, and instructs Fidelio to leave the dungeon, but Fidelio hides instead. Pizarro reveals his identity to Florestan, who accuses him of murder (\"Er sterbe! Doch er soll erst wissen\"\u2014\"Let him die! But first he should know\"). As Pizarro brandishes a dagger, Fidelio leaps between him and Florestan and reveals her identity as Leonore, the wife of Florestan. Pizarro raises his dagger to kill her, but she pulls a gun and threatens to shoot him.\nJust then, the trumpet is heard, announcing the arrival of the minister. Jaquino enters, followed by soldiers, to announce that the minister is waiting at the gate. Rocco tells the soldiers to escort Governor Pizarro upstairs. Florestan and Leonore sing to their victory as Pizarro declares that he will have revenge, while Rocco expresses his fear of what is to come (\"Es schl\u00e4gt der Rache Stunde\"\u2014\"Revenge's bell tolls\"). Together, Florestan and Leonore sing a love duet (\"O namenlose Freude!\"\u2014\"O unnamed joy!\").\nHere, the overture \"Leonore No. 3\" is sometimes played.\nThe prisoners and townsfolk sing to the day and hour of justice which has come (\"Heil sei dem Tag!\"\u2014\"Hail to the day!\"). The minister, Don Fernando, announces that tyranny has ended. Rocco enters, with Leonore and Florestan, and he asks Don Fernando to help them (\"Wohlan, so helfet! Helft den Armen!\"\u2014\"So help! Help the poor ones!\"). Rocco explains how Leonore disguised herself as Fidelio to save her husband. Previously in love with Fidelio, Marzelline is shocked. Rocco describes Pizarro's murder plot, and Pizarro is led away to prison. Florestan is released from his chains by Leonore, and the crowd sings the praises of Leonore, the loyal savior of her husband (\"Wer ein holdes Weib errungen\"\u2014\"Who has got a good wife\").\nInstrumentation.\nThe orchestra consists of 1 piccolo, 2 flutes, 2 oboes, 2 clarinets, 2 bassoons, contrabassoon, 4 horns, 2 trumpets, 2 trombones, timpani, and strings. There is also an offstage trumpet.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38476", "revid": "25708940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38476", "title": "Franche-Comt\u00e9", "text": "Franche-Comt\u00e9 (, ; ) is a cultural and historical region of northeastern France. It is composed of the modern departments of Doubs, Jura, Haute-Sa\u00f4ne and the Territoire de Belfort. In 2021, its population was 1,179,601.\nFrom 1956 to 2015, the Franche-Comt\u00e9 was a French administrative region. Since 1 January 2016, it has been part of the new region Bourgogne-Franche-Comt\u00e9.\nThe region is named after the \"\" (Free County of Burgundy), definitively separated from the region of Burgundy proper in the fifteenth century. In 2016, these two-halves of the historic Kingdom of Burgundy were reunited, as the region of Bourgogne-Franche-Comt\u00e9. It is also the 6th biggest region in France. The name \"Franche-Comt\u00e9\" is feminine because the word \"comt\u00e9\" in the past was generally feminine, although today it is masculine.\nThe principal cities are the capital Besan\u00e7on, Belfort and Montb\u00e9liard. Other important cities are Dole (the capital before the region was conquered by Louis XIV in the late seventeenth century), Vesoul (capital of Haute-Sa\u00f4ne), Arbois (the \"wine capital\" of the Jura), and Lons-le-Saunier (the capital of Jura).\nHistory.\nThe region has been inhabited since the Paleolithic age and was occupied by the Gauls. It was then heavily settled by Germanic peoples during the Germanic migrations, most notably the Burgundians, who settled in the region after the Gauls had vacated the area. Later, it was part of the territory of the Alemanni in the fifth century, then the Kingdom of Burgundy from 457 to 534. The Burgundians adopted Chalcedonian Christianity, Christianizing the region. In 534, it became part of the Frankish kingdom. In 561 it was included in the Merovingian Kingdom of Burgundy under Guntram, the third son of Clotaire I. In 613, Clotaire II reunited the Frankish Kingdom under his rule, and the region remained a part of the Kingdom of Burgundy under the later Merovingians and Carolingians.\nFree County of Burgundy.\nUnder the Treaty of Verdun (843), all north-western regions of Carolingian Burgundy were designated to West Francia, while the rest of Burgundy went to Middle Francia. By the end of the 9th century, the West-Frankish part was organized as the Duchy of Burgundy, while eastern regions belonged to the Kingdom of Burgundy, that was gradually divided into several feudal polities. One of them, encompassing much of the Upper Burgundy, became known as the County of Burgundy, and since 1032 it belonged to the Holy Roman Empire. The name \"Free County of Burgundy\" (; ) did not appear officially until 1366. \nThe \"Free County\" () was acquired by John the Fearless, Duke of Burgundy, thus placing the Free County under the same feudal lord as the Duchy. They were separated again by the end of the 15th century, since duke and count Charles the Bold died in 1477 without sons, and his cousin King Louis XI consequently failed to secure all of Burgundy, ceding the Free County to Philip of Austria by the Treaty of Senlis in 1493. In 1506, Philip was succeeded by his son Charles, the future king of Spain (1516) and the Holy Roman Emperor (1519). All of his Burgundian domains, including the Free County were later passed to his son Philip II of Spain, thus solidifying the political ties between Habsburg domains in Burgundy and the Habsburg Spain. Although ruled by Spanish Habsburgs, the Free County was never annexed into the Kingdom of Spain, and thus remained a domain within the Holy Roman Empire.\nIn 1598, king Philip II of Spain ceded the Free County of Burgundy, together wit the Spanish Netherlands, to his daughter Isabella Clara Eugenia, who ruled those lands as a sovereign monarch, jointly with her husband Archduke Albert VII of Austria. After Albert's death in 1621, all of those regions, including the Free County of Burgundy, were returned to the Spanish Habsburgs, but highly respected princess Isabella was left to rule as governess until her death in 1633, under the sovereignty of her cousin, king Philip IV of Spain.\nDuring the War of Devolution (1667-1668), the region of Franche-Comt\u00e9 was occupied by the French Royal Army, but it was soon returned to Spanish Habsburgs under the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, that was signed on 2 May 1668. \nDuring the War of the Quadruple Alliance (1673-1678), the region was again captured by the French in 1674, this time permanently, since it was officially ceded to France by the Treaty of Nijmegen (1678), thus leaving the Holy Roman Empire, and also ending the Habsburg period in the history of Franche-Comt\u00e9.\nProvince of the Kingdom of France.\nFrance officially annexed the region of Franche-Comt\u00e9 in 1678, but minor enclaves such as Montb\u00e9liard remained outside French control.\nThe Franche-Comt\u00e9 was one of the last parts of France to have serfdom. In 1784, half of the population consisted of serfs, accounting for 400,000 out of the 1\u00a0million French serfs. Landowners took one-twelfth of the sale's price if a serf (\"mainmortable\") wanted to sell up. Serfs were not forced to stay on the land, but the lord could claim \"droit de suite\", whereby a peasant who died away from his holding left it to the lord, even if he had heirs. A runaway serf's land was forfeit after ten years. Louis XVI issued a decree banning these practices on 8 August 1779, but the Parlement of Besan\u00e7on blocked this until 1787.\nAfter 1790.\nThe population of the region fell by a fifth from 1851 to 1946, reflecting low French natural growth and migration to more urbanized parts of the country. Most of the decline occurred in Haute-Sa\u00f4ne and Jura, which remain among the country's more agriculture-dependent areas.\nEnvironment.\nThis region borders Switzerland and shares much of its architecture, cuisine, and culture with its neighbour. Between the Vosges range of mountains to the north and the Jura range to the south, the landscape consists of rolling cultivated fields, dense pine forest, and rampart-like mountains. Not so majestic as the Alps, the Jura mountains are more accessible and are France's first cross-country skiing area. It is also a superb place to hike, and there are some fine nature trails on the more gentle slopes. The Doubs and Loue valleys, with their timbered houses perched on stilts in the river, and the high valley of Ain, are popular visitor areas. The \"\" is a land of gorges and waterfalls dotted with tiny villages, each with a domed belfry decorated with mosaic of tiles or slates or beaten from metal. The lakes are perfect for swimming in the warmer months. The summits of Haut Jura have wonderful views across (Lake Geneva) and toward the Alps.\nForty percent of the region's GDP is dependent on manufacturing activities, and most of its production is exported. Construction of automobiles and their parts is one of the most buoyant industries there. Forestry exploitation is steadily growing, and 38% of the agriculture is dairy and 17% cattle farming. The region has a large and lucrative cheese-making industry, with 40\u00a0million tonnes of cheese produced here each year, much of which is made by \"fruiti\u00e8res\" (traditional cheese dairies of Franche-Comt\u00e9); for instance, Comt\u00e9 cheese comes from this region.\nLanguage.\nAmong the regional languages of France, the term \"Franc-comtois\" refers to two dialects of two different languages. Franc-comtois is the name of the dialect of Langue d'O\u00efl spoken by people in the northern part of the region. The dialect of Arpitan has been spoken in its southern part since as early as the thirteenth century (the southern two-thirds of Jura and the southern third of Doubs). Both are recognized as languages of France.\nEducation.\n215,178 students were in school in Franche-Comt\u00e9 at the start of the 2018 school year. The region has potential in the research sector. We find in Besan\u00e7on the National School of Mechanics and Microtechnology (ENSMM) or the UTBM, the University of Technology of Belfort-Montb\u00e9liard in Belfort and Montb\u00e9liard.\nThe University of Franche-Comt\u00e9 is mainly located in Besan\u00e7on. It has 24,000 students spread over six training and research areas (UFR), including five in Besan\u00e7on and one in Belfort and Montb\u00e9liard, two university institutes of technology (IUT) (Besan\u00e7on-Vesoul and Nord Franche-Comt\u00e9), 920 students engineers at ENSMM and 2,550 students at UTBM.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38477", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38477", "title": "Singer Corporation", "text": "American manufacturer of sewing machines\nSinger Corporation is an American manufacturer of consumer sewing machines, first established as I. M. Singer &amp; Co. in 1851 by Isaac M. Singer with New York lawyer Edward C. Clark. Best known for its sewing machines, it was renamed Singer Manufacturing Company in 1865, then the Singer Company in 1963. The global headquarters are based in Nashville, Tennessee. Its first large factory for mass production was built in 1863 in Elizabeth, New Jersey.\nHistory.\nSinger's original design was the first practical sewing machine for general domestic use. It incorporated the basic eye-pointed needle and lock stitch, developed by Elias Howe, who won a patent-infringement suit against Singer in 1854.\nSinger obtained https:// in August 1851 for an improved sewing machine that included a circular feed wheel, thread controller, and power transmitted by gear wheels and shafting.\nSinger consolidated enough patents in the field to enable him to engage in mass production, and by 1860 his company was the largest manufacturer of sewing machines in the world. \nIn 1885, Singer built a new works at Kilbowie (designed by Robert Ewan) which produced its first \"vibrating shuttle\" sewing machine, an improvement over contemporary transverse shuttle designs (see bobbin drivers). The Singer company began to market its machines internationally in 1855 and won first prize at the Paris World's Fair that year. The company demonstrated the first workable electric sewing machine in 1910. Singer was also a marketing innovator and a pioneer in promoting the use of installment payment plans.\nEarly sales figures.\nBy 1876, Singer was claiming cumulative sales of two million sewing machines and had put the two millionth machine on display in Philadelphia.\nSinger in Scotland.\nIn 1867, the Singer Company decided that the demand for their sewing machines in the United Kingdom was sufficiently high to open a local factory in Glasgow on John Street. The Vice President of Singer, George Ross McKenzie selected Glasgow because of its iron making industries, cheap labour, and shipping capabilities. Demand for sewing machines outstripped production at the new plant and by 1873, a new larger factory was completed on James Street, Bridgeton. By that point, Singer employed over 2,000 people in Scotland, but they still could not produce enough machines.\nIn 1882, McKenzie, by then President-elect of the Singer Manufacturing Company, undertook the ground breaking ceremony on of farmland at Kilbowie, Clydebank. Originally, two main buildings were constructed, each long, wide and three storeys high. These were connected by three wings. Built above the middle wing was a tall clock tower with the \"Singer\" name clearly displayed for all to see for miles around. A total of of railway lines were laid throughout the factory to connect the different departments such as the boiler room, foundry, shipping and the lines to main railway stations. Sir Robert McAlpine was the building contractor and the factory was designed to be fire proof with water sprinklers, making it the most modern factory in Europe at that time.\nWith nearly a million square feet of space and almost 7,000 employees, it was possible to produce on average 13,000 machines a week, making it the largest sewing machine factory in the world. The Clydebank factory was so productive that in 1905, the U.S. Singer Company set up and registered the Singer Manufacturing Company Ltd. in the United Kingdom. Demand continued to exceed production, so each building was extended upwards to 6 storeys high. A railway station with the company name was established in 1907 with connections to adjoining towns and central Glasgow to assist in transporting the workforce to the facility. Increased productivity came from 'scientific management' techniques which increased workloads whilst keeping salary overheads low, and in 1911, a mass walk out of 10,000 workers, the 'Singer Strike', took place in support of twelve women polishers, who had seen three staff dismissed, but the workload remained the same with no extra pay. It was significant in its recognition of the rights of women workers and 'collective bargaining' and predated the labour movement known as 'Red Clydeside'. A centenary film was made by the BBC about the female workers who stood up to the American management.\nIn the First World War, sewing machine production gave way to munitions. The Singer Clydebank factory received over 5000 government contracts, and made 303 million artillery shells, shell components, fuses, and aeroplane parts, as well as grenades, rifle parts, and 361,000 horseshoes. Its labour force of 14,000 was about 70% female at war's end.\nFrom its opening in 1884 until 1943, the Kilbowie factory produced approximately 36,000,000 sewing machines. Singer was the world leader and sold more machines than all the other makers added together. In 1913, the factory shipped 1.3 million machines. The late 1950s and 1960s saw a period of significant change at the Clydebank factory. In 1958, Singer reduced production at their main American plant and transferred 40% of this production to the Clydebank factory in a bid to reduce costs. Between 1961 and 1964, the Clydebank factory underwent a \u00a34 million modernisation programme which saw the Clydebank factory cease the production of cast iron machines and focus on the production of aluminium machines for western markets. As part of this modernisation programme, the famous Singer Clock was demolished in 1963. At the height of its productiveness in the mid-1960s, Singer employed over 16,000 workers but by the end of that decade, compulsory redundancies were taking place and 10 years later the workforce was down to 5,000. Financial problems and lack of orders forced the world's largest sewing machine factory to close in June 1980, bringing to an end over 100 years of sewing machine production in Scotland. The complex of buildings was demolished in 1998.\nAn archive about the factory, the strike and the history of its business in Scotland, is regarded as a recognised collection of national significance by Museums Galleries Scotland.\nMarketing before the World Wars.\nThe Singer sewing machine was the first complex standardised technology to be mass marketed. It was not the first sewing machine, and its patent in 1851 led to a patent battle with Elias Howe, inventor of the lockstitch machine. This eventually resulted in a patent sharing accord among the major firms. Marketing strategies included focusing on the manufacturing industry, gender identity, credit plans, and \"hire purchases.\"\nSinger's marketing emphasized the role of women and their relationship to the home, evoking ideals of virtue, modesty, and diligence. Though the sewing machine represented liberation from arduous hand sewing, it chiefly benefited those sewing for their families and themselves. Tradespeople relying on sewing as a livelihood still suffered from poor wages, which dropped further in response to the time savings gained by machine sewing. Singer offered credit purchases and rent-to-own arrangements, allowing people to rent a machine with the rental payments applied to the eventual purchase of the machine, and sold globally through the use of direct-sales door-to-door canvassers to demonstrate and sell the machines.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, the company suspended sewing machine production to take on government contracts for weapons manufacturing. Factories in the United States supplied the American forces with Norden bomb sights and M1 Carbine rifle receivers, while factories in Germany provided their armed forces with weapons.\nIn 1939, the company was given a production study by the government to draw plans and develop standard raw material sizes for building M1911A1 pistols. The following April 17, Singer was given an educational order of 500 units with serial numbers S800001 \u2013 S800500. The educational order was a programme set up by the Ordnance Board in the U.S. to teach companies without gun-making experience to manufacture weapons.\nSinger delivered 500 units to the U.S. government. Although Singer was unable to produce 100 guns a day, which the government contract required, the War Department was impressed with the quality of their pistols and asked the company to produce navigation and targeting equipment components. The pistol tooling and manufacturing machines were transferred to Remington Rand whilst some went to the Ithaca Gun Company. Approximately 1.75 million 1911A1 pistols were produced during World War II, making original Singer pistols relatively rare and collectable. In 2017, one sold at auction for $414,000.\nIn December 1940, Singer won a contract to produce the M5 Antiaircraft Director, a version of the UK-designed Kerrison Predictor. The US Army had previously adopted the M7 Computing Sight for their 37 mm gun M1 anti-aircraft guns, but the gun proved temperamental and Sperry Corporation was too busy producing other systems to build the required number of M7's. After testing in September 1940, the Army accepted the Kerrison as the M5, and later, the Bofors 40 mm gun in place of the M1.\nPost-war.\nSinger resumed developing sewing machines in 1946. They introduced one of their most popular, highest-quality and fully-optioned machines in 1957, the 401 Slant-o-Matic.\nIn the late 1960s and early 1970s, Singer sponsored rock and roll concerts to help advertise a variety of products including a line of Singer record players. The 1971 concert series was broadcast by WPLJ New York from the A&amp;R Recording Studios and included the Paul Butterfield Blues Band, Seatrain, Procol Harum, Incredible String Band, Mother Earth, and Delaney &amp; Bonnie and Friends. In 1968, Singer sponsored \"Singer Presents ... Elvis\", commonly referred to as the '68 Comeback Special.\nDiversification.\nSales and profits grew until the 1940s. The market was affected in several ways. The US market matured after WWII. European and Japanese manufacturers ate into the market with zig-zag sewing machines. Under the leadership of Donald P. Kircher, Singer diversified into markets such as office equipment, defense, and aerospace. While 90% of Singer's revenue was from sewing machines before diversification, this was reduced to 35% after the change.\nIn the 1960s, the company diversified, acquiring the Friden calculator company in 1965 and General Precision Equipment Corporation in 1968. GPE included Librascope, The Kearfott Company, Inc, and Link Flight Simulation. In 1968 also, Singer bought out GPS Systems and added it to the Link Simulations Systems Division (LSSD). This unit produced nuclear power plant control room simulators in Silver Spring, Maryland: Tech Road building for Boiling Water Reactor (BWR), Parkway building for Pressurized Water Reactor (PWR) and later moved to Broken Land Parkway in Columbia, Maryland while flight simulators were produced in Binghamton, New York.\nFriden became \"Singer Business Machines\" which produced the Singer System 10. In January 1976, Singer announced its withdrawal from the data processing market, offering the division to other companies. In March 1976, TRW Inc. and Singer announced an agreement whereby TRW would assume \"managerial responsibilities\" for Singer's System 10 and point-of-sale products, perceived as a way for TRW to expand its market presence. Maintenance and customer support for Singer's products were transferred to TRW, accompanied by a pledge for TRW to continue manufacturing at Singer's Cogar facility in Utica, New York. Concurrently with these arrangements, ICL assumed the corresponding \"management responsibilities\" to Singer's international operations and acquired the rights to products marketed internationally, including the System 10. ICL would later acquire the Cogar subsidiary and its manufacturing facility, continuing to manufacture the System 10 for its own customers. Despite Singer's original announcement, its international operations continued to win orders and show signs of profitability. As some existing Singer customers contemplated legal action against the company for failing to fulfil its obligations, ICL sought to expand its US presence, attracting new business for both its own products as well as those acquired from Singer.\nBy 1971 Singer was also producing portable/home audio/visual equipment. In order to support this venture, Singer sponsored concerts such as the 1971 A&amp;R Studio concerts on WPLJ-New York mentioned above.\nFor several years in the 1970s, Singer set up a national sales force for CAT phototypesetting machines (of UNIX troff fame) made by another Massachusetts company, Graphic Systems Inc. This division was purchased by Wang Laboratories in 1978.\nLate 20th and early 21st centuries.\nIn 1978 Singer moved its HQ from Rockefeller Plaza to Stamford, Connecticut. 430 jobs were moved to the new location.\nDuring the 1980s Singer sewing machine markets were being hit with Japanese machines and European brands including Bernina, Pfaff, and Viking. In 1986 Singer purchased Dalmo Victor for $174m from Textron, It would subsequently be resold in 1989 for $175m in cash to General Instrument. The original Singer company announced in July 1986 that it would be spinning off its sewing machine business under the name SSMC Ltd.\nIn 1987, corporate raider Paul Bilzerian made a \"greenmail\" run at Singer, and ended up owning the company when no \"white knight\" rescuer appeared. To recover his money, Bilzerian sold off parts of the company. Kearfott was split. The Kearfott Guidance &amp; Navigation Corporation was sold to the Astronautics Corporation of America in 1988, and the Electronic Systems Division was purchased by the Plessey Company in 1988 and renamed Plessey Electronic Systems (and then acquired by GEC-Marconi in 1990, renamed GEC-Marconi Electronic Systems, and later incorporated into BAE Systems). The four Link divisions developing and supporting industrial and flight simulation were sold to Canadian Avionics Electronics (CAE) and became CAE-Link. The nuclear power simulator division became S3 Technologies, and later GSE Systems, and relocated to Eldersburg, Maryland. The Sewing Machine Division was sold in 1989 to Semi-Tech Microelectronics, a publicly traded Toronto-based company.\nIn 1989 Semi-Tech Global purchased SSMC along with the rights to the Singer name, allowing for the renaming of SSMC back to Singer. As a result the former Singer Corporation was renamed to Bicoastal Corporation. Semi-Tech Global incorporated Singer (former SSMC Ltd.) into Singer N.V., based in the Netherlands Antilles, owned by the Hong Kong holding company.\nSinger N.V. filed for bankruptcy in 1999, and was acquired by Kohlberg &amp; Company. In 1997, Singer (Singer N.V.) US operations moved its consumer products to LaVergne, Tennessee. This location also served its wholesale distribution of sewing machines and parts. In 2006 the parent company of Singer, Kohlberg &amp; Company, acquired the Husqvarna and Pfaff brands. This merged the three brands into the current company, the SVP Group. Its main competitors are Baby Lock, Bernina, Brother, Janome, Juki and Aisin Seiki.\nIn 2017, the company launched their new Singer Sewing Assistant App. \nIn 2018, a large factory fire destroyed a Singer distribution office and warehouse in Seven Hills, Sydney. Singer had manufactured sewing machines in Australia at a purpose-built plant in the western Sydney suburb of Penrith, from 1959 until 1967.\nSinger buildings.\nSinger was heavily involved in Manhattan real estate in the 1800s through Edward C. Clark, a founder of the company. Clark had built The Dakota apartments and other Manhattan buildings in the 1880s. In 1900, the Singer company retained Ernest Flagg to build a 12-story loft building at Broadway and Prince Street in Lower Manhattan. The building is now considered architecturally notable, and it has been restored.\nThe 47-story Singer Building, completed in 1908, was also designed by Flagg, who designed two landmark residences for Bourne. Constructed during Bourne's tenure, the Singer Building (demolished in 1968 for the One Liberty Plaza development) was then the tallest building in the world and was the tallest building to be intentionally demolished until the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center were destroyed in the September 11 attacks.\nAt their Clydebank factory, Singer built a clock tower, which stood over the central wing and had the reputation of being the largest four-faced clock in the world. Each face weighed five tons, and it took four men fifteen minutes twice a week to keep it wound. The tower was demolished in 1963, and the factory itself was closed in 1980. Singer railway station, built to serve the factory, is only one of two railway stations in the UK named after a factory, and is still in operation today.\nThe famous Singer House, designed by architect Pavel Suzor, was built in 1902\u20131904 at Nevsky Prospekt in Saint Petersburg as headquarters of the Russian branch of the company. This modern style building (situated just opposite the Kazan Cathedral) is officially recognised as an object of Russian historical-cultural heritage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38481", "revid": "41412902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38481", "title": "Human voice", "text": "Sound made by a human being using the vocal tract\nThe human voice consists of sound made by a human being using the vocal tract, including talking, singing, laughing, crying, screaming, shouting, humming or yelling. The human voice is specifically a part of human sound production in which the vocal folds (vocal cords) are the primary sound source. (Other sound production mechanisms produced from the same general area of the body involve the production of unvoiced consonants, clicks, whistling and whispering.)\nGenerally speaking, the mechanism for generating the human voice can be subdivided into three parts; the lungs, the vocal folds within the larynx (voice box), and the articulators. The lungs, the \"pump\" must produce adequate airflow and air pressure to vibrate vocal folds. The vocal folds (vocal cords) then vibrate to use airflow from the lungs to create audible pulses that form the laryngeal sound source. The muscles of the larynx adjust the length and tension of the vocal folds to 'fine-tune' pitch and tone. The articulators (the parts of the vocal tract above the larynx consisting of tongue, palate, cheek, lips, etc.) articulate and filter the sound emanating from the larynx and to some degree can interact with the laryngeal airflow to strengthen or weaken it as a sound source.\nThe vocal folds, in combination with the articulators, are capable of producing highly intricate arrays of sound. The tone of voice may be modulated to suggest emotions such as anger, surprise, fear, happiness or sadness. The human voice is used to express emotion, and can also reveal the age and sex of the speaker. Singers use the human voice as an instrument for creating music.\nVoice types and the folds (cords) themselves.\nAdult men and women typically have different sizes of vocal fold; reflecting the male\u2013female differences in larynx size. Adult male voices are usually lower-pitched and have larger folds. The male vocal folds (which would be measured vertically in the opposite diagram), are between 17\u00a0mm and 25\u00a0mm in length. The female vocal folds are between 12.5\u00a0mm and 17.5\u00a0mm in length.\nThe folds are within the larynx. They are attached at the back (side nearest the spinal cord) to the \"arytenoids cartilages\", and at the front (side under the chin) to the thyroid cartilage. They have no outer edge as they blend into the side of the breathing tube (the illustration is out of date and does not show this well) while their inner edges or \"margins\" are free to vibrate (the hole). They have a three layer construction of an epithelium, vocal ligament, then muscle (vocalis muscle), which can shorten and bulge the folds. They are flat triangular bands and are pearly white in color. Above both sides of the vocal cord is the vestibular fold or \"false vocal cord\", which has a small sac between its two folds.\nThe difference in vocal fold size between men and women means that they have differently pitched voices. There is also genetic variation amongst the same sex, with men's and women's singing voices being categorized into types. For example, among men, there are bass, bass-baritone, baritone, baritenor, tenor and countertenor (ranging from E2 to E5 and higher), and among women, contralto, alto, mezzo-soprano and soprano (ranging from F3 to C6 and higher). There are additional categories for operatic voices, see voice type. This is not the only source of difference between male and female voice. Men, generally speaking, have a larger vocal tract, which essentially gives the resultant voice a lower-sounding timbre. This is mostly independent of the vocal folds themselves.\nVoice modulation in spoken language.\nHuman spoken language makes use of the ability of almost all people in a given society to dynamically modulate certain parameters of the laryngeal voice source in a consistent manner. The most important communicative, or phonetic, parameters are the voice pitch (determined by the vibratory frequency of the vocal folds) and the degree of separation of the vocal folds, referred to as vocal fold adduction (coming together) or abduction (separating).\nThe ability to vary the ab/adduction of the vocal folds quickly has a strong genetic component, since vocal fold adduction has a life-preserving function in keeping food from passing into the lungs, in addition to the covering action of the epiglottis. Consequently, the muscles that control this action are among the fastest in the body. Children can learn to use this action consistently during speech at an early age, as they learn to speak the difference between utterances such as \"apa\" (having an abductory\u2013adductory gesture for the p) as \"aba\" (having no abductory\u2013adductory gesture). They can learn to do this well before the age of two by listening only to the voices of adults around them who have voices much different from their own, and even though the laryngeal movements causing these phonetic differentiations are deep in the throat and not visible to them.\nIf an abductory movement or adductory movement is strong enough, the vibrations of the vocal folds will stop (or not start). If the gesture is abductory and is part of a speech sound, the sound will be called voiceless. However, voiceless speech sounds are sometimes better identified as containing an abductory gesture, even if the gesture was not strong enough to stop the vocal folds from vibrating. This anomalous feature of voiceless speech sounds is better understood if it is realized that it is the change in the spectral qualities of the voice as abduction proceeds that is the primary acoustic attribute that the listener attends to when identifying a voiceless speech sound, and not simply the presence or absence of voice (periodic energy).\nAn adductory gesture is also identified by the change in voice spectral energy it produces. Thus, a speech sound having an adductory gesture may be referred to as a \"glottal stop\" even if the vocal fold vibrations do not entirely stop.\nOther aspects of the voice, such as variations in the regularity of vibration, are also used for communication, and are important for the trained voice user to master, but are more rarely used in the formal phonetic code of a spoken language.\nPhysiology and vocal timbre.\nThe sound of each individual's voice is thought to be entirely unique not only because of the actual shape and size of an individual's vocal cords but also due to the size and shape of the rest of that person's body, especially the vocal tract, and the manner in which the speech sounds are habitually formed and articulated. (It is this latter aspect of the sound of the voice that can be mimicked by skilled performers.) Humans have vocal folds that can loosen, tighten, or change their thickness, and over which breath can be transferred at varying pressures. The shape of chest and neck, the position of the tongue, and the tightness of otherwise unrelated muscles can be altered. Any one of these actions results in a change in pitch, volume, timbre, or tone of the sound produced. Sound also resonates within different parts of the body, and an individual's size and bone structure can affect somewhat the sound produced by an individual.\nSingers can also learn to project sound in certain ways so that it resonates better within their vocal tract. This is known as vocal resonation. Another major influence on vocal sound and production is the function of the larynx, which people can manipulate in different ways to produce different sounds. These different kinds of laryngeal function are described as different kinds of vocal registers. The primary method for singers to accomplish this is through the use of the singer's formant, which has been shown to be a resonance added to the normal resonances of the vocal tract above the frequency range of most instruments and so enables the singer's voice to carry better over musical accompaniment.\nVocal registration.\nVocal registration refers to the system of vocal registers within the human voice. A register in the human voice is a particular series of tones, produced in the same vibratory pattern of the vocal folds, and possessing the same quality. Registers originate in \"laryngeal\" functioning. They occur because the vocal folds are capable of producing several different vibratory patterns. Each of these vibratory patterns appears within a particular \"Vocal range\" of pitches and produces certain characteristic sounds. The occurrence of registers has also been attributed to effects of the acoustic interaction between the vocal fold oscillation and the vocal tract. The term register can be somewhat confusing as it encompasses several aspects of the human voice. The term register can be used to refer to any of the following:\nIn linguistics, a register language is a language that combines tone and vowel phonation into a single phonological system.\nWithin speech pathology, the term vocal register has three constituent elements: a certain vibratory pattern of the vocal folds, a certain series of pitches, and a certain type of sound. Speech pathologists identify four vocal registers based on the physiology of laryngeal function: the vocal fry register, the modal register, the falsetto register, and the whistle register. This view is also adopted by many vocal pedagogists.\nVocal resonation.\nVocal resonation is the process by which the basic product of phonation is enhanced in timbre and/or intensity by the air-filled cavities through which it passes on its way to the outside air. Various terms related to the resonation process include amplification, enrichment, enlargement, improvement, intensification, and prolongation; although in strictly scientific usage acoustic authorities would question most of them. The main point to be drawn from these terms by a singer or speaker is that the result of resonation is, or should be, to make a better sound.\nThere are seven areas that may be listed as possible vocal resonators. In sequence from the lowest within the body to the highest, these areas are the chest, the tracheal tree, the larynx itself, the pharynx, the oral cavity, the nasal cavity, and the sinuses.\nInfluences of the human voice.\nThe twelve-tone musical scale, upon which a large portion of all music (western popular music in particular) is based, may have its roots in the sound of the human voice during the course of evolution, according to a 2021 study published in the Journal of Neuroscience. Analysis of recorded speech samples found peaks in acoustic energy that mirrored the distances between notes in the twelve-tone scale.\nVoice disorders.\nThere are many disorders that affect the human voice; these include speech impediments, and growths and lesions on the vocal folds. Talking improperly for long periods of time causes vocal loading, which is stress inflicted on the speech organs. When vocal injury is done, often an ENT specialist may be able to help, but the best treatment is the prevention of injuries through good vocal production. Voice therapy is generally delivered by a speech-language pathologist.\nVocal cord nodules and polyps.\nVocal nodules are caused over time by repeated abuse of the vocal cords which results in soft, swollen spots on each vocal cord. These spots develop into harder, callous-like growths called nodules. The longer the abuse occurs the larger and stiffer the nodules will become. Most polyps are larger than nodules and may be called by other names, such as polypoid degeneration or Reinke's edema. Polyps are caused by a single occurrence and may require surgical removal. Irritation after the removal may then lead to nodules if additional irritation persists. Speech-language therapy teaches the patient how to eliminate the irritations permanently through habit changes and vocal hygiene.\nHoarseness or breathiness that lasts for more than two weeks is a common symptom of an underlying voice disorder such as nodes or polyps and should be investigated medically.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38482", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38482", "title": "Mardi Gras", "text": "Holiday on the day before Ash Wednesday\nMardi Gras (, ; also known as Shrove Tuesday) is the final day of Carnival (also known as Shrovetide or Fastelavn); it thus falls on the day before the beginning of Lent on Ash Wednesday. is French for \"Fat Tuesday\", referring to it being the last day of consuming rich, fatty foods, most notably red meat, in preparation for the Christian fasting season of Lent, during which such foods are avoided.\nRelated popular practices are associated with Carnival celebrations before the fasting and religious obligations associated with the penitential season of Lent. In countries such as the United Kingdom, Mardi Gras is more usually known as Pancake Day or (traditionally) Shrove Tuesday, derived from the word \"shrive\", meaning \"to administer the sacrament of confession to; to absolve\".\nBackground.\nDuring the liturgical season of Lent, some Christians abstain from the consumption of certain foods such as meat, eggs, dairy products, and alcoholic beverages. Most Christian denominations observe the tradition of Lent; exceptions include many churches within the Anabaptist, Baptist, Methodist, and Reformed traditions. Shrovetide provided Christians with the opportunity to use up these foods prior to the start of the 40-day fasting season of Lent. \nPrior to the 6th century, Lent was normatively observed through the practice of the Black Fast, which enjoins fasting from food and liquids, with the allowance of one vegetarian meal and water after sunset. The tradition of pancake breakfasts during Shrovetide, as well as that of pancake races, owes itself to this practice of \"using up the surplus eggs, milk and butter\" prior to Lent. \nThe specific tradition of eating pancakes is said to have roots in Slavic paganism, with this practice being co-opted into Christian ritual. Specifically the pancake was said to symbolise the returning of the sun as spring approached.\nIn many Christian parish churches, both Protestant and Roman Catholic, a popular Shrove Tuesday tradition is the ringing of the church bells (on this day, the toll is known as the Shriving Bell) \"to call the faithful to confession before the solemn season of Lent\" and for people to \"begin frying their pancakes\". As such, a hallmark of Shrovetide is the opportunity for a last round of merrymaking associated with Mardis Gras before the start of the somber Lenten season. The last day of Shrovetide, Mardi Gras (Fat Tuesday), is named as such \"because people felt bloated having eaten up all the rich foods before Lent\" in order to prepare for the coming season of repentance.\nTraditions.\nThe festival season varies from city to city; Mardis Gras often refers to the last day of Shrovetide (or Fastelavn or Carnival), thus being synonymous with Shrove Tuesday. Some traditions, such as the one in New Orleans, Louisiana, consider Mardi Gras to stretch the entire period from Twelfth Night (the last night of Christmas which begins Epiphany) to Ash Wednesday.&lt;ref name=\"Wild/Dufour/Cowan (seas/New Orl.)\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Others treat the final three-day period before Ash Wednesday as the Mardi Gras.\nIn Mobile, Alabama, Mardi Gras\u2013associated social events begin in November, followed by mystic society balls New Year's Eve, followed by parades and balls in January and February, celebrating up to midnight before Ash Wednesday. In earlier times, parades were held on New Year's Day. Carnival (or Fastelavn or Shrovetide) is an important celebration in Lutheran, Anglican and Catholic European nations.\nBelgium.\nThe three-day Carnival of Binche, near Mons, is one of the best known in Belgium. It takes place around Shrove Tuesday (or Mardi Gras) just before Lent. Performers known as Gilles wear elaborate costumes in the national colours of red, black and yellow. During the parade, they throw oranges at the crowd. In 2003, it was recognized by UNESCO as one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.\nCzech Republic.\nIn the Czech Republic, it is a folk tradition to celebrate Mardi Gras, which is called Masopust (meat-fast, i.e. beginning of the fast there). There are celebrations in many places including Prague, but the tradition also prevails in villages such as Star\u00e9 Hamry, whose door-to-door processions made it to the UNESCO World Intangible Cultural Heritage List.\nGermany.\nThe celebration on the same day in Germany knows many different terms, depending on the region, such as Fastnacht, meaning the eve of the fast that takes place during Lent, or Veilchensdienstag (Violet Tuesday), as it is called in the Lower Rhine region. The celebrations often stretch from Epiphany, known in sections of Germany as Heilige Drei K\u00f6nige, through the night before Ash Wednesday, and is variously known by different names, such as Karneval or Fasching in Germany, Austria and German-speaking areas of Switzerland. It is also often referred to as the \"fifth season\", which traditionally begins with Hoppeditz Erwachen (the waking of Hoppeditz, the Fool who embodies the Karneval season) on 11 November at 11:11 AM (11/11 11:11). and ends with his comic funeral mass on Fastnacht.\nKarneval is filled with large banquets held by the various organizing societies and generally comes to a climax beginning on what is variously known as \"Schmutziger Donnerstag\" or \"Fetter Donnerstag\" (Fat Thursday), \"Unsinniger Donnerstag\" (Nonsense Thursday), \"Altweiberfastnacht\", \"Greesentag\" and others. In standard German, \"schmutzig\" means \"dirty\", but in the Alemannic dialects \"schmotzig\" means \"lard\" (Schmalz), or \"fat\"; thus \"Greasy Thursday\", as remaining winter stores of lard and butter used to be consumed at that time, before the fasting began. Altweiberfastnacht often featured women wearing men's clothing and assuming their roles. In many towns across the state of North Rhine Westphalia, a ritual \"takeover\" of the town halls by local women has become tradition.\nItaly.\nIn Italy Mardi Gras is called Marted\u00ec Grasso (Fat Tuesday). It is the main day of Carnival along with the Thursday before, called Gioved\u00ed Grasso (Fat Thursday), which ratifies the start of the celebrations. The most famous Carnivals in northern Italy are in Venice, Viareggio and Ivrea, while in the southern part of Italy the Sardinian Sartiglia and the intriguing apotropaic masks, especially the mamuthones, issohadores, s'urtzu (and so on), are more popular, belonging to a very ancient tradition. Ivrea has the characteristic \"Battle of Oranges\" that finds its roots in medieval times. The Italian version of the festival is spelled Carnevale.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden the celebration is called Fettisdagen, when fastlagsbulle is eaten, more commonly called Semla. The name comes from the words \"fett\" (fat) and \"tisdag\" (Tuesday). Originally, this was the only day one should eat fastlagsbullar.\nUnited Kingdom.\nSee Shrove Tuesday.\nUnited States.\nWhile not observed nationally throughout the United States, a number of historically ethnically French cities and regions in the country have notable celebrations. Mardi Gras arrived in North America as a French Catholic tradition with the Le Moyne brothers, Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville and Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville, in the late 17th century, when King Louis XIV sent the pair to defend France's claim on the territory of \"Louisiane\", which included what are now the U.S. states of Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana and part of eastern Texas.\nThe expedition, led by Iberville, entered the mouth of the Mississippi River on the evening of 2 March 1699 (new style), Lundi Gras. They did not yet know it was the river explored and claimed for France by Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle in 1683. The party proceeded upstream to a place on the east bank about downriver from where New Orleans is today, and made camp. This was on 3 March 1699, Mardi Gras, so in honour of this holiday, Iberville named the spot \"Point du Mardi Gras\" (French: \"Mardi Gras Point\") and called the nearby tributary Bayou Mardi Gras.\nBienville went on to found the settlement of Mobile (now in Alabama) in 1702 as the first capital of French Louisiana. In 1703 French settlers in Mobile established the first organised Mardi Gras celebration tradition in what was to become the United States. The first informal mystic society, or krewe, was formed in Mobile in 1711, the \"Boeuf Gras Society\". Then came the Striker's Independent Society in 1842, followed by the oldest parading mystic society the Order of Myths or \"OOMs\" in 1867.\nIn 1720, Biloxi had been made capital of Louisiana. The French Mardi Gras customs had accompanied the colonists who settled there.\nIn 1723, the capital of Louisiana was moved to New Orleans, founded in 1718. The first Mardi Gras parade held in New Orleans is recorded to have taken place in 1833 with Bernard de Marigny funding the first organized parade, tableau, and ball. The tradition in New Orleans expanded to the point that it became synonymous with the city in popular perception, and embraced by residents of New Orleans beyond those of French or Catholic heritage. Mardi Gras celebrations are part of the basis of the slogan \"Laissez les bons temps rouler\" (\"Let the good times roll\"), as floats \"roll\".\nFestivities formally began in 1853 when a group of Protestant Anglo-Americans, some members of Mobile Mystic Societies, formed the first \"old-line\" krewe, The Mistick Krewe of Comus, based on Bernard de Marigny's 1833 parade of paper-mached wagons, a formal tableau vivant and presentation of debutants, followed by a formal ball. The Twelfth Night Revelers were formed in 1870, again with ties to Mobile, but no longer stage a parade, just tableau and ball. The Knights of Momus and Rex came about in 1872, with the last of the old-line krewes the Krewe of Proteus being formed 10 years later. Of these 5 groups only Rex and Proteus still formally parade, with the Knights of Chaos replacing Momus.\nThe parades of the largest krewes (colloquially known as \"super krewes\") came later, during the 1960s/70's, and traditionally occur immediately prior to and on Shrove Tuesday, including those of Endymion (Saturday, which also culminates with a concert event at Caesars Superdome), Bacchus (Sunday), and Zulu and Rex (Tuesday).\nOther cities along the Gulf Coast with early French colonial heritage, from Pensacola, Florida, and Galveston, Texas, to Lake Charles and Lafayette, Louisiana, and north to Natchez, Mississippi, and Alexandria, Louisiana, have active Mardi Gras celebrations.\nGalveston's first recorded Mardi Gras celebration, in 1867, included a masked ball at Turner Hall (Sealy at 21st St.) and a theatrical performance from Shakespeare's \"King Henry IV\" featuring Alvan Reed (a justice of the peace weighing in at 350 pounds) as Falstaff. The first year that Mardi Gras was celebrated on a grand scale in Galveston was 1871 with the emergence of two rival Mardi Gras societies, or \"Krewes\" called the Knights of Momus (known only by the initials \"K.O.M.\") and the Knights of Myth, both of which devised night parades, masked balls, exquisite costumes and elaborate invitations. The Knights of Momus, led by some prominent Galvestonians, decorated horse-drawn wagons for a torch lit night parade. Boasting such themes as \"The Crusades\", \"Peter the Great\", and \"Ancient France\", the procession through downtown Galveston culminated at Turner Hall with a presentation of tableaux and a grand gala.\nIn the rural Acadiana area, many Cajuns celebrate with the \"Courir de Mardi Gras\", a tradition that dates to medieval celebrations in France.\nSt. Louis, Missouri, founded in 1764 by French fur traders, claims to host the second largest Mardi Gras celebration in the United States. The celebration is held in the historic French neighborhood, Soulard, and attracts hundreds of thousands of people from around the country. Although founded in the 1760s, the St. Louis Mardi Gras festivities only date to the 1980s. The city's celebration begins with \"12th night\", held on Epiphany, and ends on Fat Tuesday. The season is peppered with various parades celebrating the city's rich French Catholic heritage.\nCostumes.\nMardi Gras, as a celebration of life before the more-somber occasion of Ash Wednesday, nearly always involves the use of masks and costumes by its participants, and the most popular celebratory colors are purple, green, and gold. In New Orleans, for example, these often take the shape of fairies, animals, people from myths, or various Medieval costumes as well as clowns and Native Americans.\nExposure by women.\nAlthough the Church teaches that it is sinful and that it contravenes the Christian standards of modesty, the practice of some women exposing their breasts during Mardi Gras in New Orleans, US, has been documented since 1889, when the \"Times-Democrat\" decried the \"degree of immodesty exhibited by nearly all female masqueraders seen on the streets.\" The practice was mostly limited to tourists in the upper Bourbon Street area. In the crowded streets of the French Quarter, generally avoided by locals on Mardi Gras Day, flashers on balconies cause crowds to form on the streets.\nIn the last decades of the 20th century, the rise in producing commercial videotapes catering to voyeurs helped encourage a tradition of women baring their breasts in exchange for beads and trinkets. Social scientists studying \"ritual disrobement\" found, at Mardi Gras 1991, 1,200 instances of body-baring in exchange for beads or other favors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38483", "revid": "49679309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38483", "title": "Carnival", "text": "Christian festival before Lent\nCarnival (known as Shrovetide in certain localities) is a festive season that occurs at the close of the Christian pre-Lenten period, consisting of Quinquagesima or Shrove Sunday, Shrove Monday, and Shrove Tuesday or Mardi Gras.\nCarnival typically involves public celebrations, including events such as parades, public street parties and other entertainments, combining some elements of a circus. Elaborate costumes and masks allow people to set aside their everyday individuality and experience a heightened sense of social unity. Participants often indulge in excessive consumption of alcohol, meat, and other foods that will be forgone during upcoming Lent. Traditionally, butter, milk, and other animal products were not consumed \"excessively\", rather, their stock was fully consumed during Shrovetide as to reduce waste. This festival is known for being a time of great indulgence before Lent (which is a time stressing the opposite), with drinking, overeating, and various other activities of indulgence being performed. For example, pancakes, donuts, and other desserts are prepared and eaten for a final time. During Lent, dairy and animal products are eaten less, if at all, and individuals make a Lenten sacrifice, thus giving up a certain object of desire (e.g. sweets), with the money that would go to purchase what was sacrificed being donated at the church as alms for the poor.\nAs such, during the season of Shrovetide, it is customary for Christians to ponder what Lenten sacrifices they will make for the coming Lent. The traditions of carrying Shrovetide rods and consuming Shrovetide buns after attending church are celebrated. On the final day of the season, Shrove Tuesday, many traditional Christians, such as Lutherans, Anglicans, and Roman Catholics, \"make a special point of self-examination, of considering what wrongs they need to repent, and what amendments of life or areas of spiritual growth they especially need to ask God's help in dealing with.\" During Shrovetide, many churches place a basket in the narthex to collect the previous year's Holy Week palm branches that were blessed and distributed during the Palm Sunday liturgies. On Shrove Tuesday (the final day of Shrovetide), churches burn these palms to make the ashes used during the services held on the very next day, Ash Wednesday.\nThe term \"Carnival\" is traditionally used in areas with a large Catholic presence, as well as in Greece. The celebration is known as Fastelavn in historically Evangelical Lutheran countries. It is called Shrovetide in areas with a high concentration of Anglicans (Church of England/US Episcopal Church), Methodists, and other Protestants. In Slavic Eastern Orthodox nations, Maslenitsa is celebrated during the last week before Great Lent. In German-speaking Europe and the Netherlands, the Carnival season traditionally opens on 11/11 (often at 11:11\u00a0a.m.). This dates back to celebrations before the Advent season or with harvest celebrations of St. Martin's Day. \nEtymology.\nThe word \"carnival\" is said to come from the Late Latin expression , which means \"remove meat\"; a folk etymology derives it from , \"farewell to meat\". In either case, this signifies the approaching fast of Lent. The word may also be translated as flesh, producing \"a farewell to the flesh\", a phrase embraced by certain Carnival celebrants to embolden the festival's carefree spirit.\nOther scholars argue that the origin of the word is a common meat-based country feast (in Latin ) or the festival of the (\"ship of Isis\"), where the image of Isis was carried to the seashore to bless the start of sailing season. The festival consisted of a parade of masks following an adorned wooden boat, called in Latin , possibly the source of both the name and the parade floats.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe characteristics of the celebration of Carnival take their origins from ancient European festivals, such as the Greek Dionysian (the Anthesteria) or the Roman Saturnalia. During these festivities, there was a temporary release from social obligations and hierarchies to make way for the overthrow of order, joking and even debauchery. From a historical and religious point of view, the Carnival therefore represented a period of celebration, but above all of symbolic renewal, during which chaos replaced the established order, which, however, once the festive period was over, re-emerged new or renewed and guaranteed for a cycle valid until the beginning of the following Carnival.\nFrom an anthropological point of view, Carnival is a reversal ritual, in which social roles are reversed and norms about desired behavior are suspended. During antiquity, winter was thought of as the reign of the winter spirits; these needed to be driven out in order for summer to return. Carnival can thus be regarded as a rite of passage from darkness to light, from winter to summer: a fertility celebration, the first spring festival of the new year.\nSeveral Germanic tribes celebrated the returning of the daylight. Winter would be driven out, to make sure that fertility could return in spring. A central figure of this ritual was possibly the fertility goddess Nerthus. Also, there are some indications that the effigy of Nerthus or Freyr was placed on a ship with wheels and accompanied by a procession of people in animal disguise and men in women's clothes. Aboard the ship a marriage would be consummated as a fertility ritual.\nTacitus wrote in his \"Germania\": \"Germania 9.6: Ceterum nec cohibere parietibus deos neque in ullam humani oris speciem adsimulare ex magnitudine caelestium arbitrator\" \u2013 \"The Germans, however, do not consider it consistent with the grandeur of celestial beings to confine the gods within walls, or to liken them to the form of any human countenance.\" \u2013 \"Afterwards the car, the vestments, and, if you like to believe it, the divinity herself, are purified in a secret lake.\"\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the Middle Ages, Carnival referred to a period following Epiphany season that reached its climax before midnight on Shrove Tuesday. British historian John Bossy, in writing on the origin of the practices during Carnival, states that \"These were, despite some appearances, Christian in character, and they were medieval in origin: although it has been widely supposed that they continued some kind of pre-Christian cult, there is in fact no evidence that they existed much before 1200.\" Because Lent was a period of fasting, \"Carnival therefore represented a last period of feasting and celebration before the spiritual rigors of Lent.\" Meat was plentiful during this part of the Christian calendar and it was consumed during Carnival as people abstained from meat consumption during the following liturgical season, Lent. During Carnival, also known as Shrovetide, people confessed (shrived) their sins in preparation for Lent as well. Shakespeare's 1601 play, \"The Merchant of Venice\", Scene 5 of Act 2, mentions Christians who painted their faces to celebrate the season: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTraditionally, a Carnival feast was the last opportunity for common people to eat well, as there was typically a food shortage at the end of the winter as stores ran out. Until spring produce was available, people were limited to the minimum necessary meals during this period. On what nowadays is called \"vastenavond\" (the days before fasting), all the remaining winter stores of lard, butter, and meat which were left would be eaten, for these would otherwise soon start to rot and decay. The selected livestock had already been slaughtered in November and the meat would no longer be preservable. All the food that had survived the winter had to be eaten to assure that everyone was fed enough to survive until the coming spring would provide new food sources.\nTraditionally, the feast also was a time to indulge in sexual desires, which were supposed to be suppressed during the following period fasting. Before Lent began, all rich food and drink were consumed in what became a giant celebration that involved the whole community, and is thought to be the origin of Carnival.\nIn many Christian sermons and texts, the example of a vessel is used to explain Christian doctrine: \"the nave of the church of baptism\", \"the ship of Mary\", etc. The writings show that processions with ship-like carts were held and lavish feasts were celebrated on the eve of Lent or the greeting of spring in the early Middle Ages.\nThe Lenten period of the liturgical calendar, the six weeks directly before Easter, was historically marked by fasting, study, and other pious or penitential practices. During Lent, no parties or celebrations were held, and people refrained from eating rich foods, such as meat, dairy, fat, and sugar. The first three classes were often totally unavailable during this period because of late winter shortages.\nWhile Christian festivals such as Corpus Christi were Church-sanctioned celebrations, Carnival was also a manifestation of European folk culture. In the Christian tradition, fasting is to commemorate the 40 days that Jesus fasted in the desert, according to the New Testament, and also to reflect on Christian values. It was a time for catechumens (those converting to Christianity) to prepare for baptism at Easter.\nCarnival in the Middle Ages took not just a few days, but almost the entire period between Christmas and the beginning of Lent. In those two months, Christian populations used their several holidays as an outlet for their daily frustrations.\nMany synods and councils attempted to set things \"right\". Caesarius of Arles (470\u2013542) protested around 500 CE in his sermons against the pagan practices. Centuries later, his statements were adapted as the building blocks of the \"Indiculus superstitionum et paganiarum\" (\"small index of superstitious and pagan practices\"), which was drafted by the Synod of Leptines in 742. It condemned the \"Spurcalibus en februario\".\nPope Gregory the Great (590\u2013604) decided that fasting would start on Ash Wednesday. The whole Carnival event was set before the fasting, to set a clear division between celebrations and penitence. He also dispatched missionaries to sanctify any excesses in popular Carnival customs. It was also the custom during Carnival that the ruling class would be playfully mocked using masks and disguises.\nIn the year 743, the synod in Leptines (located near Binche in Belgium) spoke out furiously against the excesses in the month of February. Also from the same period dates the phrase: \"Whoever in February by a variety of less honorable acts tries to drive out winter is not a Christian, but a pagan.\" Confession books from around 800 contain more information about how people would dress as an animal or old woman during the festivities in January and February, even though this was a sin with no small penance. Also in Spain in the seventh century, San Isidoro de Sevilla complained in his writings about people coming out into the streets disguised, in many cases, as the opposite sex.\nDevelopment.\nGradually, ecclesiastical authority began to realize that the desired result could not be achieved by banning Carnivals, which eventually led to a degree of Christianization of the traditions. They then became part of the liturgy and the liturgical year. In the Middle Ages, \"Carnival and Lent were both necessary, inevitable episodes in the eternal cycle of the Church year.\" While forming an integral part of the Christian calendar, particularly in Catholic regions, many Carnival traditions resemble those antedating Christianity.\nWhile medieval pageants and festivals such as Corpus Christi were church-sanctioned, Carnival was also a manifestation of medieval folk culture. Many local Carnival customs are claimed to derive from local pre-Christian rituals, such as elaborate rites involving masked figures in the Swabian-Alemannic Fastnacht. However, evidence is insufficient to establish a direct origin from Saturnalia or other ancient festivals. No complete accounts of Saturnalia survive, and the shared features of feasting, role reversals, temporary social equality, masks, and permitted rule-breaking do not necessarily constitute a coherent festival or link these festivals. These similarities may represent a reservoir of cultural resources that can embody multiple meanings and functions. For example, Easter begins with the resurrection of Jesus, followed by a liminal period, and ends with rebirth. Carnival reverses this as King Carnival comes to life, and a liminal period follows before his death. Both feasts are calculated by the lunar calendar. Both Jesus and King Carnival may be seen as expiatory figures who make a gift to the people with their deaths. In the case of Jesus, the gift is eternal life in heaven, and in the case of King Carnival, the acknowledgement that death is a necessary part of the cycle of life. Besides Christian anti-Judaism, the commonalities between church and Carnival rituals and imagery suggest a common root. In early Christianity, Christ is figured as the victim of summary judgment, and is tortured and executed by Romans before a Jewish mob (\"His blood is on us and on our children!\" ).\nHoly Week processions in Spain include crowds who vociferously insult the figure of Jesus. Irreverence, parody, degradation, and laughter at a tragicomic effigy of God can be seen as intensifications of the sacred order. In 1466, in festivities sponsored by Pope Paul II, Jews were forced to race naked through the streets of the city of Rome. Clement IX stopped these practices and in their place assessed a heavy tax on the Jews to help pay for the costs of the city's Carnival celebrations.\nSome of the best-known traditions, including carnal parades and masquerade balls, were first recorded in medieval Italy. The Carnival of Venice was, for a long time, the most famous Carnival (although Napoleon abolished it in 1797 and only in 1979 was the tradition restored). From Italy, Carnival traditions spread to Spain, Portugal, and France, and from France to New France in North America. From Spain and Portugal, it spread with colonization to the Caribbean and Latin America. In the early 19th century in the German Rhineland and Southern Netherlands, the weakened medieval tradition also revived. Continuously in the 18th and 19th centuries CE, as part of the annual abuse of the Carnival in Rome, rabbis of the ghetto were forced to march through the city streets wearing foolish guise, jeered upon and pelted by a variety of missiles from the crowd. A petition of the Jewish community of Rome sent in 1836 to Pope Gregory XVI to stop the annual abuse was denied: \"It is not opportune to make any innovation.\"\nIn the Rhineland in 1823, the first modern Carnival parade took place in Cologne. Carnaval (\"Karneval\", \"Fasching\" or \"Fastnacht\" in Germany) mixed pagan traditions with Christian traditions. Pre-Lenten celebrations featured parades, costumes and masks to endure Lent's withdrawal from worldly pleasures.\nOther areas developed their own traditions. In the United Kingdom, West Indian immigrants brought with them the traditions of Caribbean Carnival; however, the Carnivals now celebrated at Notting Hill, Leeds, Yorkshire, and other places became divorced from their religious origin and became secular events that take place in the summer months.\nTheories.\nInterpretations of Carnival present it as a social institution that degrades or \"uncrowns\" the higher functions of thought, speech, and the soul by translating them into the grotesque body, which serves to renew society and the world, as a release for impulses that threaten the social order that ultimately reinforces social norms, as a social transformation, or as a tool for different groups to focus attention on conflicts and incongruities by embodying them in \"senseless\" acts.\nFurthermore, some cultures use Carnival as a method of empowering themselves in spite of social conflicts. For example, when the Caribbean Carnival was established as a result of French settlers, even the slaves had their version of the masquerade, where they would reverse roles to mock those of higher social status. Along with empowering individuals for a period of time, despite their typical status, Carnival brings communities together. In a day where all are meant to perform a \"mask\" that differs from their typical identity, all members of a society are able to connect through their theatricality and satire.\nMircea Eliade, historian of religions, writes: \"Any new year is a revival of time at its beginning, a repetition of the cosmogony. Ritual fights between two groups of extras, the presence of the dead, Saturnalia and orgies, are all elements which indicate that at the end of the year and in the expectation of the new year the mythical moments of the passage of chaos to the cosmogony are repeated\". Eliade also writes: \"Then the dead will come back, because all barriers between the dead and the living are broken (is the primordial chaos not revived?), and will come back since \u2013 at this paradoxical moment \u2013 time will be interrupted, so that the dead may be again contemporaries of the living.\" Eliade speculates that people have \"a deep need to regenerate themselves periodically by abolishing the elapsed time and making topical the cosmogony\". As regards masks (monsters, animals, demons), he assigns them an apotropaic meaning.\nGeographic distribution.\nAfrica.\nFor the Canary Islands, see its section under Europe.\nCape Verde Islands.\nCarnival was introduced by Portuguese settlers. It is celebrated on each of the archipelago's nine inhabited islands. In Mindelo, S\u00e3o Vicente, groups challenge each other for a yearly prize. It has imported various Brazilian Carnival traditions. The celebration in S\u00e3o Nicolau is more traditional, where established groups parade through the Ribeira Brava, gathering in the town square, although it has adopted drums, floats and costumes from Brazil. In S\u00e3o Nicolau, three groups, Copa Cabana, Estrela Azul, and Brilho Da Zona, construct a painted float using fire, newspaper for the mold, and iron and steel for structure. Carnival S\u00e3o Nicolau is celebrated over three days: dawn Saturday, Sunday afternoon, and Tuesday. The celebrations are captured in the award-winning feature documentary Tchindas, nominated at the 12th Africa Movie Academy Awards.\nNamibia.\nCarnival was introduced by German settlers. The celebration is based on the \"Rheinische\" Carnival tradition.\nSeychelles.\nThe Seychelles carnival began in 2011. It is held in the capital city of Victoria and takes place over three days. On Day 1, the grand opening is held in the city center near the clock tower. The second day is parade day. On Day 3, the closing ceremony is held, and a lottery winner is announced.\nZimbabwe.\nThe Harare Carnival is held late in May. Events include fashion and music shows. The climax is a street party featuring costumes and music.\nAmericas.\nAntigua.\nThe Antiguan Carnival is held from the end of July to the first Tuesday in August. The most important day is that of the \"j'ouvert\" (or \"juv\u00e9\"), in which brass and steelpan bands perform. Barbuda's Carnival, held in June, is known as \"Caribana\". The Antiguan and Barbudan Carnivals replaced the Old Time Christmas Festival in 1957, with hopes of inspiring tourism.\nArgentina.\nIn Argentina, the most representative Carnival performed is the so-called Murga, although other famous Carnivals, more like Brazil's, are held in Argentine Mesopotamia and the North-East. Gualeguaych\u00fa in the east of Entre R\u00edos Province is the most important Carnival city and has one of the largest parades. It adopts a musical background similar to Brazilian or Uruguayan Carnival. Corrientes is another city with a Carnival tradition. Chamam\u00e9 is a popular musical style. In all major cities and many towns throughout the country, Carnival is celebrated.\nThe Humahuaca Carnival is a popular celebration, which takes place at the beginning of Lent (40 days before Holy Week), in the Quebrada de Humahuaca area, Jujuy province, Argentina.\nAs Carnival coincides with summer in the Southern Hemisphere, in many parts of Argentina children play with water. The 19th century tradition of filling empty egg shells with water has evolved into water games that include the throwing of water balloons.\nAruba.\nCarnival in Aruba means weeks of events that bring colourfully decorated floats, contagiously throbbing music, luxuriously costumed groups of celebrants of all ages, King and Queen elections, electrifying jump-ups and torchlight parades, the Jouvert morning: the Children's Parades, and finally the Grand Parade. Aruba's biggest celebration is a month-long affair consisting of festive \"jump-ups\" (street parades), spectacular parades, and creative contests. Music and flamboyant costumes play a central role, from the Queen elections to the Grand Parade. Street parades continue in various districts throughout the month, with brass band, steelpan and roadmarch tunes. On the evening before Lent, Carnival ends with the symbolic burning of King Momo.\nBahamas.\nJunkanoo is the principal street parade in the Bahamas, it has been practiced in the Bahamas before and after the 1834 emancipation of slavery in the British Empire.\nThe Bahamas announced the first Bahamas Junkanoo Carnival to commence in May 2015. Carnival in the Bahamas rivals various carnivals throughout the Caribbean in that it is a unique blend between the revered Junkanoo and traditional Carnival. This fairly new festival has been referred to as the ultimate celebration of everything Bahamian.\nBarbados.\n\"Crop Over\" (formerly called \"Harvest Home\") is a traditional harvest festival celebrated in Barbados. Its early beginnings were on the sugar cane plantations during the colonial period. Crop Over began in 1688, and featured singing, dancing, and accompaniment by shak-shak, banjo, triangle, fiddle, guitar, bottles filled with water, and bones. Other traditions included climbing a greased pole, feasting, and drinking competitions. Originally signaling the end of the yearly cane harvest, it evolved into a national festival. In the late 20th century, Crop Over began to closely mirror the Trinidad Carnival. Beginning in June, Crop Over runs until the first Monday in August when it culminates in the finale, the Grand Kadooment.\nCrop Over time for many islanders is one big party. Craft markets, food tents/stalls, street parties, and cavalcades fill every week.\nA major feature is the calypso competition. Calypso music, originating in Trinidad, uses syncopated rhythm and topical lyrics. It offers a medium in which to satirise local politics, amidst the general bacchanal. Calypso tents, also originating in Trinidad, feature cadres of musicians who perform biting social commentaries, political expos\u00e9s or rousing exhortations to \"wuk dah waistline\" and \"roll dat bumper\". The groups compete for the Calypso Monarch Award, while the air is redolent with the smells of Bajan cooking during the Bridgetown Market Street Fair. The Cohobblopot Festival blends dance, drama, and music with the crowning of the King and Queen of costume bands. Every evening the \"Pic-o-de-Crop\" Show is performed after the King of Calypso is finally crowned. The climax of the festival is Kadooment Day, celebrated with a national holiday, when costume bands fill the streets with pulsating Barbadian rhythms and fireworks.\nBelize.\nSan Pedro is one of Belize's few cities to observe Carnaval before Lent. Elsewhere, Carnaval (sometimes referred to as Carnival) often occurs in September. The Fiesta de Carnaval is often the most popular celebration, usually held over three days prior to Ash Wednesday, but the festivities often extend to the full week. This festival \"always includes music, dancing, costumes and parades\".\nComparsas are held throughout the week, consisting of large groups \"of dancers dancing and traveling on the streets, followed by a Carrosa (carriage) where the musicians play. The Comparsa is a development of African processions where groups of devotees follow a given saint or deity during a particular religious celebration.\" One of the most popular comparsas of Fiesta de Carnaval is the male group comparsa, usually composed of notable men from the community who dress up in outlandish costumes or cross-dress and dance to compete for money and prizes. Other popular activities include body painting and flour fighting. \"On the last day of Carnival painters flood the street to paint each other. This simply means that a mixture of water paint and water or raw eggs is used to paint people on the streets, the goal being to paint as many people as you can.\"\nStreet fights often occur during the festivities \u2013 some locals treat this festival as an opportunity to exact revenge on their enemies. Vandalism is common and \"businesses constantly have to prepare in covering or repainting their advertisements during Carnival season because of the mischief performed.\" The tradition continues despite critics who advocate the termination of these festivities.\nBolivia.\n\"La Diablada\" Carnival takes place in Oruro in central Bolivia. It is celebrated in honor of the miners' patron saint, \"V\u00edrgen de Socavon\" (the Virgin of the Tunnels). Over 50 parade groups dance, sing, and play music over a five kilometre-long course. Participants dress up as demons, devils, angels, Incas, and Spanish conquistadors. Dances include caporales and tinkus. The parade runs from morning until late at night, 18 hours a day, for three days before Ash Wednesday. It was declared the 2001 \"Masterpieces of Oral Heritage and Intangible Heritage of Humanity\" by UNESCO. Throughout the country, celebrations are held involving traditional rhythms and water parties. In Santa Cruz de la Sierra, on the east side of the country, tropical weather allows a Brazilian-type Carnival, with Comparsas dancing traditional songs in matching uniforms.\nBrazil.\nThe Carnival in Brazil (Portuguese: Carnaval) is a major part of Brazilian culture. The first expression of this festivity took place in Rio de Janeiro in 1641, with the \"pr\u00e9stitos\", very similar to musical processions that were held on public streets when John IV of Portugal was crowned King.\nRio de Janeiro.\nThe street carnival of Rio de Janeiro is designated by \"Guinness World Records\" as the largest carnival in the world, with approximately two million people each day.\nSamba schools are large, social entities with thousands of members and a theme for their song and parade each year. In Rio Carnival, samba schools parade in the Sambadrome (\"samb\u00f3dromo\" in Portuguese). Some of the most famous include GRES Esta\u00e7\u00e3o Primeira de Mangueira, GRES Portela, GRES Acad\u00eamicos do Salgueiro, GRES Imperatriz Leopoldinense, GRES Beija-Flor de Nil\u00f3polis, GRES Mocidade Independente de Padre Miguel, and recently, Unidos da Tijuca and GRES Uni\u00e3o da Ilha do Governador. Local tourists pay $500\u2013950, depending on the costume, to buy a samba costume and dance in the parade. \"Blocos\" are small informal groups with a definite theme in their samba, usually satirizing the political situation. About 30 schools in Rio gather hundreds of thousands of participants. More than 440 \"blocos\" operate in Rio. \"Bandas\" are samba musical bands, also called \"street carnival bands\", usually formed within a single neighborhood or musical background. The Carnival industry chain amassed in 2012 almost US$1\u00a0billion in revenues.\nRecife, Pernambuco.\nRecife is marked by the parade of the largest carnival block in the world, the Galo da Madrugada. This parade happens on the first Saturday of Carnival (Z\u00e9 Pereira's Saturday), passes through downtown Recife, and has as symbol a giant rooster that is positioned on the Duarte Coelho Bridge. In this block, there is a great variety of musical genres, but Frevo is the most common one; it is typical of both Recife and Olinda, and is considered an Intangible Heritage of Humanity by Unesco.\nSalvador, Bahia.\nSalvador has large Carnival celebrations, including the Ax\u00e9, a typical Bahia music. A truck with giant speakers and a platform, where musicians play songs of local genres such as Ax\u00e9, samba-reggae, and Arrocha, drives through town with a crowd following while dancing and singing. It was originally staged by two Salvador musicians, Dodo &amp; Osmar, in the 1950s. After the Salvador Carnival, Porto Seguro continues the celebration.\nThree circuits make up the festival. Campo Grande is the longest and most traditional. Barra-Ondina is the most famous, on the seaside of Pelourinho and the beaches Barra and Ondina.\nInternational singers like David Guetta, will.i.am, Psy, and Bob Sinclar have performed in Salvador. Ivete Sangalo, Claudia Leitte, Daniela Mercury, Margareth Menezes, Chiclete com Banana, and Banda Eva are some traditional attractions. The party officially lasts six days, but may go on for longer.\nCanada.\nToronto Caribbean Carnival, held in Toronto on the first weekend of August to take advantage of more comfortable weather, has its origins in Caribbean Carnival traditions. Tourist attendance at the parade typically exceeds one million.\nThe Quebec Winter Carnival is one of the biggest winter-themed Carnivals in the world. It depends on snowfall and very cold weather, to keep snowy ski trails in good condition and ice sculptures frozen. The carnival is held during the last days of January and first days of February.\nCaribbean.\nMost Caribbean islands celebrate Carnival. The largest and most well-known is in Trinidad and Tobago. Antigua, Aruba, Barbados, Bonaire, Cayman Islands, Cuba, Cura\u00e7ao, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Martinique, Puerto Rico, Saba, Sint Eustatius (Statia), Sint Maarten, Saint Lucia, Saint Kitts, Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, Saint Vincent, and the Grenadines hold lengthy carnival seasons and large celebrations.\nCarnival is an important cultural event in the Dutch Caribbean. Festivities include \"jump-up\" parades with beautifully colored costumes, floats, and live bands, as well as beauty contests and other competitions. Celebrations include a middle-of-the-night j'ouvert (\"juv\u00e9\") parade that ends at sunrise with the burning of a straw King Momo, cleansing sins and bad luck. On Statia, he is called Prince Stupid.\nCarnival has been celebrated in Cuba since the 18th century. Participants don costumes demonstrating the island's cultural and ethnic variety.\nColombia.\nCarnival was introduced by the Spaniards and incorporated elements from European cultures. It has managed to reinterpret traditions that belonged to Colombia's African and Amerindian cultures. Documentary evidence shows that Carnival existed in Colombia in the 18th century and had already been a cause for concern for colonial authorities, who censored the celebrations, especially in the main political centres such as Cartagena, Bogot\u00e1, and Popay\u00e1n.\nThe Carnival continued its evolution in small/unimportant towns out of view of the rulers. The result was the uninterrupted celebration of Carnival festivals in Barranquilla (see Barranquilla's Carnival), now recognized as one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity. The Barranquilla Carnival includes several parades on Friday and Saturday nights beginning on 11 January and ending with a six-day non-stop festival, beginning the Wednesday prior to Ash Wednesday and ending Tuesday midnight. Other celebrations occur in villages along the lower Magdalena River in northern Colombia, and in Pasto and Nari\u00f1o (see Blacks and Whites' Carnival) in the south of the country. In the early 20th century, attempts to introduce Carnival in Bogot\u00e1 were rejected by the government. The Bogot\u00e1 Carnival was renewed in the 21st century.\nDominica.\nCarnival in Dominica is held in the capital city of Roseau, and takes elements of Carnival that can be seen in the neighboring French islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe, as well as Trinidad. Notable events leading up to Carnival include the Opening of Carnival celebrations, the Calypso Monarch music competition, the Queen of Carnival Beauty Pageant, and bouyon music bands. Celebrations last for the Monday and Tuesday before Ash Wednesday.\nDominican Republic.\nDominican Carnival is celebrated in most cities and towns in the main streets during February. Among its main characteristics are its flashy costumes and loud music. The one held in La Vega, which is one of the biggest in the country, and the national parade in Santo Domingo were where the first Carnival of the Americas was held.\nCarnival masks are elaborate and colorful. The costumes used on the parades are satires of the Devil and are called \"Diablos Cojuelos\". They dance, and run to the rhythm of merengue music mixed with techno, hip-hop, and reggaeton. Additional allegorical characters represent Dominican traditions such as \"Roba la Gallina\" and \"Calif\u00e9\".\nOne of the most international parades is in San Pedro de Macor\u00eds. It exhibits the \"Guloyas\" parade of costumed groups dancing in the streets. Revelers flee from the \"Diablos Cojuelos\" who try to hit them with \"Vejigas\".\nThe timing of the festivals has grown apart from its original religious synchronization with the period of Lent. With National Independence Day on 27 February and the birthday of Juan Pablo Duarte, its founding father, on 26 January, the Carnival celebrations fill February regardless of the Lenten calendar.\nEcuador.\nIn Ecuador, the celebrations began before the arrival of Catholicism. The Huarangas Indians (from the Chimbos nation) used to celebrate the second moon of the year with a festival at which they threw flour, flowers, and perfumed water. This Indigenous tradition merged with the Catholic celebration of Carnival.\nA common feature of Ecuadorian Carnival is the \"diablitos\" (little devils) who play with water. As with snowball fights, the practice of throwing or dumping water on unsuspecting victims is revered by children and teenagers although feared by some adults. Throwing water balloons, sometimes even eggs and flour both to friends and strangers is fun, but can also upset the uninformed.\nAlthough the government as well as school authorities forbid such games, they are widely practiced. Historians tell of a bishop in 1867 who threatened excommunication for the sin of playing Carnival games.\nFestivals differ across the country. Locals wear disguises with colorful masks and dance. Usually, the celebrations begin with the election of \"Taita Carnival\" (Father Carnival) who heads the festivities and leads the parades in each city.\nThe most famed Carnival festivities are in Guaranda (Bolivar province) and Ambato (Tungurahua province). In Ambato, the festivities are called \"Fiesta de las Flores y las Frutas\" (Festival of the Flowers and Fruits). Other cities have revived Carnival traditions with colorful parades, such as in Azogues (Ca\u00f1ar Province). In Azogues and the Southern Andes in general, \"Taita Carnival\" is always an Indigenous Ca\u00f1ari. Recently, a celebration has gained prominence in the northern part of the Andes in the Chota Valley in Imbabura which is a zone of a strong Afro-Ecuadorian population and so the Carnival is celebrated with bomba del chota music.\nLatacunga celebrates Carnival in three manners: Carnival with water where people play with water, religious Carnival where people make religious festivity, and Carnival parade in the city in which people march on the Latacunga streets wearing masks while they dance with music bands.\nFrench Guiana.\nThe Carnival of French Guiana has roots in Creole culture. Everyone participates \u2013 mainland French, Brazilians (Guiana has a frontier with Brazil), and Chinese as well as Creoles.\nIts duration is variable, determined by movable religious festivals: Carnival begins at Epiphany and ends on Ash Wednesday, and so typically lasts through most of January and February. During this period, from Friday evening until Monday morning the entire country throbs to the rhythm of masked balls and street parades.\nFriday afternoons are for eating \"galette des rois\" (the cake of kings) and drinking champagne. The cake may be flavoured with frangipani, guava, or coconut.\nOn Sunday afternoons, major parades fill the streets of Cayenne, Kourou, and Saint-Laurent du Maroni. Competing groups prepare for months. Dressed to follow the year's agreed theme, they march with Carnival floats, drums, and brass bands.\nBrazilian groups are appreciated for their elaborate feathered and sequined costumes. However, they are not eligible for competition since the costumes do not change over time.\nMythical characters appear regularly in the parades:\nA uniquely Creole tradition are the \"touloulous\". These women wear decorative gowns, gloves, masks, and headdresses that cover them completely, making them unrecognisable, even to the colour of their skin. On Friday and Saturday nights of Carnival, touloulou balls are held in so-called \"universities\", large dance halls that open only at Carnival time. Touloulous get in free, and are even given condoms in the interest of the sexual health of the community. Men attend the balls, but they pay admittance and are not disguised. The touloulous pick their dance partners, who may not refuse. The setup is designed to make it easy for a woman to create a temporary liaison with a man in total anonymity. Undisguised women are not welcomed. By tradition, if such a woman gets up to dance, the orchestra stops playing. Alcohol is served at bars \u2013 the disguised women whisper to the men \"touloulou thirsty\", at which a round of drinks is expected, to be drunk through a straw protect their anonymity.\nIn more modern times, Guyanais men have attempted to turn the tables by staging \"soir\u00e9es tololo\", in which it is the men who, in disguise, seek partners from undisguised women bystanders.\nThe final four days of Carnival follow a rigid schedule, and no work is done:\nGuatemala.\nThe Mazatenango carnival is a two- or three-day celebration that has been celebrated in this city for more than a century. Though secular in nature, it takes place immediately before Christian Lent begins. Early celebrations included bull fights, and modern celebrations include the wearing of masks and costumes, the selection of an Ugly King and the Queen of the Carnival, dances, and a variety of games.\nHaiti.\nCarnival in Haiti started in 1804 in the capital Port-au-Prince after the declaration of independence. The Port-au-Prince Carnival is one of the largest in North America. It is known as Kanaval in the Creole language. It starts in January, known as \"Pre-Kanaval\", while the main carnival activities begin in February. In July 2012, Haiti had another carnival called Kanaval de Fleur. Beautiful costumes, floats, Rara festival parades, masks, foods, and popular rasin music (such as Boukman Eksperyans, Foula Vodoule, Tokay, Boukan Ginen, and Eritaj) and kompa bands (such as T-Vice, Djakout No. 1, Sweet Micky, Krey\u00f2lLa, D.P. Express, Mizik Mizik, Ram, T-Micky, Carimi, Djakout Mizik, and Scorpio Fever) play for dancers in the streets of the plaza of Champ-de-Mars, Port-au-Prince. A song competition takes place.\nOther places in Haiti celebrate carnival, including Jacmel and Aux Cayes. In 2013, Kanaval was celebrated in Okap (Cap-Ha\u00eftien).\nCarnival finishes on Ash Wednesday, followed by rara festival, another parading musical tradition known mainly in Haiti and in the Dominican Republic. This festival emphasises religion. Songs are composed each year, and bands play bamboo tubes (\"vaksin\") and homemade horns (\"kon\u00e8t\"). Rara is also performed in Prospect and Central Park in summertime New York.\nHonduras.\nIn La Ceiba in Honduras, Carnival is held on the third or fourth Saturday of every May to commemorate San Isidro. It is the largest Carnival celebration in Central America.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, \"Carnaval\" is celebrated in about 225 cities and towns. The largest are in Mazatl\u00e1n and the city of Veracruz, with others in Baja California and Yucat\u00e1n. The larger city Carnavals employ costumes, elected queens, and parades with floats, but Carnaval celebrations in smaller and rural areas vary widely depending on the level of European influence during Mexico's colonial period. The largest of these is in Huejotzingo, Puebla, where most townspeople take part in mock combat with rifles shooting blanks, roughly based on the Battle of Puebla. Other important states with local traditions include Morelos, Oaxaca, Tlaxcala, and Chiapas. Carnaval of Campeche goes back 400 years, to 1582.\nNicaragua.\nOn the Caribbean coast of Bluefields, Nicaragua, Carnival is better known as \"Palo de Mayo\" (or Mayo Ya!) and is celebrated every day of May.\nIn Managua, it is celebrated for two days. There it is named \"Alegria por la vida\" (\"Joy for Life\") and features a different theme each year. Another festival in Managua celebrates patron saint Domingo de Guzman and lasts ten days.\nPanama.\nTraditionally beginning on Friday and ending on the Tuesday before Ash Wednesday, \"los Carnavales\", as Panamanians refer to the days of Carnival, are celebrated across the country. Carnival Week is especially popular in the sleepy town of Las Tablas. The population multiplies because of the opulent Carnival celebrations. Carnival celebrations in Panama City and almost all of the Azuero Peninsula are popular tourist attractions. Penonom\u00e9 features a parade on the Rio Zarati as a unique Carnival event.\nThe Panamanian Carnival is also popular because of the concerts featuring popular artists in the most visited areas. Concerts are often carried out during the night, and continue until the next morning.\nCarnival Week is a national holiday in Panama, with most businesses and government offices remaining closed during its duration, and with most Panamanians opting to go to the country's rural areas to participate on the Carnivals and visit their relatives.\nCarnivals in Panama also feature large repurposed fuel trucks that are used for soaking attendees through the use of firehoses that are controlled and directed by one or more people that stand in a platform that is mounted on top of the truck. This is known as \"culecos\" or \"los culecos\". Trucks get their water from nearby, government-approved rivers, and the water is tested for cleanliness before use. Culecos are often performed from 10 am to 3 pm, when the sun is at its brightest. Children and pregnant women are banned from participating in the culecos, and the trucks are always sponsored by a well-known Panamanian company or brand. The culecos are also often accompanied by reggaeton concerts.\nThe open consumption of large amounts of cold, low-alcohol beer or Smirnoff, stored in ice-filled coolers, is common among attendees. Just like in Rio de Janeiro, some carnivals also feature floats, but they may have young women with elaborate costumes that stand as the \"Queens\" of \"Calle Arriba\" and \"Calle Abajo\", representing rich and working-class people, respectively. The queens are chosen through a contest and announced on October of the previous year, and are replaced every year. The queens are introduced on the first carnival day, and are always accompanied by a music band, who are present whenever the queens are present. Fireworks are launched on the last carnival night, to signal the end of the carnival.\nPeru.\nCajamarca.\nThe town of Cajamarca is considered the capital of Carnival in Peru. Local residents of all ages dance around the \"unsha\", or , a tree adorned with ribbons, balloons, toys, fruits, bottles of liquor, and other prizes.\nAt a certain point, the \"Mayordomo\" (governor of the feast) walks into the circle. The governor chooses a partner to go to the \"unsha\", which they attempt to cut down by striking it three times with a machete. The machete is passed from couple to couple as each strikes the tree three times. When the unsha finally falls, the crowd rushes to grab the prizes.\nThe person who successfully brings down the unsha becomes the following year's governor.\nCrime.\nWhile generally peaceful, there have been issues with people using Carnival as a pretext for crime, particularly robbery or vandalism, especially in certain areas of Lima.\nTrinidad and Tobago.\nIn Trinidad and Tobago, Carnival lasts months and culminates in large celebrations on the three days before Ash Wednesday with Dimanche Gras, J'ouvert, and Mas (masquerade). Tobago's celebration culminates on Monday and Tuesday on a much smaller scale, however Tobago hosted its inaugural standalone carnival on October 28\u201330, 2022 Carnival combines costumes, dance, music, competitions, rum, and partying (fete-ing). Music styles include soca, calypso, rapso, and more recently chutney and chutney soca.\nThe annual Carnival steel pan competition known as the National Panorama competition holds the finals on the Saturday before the main event. Pan players compete in categories such as \"Conventional Steel Band\" or \"Single Pan Band\" by performing renditions of the year's calypsos.\n\"Dimanche Gras\" takes place on the Sunday night before Ash Wednesday. Here the Calypso Monarch is chosen (after competition) and prize money and a vehicle awarded. The King and Queen of the bands are crowned, where each band parades costumes for two days and submits a king and queen, from which an overall winner is chosen. These usually involve huge, complex, beautiful well-crafted costumes, that includes 'wire-bending'.\nJ'ouvert, or \"Dirty Mas\", takes place before dawn on the Monday (known as Carnival Monday) before Ash Wednesday. It means \"opening of the day\". Revelers dress in costumes embodying puns on current affairs, especially political and social events. \"Clean Mud\" (clay mud), oil paint and body paint are familiar during J'ouvert. A common character is \"Jab-jabs\" (devils, blue, black, or red) complete with pitchfork, pointed horns and tails. A King and Queen of J'ouvert are chosen, based on their witty political/social messages.\nCarnival Monday involves the parade of the mas bands. Revelers wear only parts of their costumes, more for fun than display or competition. Monday Night Mas is popular in most towns and especially the capital, where smaller bands compete. There is also the \"Bomb Competition\", a smaller-scaled judging of steel bands.\nCarnival Tuesday hosts the main events. Full costume is worn, complete with make-up and body paint/adornment. Usually \"Mas Boots\" that complement the costumes are worn. Each band has their costume presentation based on a particular theme, and contains various sections (some consisting of thousands of revelers) that reflect these themes. The street parade and band costume competition take place. The mas bands eventually converge on the Queen's Park Savannah to pass on \"The Stage\" for judging. The singer of the most played song is crowned Road March King or Queen, earning prize money and usually a vehicle.\nThis parading and revelry goes on until Tuesday midnight. Ash Wednesday itself, while not an official holiday, sends flocks to local beaches. The most popular are Maracas Beach and Manzanilla Beach, where huge beach parties take place on Ash Wednesday.\nUnited States.\nCarnival celebrations, usually referred to as Mardi Gras (\"Fat Tuesday\" in French), were first celebrated in the Gulf Coast area, but now occur in many states. Customs originated in the onetime French colonial capitals of Mobile (now in Alabama), New Orleans (Louisiana), and Biloxi (Mississippi), all of which have celebrated for many years with street parades and masquerade balls. Other major American cities with celebrations include Washington, D.C.; St. Louis, Missouri; San Francisco and San Diego, California; Galveston, Texas; and Pensacola, Tampa,Orlando, and Miami in Florida.\nThe most widely known, elaborate, and popular U.S. events are in New Orleans, where krewes organize parades, balls, and other activities starting with Phunny Phorty Phellows streetcar parade on Twelfth Night and ending with the closing of Bourbon Street at midnight on Fat Tuesday. It is often called \"the greatest free party on earth\". Many other Louisiana cities such as Lake Charles, Baton Rouge, Shreveport, Lafayette, Mamou, Houma, and Thibodaux, most of which were under French control at one time or another, also hold Carnival celebrations. On the prairie country northwest of Lafayette, Louisiana, the Cajuns celebrate the traditional Courir de Mardi Gras, which has its roots in celebrations from rural Medieval France.\nIn Puerto Rico, the most popular festivals are the Carnaval de Lo\u00edza and Carnaval de Ponce. The Carnaval de Ponce (officially \"Carnaval Ponce\u00f1o\") is celebrated annually in Ponce. The celebration lasts one week and ends on the day before Ash Wednesday. It is one of the oldest carnivals of the Western Hemisphere, dating to 1858. Some authorities trace the Ponce Carnaval to the eighteenth century.\nIn New York City, a Caribbean Carnival known as the West Indian Day Parade is held in Crown Heights, Brooklyn on Labor Day. Founded by immigrants from Trinidad, the event was initially held at the beginning of Lent, but was later moved to Labor Day in order to allow an outdoor event in the summer.\nStarting in 2013, the Slovenian-American community located in the St. Clair-Superior neighborhood of Cleveland began hosting a local version of Kurentovanje, the Carnival event held in the city of Ptuj, Slovenia. The event is conducted on the Saturday prior to Ash Wednesday.\nUruguay.\nThe Carnival in Uruguay lasts more than 40 days, generally beginning towards the end of January and running through mid March. Celebrations in Montevideo are the largest. The festival is performed in the European parade style with elements from Bantu and Angolan Benguela cultures imported with slaves in colonial times. The main attractions of Uruguayan Carnival include two colorful parades called \"Desfile de Carnaval\" (Carnival Parade) and \"Desfile de Llamadas\" (Calls Parade, a candombe-summoning parade).\nDuring the celebration, theaters called \"tablados\" are built in many places throughout the cities, especially in Montevideo. Traditionally formed by men and now starting to be open to women, the different Carnival groups (Murgas, Lubolos, or Parodistas) perform a kind of popular opera at the \"tablados\", singing and dancing songs that generally relate to the social and political situation. The 'Calls' groups, basically formed by drummers playing the tamboril, perform candombe rhythmic figures. The carnival in Uruguay have escolas de samba too, and the biggest samba parades are in Artigas and in Montevideo. Revelers wear their festival clothing. Each group has its own theme. Women wearing elegant, bright dresses are called vedettes and provide a sensual touch to parades.\nEuropean archetypes (Pierrot, Harlequin, and Columbina) merge with African ancestral elements (the Old Mother or \"Mama Vieja\", the Medicine Man or \"Gramillero\" and the Magician or \"Escobero\") in the festival.\nVenezuela.\nCarnival in Venezuela covers two days, 40 days before Easter. It is a time when youth in many rural towns have water fights (including the use of water balloons and water guns). Any pedestrian risks getting soaked. Coastal towns and provinces celebrate Carnival more fervently than elsewhere in the country. Venezuelans regard Carnival about the same way they regard Christmas and Semana Santa (Holy Week; the week before Easter Sunday) when they take the opportunity to visit their families.\nAsia.\nIndia.\nIn India, Carnival is celebrated only in the state of Goa and was originally a local Roman Catholic tradition known as Intruz which means \"swindler\" in Konkani while \"Entrudo\" is the appropriate word in Portuguese for \"Carnival\". The present commercial version of the Goan carnival (King Momo, floats, etc.) was created based on the Rio Carnival only in the 1960s as a means of attracting tourism. The largest celebration takes place in the capital Panaji. The commercial Carnival festivities occur during the three days and nights preceding Ash Wednesday. Sixtus Eric Dias from Candolim was the King Momo for the Carnival 2021. All-night parades occur throughout the state with bands, dances, and floats. Grand balls are held in the evenings.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, the word \"carnival\" or \"karnaval\" is not related to pre-Lent festivities, but more to festivals in general, especially those with processions and extravagant costumes. One of the largest carnivals in Indonesia is the Solo Batik Carnival, held in Solo, Central Java. The Jember Fashion Carnaval is held in Jember, East Java.\nThe Roman Catholic community of Kupang, East Nusa Tenggara, held an Easter procession in form of an Easter Carnival called \"Pawai Paskah Kupang\".\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, the Manila Carnival (Philippine Spanish: ) was formerly a major annual event in Manila during the early American colonial period up to the time before the Second World War. It was organized by the American colonial administration to showcase the economic development of the Philippines. The highlight of the event is the crowning of the Carnival Queens, which is the precursor of later national pageants like Miss Philippines. It is also notable for founding and hosting the first Far Eastern Championship Games (then known as the \"First Oriental Olympic Games\") which became the precursor of the modern Asian Games.\nThe carnival lasted around two weeks in which a variety of shows were presented like circus, vaudeville, slapstick comedies, and theater. Five parades were also held, an opening parade, a military parade, a school parade, a business and industry parade (which included foreign participants), and the floral parade (which featured the Carnival Queen winner).\nThe carnival was first held in February 1908 and was initially only a city celebration. It expanded to a national scope by 1912, the year that it was held concurrently with the Philippine Exposition. It was discontinued in 1939, due to the outbreak of the Second World War. It was also not held during the Japanese occupation of the Philippines (1941 to 1944). After Philippine independence in 1946, it was never renewed.\nIn the modern Philippines, thousands of annual festivals and fiestas throughout the islands feature public celebrations and street parade competitions with elaborate costumes similar to the carnival. However, they are not tied to the Lenten period and are instead celebrations of a Catholic patron saint, of the local culture, or both.\nEurope.\nAlbania.\nCarnivals have begun to be celebrated in Kor\u00e7a before 1940, a period in which cultural life in this city has been varied. Although a pagan holiday, the Carnival was later celebrated on Feast Day in February. In addition to the many carnival-wearing individuals, there were bands with guitars, bows, and butaphoric masks such as animal heads and humans. The Kor\u00e7a Carnival took a big hit after the creation of cultural societies such as the \"Kor\u00e7a Youth\". During this period carnivals were accompanied by mandolins, guitars and humorous songs. Carnival celebrations were discontinued after 1960, to resume in other social conditions after 1990. Kor\u00e7a is one of the first cities to revive the Carnival tradition by establishing the Carnival Association in 1992 as part of the National Carnival Association of Albania. On 10 April 1994, the first International Carnival Festival in Albania was organized in Kor\u00e7a. The following year, the second International Carnival Festival is even larger. Since this year and until 2008, the Korca Carnival group has been represented at a number of international festivals organized in various European countries.\nBelgium.\nMany parts of Belgium celebrate Carnival, typically with costume parades, partying and fireworks. These areas include the province of Limburg with its cities Maasmechelen, Maaseik and Lanaken along the river Meuse, the cities of Aalst, Ninove, Binche, Eupen, Halle, Heist, Kelmis, Malmedy, and Stavelot.\nThe Carnival of Binche dates at least to the 14th century. Parades are held over the three days before Lent; the most important participants are the Gilles, who wear traditional costumes on Shrove Tuesday and throw blood oranges to the crowd. In 2003, the Carnival of Binche was recognised as one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.\nThe Carnival of Aalst, celebrated during the three days preceding Ash Wednesday, received the same recognition in 2010.\nBelgium's oldest parade is the Carnival Parade of Maaseik, also held on Laetare Sunday, which originated in 1865.\nThe Carnival of Malmedy is locally called \"Cwarm\u00ea\". Even if Malmedy is located in the east Belgium, near the German-speaking area, the \"Cwarm\u00ea\" is a pure Walloon and Latin carnival. The celebration takes place during the four days before Shrove Tuesday. The \"Cwarm\u00ea\" Sunday is the most important and interesting to see. All the old traditional costumes parade in the street. The \"Cwarm\u00ea\" is a \"street carnival\" and is not only a parade. People who are disguised pass through the crowd and perform a part of the traditional costume they wear. The famous traditional costumes at the \"Cwarm\u00ea\" of Malmedy are the \"Hagu\u00e8te\", the \"Longu\u00e8s-Br\u00e8sses\", and the \"Long-N\u00e9.\"\nSome Belgian cities hold Carnivals during Lent. One of the best-known is Stavelot, where the \"Carnival de la Laetare\" takes place on Laetare Sunday, the fourth Sunday of Lent. The participants include the \"Blancs-Moussis\", who dress in white, carry long red noses and parade through town attacking bystanders with confetti and dried pig bladders. The city of Halle also celebrates on Laetare Sunday.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nIn Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Croat-majority city of Ljubu\u0161ki holds a traditional Carnival (). Ljubu\u0161ki is a member of the Federation of European Carnival Cities (FECC).\nCroatia.\nThe most famous Croatian Carnival (Croatian: \"karneval\", also called \"ma\u0161kare\" or \"fa\u0161nik\") is the Rijeka Carnival, during which the mayor of Rijeka hands over the keys to the city to the Carnival master (\"me\u0161tar od karnevala\"). The festival includes several events, culminating on the final Sunday in a masked procession. (A similar procession for children takes place on the previous weekend.)\nMany towns in Croatia's Kvarner region (and in other parts of the country, e.g. in Me\u0111imurje County in Northern Croatia) observe the Carnival period, incorporating local traditions and celebrating local culture. Some of the towns and places are Grobnik, Permani, Kastav and many others places near Rijeka, then \u010cakovec, Samobor etc. Just before the end of Carnival, every Kvarner town burns a man-like doll called a \"Pust\", who is blamed for all the strife of the previous year. The Zvon\u010dari, or bell-ringers push away winter and all the bad things in the past year and calling spring, they wear bells and large head regalia representing their areas of origin (for example, those from Halubje wear regalia in the shape of animal heads). The traditional Carnival food is fritule, a pastry. This festival can also be called Poklade.\nMasks are worn to many of the festivities, including concerts and parties. Children and teachers are commonly allowed to wear masks to school for a day, and also wear masks at school dances or while trick-or-treating. Carnivals also take place in summer. One of the most famous is the Senj Summer Carnival \u2013 first celebrated in 1968. The towns of Cres, Pag, Novi Vinodolski, and Fu\u017eine also organise Summer Carnivals.\nCyprus.\nCarnival has been celebrated in Cyprus for centuries. The tradition was likely established under Venetian rule around the 16th century. It may have been influenced by Greek traditions, such as festivities for deities such as Dionysus. The celebration originally involved dressing in costumes and holding masked balls or visiting friends. In the twentieth century, it became an organized event held during the 10 days preceding Lent (according to the Greek Orthodox calendar). The festival is celebrated almost exclusively in the city of Limassol.\nThree main parades take place during Carnival. The first is held on the first day, during which the \"Carnival King\" (either a person in costume or an effigy) rides through the city on his carriage. The second is held on the first Sunday of the festival, and the participants are mainly children. The third and largest takes place on the last day of Carnival and involves hundreds of people walking in costume along the town's longest avenue. The latter two parades are open to anyone who wishes to participate.\nCzech Republic.\nIn the Czech Republic, the Masopust Festival takes place from Epiphany (\"Den t\u0159\u00ed kr\u00e1l\u016f\") through Ash Wednesday (\"Popele\u010dn\u00ed st\u0159eda\"). The word \"masopust\" translates literally from old Czech to mean \"meat fast\", and the festival often includes a pork feast. The tradition is most common in Moravia but also occurs in Bohemia. While practices vary, masks and costumes are present everywhere.\nDenmark and Norway.\nCarnival in Denmark is called \"Fastelavn\", and is held on the Sunday or Monday before Ash Wednesday. The holiday is sometimes described as a Nordic Halloween, with children dressing in costume and gathering treats for the \"Fastelavn\" feast. One popular custom is the \"fastelavnsris\", a switch that children use to flog their parents to wake them up on Fastelavns Sunday.\nIn Norway, students having seen celebrations in Paris introduced Carnival processions, masked balls, and Carnival balls to Christiana in the 1840s and 1850s. From 1863, the artist federation \"Kunstnerforeningen\" held annual Carnival balls in the old Freemasons lodge, which inspired Johan Svendsen's compositions \"Norsk Kunstnerkarneval\" and \"Karneval in Paris\". The following year, Svendsen's \"Festpolonaise\" was written for the opening procession. Edvard Grieg attended and wrote \"Aus dem Karneval\" (\"Folkelivsbilleder\" Op. 19). Since 1988, the student organization T\u00e5rnseilerne has produced annual masquerade balls in Oslo, with masks, costumes, and processions after attending an opera performance. The Carnival season also includes \"Fastelavens s\u00f8ndag\" (with cream buns) and \"fastelavensris\" with decorated branches.\nFinland.\nThe Helsinki Samba Carnaval, modelled after the samba carnivals in Brazil, takes place every year in middle June. The carnival lacks a proper historical tradition and has instead mostly grown from experimenting.\nFrance.\nSome major Carnivals of mainland France are the Nice Carnival, the Dunkirk Carnival and the Limoux Carnival. The Nice Carnival was held as far back as 1294, and annually attracts over a million visitors during the two weeks preceding Lent.\nSince 1604, a characteristic masked Carnival is celebrated in Limoux.\nThe Dunkirk Carnival is among the greatest and most exuberant carnivals celebrated in Europe. Its traditions date back to the 17th century and are based on the \"vischerbende\" as fishermen went from one caf\u00e9 to another accompanied by their relatives and friends just before departing to Icelandic fishing grounds.\nIn the French West Indies, it occurs between the Sunday of Epiphany and Ash Wednesday; this dates back to the arrival of French colonists in the islands.\nGermany, Switzerland, and Austria.\nGermany.\nThe earliest written record of Carnival in Germany was in 1296 in Speyer. The first worldwide Carnival parade took place in Cologne in 1823. The most active Carnival week begins on the Thursday before Ash Wednesday, with parades during the weekend, and finishes the night before Ash Wednesday, with the main festivities occurring around \"Rosenmontag\" (Rose Monday). This time is also called the \"Fifth Season\". Shrove Tuesday, called \"Fastnacht\" or \"Veilchendienstag\", is celebrated in some cities.\nParties feature self-made and more fanciful costumes and occasional masks. The parties become more exuberant as the weeks progress and peak after New Year, in January and February. The final Tuesday features all-night parties, dancing, hugging, and smooching. Some parties are for all, some for women only and some for children. \"Fasnachtsk\u00fcchle\" (similar to \"Kreppel\" or donuts) are the traditional Fasching food and are baked or fried.\nIn Germany, \"Rheinischer Karnival\" and \"Schw\u00e4bische Fastnacht\" are distinct; first is less formal and more political, second is much more traditional.\n\"Rhenish Carnival\" (Rheinischer Karneval, Fasnacht, Fasnet, Fastabend, Fastelovend, Fasteleer, Fasching).\nThe \"Rheinische\" Carnival is held in the west of Germany, mainly in the states of North Rhine-Westphalia and Rhineland-Palatinate, but also in Hesse (including Upper Hesse). Similar forms of the festival occur in Bavaria, and other states. Some cities are more famous for celebrations such as parades and costume balls. The Cologne Carnival, as well as those in Mainz, Eschweiler and D\u00fcsseldorf, are the largest and most famous. Other cities have their own, often less well-known celebrations, parades, and parties, such as Aachen, Bonn, Worms am Rhein, Speyer, Kaiserslautern, Frankfurt, Darmstadt, Duisburg, Dortmund, Essen, Mannheim, M\u00fcnster, Krefeld, Ludwigshafen, M\u00f6nchengladbach, Stuttgart, Augsburg, Munich, and Nuremberg. The biggest German carnival club is located in the relatively small town of Dieburg in South Hesse. Festivities start as early as 11 November at 11:11am for some carnival organizations, but the main events usually take place after the Christmas season. On Carnival Thursday (called \"Old Women Day\" or \"The Women's Day\" in commemoration of an 1824 revolt by washer-women), women storm city halls, cut men's ties, and are allowed to kiss any passing man. Special acrobatic show dances in mock uniforms are a traditional contribution to most festive balls. They may or may not have been a source of inspiration to American cheerleading. The Fasching parades and floats make fun of individual politicians and other public figures. Many speeches do the same.\nTraditions often also include the \"Faschingssitzung\" \u2013 a sit-only party with dancing and singing presentations, and often many speeches given that humorously criticize politics.\n\"Swabian-Alemannic\" Carnival (\"Schw\u00e4bische Fastnacht\").\nThe Swabian-Alemannic Fastnacht, known as \"Schw\u00e4bische Fastnacht\", takes place in Baden, Swabia, the Allg\u00e4u, Alsace, and Vorarlberg (western Austria). During the pagan era, it represented the time of year when the reign of the grim winter spirits is over, and these spirits are hunted and expelled. It then adapted to Catholicism. The first official record of Karneval, Fasching or Fastnacht in Germany dates to 1296. Often the costumes and masks on parades strictly follow traditional designs and represent specific historical characters, public figures \u2013 or specific daemons.\nSwiss Fasnacht.\nIn Switzerland, \"Fasnacht\" takes place in the Catholic cantons of Switzerland, e.g. in Lucerne (\"Loz\u00e4rner Fasnacht\"), but also in Protestant Basel. However, the \"Basler Fasnacht\" begins on the Monday \"after\" Ash Wednesday. Both began in the Late Middle Ages. Smaller Fasnacht festivities take place across German Switzerland, e.g. in Bern and Olten, or in the eastern part (Z\u00fcrich, St. Gallen, Appenzell).\nGreece.\nIn Greece, Carnival is known as (, '[goodbye] to meat'), and officially begins with the \"Opening of the Triodion\", the liturgical book used by the Orthodox Church from then until Holy Week. Apokries is made up of three themed weeks of celebration known as (, 'preannouncement week'), (, 'meat week'), and (, 'cheese week'). One of the season's high points during Kreatini is ( 'Smoky-Thursday'), when celebrants throw large outdoor parties and roast huge amounts of meat; the ritual is repeated the following Sunday, after which point meat is forbidden until Easter. The following week, Tirini, is marked by similar festivities revolving around the consumption of cheese, eggs, and dairy and culminates with a \"Cheese Sunday\". Great Lent, and its restrictive fasting rules, begins in earnest the next day on Clean Monday. Throughout the Carnival season, festivals, parades, and balls are held all over the country. Many people disguise themselves as (\"masqueraders\") and engage in pranks and revelry throughout the season.\nPatras holds the largest annual Carnival in Greece, and one of the largest in the world. The famous Patras Carnival is a three-day spectacle replete with concerts, theatre performances, parading troupes, an elaborate treasure hunt game, three major parades, parallel celebrations specifically for children, and many masquerade balls including the famous Bourbo\u00falia () ball in which women wear special robe-like costumes called a to hide their identy. The festivities come to a crescendo on \"Cheese Sunday\" when The Grand Parade of troupes and floats leads celebrators to the harbor for the ceremonial burning of the effigy of King Carnival.\nThe Carnival in Corfu is much influenced by the Carnival of Venice. During this period, various theatrical sketches are presented on the island, called \"Peteg\u00f3lia\" or \"Petegol\u00e9tsa\" (\u03a0\u03b5\u03c4\u03b5\u03b3\u03bf\u03bb\u03ad\u03c4\u03c3\u03b1) in the local dialect. In previous centuries, existed also the custom of \"Giostra\" (jousting).\nThe second biggest Carnival in Greece takes place in Xanthi (Eastern Macedonia and Thrace) since 1966 and it is the major event of its kind in Northern Greece. The Xanthi Carnival manages to attract visitors from the nearby countries such as Bulgaria, Turkey, and Romania. Other regions host festivities of smaller extent, focused on the reenactment of traditional carnival customs, such as Tyrnavos (Thessaly), Kozani (Western Macedonia), Rethymno (Crete). Tyrnavos holds an annual Phallus festival, a traditional \"phallkloric\" event in which giant, gaudily painted effigies of phalluses made of papier-m\u00e2ch\u00e9 are paraded, and which women are asked to touch or kiss. Their reward for so doing is a shot of the famous local tsipouro alcohol spirit.\nEvery year, from the 1st to the 8th of January, mostly in regions of Western Macedonia, traditional Carnival festivals erupt. Best known of these is the () festival in the city of Kastoria whose celebration may date back to antiquity and whose name derives from the Latin word 'beggars', in reference to the beggars who could mingle with the rich in their masks. It takes place from 6\u20138 January with mass participation and is noted for its brass bands, flutes, and Macedonian drums. It is an ancient celebration of nature's rebirth akin to ancient festivals for Dionysus (Dionysia) and Kronos (Saturnalia).\nHungary.\nCarnival season called \"Farsang\" in Hungarian happens between Epiphany (January 6) and Shrove Tuesday and is the time when costume parties traditionally take place, primarily for children (similar to Halloween).\nIn Moh\u00e1cs, Hungary, the \"Bus\u00f3j\u00e1r\u00e1s\" is a celebration held at the end of the Carnival season. It involves locals dressing in woolly costumes, with scary masks and noise-makers. According to legend, the festival celebrates both the conclusion of the winter season and a victory by the local people over invading Ottomans in 1526.\nItaly.\nCarnival in Italy is a farewell party to eat, drink, and have fun before the limitations and solemnity of Lent. About a month before Ash Wednesday, Italians celebrate over many weekends with parades, masks, and \"confetti\". The origins of this event may be traced to ancient Greece and Rome, when they worshipped Bacchus and Saturn. Some think they date back to archaic winter-to-spring ceremonies. Despite its pagan origins, the event was so extensively celebrated and the tradition so powerful that it was swiftly altered to fit into Catholic rituals. Carnival in Italy is traditionally celebrated on Fat Tuesday, but the weekend prior features activities as well.\nCarnival traditions vary across Italy. In the Ambrosian rite regions around Milan, Carnival ends on the first Sunday of Lent. The Carnival of Venice and Carnival of Viareggio are particularly renowned, featuring sophisticated masquerades and parades. In Sardinia, a distinct carnival form survives, possibly rooted in pre-Christian winter rituals of awakening the earth. These Carnivals include masquerades and parades.\nThe Carnival in Venice was first documented in 1296, with a proclamation by the Venetian Senate announcing a public festival the day before the start of Lent. Its subversive nature is reflected in Italy's many laws over the centuries attempting to restrict celebrations and the wearing of masks. Carnival celebrations in Venice were halted after the city fell under Austrian control in 1798, but were revived in the late 20th century.\nThe Carnival of Viareggio is the second-most popular in Italy. It lasts a month with night and day celebrations, floats, parades, district celebrations, masked dances, and other shows. The first masquerade took place in 1873, in response to the upper classes' dissatisfaction with having to pay hefty taxes. Thousands of travelers go to Italy for parades, Carnival masks and costumes, concerts, and music.In 2001, the town built a new \"Carnival citadel\" dedicated to Carnival preparations and entertainment.\nThe Carnival of Ivrea is famous for its \"Battle of the Oranges\" fought with fruit between the people on foot and the troops of the tyrant on carts, to remember the wars of the Middle Ages, allegory of struggle for freedom. It is considered one of the most ancient Carnivals in the world. The fight commemorates Ivrea's rebellion against tyrannical rule in the Middle Ages. The miller's daughter, \"la Mugnaia\", allegedly killed the city's dictator after he tried to kidnap her, sparking an uprising that gave the inhabitants more freedom. Ivrea's Carnival celebration now includes parades in medieval costumes, folkloric ensembles, and musical performances from Italy and Europe. A bean soup, \"fagiolata\", is associated with the festival.\nThe Ambrosian Rite () is a Latin liturgical rite of the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church (specifically The Divine Liturgy of Saint Ambrose). The rite is named after Saint Ambrose, a bishop of Milan in the fourth century. It is used by around five million Catholics in the greater part of the Archdiocese of Milan (excluding Monza, Treviglio and Trezzo sull'Adda), in some parishes of the Diocese of Como, Bergamo, Novara, Lodi, in the Diocese of Lugano, Canton of Ticino, Switzerland, less prominently in some Western Rite orthodox parishes and on special occasions of other jurisdictions. In the most part of the Archdiocese of Milan, the Carnival lasts four more days, ending on the Saturday after Ash Wednesday, because of the Ambrosian Rite.\nIn Sardinia, the Carnival (in Sardinian language \"Carrasecare\" or \"Carrasegare\") varies greatly from the one in the mainland of Italy. the majority of the Sardinian celebrations features not only feasts and parades but also crude fertility rites such as bloodsheds to fertilize the land, the death and the resurrection of the Carnival characters and representations of violence and torture. The typical characters of the Sardinian Carnival are zoomorphic and/or androgynous, such as the \"Mamuthones and Issohadores\" from Mamoiada, the \"Boes and Merdules\" from Ottana and many more. The Carnival is celebrated with street performances that are typically accompanied by Sardinian dirges called , meaning literally \"cry of a baby when the mother doesn't want nursed him/her anymore\" (from the word \"titta\" meaning breasts). Other particular and important Carnival instances in Sardinia are the Sartiglia in Oristano and the Tempio Pausania Carnival.\nLithuania.\n\"U\u017egav\u0117n\u0117s\" is a Lithuanian festival that takes place on Shrove Tuesday. Its name in English means \"the time before Lent\". The celebration corresponds to Carnival holiday traditions.\n\"U\u017egav\u0117n\u0117s\" begins on the night before Ash Wednesday, when an effigy of winter (usually named Mor\u0117) is burnt. A major element symbolizes the defeat of winter in the Northern Hemisphere. It is a staged battle between La\u0161ininis (\"porky\") personifying winter and Kanapinis (\"hempen man\") personifying spring. Devils, witches, goats, the grim reaper, and other joyful and frightening characters appear in costumes during the celebrations.\nEating pancakes is an important part of the celebration. Eating pancakes during \"U\u017egav\u0117n\u0117s\" is a traditional practice symbolizing the sun's return and the anticipation of a bountiful harvest, aligning with the festival's theme of bidding farewell to winter and welcoming spring.\nLuxembourg.\nIn Luxembourg, the pre-Lenten holiday season is known as \"Fuesend\". Throughout the Grand-Duchy, parades and parties are held.\nP\u00e9tange is the home of the Grand-Duchy's largest pre-Lenten Karneval celebration. Annually hosting a cavalcade with roughly 1,200 participants and thousand of celebrants, the official name is Karneval Gemeng P\u00e9iteng or \"Kagepe\" (the initials in Luxembourgish are pronounced \"Ka\", \"Ge\" and \"Pe\").\nThe town of Remich holds a three-day-long celebration, notable for two special events in addition to its parades. The first is the \"Str\u00e9im\u00e4nnchen\", which is the burning of a male effigy from the Remich Bridge that crosses the Moselle River separating the Grand Duchy from Germany. The \"Str\u00e9im\u00e4nnchen\" symbolizes the burning away of winter. The other special event at the Remich Fuesend celebrations is the \"Buergbrennen\" or bonfire that closes the celebration.\nLike Remich, the town of Esch-sur-Alzette holds a three-day celebration. Other major Fuesend parades in Luxembourg are held in the towns of Diekirch and Schifflange.\nMalta.\nCarnival in Malta (Maltese: \"il-Karnival ta' Malta\") was introduced to the islands by Grand Master Piero de Ponte in 1535. It is held during the week leading up to Ash Wednesday, and typically includes masked balls, fancy dresses, and grotesque mask competitions, lavish late-night parties, a colourful, ticker-tape parade of allegorical floats presided over by King Carnival (Maltese: \"ir-Re tal-Karnival\"), marching bands, and costumed revellers.\nThe largest celebration takes place in and around the capital city of Valletta and Floriana; several more \"spontaneous\" Carnivals take place in more remote areas. The Nadur Carnival is notable for its darker themes. In 2005, the Nadur Carnival hosted the largest-ever gathering of international Carnival organizers for the FECC's global summit.\nTraditional dances include the \"parata\", a lighthearted re-enactment of the 1565 victory of the Knights Hospitaller over the Turks, and an 18th-century court dance known as \"il-Maltija\". Carnival food includes \"perlini\" (multi-coloured, sugar-coated almonds) and the \"prinjolata\", which is a towering assembly of sponge cake, biscuits, almonds, and citrus fruits, topped with cream and pine nuts.\nNetherlands.\nCarnival in the Netherlands is called \"Carnaval\", \"Vastenavond\" (\"Eve of Lent\") or, in Limburgish, , and is mostly celebrated in traditionally Catholic regions, particularly in the southern provinces of North Brabant and Limburg, but also in Overijssel, especially in Twente. While Dutch Carnaval is officially celebrated on the Sunday through Tuesday preceding Ash Wednesday, since the 1970s the feast has gradually started earlier and generally includes now the preceding weekend. Although traditions vary from town to town, Dutch carnaval usually includes a parade, a \"Prince Carnival\" plus cort\u00e8ge (\"Council of 11\", sometimes with a Jester or Adjutant), sometimes also the handing over by the mayor of the symbolic keys of the town to Prince Carnival, the burning or burial of a symbolic figure, a peasant wedding (\"boerenbruiloft\"), and eating herring (\"haring happen\") on Ash Wednesday.\nTwo main variants can be distinguished: the \"Rhineland carnaval\", found in the province of Limburg, and the \"Bourgondische carnaval\", found mainly in North Brabant. Maastricht, Limburg's capital, holds a street carnaval that features elaborate costumes.\nThe first known documentation dates from the late 8th century (\"Indiculus superstitionum et paganiarum\"), but Carnaval was already mentioned during the First Council of Nicaea in 325 and by Caesarius of Arles (470\u2013542) around 500 CE. In the Netherlands itself, the first documentation is found in 1383 in 's-Hertogenbosch. The oldest-known images of Dutch Carnaval festivities date from 1485, also in 's-Hertogenbosch.\nNormal daily life comes to a stop for about a week in the southern part of the Netherlands during the carnival, with roads temporary blocked and many local businesses closed for the week as a result of employees who are en masse taking the days off during and the day after the carnival.\nNorth Macedonia.\nThe most popular Carnivals in North Macedonia are in Vev\u010dani and Strumica.\nThe Vev\u010dani Carnival (Macedonian: \u0412\u0435\u0432\u0447\u0430\u043d\u0441\u043a\u0438 K\u0430\u0440\u043d\u0435\u0432\u0430\u043b, translated \"Vevchanski Karneval\") has been held for over 1,400 years, and takes place on 13 and 14 January (New Year's Eve and New Year's Day by the old calendar). The village becomes a live theatre where costumed actors improvise on the streets in roles such as the traditional \"August the Stupid\".\nThe Strumica Carnival (Macedonian: \u0421\u0442\u0440\u0443\u043c\u0438\u0447\u043a\u0438 \u041a\u0430\u0440\u043d\u0435\u0432\u0430\u043b, translated \"Strumichki Karneval\") has been held since at least 1670, when the Turkish author Evlija Chelebija wrote while staying there, \"I came into a town located in the foothills of a high hillock and what I saw that night was masked people running house\u2013to\u2013house, with laughter, scream and song.\" The Carnival took an organized form in 1991; in 1994, Strumica became a member of FECC and in 1998 hosted the XVIII International Congress of Carnival Cities. The Strumica Carnival opens on a Saturday night at a masked ball where the Prince and Princess are chosen; the main Carnival night is on Tuesday, when masked participants (including groups from abroad) compete in various subjects. As of 2000, the Festival of Caricatures and Aphorisms has been held as part of Strumica's Carnival celebrations.\nPoland.\nThe Polish Carnival season includes Fat Thursday (Polish: \"T\u0142usty Czwartek\"), when \"p\u0105czki\" (doughnuts) are eaten, and \"\u015aledzik\" (Shrove Tuesday) or Herring Day. The Tuesday before the start of Lent is also often called \"Ostatki\" (literally \"leftovers\"), meaning the last day to party before the Lenten season.\nThe traditional way to celebrate Carnival is the \"kulig\", a horse-drawn sleigh ride through the snow-covered countryside. In modern times, Carnival is increasingly seen as an excuse for intensive partying and has become more commercialized, with stores offering Carnival-season sales.\nPortugal.\nCarnival is Carnaval in Portugal, celebrated throughout the country, most famously in Ovar, Sesimbra, Madeira, Loul\u00e9, Nazar\u00e9, Mealhada, and Torres Vedras. Carnaval in Podence and Lazarim incorporates pagan traditions such as the careto, while the Torres Vedras celebration is probably the most typical.\nAzores.\nOn the islands of the Azores, local clubs and Carnival groups create colorful and creative costumes that jab at politics or culture.\nOn S\u00e3o Miguel Island, Carnival features street vendors selling fried dough, called a malassada. The festival on the biggest island starts off with a black tie grand ball, followed by Latin music at Coliseu Micaelense. A children's parade fills the streets of Ponta Delgada with children from each school district in costume. A massive parade continues past midnight, ending in fireworks.\nThe event includes theatre performances and dances. In the \"Dan\u00e7as de Entrudo\", hundreds of people follow the dancers around the island. Throughout the show the dancers act out scenes from daily life. The \"Dances de Carnival\" are allegorical and comedic tales acted out in the streets. The largest is in Angra do Hero\u00edsmo, with more than 30 groups performing. More Portuguese-language theatrical performances occur there than anywhere else.\nFestivities end on Ash Wednesday, when locals sit down for the \"Batatada\" or potato feast, in which the main dish is salted cod with potatoes, eggs, mint, bread and wine. Residents then return to the streets for the burning of the \"Carnival clown\", ending the season.\nMadeira.\nOn the island of Madeira, the island's capital, Funchal, wakes up on the Friday before Ash Wednesday to the sound of brass bands and Carnival parades throughout downtown. Festivities continue with concerts and shows in the Pra\u00e7a do Munic\u00edpio for five consecutive days. The main Carnival street parade takes place on Saturday evening, with thousands of samba dancers filling the streets. The traditional street event takes place on Tuesday, featuring daring caricatures.\nArguably, Brazil's Carnival could be traced to the period of the Portuguese Age of Discoveries when their caravels passed regularly through Madeira, a territory that emphatically celebrated Carnival.\nOvar.\nCarnival in the town of Ovar, in the Aveiro Region, began in 1952 and is the region's largest festivity, representing a large investment and the most important touristic event to the city. It is known for its creative designs, displayed in the Carnival Parade, which features troupes with themed costumes and music, ranging from the traditional to pop culture. Along with the Carnival Parade, there are five nights of partying, finishing with the famous 'Magical night' where people come from all over the country, mostly with their handmade costumes, only to have fun with the locals.\nOther regions.\nIn Estarreja, in the Central region of Portugal, the town's first references to Carnival were in the 14th century, with \"Flower Battles\", richly decorated floats that paraded through the streets. At the beginning of the twentieth century, these festivities ended with the deaths of its main promoters, only to reappear again in the 1960s to become one of many important Carnival festivals in Portugal.\nIn the Northern region of Podence, children appear from Sunday to Tuesday with tin masks and colorful multilayered costumes made from red, green and yellow wool. In the Central Portugal towns of Nelas and Canas de Senhorim, Carnival is an important tourist event. Nelas and Canas de Senhorim host four festive parades that offer colorful and creative costumes: Bairro da Igreja and Cimo do Povo in Nelas and do Pa\u00e7o and do Rossio in Canas de Senhorim.\nIn Lisbon, Carnival offers parades, dances and festivities featuring stars from Portugal and Brazil. The Loures Carnival celebrates the country's folk traditions, including the \"enterro do bacalhau\" or burial of the cod, which marks the end of Carnival and the festivities.\nNorth of Lisbon is the famous Torres Vedras Carnival, described as the \"most Portuguese in Portugal\". The celebration highlight is a parade of creatively decorated streetcars that satirize society and politics.\nOther Central Portugal towns, such as F\u00e1tima and Leiria, offer colorful, family-friendly celebrations. In these towns, everyone dresses up as if it were Halloween. Children and adults wear masks.\nIn the Algarve region, several resort towns offer Carnival parades. Besides the themed floats and cars, the festivities include \"samba\" groups, bands, dances, and music.\nIn Lazarim, a civil parish in the municipality of Lamego, celebrations follow the pagan tradition of Roman Saturnalias. It celebrates by burning colorful effigies and dressing in home-made costumes. Locally-made wooden masks are worn. The masks are effigies of men and women with horns, but both roles are performed by men. They are distinguished by their clothes, with caricature attributes of both men and women.\nThe Lazarim Carnaval cycle encompasses two periods, the first starting on the fifth Sunday before Quinquagesima Sunday. Masked figures and people wearing large sculpted heads walk through the town. The locals feast on meats, above all pork. The second cycle, held on Sundays preceding Ash Wednesday, incorporates the tradition of the Compadres and Comadres, with men and women displaying light-hearted authority over the other.\nOver the five weeks, men prepare large masked heads and women raise funds to pay for two mannequins that will be sacrificed in a public bonfire. This is a key event and is unique to Portugal. During the bonfire, a girl reads the Compadre's will and a boy reads the Comadre's will. The executors of the will are named, a donkey is symbolically distributed to both female and male \"heirs\", and then there is the final reckoning in which the Entrudo, or Carnival doll, is burned.\nRussia.\nMaslenitsa (, also called \"Pancake Week\" or \"Cheese Week\") is a Russian folk holiday that incorporates some pagan traditions. It is celebrated during the last week before Lent. The essential element is bliny, Russian pancakes, popularly taken to symbolize the sun. Round and golden, they are made from the rich foods allowed that week by the Orthodox traditions: butter, eggs, and milk. (In the tradition of Orthodox Lent, the consumption of meat ceases one week before that of milk and eggs.)\nMaslenitsa also includes masquerades, snowball fights, sledding, swinging on swings, and sleigh rides. The mascot is a brightly dressed straw effigy of Lady Maslenitsa, formerly known as Kostroma. The celebration culminates on Sunday evening, when Lady Maslenitsa is stripped of her finery and put to the flames of a bonfire.\nSlovakia.\nIn Slovakia, the Fa\u0161iangy (\"fa\u0161iang\", \"fa\u0161angy\") takes place from Three Kings Day (\"Traja kr\u00e1li\") until the midnight before Ash Wednesday (\"\u0160kared\u00e1 streda\" or \"Popolcov\u00e1 streda\"). At the midnight marking the end of \"fa\u0161iangy\", a symbolic burial ceremony for the contrabass is performed, because music ceases for Lent.\nSlovenia.\nThe Slovenian name for carnival is \"pust\". The Slovenian countryside displays a variety of disguised groups and individual characters, among which the most popular and characteristic is the Kurent (plural: \"Kurenti\"), a monstrous and demon-like, but fluffy figure. The most significant festival is held in Ptuj (see: Kurentovanje). Its special feature are the Kurents themselves, magical creatures from another world, who visit major events throughout the country, trying to banish the winter and announce spring's arrival, fertility, and new life with noise and dancing. The origin of the Kurent is a mystery, and not much is known of the times, beliefs, or purposes connected with its first appearance. The origin of the name itself is obscure.\nThe Cerknica Carnival is heralded by a figure called \"Poganji\u010d\" carrying a whip. In the procession, organised by the \"Pust society\", a monstrous witch named Ur\u0161ula is driven from the mountain Slivnica, to be burned at the stake on Ash Wednesday. Unique to this region is a group of dormice, driven by the Devil and a huge fire-breathing dragon. Cerkno and its surrounding area are known for the \"Laufarji\", Carnival figures with artistically carved wooden masks.\nThe \"Ma\u0161kare\" from Dobrepolje used to represent a triple character: the beautiful, the ugly (among which the most important represented by an old man, an old woman, a hunchback, and a \"Kurent\"), and the noble (imitating the urban elite).\nThe major part of the population, especially the young and children, dress up in ordinary non-ethnic costumes, going to school, work, and organized events, where prizes are given for the best and most original costumes. Costumed children sometimes go from house to house asking for treats.\nSpain.\nArguably the most famous Carnivals in Spain are Santa Cruz, Las Palmas, Sitges, Vilanova i la Geltr\u00fa, Tarragona, \u00c1guilas, Solsona, C\u00e1diz, Badajoz, Bielsa (an ancestral Carnival celebration), Plan, San Juan de Plan, Laza, Ver\u00edn, Viana, and Xinzo de Limia.\nOne of the oldest pre-Indo-European carnival in Europe takes place in Ituren and Zubieta in Navarre in late January/early February. The carnival symbolises the eternal struggle between the forces of good and evil, light and darkness, winter and spring.\nAndalusia.\nIn C\u00e1diz, the costumes worn are often related to recent news, such as the bird flu epidemic in 2006, during which many people were disguised as chickens. The feeling of this Carnival is the sharp criticism, the funny play on words and the imagination in the costumes, more than the glamorous dressings. It is traditional to paint the face with lipstick as a humble substitute of a mask.\nThe most famous groups are the chirigotas, choirs, and comparsas. The chirigotas are well known witty, satiric popular groups who sing about politics, new times, and household topics, wearing the same costume, which they prepare for the whole year. The Choirs (\"coros\") are wider groups that go on open carts through the streets singing with an orchestra of guitars and lutes. Their signature piece is the \"Carnival Tango\", alternating comical and serious repertory. The comparsas are the serious counterpart of the chirigota in C\u00e1diz, and the poetic lyrics and the criticism are their main ingredients. They have a more elaborated polyphony that is easily recognizable by the typical countertenor voice.\nCanary Islands.\nThe Santa Cruz Carnival is, with the Carnival of Cadiz, the most important festival for Spanish tourism and Spain's largest Carnival. In 1980, it was declared a Festival Tourist International Interest. Every February, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, the capital of the largest of the Canary Islands, hosts the event, attracting around a million people.\nIn 1980, it was declared a Festival Tourist International Interest. In 1987, Cuban singer Celia Cruz with orchestra Billo's Caracas Boys performed at the \"Carnival Chicharrero\", attended by 250,000 people. This was registered in the \"Guinness Book of World Records\" as the largest gathering of people in an outdoor plaza to attend a concert, a record she holds today.\nThe Carnival of Las Palmas (Gran Canaria) has a drag queen's gala where a jury chooses a winner.\nCatalonia.\nIn Catalonia, people dress in masks and costume (often in themed groups) and organize a week-long series of parties, pranks, outlandish activities such as bed races, street dramas satirizing public figures, and raucous processions to welcome the arrival of \"Sa Majestat el Rei Carnestoltes\" (\"His Majesty King Carnival\"), known by various titles, including \"el Rei dels poca-soltes\" (\"King of the crackpots\"), \"Princep etern de Cornudella\" (\"eternal Prince of Cuckoldry\"), (\"Duke of the fool and corrupt\"), \"Marqu\u00e8s de la bona mamella\" (\"Marquis of the lovely breast\"), \"Comte de tots els barruts\" (\"Count of the insolent\"), \"Bar\u00f3 de les Calaverades\" (\"Baron of mocturnal debaucheries\"), and (\"Lord of the tall blooming Banana, of the voyeurs and punks and the artist of honor upon the bed\").\nThe King presides over a period of misrule in which conventional social rules may be broken and reckless behavior is encouraged. Festivities are held in the open air, beginning with a \"cercavila\", a ritual procession throughout the town to call everyone to attend. \"Rues\" of masked revelers dance alongside. On Thursday, \"Dijous Gras\" (Fat Thursday) is celebrated, also called 'omelette day' (el \"dia de la truita\"), on which \"coques\" (), and omelettes are eaten. The festivities end on Ash Wednesday with elaborate funeral rituals marking the death of King Carnival, who is typically burned on a pyre in what is called the \"burial of the sardine\" (\"enterrament de la sardina\"), or, in Vilanova, as \"l'enterro\".\nThe Carnival of Vilanova i la Geltr\u00fa has a documented history from 1790 and is one of the richest in the variety of its acts and rituals. It adopts an ancient style in which satire, the grotesque body (particularly cross-dressing and displays of exaggerated bellies, noses, and phalli), and, above all, active participation are valued over glamorous, media-friendly spectacles that Vilanovins mock as \"thighs and feathers\". It is best known for \"Les Comparses\", a tumultuous dance held on Sunday in which thousands of dancers in traditional dresses and \"Mantons de Manila\" (Manila Shawls), organized into groups of couples march in the street forming lines while throwing tons of hard candies at one another. Vilanovinians organize several rituals during the week. On \"Dijous Gras,\" Vilanovin children are excused from school to participate in the \"Merengada,\" a day-long scene of eating and fighting with sticky, sweet meringue while adults have a meringue battle at midnight at the historic \"Pla\u00e7a de les Cols\".\nOn Friday citizens are called to a parade for the arrival of King Carnival called \"l'Arrivo\" that changes every year. It includes a raucous procession of floats and dancers lampooning current events or public figures and a bitingly satiric sermon (\"el sermo\") delivered by the King himself. On Saturday, the King's procession and his concubines scandalize the town with their sexual behavior; the mysterious \"Moixo Foguer\" (Little-Bird-Bonfire) is shown accompanied by the \"Xerraire\" (jabberer), who try to convince the crowd about the wonders that this mighty bird carries in a box (which ends up being in fact a naked person covered in feathers); and other items such as: sport acts and barbecues in the streets; the \"talking-dance\" of the Mismatched Couples (\"Ball de Malcasats\"); the children's King \"Caramel\" whose massive belly, long nose and sausage-like hair hint at his insatiable appetites; or the debauched \"Nit dels Mascarots\" dance.\nAfter Sunday, vilanovinians continue its Carnival with the children's party \"Vidalet\", the satirical chorus of Carnestoltes songs and the last night of revelry, the \"Vidalot.\" For the King's funeral, people dress in elaborate mourning costume, many of them cross-dressing men who carry bouquets of phallic vegetables. In the funeral house, the body of the King is surrounded by weeping concubines, crying over the loss of sexual pleasure brought about by his death. The King's body is carried to the \"Pla\u00e7a de la Vila\" where a satiric eulogy is delivered while the townspeople eat salty grilled sardines with bread and wine, suggesting the symbolic cannibalism of the communion ritual. Finally, amid rockets and explosions, the King's body is burned in a massive pyre.\nCarnaval de Solsona takes place in Solsona, Lleida. It is one of the longest; free events in the streets and nightly concerts run for more than a week. The Carnival is known for a legend that explains how a donkey was hung at the tower bell \u2212 because the animal wanted to eat grass that grew on the top of the tower. To celebrate this legend, locals hang a stuffed donkey at the tower that \"pisses\" above the excited crowd using a water pump. This event is the most important and takes place on Saturday night. For this reason, the inhabitants are called \"matarrucs\" (\"donkey killers\").\n\"Comparses\" groups organize free activities. These groups of friends create and personalize a uniformed suit to wear during the festivities.\nIn Sitges, special feasts include (\"xat\u00f3\" is a traditional local salad of the Pened\u00e8s coast) served with omelettes. Two important moments are the \"Rua de la Disbauxa\" (Debauchery Parade) on Sunday night and the \"Rua de l'Extermini\" (Extermination Parade) on Tuesday night. In 2022, the Rua de la Disbauxa hosted 34 floats and over 1,200 participants.\nTarragona has one of the region's most complete ritual sequences. The events start with the building of a huge barrel and ends with its burning with the effigies of the King and Queen. On Saturday, the main parade takes place with masked groups, zoomorphic figures, music, and percussion bands, and groups with fireworks (the devils, the dragon, the ox, the female dragon). Carnival groups stand out for their clothes full of elegance, showing brilliant examples of fabric crafts, at the Saturday and Sunday parades. About 5,000 people are members of the parade groups.\nGalicia.\nIn Galicia, the celebration is commonly known as \"Entroido\", or otherwise \"Antroido\", \"Entroiro\", \"Entruido\" or \"Entrudio\". Throughout history, the cities, towns and villages of Galicia had poor connections between each other, so \"Entroidos\" are very diverse with different cultural traditions and characters based in the zone you're in. Nine Entroido celebrations have been declared as places of touristic interest in Galicia: Xinzo de Limia, Cobres, Laza, Ver\u00edn, Felos de Maceda, Xenerais do Ulla, Vilari\u00f1o de Conso, Androlla and Viana do Bolo and Manzaneda.\nIn Galician cuisine, there are various traditional dishes of \"Entroido\", such as \"Filloas\" (a dish similar to cr\u00eapes) and \"Orellas\" (A traditional dish of Catalonia and the Valencian Community, but also traditionally served in Galician and French carnivals). Other traditional foods include Chorizo, Lac\u00f3n, Caldo, Androlla and Pig Heads.\nValencian Community.\nOne of the most important Spanish Carnival Festivals is celebrated in Vinar\u00f2s, a small town situated in the northern part of the province of Castell\u00f3n, Valencian Community.\nThe Carnival Festival in Vinar\u00f2s has been declared of Regional Touristic Interest and in 2017, this outstanding and ancient show celebrated 35 years of History. The Carnival Festival in Vinar\u00f2s became a forbidden celebration during the Spanish Civil War but after the dictatorship, the party regained importance with the democracy's arrival.\nEvery year in February, forty days before the Spanish Cuaresma, thirty-three \"comparsas\" go singing, dancing and walking down the streets in a great costumes' parade in Vinar\u00f2s. In addition, many other festive, cultural and musical activities of all ages take place, such as an epic battle of confetti and flour, funny karaoke contests or the so-called \"Entierro de la Sardina\" (Burial of the Sardine).\nNevertheless, the most important event is the gala performance of the Carnival's Queen. In this breathtaking show, it is elected the Queen of the Carnival, the major representative of the Carnival in Vinar\u00f2s all year round.\nTurkey.\nFor almost five centuries, local Greek Orthodox communities throughout Istanbul celebrated Carnival with weeks of bawdy parades, lavish balls, and street parties. This continued for weeks before Lent. Baklahorani took place on Shrove Monday or Clean Monday, the last day of the carnival season. The event was led by the Greek Orthodox community, but the celebrations were public and inter-communal. The final celebration was sited in the Kurtulu\u015f district. In 2010, the festival was revived.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn England, the three days before Lent were called Shrovetide. A time for confessing sins (\"shriving\"), it had fewer festivities than the continental Carnivals. Today, Shrove Tuesday is celebrated as Pancake Day, but little else of the Lent-related Shrovetide survived the 16th-century English Reformation.\nSince 2012, Hastings in East Sussex has celebrated with its own Mardi Gras, or Fat Tuesday. Five days of music and street events culminating with a Grand Ball on Fat Tuesday itself. Loosely based on the New Orleans style of carnival, Hastings has taken its own course.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38484", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38484", "title": "Artois", "text": "Region of northern France\nArtois ( , ; ; Picard: \"Arto\u00e9;\" English adjective: \"Artesian\") is a region of northern France. Its territory covers an area of about 4,000\u00a0km2 and it has a population of about one million. Its principal cities include Arras (Dutch: \"Atrecht\"), Saint-Omer, Lens, and B\u00e9thune. It is the eponym for the term \"Artesian\".\nLocation.\nArtois occupies the interior of the Pas-de-Calais \"d\u00e9partement\", the western part of which constitutes the former Boulonnais. Artois roughly corresponds to the arrondissements of Arras, B\u00e9thune, Saint Omer, and Lens, and the eastern part of the arrondissement of Montreuil. It occupies the western end of the coalfield which stretches eastward through the neighbouring Nord \"d\u00e9partement\" and across central Belgium.\nHistory.\nOriginally a feudal county itself, Artois was annexed by the county of Flanders. It came to France in 1180 as a dowry of a Flemish princess, Isabelle of Hainaut, and was again made a separate county in 1237 for Robert, a grandson of Isabelle. Through inheritance, Artois came under the rule of the dukes of Burgundy in 1384. At the death of the fourth duke, Charles the Bold, Artois was inherited by the Habsburgs and passed to the dynasty's Spanish line. After the religious revolts of 1566 in the Netherlands, Artois briefly entered the Dutch Revolt in 1576, participating in the Pacification of Ghent until it formed the Union of Atrecht in 1579.\nAfter the Union of Atrecht, Artois and Hainaut (Dutch: \"Henegouwen\") reached a separate agreement with Philip II. Artois remained with the Spanish Netherlands until it was conquered by France during the Franco-Spanish War. The annexation was acknowledged during the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659, and it became a French province. Artois had already been largely French-speaking, but it was part of the Southern Netherlands until the French annexation.\nArtois experienced rapid industrial development during the second half of the 19th century, fueled by its rich coal resources. During World War I, the front line between the opposing Central Powers and Allied armies in France ran through the province, resulting in enormous physical damage. Since the second half of the 20th century, Artois has suffered along with nearby areas because of the decline of the coal industry.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38485", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38485", "title": "Geometry in R2", "text": ""}
{"id": "38486", "revid": "1659234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38486", "title": "List of Anuran families", "text": "This list of Anuran families shows all extant families of Anura. Anura is an order of animals in the class Amphibia that includes frogs and toads. More than 5,000 species are described in the order. The living anurans are typically divided into three suborders: Archaeobatrachia, Mesobatrachia, and Neobatrachia. This classification is based on such morphological features as the number of vertebrae, the structure of the pectoral girdle, and the morphology of tadpoles.\nTaxonomy.\nThe archaeobatrachians are the most primitive of frogs. These frogs have morphological characteristics which are found mostly in extinct frogs, and are absent in most of the modern frog species. Most of these characteristics are not common between all the families of Archaeobatrachia, or are not absent from all the modern species of frogs. However, all archaeobatrachians have free vertebrae, whereas all other species of frogs have their ribs fused to their vertebrae.\nThe Neobatrachia comprise the most modern species of frogs. Most of these frogs have morphological features which are more complex than those of the mesobatrachians and archaeobatrachians. The neobatrachians all have a palatine bone, which braces the upper jaw to the neurocranium. This is absent in all Archaeobatrachia and some Mesobatrachia. The third distal carpus is fused with the remaining carpal bones. The adductor longus muscle is present in the neobatrachians, but absent in the archaeobatrachians and some mesobatrachians. It is believed to have differentiated from pectineus muscle, and this differentiation has not occurred in the primitive frogs. \nThe Mesobatrachia are considered the evolutionary link between the Archaeobatrachia and the Neobatrachia. The families within the mesobatrachian suborder generally contain morphological features typical of both the other suborders. For example, the palatine bone is absent in all archaeobatrachians, and present in all neobatrachians. However, within the mesobatrachians families, it can be dependent on the species as to whether the palatine bone is present.\nDue to the many morphological features which separate the frogs, many different systems are used for the classification of the anuran suborders. These different classification systems usually split the Mesobatrachia suborder."}
{"id": "38490", "revid": "49291118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38490", "title": "Drummer", "text": "Percussionist who creates and accompanies music using drums\nA drummer is a percussionist who creates music using drums. Most contemporary western bands that play rock, pop, jazz, or R&amp;B music include a drummer for purposes including timekeeping and embellishing the musical timbre. The drummer's equipment includes a drum kit (or \"drum set\" or \"trap set\"), which includes various drums, cymbals and an assortment of accessory hardware such as pedals, standing support mechanisms, and drum sticks.\nParticularly in the traditional music of many countries, drummers use individual drums of various sizes and designs rather than drum kits. Some use only their hands to strike the drums.\nIn larger ensembles, the drummer may be part of a rhythm section with other percussionists playing. These musicians provide the timing and rhythmic foundation which allow the players of melodic instruments, including voices, to coordinate their musical performance.\nSome famous drummers include: Max Roach, Ringo Starr (the Beatles), John Bonham (Led Zeppelin), Ginger Baker (Cream), Keith Moon (the Who), Neil Peart (Rush), Buddy Rich, Gene Krupa, Tony Williams, Elvin Jones, Sheila E, Brian Blade, Jack DeJohnette, Tim \"Herb\" Alexander (Primus), Phil Rudd (AC/DC), Roger Taylor (Queen), Charlie Watts (the Rolling Stones), Nick Mason (Pink Floyd), Bill Ward (Black Sabbath), Chad Smith (Red Hot Chili Peppers), Travis Barker (Blink-182), Phil Collins (Genesis), Rick Allen (Def Leppard), Alex Van Halen (Van Halen), Tr\u00e9 Cool (Green Day), Dave Grohl (Nirvana), Joey Jordison (Slipknot), Lars Ulrich (Metallica), Tommy Lee (M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce), James \u201cThe Rev\u201d Sullivan (Avenged Sevenfold) and Cesar Zuiderwijk (Golden Earring).\nAs well as the primary rhythmic function, in some musical styles, such as world, jazz, classical, and electronica, the drummer is called upon to provide solo and lead performances, at times when the main feature of the music is the rhythmic development. Drummers tend to possess considerable stamina and hands-eyes-legs coordination.\nThere are many tools that a drummer can use for either timekeeping or soloing.\nThese include cymbals (china, crash, ride, splash, hi-hats, etc.), snare, toms, \nauxiliary percussion (bells, Latin drums, cowbells, temple blocks) and many others.\nThere are also single, double, and triple bass pedals that drummers may use for the bass drum.\nMilitary.\nBefore motorized transport became widespread, drummers played a key role in military conflicts. Military drummers provided drum cadences that set a steady marching pace and elevated troop morale on the battlefield. In some armies drums also assisted in combat by keeping cadence for firing and loading drills with muzzle loading guns. Military drummers were also employed on the parade field, when troops passed in review, and in various ceremonies including ominous drum rolls accompanying disciplinary punishments. Children also served as drummer boys well into the nineteenth century, though less commonly than is popularly assumed; due to the nature of the job, experienced older men were preferred.\nIn modern times, drummers are not employed in battle, but their ceremonial duties continue. Typically buglers and drummers mass under a sergeant-drummer and during marches alternately perform with the regiment or battalion ensembles.\nMilitary-based musical percussion traditions were not limited exclusively to the western world. When Emir Osman I was appointed commander of the Turkish army on the Byzantine border in the late 13th century, he was symbolically installed via a handover of musical instruments by the Seldjuk sultan. In the Ottoman Empire, the size of a military band reflected the rank of its commander in chief: the largest band was reserved for the Sultan (viz. his Grand Vizier when taking the field). It included various percussion instruments, often adopted in European military music (as 'Janissary music'). The pitched bass drum is still known in some languages as the Turkish Drum.\nMilitary drumming is the origin of Traditional grip as opposed to Matched grip of drumsticks.\nParades.\nThe drumline is a type of marching ensemble descended from military drummers, and can be arranged as a performance of a drum, a group of drummers, or as a part of a larger marching band. Their uniforms will often have a military style and a fancy hat. In recent times, it is more common to see drummers in parades wearing costumes with an African, Asian, Latin, Native American, or tribal look and sound.\nCultural drumming.\nVarious indigenous cultures use the drum to create a sense of unity with others especially during recreational events. The drum also helps in prayers and meditations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38493", "revid": "10370269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38493", "title": "Genus", "text": "Taxonomic rank above species and below family\nGenus (; pl.: genera ) is a taxonomic rank above species and below family as used in the biological classification of living and fossil organisms as well as viruses. In binomial nomenclature, the genus name forms the first part of the binomial species name for each species within the genus.\nE.g. \"Panthera leo\" (lion) and \"Panthera onca\" (jaguar) are two species within the genus \"Panthera\". \"Panthera\" is a genus within the family Felidae.\nThe composition of a genus is determined by taxonomists. The standards for genus classification are not strictly codified, so different authorities often produce different classifications for genera. There are some general practices used, however, including the idea that a newly defined genus should fulfill these three criteria to be descriptively useful:\nMoreover, genera should be composed of phylogenetic units of the same kind as other (analogous) genera.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"genus\" comes from Latin , a noun form cognate with \"\" ('to bear; to give birth to'). The Swedish taxonomist Carl Linnaeus popularized its use in his 1753 \"Species Plantarum\", but the French botanist Joseph Pitton de Tournefort (1656\u20131708) is considered \"the founder of the modern concept of genera\".\nUse.\nThe scientific name (or the scientific epithet) of a genus is also called the \"generic name\"; in modern style guides and science, it is always capitalized. It plays a fundamental role in binomial nomenclature, the system of naming organisms, where it is combined with the scientific name of a species: see Botanical name and Specific name (zoology).\nUse in nomenclature.\nThe rules for the scientific names of organisms are laid down in the nomenclature codes, which allow each species a single unique name that, for animals (including protists), plants (also including algae and fungi) and prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea), is Latin and binomial in form; this contrasts with common or vernacular names, which are non-standardized, can be non-unique, and typically also vary by country and language of usage.\nThe standard format for a species name comprises the generic name, indicating the genus to which the species belongs, followed by the specific epithet, which (within that genus) is unique to the species. For example, the gray wolf's scientific name is \"\", with \"Canis\" (Latin for 'dog') being the generic name shared by the wolf's close relatives and (Latin for 'wolf') being the specific name particular to the wolf. A botanical example would be \"Hibiscus arnottianus\", a particular species of the genus \"Hibiscus\" native to Hawaii. The specific name is written in lower-case and may be followed by subspecies names in zoology or a variety of infraspecific names in botany.\nWhen the generic name is already known from context, it may be shortened to its initial letter, for example, \"C. lupus\" in place of \"Canis lupus\". Where species are further subdivided, the generic name (or its abbreviated form) still forms the leading portion of the scientific name, for example, ' for the Eurasian wolf subspecies, or as a botanical example, ' subsp. \"\". Also, as visible in the above examples, the Latinised portions of the scientific names of genera and their included species (and infraspecies, where applicable) are, by convention, written in italics.\nAs with scientific names at other ranks, in all groups other than viruses, names of genera may be cited with their authorities, typically in the form \"author, year\" in zoology, and \"standard abbreviated author name\" in botany. Thus in the examples above, the genus \"Canis\" would be cited in full as \"\"Canis\" Linnaeus, 1758\" (zoological usage), while \"Hibiscus\", also first established by Linnaeus but in 1753, is simply \"\"Hibiscus\" L.\" (botanical usage).\nThe type concept.\nEach genus should have a designated type, although in practice there is a backlog of older names without one. In zoology, this is the type species, and the generic name is permanently associated with the type specimen of its type species. Should the specimen turn out to be assignable to another genus, the generic name linked to it becomes a junior synonym and the remaining taxa in the former genus need to be reassessed.\nCategories of generic name.\nIn zoological usage, taxonomic names, including those of genera, are classified as \"available\" or \"unavailable\". Available names are those published in accordance with the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature; the earliest such name for any taxon (for example, a genus) should then be selected as the \"valid\" (i.e., current or accepted) name for the taxon in question.\nConsequently, there will be more available names than valid names at any point in time; which names are currently in use depending on the judgement of taxonomists in either combining taxa described under multiple names, or splitting taxa which may bring available names previously treated as synonyms back into use. \"Unavailable\" names in zoology comprise names that either were not published according to the provisions of the ICZN Code, e.g., incorrect original or subsequent spellings, names published only in a thesis, and generic names published after 1930 with no type species indicated. According to \"Glossary\" section of the zoological Code, suppressed \"names\" (per published \"Opinions\" of the International Commission of Zoological Nomenclature) remain available but cannot be used as the valid name for a taxon; however, the names published in suppressed \"works\" are made unavailable via the relevant Opinion dealing with the work in question.\nIn botany, similar concepts exist but with different labels. The botanical equivalent of zoology's \"available name\" is a validly published name. An invalidly published name is a or ; a rejected name is a or ; a later homonym of a validly published name is a or ; for a full list refer to the \"International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants\" and the work cited above by Hawksworth, 2010. In place of the \"valid taxon\" in zoology, the nearest equivalent in botany is \"correct name\" which can, again, differ or change with alternative taxonomic treatments or new information that results in previously accepted genera being combined or split.\nProkaryote and virus codes of nomenclature also exist which serve as a reference for designating currently accepted genus names as opposed to others which may be either reduced to synonymy, or, in the case of prokaryotes, relegated to a status of \"names without standing in prokaryotic nomenclature\".\nAn \"available\" (zoological) or \"validly published\" (botanical) name that has been historically applied to a genus but is not regarded as the accepted (current/valid) name for the taxon is termed a synonym; some authors also include unavailable names in lists of synonyms as well as available names, such as misspellings, names previously published without fulfilling all of the requirements of the relevant nomenclatural code, and rejected or suppressed names.\nA particular genus name may have zero to many synonyms, the latter case generally if the genus has been known for a long time and redescribed as new by a range of subsequent workers, or if a range of genera previously considered separate taxa have subsequently been consolidated into one. For example, the World Register of Marine Species presently lists 8 genus-level synonyms for the sperm whale genus \"Physeter\" Linnaeus, 1758, and 13 for the bivalve genus \"Pecten\" O.F. M\u00fcller, 1776.\nIdentical names (homonyms).\nWithin the same kingdom, one generic name can apply to one genus only. However, many names have been assigned (usually unintentionally) to two or more different genera. For example, the platypus belongs to the genus \"Ornithorhynchus\" although George Shaw named it \"Platypus\" in 1799 (these two names are thus \"synonyms\"). However, the name \"Platypus\" had already been given to a group of ambrosia beetles by Johann Friedrich Wilhelm Herbst in 1793. A name that means two different things is a \"homonym\". Since beetles and platypuses are both members of the kingdom Animalia, the name could not be used for both. Johann Friedrich Blumenbach published the replacement name \"Ornithorhynchus\" in 1800.\nHowever, a genus in one kingdom is allowed to bear a scientific name that is in use as a generic name (or the name of a taxon in another rank) in a kingdom that is governed by a different nomenclature code. Names with the same form but applying to different taxa are called \"homonyms\". Although this is discouraged by both the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature and the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants, there are some five thousand such names in use in more than one kingdom. For instance,\nA list of generic homonyms (with their authorities), including both available (validly published) and selected unavailable names, has been compiled by the Interim Register of Marine and Nonmarine Genera (IRMNG).\nUse in higher classifications.\nThe type genus forms the base of names for higher taxonomic ranks, such as the name of the family Poaceae (true grasses), as well as the order Poales, based on the genus \"Poa\".\nNumbers of accepted genera.\nThe numbers of either accepted, or all published genus names is not known precisely; Rees et al., 2020 estimate that approximately 310,000 accepted names (valid taxa) may exist, out of a total of c. 520,000 published names (including synonyms) as at end 2019, increasing at some 2,500 published generic names per year. \"Official\" registers of taxon names at all ranks, including genera, exist for a few groups only such as viruses and prokaryotes, while for others there are compendia with no \"official\" standing such as \"Index Fungorum\" for fungi, \"Index Nominum Algarum\" and AlgaeBase for algae, \"Index Nominum Genericorum\" and the International Plant Names Index for plants in general, and ferns through angiosperms, respectively, and \"Nomenclator Zoologicus\" and the Index to Organism Names for zoological names.\nTotals for both \"all names\" and estimates for \"accepted names\" as held in the \"Interim Register of Marine and Nonmarine Genera\" (IRMNG) are broken down further in the publication by Rees et al., 2020 cited above. The accepted names estimates are as follows, broken down by kingdom:\nThe cited ranges of uncertainty arise because IRMNG lists \"uncertain\" names (not researched therein) in addition to known \"accepted\" names; the values quoted are the mean of \"accepted\" names alone (all \"uncertain\" names treated as unaccepted) and \"accepted + uncertain\" names (all \"uncertain\" names treated as accepted), with the associated range of uncertainty indicating these two extremes.\nWithin Animalia, the largest phylum is Arthropoda, with 151,697 \u00b1 33,160 accepted genus names, of which 114,387 \u00b1 27,654 are insects (class Insecta). Within Plantae, Tracheophyta (vascular plants) make up the largest component, with 23,236 \u00b1 5,379 accepted genus names, of which 20,845 \u00b1 4,494 are angiosperms (superclass Angiospermae).\nBy comparison, the 2018 annual edition of the Catalogue of Life (estimated &gt;90% complete, for extant species in the main) contains currently 175,363 \"accepted\" genus names for 1,744,204 living and 59,284 extinct species, also including genus names only (no species) for some groups.\nGenus size.\nThe number of species in genera varies considerably among taxonomic groups. For instance, among (non-avian) reptiles, which have about 1180 genera, the most (&gt;300) have only 1 species, roughly 360 have between 2 and 4 species, 260 have 5\u201310 species, approximately 200 have 11\u201350 species, and only 27 genera have more than 50 species. However, some insect genera such as the bee genera \"Lasioglossum\" and \"Andrena\" have over 1000 species each. The largest flowering plant genus, \"Astragalus\", contains over 3,000 species.\nWhich species are assigned to a genus is somewhat arbitrary. Although all species within a genus are supposed to be \"similar\", there are no objective criteria for grouping species into genera. There is much debate among zoologists whether enormous, species-rich genera should be maintained, as it is extremely difficult to come up with identification keys or even character sets that distinguish all species. Hence, many taxonomists argue in favor of breaking down large genera. For instance, the lizard genus \"Anolis\" has been suggested to be broken down into 8 or so different genera which would bring its approximately 400 species to smaller, more manageable subsets.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38494", "revid": "455826", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38494", "title": "Tiling", "text": "Tiling may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38498", "revid": "40817328", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38498", "title": "Frog", "text": "Order of amphibians\nA frog is any member of a diverse and largely semiaquatic group of short-bodied, tailless amphibian vertebrates composing the order Anura (coming from the Ancient Greek , literally 'without tail'). Frog species with rough skin texture due to wart-like parotoid glands tend to be called toads, but the distinction between frogs and toads is informal and purely cosmetic, not from taxonomy or evolutionary history.\nFrogs are widely distributed, ranging from the tropics to subarctic regions, but the greatest concentration of species diversity is in tropical rainforest and associated wetlands. They account for around 88% of extant amphibian species, and are one of the five most diverse vertebrate orders. The oldest fossil \"proto-frog\" \"Triadobatrachus\" is known from the Early Triassic of Madagascar (250million years ago), but molecular clock dating suggests their divergence from other amphibians may extend further back to the Permian, 265million years ago.\nAdult frogs have a stout body, protruding eyes, anteriorly-attached tongue, limbs folded underneath, and no tail (the \"tail\" of tailed frogs is an extension of the male cloaca). Frogs have glandular skin, with secretions ranging from distasteful to toxic. Their skin varies in colour from well-camouflaged dappled brown, grey and green, to vivid patterns of bright red or yellow and black to show toxicity and ward off predators. Adult frogs live in both fresh water and on dry land; some species are adapted for living underground or in trees. As their skin is semi-permeable, making them susceptible to dehydration, they either live in moist niches or have special adaptations to deal with drier habitats. Frogs produce a wide range of vocalisations, particularly in their breeding season, and exhibit many different kinds of complex behaviors to attract mates, to fend off predators and to generally survive.\nBeing oviparous anamniotes, frogs typically spawn their eggs in bodies of water. The eggs then hatch into fully aquatic larvae called tadpoles, which have tails and internal gills. A few species lay eggs on land or bypass the tadpole stage altogether. Tadpoles have highly specialised rasping mouth parts suitable for herbivorous, omnivorous or planktivorous diets. The life cycle is completed when they metamorphose into semiaquatic adults capable of terrestrial locomotion and hybrid respiration using both lungs aided by buccal pumping and gas exchange across the skin, and the larval tail regresses into an internal urostyle. Adult frogs generally have a carnivorous diet consisting of small invertebrates, especially insects, but omnivorous species exist and a few feed on plant matter. Frogs generally seize and ingest food by protruding their adhesive tongue and then swallow the item whole, often using their eyeballs and extraocular muscles to help pushing down the throat, and their digestive system is extremely efficient at converting what they eat into body mass. Being low-level consumers, both tadpoles and adult frogs are an important food source for other predators and a vital part of the food web dynamics of many of the world's ecosystems.\nFrogs (especially their muscular hindlimbs) are eaten by humans as food in many cuisines, and also have many cultural roles in literature, symbolism and religion. They are environmental bellwethers, with declines in frog populations considered early warning signs of environmental degradation. Global frog populations and diversities have declined significantly since the 1950s. More than one third of species are considered to be threatened with extinction, and over 120 are believed to have become extinct since the 1980s. Frog malformations are on the rise as an emerging fungal disease, chytridiomycosis, has spread around the world. Conservation biologists are working to solve these problems.\nEtymology and taxonomy.\nThe use of the common names \"frog\" and \"toad\" has no taxonomic justification. From a classification perspective, all members of the order Anura are frogs, but only members of the family Bufonidae are considered \"true toads\". The use of the term \"frog\" in common names usually refers to species that are aquatic or semi-aquatic and have smooth, moist skins; the term \"toad\" generally refers to species that are terrestrial with dry, warty skins. There are numerous exceptions to this rule. The European fire-bellied toad (\"Bombina bombina\") has a slightly warty skin and prefers a watery habitat whereas the Panamanian golden frog (\"Atelopus zeteki\") is in the toad family Bufonidae and has a smooth skin.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the order name \"Anura\"\u2014and its original spelling \"Anoures\"\u2014is the Ancient Greek alpha privative prefix ( from before a vowel) 'without', and () 'animal tail'. meaning \"tailless\". It refers to the tailless character of these amphibians.\nThe origins of the word \"frog\" are uncertain and debated. The word is first attested in Old English as , but the usual Old English word for the frog was (with variants such as and ), and it is agreed that the word \"frog\" is somehow related to this. Old English remained in dialectal use in English as \"frosh\" and \"frosk\" into the nineteenth century, and is paralleled widely in other Germanic languages, with examples in the modern languages including German , Norwegian , Icelandic , and Dutch \"(kik)vors\". These words allow reconstruction of a Common Germanic ancestor . The third edition of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" finds that the etymology of is uncertain, but agrees with arguments that it could plausibly derive from a Proto-Indo-European base along the lines of , meaning 'jump'.\nHow Old English gave rise to is, however, uncertain, as the development does not involve a regular sound-change. Instead, it seems that there was a trend in Old English to coin nicknames for animals ending in -\"g\", with examples\u2014themselves all of uncertain etymology\u2014including \"dog\", \"hog\", \"pig, stag\", and \"(ear)wig\". \"Frog\" appears to have been adapted from as part of this trend.\nMeanwhile, the word \"toad\", first attested as Old English , is unique to English and is likewise of uncertain etymology. It is the basis for the word \"tadpole\", first attested as Middle English , apparently meaning 'toad-head'.\nTaxonomy.\nAbout 87% of amphibian species are classified in the order Anura. These include over 7,700 species in 59 families, of which the Hylidae (1062 spp.), Strabomantidae (807 spp.), Microhylidae (758 spp.), and Bufonidae (657 spp.) are the richest in species.\nThe Anura include all modern frogs and any fossil species that fit within the anuran definition. The characteristics of anuran adults include: 9 or fewer presacral vertebrae, the presence of a urostyle formed of fused vertebrae, no tail, a long and forward-sloping ilium, shorter fore limbs than hind limbs, radius and ulna fused, tibia and fibula fused, elongated ankle bones, absence of a prefrontal bone, presence of a hyoid plate, a lower jaw without teeth (with the exception of \"Gastrotheca guentheri\") consisting of three pairs of bones (angulosplenial, dentary, and mentomeckelian, with the last pair being absent in Pipoidea), an unsupported tongue, lymph spaces underneath the skin, and a muscle, the protractor lentis, attached to the lens of the eye. The anuran larva or tadpole has a single central respiratory spiracle and mouthparts consisting of keratinous beaks and denticles.\nFrogs and toads are broadly classified into three suborders: Archaeobatrachia, which includes four families of primitive frogs; Mesobatrachia, which includes five families of more evolutionary intermediate frogs; and Neobatrachia, by far the largest group, which contains the remaining families of modern frogs, including most common species throughout the world. The suborder Neobatrachia is further divided into the two superfamilies Hyloidea and Ranoidea. This classification is based on such morphological features as the number of vertebrae, the structure of the pectoral girdle, and the morphology of tadpoles. While this classification is largely accepted, relationships among families of frogs are still debated.\nSome species of anurans hybridise readily. For instance, the edible frog (\"Pelophylax esculentus\") is a hybrid between the pool frog (\"P. lessonae\") and the marsh frog (\"P. ridibundus\"). The fire-bellied toads \"Bombina bombina\" and \"B. variegata\" are similar in forming hybrids. These are less fertile than their parents, giving rise to a hybrid zone where the hybrids are prevalent.\nEvolution.\nThe origins and evolutionary relationships between the three main groups of amphibians are hotly debated. A molecular phylogeny based on rDNA analysis dating from 2005 suggests that salamanders and caecilians are more closely related to each other than they are to frogs and the divergence of the three groups took place in the Paleozoic or early Mesozoic before the break-up of the supercontinent Pangaea and soon after their divergence from the lobe-finned fishes. This would help account for the relative scarcity of amphibian fossils from the period before the groups split. Another molecular phylogenetic analysis conducted about the same time concluded that lissamphibians first appeared about 330 million years ago and that the temnospondyl-origin hypothesis is more credible than other theories. The neobatrachians seemed to have originated in Africa/India, the salamanders in East Asia and the caecilians in tropical Pangaea. Other researchers, while agreeing with the main thrust of this study, questioned the choice of calibration points used to synchronise the data. They proposed that the date of lissamphibian diversification should be placed in the Permian, rather less than 300 million years ago, a date in better agreement with the palaeontological data. A further study in 2011 using both extinct and living taxa sampled for morphological, as well as molecular data, came to the conclusion that Lissamphibia is monophyletic and that it should be nested within Lepospondyli rather than within Temnospondyli. The study postulated that Lissamphibia originated no earlier than the late Carboniferous, some 290 to 305 million years ago. The split between Anura and Caudata was estimated as taking place 292 million years ago, rather later than most molecular studies suggest, with the caecilians splitting off 239 million years ago.\nIn 2008, \"Gerobatrachus hottoni\", a temnospondyl with many frog- and salamander-like characteristics, was discovered in Texas. It dated back 290 million years and was hailed as a missing link, a stem batrachian close to the common ancestor of frogs and salamanders, consistent with the widely accepted hypothesis that frogs and salamanders are more closely related to each other (forming a clade called Batrachia) than they are to caecilians. However, others have suggested that \"Gerobatrachus hottoni\" was only a dissorophoid temnospondyl unrelated to extant amphibians.\nSalientia (Latin \"salire\" (\"salio\"), \"to jump\") is the name of the total group that includes modern frogs in the order Anura as well as their close fossil relatives, the \"proto-frogs\" or \"stem-frogs\". The common features possessed by these proto-frogs include 14 presacral vertebrae (modern frogs have eight or 9), a long and forward-sloping ilium in the pelvis, the presence of a frontoparietal bone, and a lower jaw without teeth. The earliest known amphibians that were more closely related to frogs than to salamanders are \"Triadobatrachus massinoti\", from the early Triassic period of Madagascar (about 250 million years ago), and \"Czatkobatrachus polonicus\", from the Early Triassic of Poland (about the same age as \"Triadobatrachus\"). The skull of \"Triadobatrachus\" is frog-like, being broad with large eye sockets, but the fossil has features diverging from modern frogs. These include a longer body with more vertebrae. The tail has separate vertebrae unlike the fused urostyle or coccyx in modern frogs. The tibia and fibula bones are also separate, making it probable that \"Triadobatrachus\" was not an efficient leaper. A 2019 study has noted the presence of Salientia from the Chinle Formation, and suggested that anurans might have first appeared during the Late Triassic.\nOn the basis of fossil evidence, the earliest known \"true frogs\" that fall into the anuran lineage proper all lived in the early Jurassic period. One such early frog species, \"Prosalirus bitis\", was discovered in 1995 in the Kayenta Formation of Arizona and dates back to the Early Jurassic epoch (199.6 to 175 million years ago), making \"Prosalirus\" somewhat more recent than \"Triadobatrachus\". Like the latter, \"Prosalirus\" did not have greatly enlarged legs, but had the typical three-pronged pelvic structure of modern frogs. Unlike \"Triadobatrachus\", \"Prosalirus\" had already lost nearly all of its tail and was well adapted for jumping. Another Early Jurassic frog is \"Vieraella herbsti\", which is known only from dorsal and ventral impressions of a single animal and was estimated to be from snout to vent. \"Notobatrachus degiustoi\" from the middle Jurassic is slightly younger, about 155\u2013170 million years old. The main evolutionary changes in this species involved the shortening of the body and the loss of the tail. Tadpoles of \"N. degiustoi\" constitute the oldest tadpoles found as of 2024, dating back to 168\u2013161 million years ago. These tadpoles also showed adaptations for filter-feeding, implying residence in temporary pools by filter-feeding larvae was already commonplace. The evolution of modern Anura likely was complete by the Jurassic period. Since then, evolutionary changes in chromosome numbers have taken place about 20 times faster in mammals than in frogs, which means speciation is occurring more rapidly in mammals.\nAccording to genetic studies, the families Hyloidea, Microhylidae, and the clade Natatanura (comprising about 88% of living frogs) diversified simultaneously some 66 million years ago, soon after the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event associated with the Chicxulub impactor. All origins of arboreality (e.g. in Hyloidea and Natatanura) follow from that time and the resurgence of forest that occurred afterwards.\nFrog fossils have been found on all of the Earth's continents. In 2020, it was announced that 40 million year old helmeted frog fossils had been discovered by a team of vertebrate palaeontologists in Seymour Island on the Antarctic Peninsula, indicating that this region was once home to frogs related to those now living in South American \"Nothofagus\" forest.\nPhylogeny.\nA cladogram showing the relationships of the different families of frogs in the clade Anura can be seen in the table below. This diagram, in the form of a tree, shows how each frog family is related to other families, with each node representing a point of common ancestry. It is based on Frost \"et al.\" (2006), Heinicke \"et al.\" (2009) and Pyron and Wiens (2011).\nMorphology and physiology.\nFrogs have no tail, except as larvae. Most frogs have long hind legs, elongated ankle bones, webbed toes, no claws, large eyes, and either smooth or warty skin. They have short vertebral columns, with no more than 10 free vertebrae and fused tailbones (urostyle or coccyx). Frogs range in size from a snout\u2013vent length of (the \"Paedophryne amauensis\" of Papua New Guinea) to about (the goliath frog (\"Conraua goliath\") of central Africa, which is about ). Some extinct prehistoric species were even larger.\nFeet and legs.\nA frog's foot and leg structure is related to its habitat. Across species, these structures vary based on whether the species lives primarily on the ground, in water, in trees, or in burrows. Adult anurans have four fingers on the hands and five toes on the feet, but the smallest species often have hands and feet where some of the digits are vestigial. Frogs must be able to move quickly through their environment to catch prey and escape predators, and numerous adaptations help them to do so. Most frogs are either proficient jumpers or descend from ancestors that were, with much of the musculoskeletal morphology modified for this purpose. The tibia, fibula, and tarsals have been fused into a single strong bone, as have the radius and ulna in the fore limbs (which must absorb the impact on landing). The metatarsals have become elongated to add to the leg length, allowing frogs to push against the ground for a longer period on take-off. The ilium has elongated and formed a mobile joint with the sacrum which, in specialist jumpers such as ranids and hylids, functions as an additional limb joint to further power the leaps. The tail vertebrae have fused into a urostyle which is retracted inside the pelvis. This enables frogs to transfer force from the legs to the body during a leap.\nThe muscular system has been similarly modified. The hind limbs of ancestral frogs presumably contained pairs of muscles which would act in opposition (one muscle to flex the knee, a different muscle to extend it), as is seen in most other limbed animals. However, in modern frogs, almost all muscles have been modified to contribute to the action of jumping, with only a few small muscles remaining to bring the limb back to the starting position and maintain posture. The muscles have also been greatly enlarged, with the main leg muscles accounting for over 17% of the total mass of frogs.\nMany frogs have webbed feet and the degree of webbing is directly proportional to the amount of time the species spends in the water. The completely aquatic African dwarf frog (\"Hymenochirus\" sp.) has fully webbed toes, whereas those of White's tree frog (\"Litoria caerulea\"), an arboreal species, are only a quarter or half webbed. Exceptions include flying frogs in the Hylidae and Rhacophoridae, which also have fully webbed toes used in gliding.\nArboreal frogs have pads located on the ends of their toes to help grip vertical surfaces. These are not suction pads, the surface consisting instead of columnar cells with flat tops with small gaps between them lubricated by mucous glands. When the frog applies pressure, the cells adhere to irregularities on the surface and the grip is maintained through adhesion. This allows the frog to climb on smooth surfaces, but the system does not function efficiently when the pads are excessively wet.\nIn many arboreal frogs, a small \"intercalary structure\" on each toe increases the surface area touching the substrate. Furthermore, many arboreal frogs have hip joints that allow both hopping and walking. Some frogs that live high in trees even possess an elaborate degree of webbing between their toes. This allows the frogs to \"parachute\" or make a controlled glide from one position in the canopy to another.\nGround-dwelling frogs generally lack the adaptations of aquatic and arboreal frogs. Most have smaller toe pads, if any, and little webbing. Some burrowing frogs such as Couch's spadefoot (\"Scaphiopus couchii\") have a flap-like toe extension on the hind feet, a keratinised tubercle often referred to as a spade, that helps them to burrow.\nSometimes during the tadpole stage, one of the developing rear legs is eaten by a predator such as a dragonfly nymph. In some cases, the full leg still grows, but in others it does not, although the frog may still live out its normal lifespan with only three limbs. Occasionally, a parasitic flatworm (\"Ribeiroia ondatrae\") digs into the rear of a tadpole, causing a rearrangement of the limb bud cells and the frog develops one or more extra legs.\nSkin.\nA frog's skin is protective, has a respiratory function, can absorb water, and helps control body temperature. It has many glands, particularly on the head and back, which often exude distasteful and toxic substances (granular glands). The secretion is often sticky and helps keep the skin moist, protects against the entry of moulds and bacteria, and makes the animal slippery and more able to escape from predators. The skin is shed every few weeks. It usually splits down the middle of the back and across the belly, and the frog pulls its arms and legs free. The sloughed skin is then worked towards the head where it is quickly eaten.\nBeing cold-blooded, frogs have to adopt suitable behaviour patterns to regulate their temperature. To warm up, they can move into the sun or onto a warm surface; if they overheat, they can move into the shade or adopt a stance that exposes the minimum area of skin to the air. This posture is also used to prevent water loss and involves the frog squatting close to the substrate with its hands and feet tucked under its chin and body. The colour of a frog's skin is used for thermoregulation. In cool damp conditions, the colour will be darker than on a hot dry day. The grey foam-nest tree frog (\"Chiromantis xerampelina\") is even able to turn white to minimise the chance of overheating.\nMany frogs are able to absorb water and oxygen directly through the skin, especially around the pelvic area, but the permeability of a frog's skin can also result in water loss. Glands located all over the body exude mucus which helps keep the skin moist and reduces evaporation. Some glands on the hands and chest of males are specialised to produce sticky secretions to aid in amplexus. Similar glands in tree frogs produce a glue-like substance on the adhesive discs of the feet. Some arboreal frogs reduce water loss by having a waterproof layer of skin, and several South American species coat their skin with a waxy secretion. Other frogs have adopted behaviours to conserve water, including becoming nocturnal and resting in a water-conserving position. Some frogs may also rest in large groups with each frog pressed against its neighbours. This reduces the amount of skin exposed to the air or a dry surface, and thus reduces water loss. Woodhouse's toad (\"Bufo woodhousii\"), if given access to water after confinement in a dry location, sits in the shallows to rehydrate. The male hairy frog (\"Trichobatrachus robustus\") has dermal papillae projecting from its lower back and thighs, giving it a bristly appearance. These contain blood vessels and are thought to increase the area of the skin available for respiration.\nSome species have bony plates embedded in the skin, a trait that appears to have evolved independently several times. In certain other species, the skin at the top of the head is compacted and the connective tissue of the dermis is co-ossified with the bones of the skull (exostosis).\nCamouflage is a common defensive mechanism in frogs. Features such as warts and skin folds are usually on ground-dwelling frogs, for whom smooth skin would not provide such effective camouflage. Certain frogs change colour between night and day, as light and moisture stimulate the pigment cells and cause them to expand or contract. Some are even able to control their skin texture. The Pacific tree frog (\"Pseudacris regilla\") has green and brown morphs, plain or spotted, and changes colour depending on the time of year and general background colour. The Wood frog (\"Lithobates sylvaticus\") uses disruptive coloration including black eye markings similar to voids between leaves, bands of the dorsal skin (dorsolateral dermal plica) similar to a leaf midrib as well as stains, spots and leg stripes similar to fallen leaf features.\nRespiration and circulation.\nLike other amphibians, oxygen can pass through their highly permeable skins. This unique feature allows them to remain in places without access to the air, respiring through their skins. Ribs are generally absent, so the lungs are filled by buccal pumping and a frog deprived of its lungs can maintain its body functions without them. The fully aquatic Bornean flat-headed frog (\"Barbourula kalimantanensis\") is the first frog known to lack lungs entirely.\nFrogs have three-chambered hearts, a feature they share with lizards. Oxygenated blood from the lungs and de-oxygenated blood from the respiring tissues enter the heart through separate atria. When these chambers contract, the two blood streams pass into a common ventricle before being pumped via a spiral valve to the appropriate vessel, the aorta for oxygenated blood and pulmonary artery for deoxygenated blood.\nSome species of frog have adaptations that allow them to survive in oxygen deficient water. The Titicaca water frog (\"Telmatobius culeus\") is one such species and has wrinkly skin that increases its surface area to enhance gas exchange. It normally makes no use of its rudimentary lungs but will sometimes raise and lower its body rhythmically while on the lake bed to increase the flow of water around it.\nDigestion and excretion.\nFrogs have maxillary teeth along their upper jaw which are used to hold food before it is swallowed. These teeth are very weak, and cannot be used to chew or catch and harm agile prey. Instead, the frog uses its sticky, cleft tongue to catch insects and other small moving prey. The tongue normally lies coiled in the mouth, free at the back and attached to the mandible at the front. It can be shot out and retracted at great speed. In amphibians there are salivary glands on the tongue, which in frogs produce what is called a two-phase viscoelastic fluid. When exposed to pressure, like when the tongue is wrapping around a prey, it becomes runny and covers the prey's body. As the pressure drops, it returns to a thick and elastic state, which gives the tongue an extra grip. Some frogs have no tongue and just stuff food into their mouths with their hands. The African bullfrog (\"Pyxicephalus\"), which preys on relatively large animals such as mice and other frogs, has cone shaped bony projections called odontoid processes at the front of the lower jaw which function like teeth. The eyes assist in the swallowing of food as they can be retracted through holes in the skull and help push food down the throat.\nThe food then moves through the oesophagus into the stomach where digestive enzymes are added and it is churned up. It then proceeds to the small intestine (duodenum and ileum) where most digestion occurs. Pancreatic juice from the pancreas, and bile, produced by the liver and stored in the gallbladder, are secreted into the small intestine, where the fluids digest the food and the nutrients are absorbed. The food residue passes into the large intestine where excess water is removed and the wastes are passed out through the cloaca.\nAlthough adapted to terrestrial life, frogs resemble freshwater fish in their inability to conserve body water effectively. When they are on land, much water is lost by evaporation from the skin. The excretory system is similar to that of mammals and there are two kidneys that remove nitrogenous products from the blood. Frogs produce large quantities of dilute urine in order to flush out toxic products from the kidney tubules. The nitrogen is excreted as ammonia by tadpoles and aquatic frogs but mainly as urea, a less toxic product, by most terrestrial adults. A few species of tree frog with little access to water excrete the even less toxic uric acid. The urine passes along paired ureters to the urinary bladder from which it is vented periodically into the cloaca. All bodily wastes exit the body through the cloaca which terminates in a cloacal vent.\nReproductive system.\nIn the male frog, the two testes are attached to the kidneys and semen passes into the kidneys through fine tubes called efferent ducts. It then travels on through the ureters, which are consequently known as urinogenital ducts. There is no penis, and sperm is ejected from the cloaca directly onto the eggs as the female lays them. The ovaries of the female frog are beside the kidneys and the eggs pass down a pair of oviducts and through the cloaca to the exterior.\nWhen frogs mate, the male climbs on the back of the female and wraps his fore limbs round her body, either behind the front legs or just in front of the hind legs. This position is called amplexus and may be held for several days. The male frog has certain hormone-dependent secondary sexual characteristics. These include the development of special pads on his thumbs in the breeding season, to give him a firm hold. The grip of the male frog during amplexus stimulates the female to release eggs, usually wrapped in jelly, as spawn. In many species the male is smaller and slimmer than the female. Males have vocal cords and make a range of croaks, particularly in the breeding season, and in some species they also have vocal sacs to amplify the sound.\nNervous system.\nFrogs have a highly developed nervous system that consists of a brain, spinal cord and nerves. Many parts of frog brains correspond with those of humans. It consists of two olfactory lobes, two cerebral hemispheres, a pineal body, two optic lobes, a cerebellum and a medulla oblongata. Muscular coordination and posture are controlled by the cerebellum, and the medulla oblongata regulates respiration, digestion and other automatic functions. The relative size of the cerebrum in frogs is much smaller than it is in humans. Frogs have ten pairs of cranial nerves which pass information from the outside directly to the brain, and ten pairs of spinal nerves which pass information from the extremities to the brain through the spinal cord. By contrast, all amniotes (mammals, birds and reptiles) have twelve pairs of cranial nerves.\nSight.\nThe eyes of most frogs are located on either side of the head near the top and project outwards as hemispherical bulges. They provide binocular vision over a field of 100\u00b0 to the front and a total visual field of almost 360\u00b0. They may be the only part of an otherwise submerged frog to protrude from the water. Each eye has closable upper and lower lids and a nictitating membrane which provides further protection, especially when the frog is swimming. Members of the aquatic family Pipidae have the eyes located at the top of the head, a position better suited for detecting prey in the water above. The irises come in a range of colours and the pupils in a range of shapes. The common toad (\"Bufo bufo\") has golden irises and horizontal slit-like pupils, the red-eyed tree frog (\"Agalychnis callidryas\") has vertical slit pupils, the poison dart frog has dark irises, the fire-bellied toad (\"Bombina\" spp.) has triangular pupils and the tomato frog (\"Dyscophus\" spp.) has circular ones. The irises of the southern toad (\"Anaxyrus terrestris\") are patterned so as to blend in with the surrounding camouflaged skin.\nThe distant vision of a frog is better than its near vision. Calling frogs will quickly become silent when they see an intruder or even a moving shadow but the closer an object is, the less well it is seen. When a frog shoots out its tongue to catch an insect it is reacting to a small moving object that it cannot see well and must line it up precisely beforehand because it shuts its eyes as the tongue is extended. Although it was formerly debated, more recent research has shown that frogs can see in colour, even in very low light.\nHearing.\nFrogs can hear both in the air and below water. They do not have external ears; the eardrums (tympanic membranes) are directly exposed or may be covered by a layer of skin and are visible as a circular area just behind the eye. The size and distance apart of the eardrums is related to the frequency and wavelength at which the frog calls. In some species such as the bullfrog, the size of the tympanum indicates the sex of the frog; males have tympani that are larger than their eyes while in females, the eyes and tympani are much the same size. A noise causes the tympanum to vibrate and the sound is transmitted to the middle and inner ear. The middle ear contains semicircular canals which help control balance and orientation. In the inner ear, the auditory hair cells are arranged in two areas of the cochlea, the basilar papilla and the amphibian papilla. The former detects high frequencies and the latter low frequencies. Because the cochlea is short, frogs use electrical tuning to extend their range of audible frequencies and help discriminate different sounds. This arrangement enables detection of the territorial and breeding calls of their conspecifics. In some species that inhabit arid regions, the sound of thunder or heavy rain may arouse them from a dormant state. A frog may be startled by an unexpected noise but it will not usually take any action until it has located the source of the sound by sight.\nCall.\nThe call or croak of a frog is unique to its species. Frogs create this sound by passing air through the larynx in the throat. In most calling frogs, the sound is amplified by one or more vocal sacs, membranes of skin under the throat or on the corner of the mouth, that distend during the amplification of the call. Some frog calls are so loud that they can be heard up to a mile (1.6km) away. Additionally, some species have been found to use man-made structures such as drain pipes for artificial amplification of their call. The coastal tailed frog (\"Ascaphus truei\") lives in mountain streams in North America and does not vocalise.\nThe main function of calling is for male frogs to attract mates. Males may call individually or there may be a chorus of sound where numerous males have converged on breeding sites. In many frog species, such as the common tree frog (\"Polypedates leucomystax\"), females reply to males' calls, which acts to reinforce reproductive activity in a breeding colony. Female frogs prefer males that produce sounds of greater intensity and lower frequency, attributes that stand out in a crowd. The rationale for this is thought to be that by demonstrating his prowess, the male shows his fitness to produce superior offspring.\nA different call is emitted by a male frog or unreceptive female when mounted by another male. This is a distinct chirruping sound and is accompanied by a vibration of the body. Tree frogs and some non-aquatic species have a rain call that they make on the basis of humidity cues prior to a shower. Many species also have a territorial call that is used to drive away other males. All of these calls are emitted with the mouth of the frog closed. A distress call, emitted by some frogs when they are in danger, is produced with the mouth open resulting in a higher-pitched call. It is typically used when the frog has been grabbed by a predator and may serve to distract or disorient the attacker so that it releases the frog.\nMany species of frog have deep calls. The croak of the American bullfrog (\"Rana catesbiana\") is sometimes written as \"jug o' rum\". The Pacific tree frog (\"Pseudacris regilla\") produces the onomatopoeic \"ribbit\" often heard in films. Other renderings of frog calls into speech include \"brekekekex koax koax\", the call of the marsh frog (\"Pelophylax ridibundus\") in \"The Frogs\", an Ancient Greek comic drama by Aristophanes. The calls of the Concave-eared torrent frog (\"Amolops tormotus\") are unusual in many aspects. The males are notable for their varieties of calls where upward and downward frequency modulations take place. When they communicate, they produce calls that fall in the ultrasound frequency range. The last aspect that makes this species of frog's calls unusual is that nonlinear acoustic phenomena are important components in their acoustic signals.\nTorpor.\nDuring extreme conditions, some frogs enter a state of torpor and remain inactive for months. In colder regions, many species of frog hibernate in winter. Those that live on land such as the American toad (\"Bufo americanus\") dig a burrow and make a hibernaculum in which to lie dormant. Others, less proficient at digging, find a crevice or bury themselves in dead leaves. Aquatic species such as the American bullfrog (\"Rana catesbeiana\") normally sink to the bottom of the pond where they lie, semi-immersed in mud but still able to access the oxygen dissolved in the water. Their metabolism slows down and they live on their energy reserves. Some frogs such as the wood frog, moor frog, or spring peeper can even survive being frozen. Ice crystals form under the skin and in the body cavity but the essential organs are protected from freezing by a high concentration of glucose. An apparently lifeless, frozen frog can resume respiration and its heartbeat can restart when conditions warm up.\nAt the other extreme, the striped burrowing frog (\"Cyclorana alboguttata\") regularly aestivates during the hot, dry season in Australia, surviving in a dormant state without access to food and water for nine or ten months of the year. It burrows underground and curls up inside a protective cocoon formed by its shed skin. Researchers at the University of Queensland have found that during aestivation, the metabolism of the frog is altered and the operational efficiency of the mitochondria is increased. This means that the limited amount of energy available to the comatose frog is used in a more efficient manner. This survival mechanism is only useful to animals that remain completely unconscious for an extended period of time and whose energy requirements are low because they are cold-blooded and have no need to generate heat. Other research showed that, to provide these energy requirements, muscles atrophy, but hind limb muscles are preferentially unaffected. Frogs have been found to have upper critical temperatures of around 41 degrees Celsius.\nLocomotion.\nDifferent species of frog use a number of methods of moving around including jumping, running, walking, swimming, burrowing, climbing and gliding.\nJumping.\nFrogs are generally recognised as exceptional jumpers and, relative to their size, the best jumpers of all vertebrates. The striped rocket frog, \"Litoria nasuta\", can leap over , a distance that is more than fifty times its body length of . There are tremendous differences between species in jumping capability. Within a species, jump distance increases with increasing size, but relative jumping distance (body-lengths jumped) decreases. The Indian skipper frog (\"Euphlyctis cyanophlyctis\") has the ability to leap out of the water from a position floating on the surface. The tiny northern cricket frog (\"Acris crepitans\") can \"skitter\" across the surface of a pond with a series of short rapid jumps.\nSlow-motion photography shows that the muscles have passive flexibility. They are first stretched while the frog is still in the crouched position, then they are contracted before being stretched again to launch the frog into the air. The fore legs are folded against the chest and the hind legs remain in the extended, streamlined position for the duration of the jump. In some extremely capable jumpers, such as the Cuban tree frog (\"Osteopilus septentrionalis\") and the northern leopard frog (\"Lithobates pipiens\"), the peak power exerted during a jump can exceed that which the muscle is theoretically capable of producing. When the muscles contract, the energy is first transferred into the stretched tendon which is wrapped around the ankle bone. Then the muscles stretch again at the same time as the tendon releases its energy like a catapult to produce a powerful acceleration beyond the limits of muscle-powered acceleration. A similar mechanism has been documented in locusts and grasshoppers.\nEarly hatching of froglets can have negative effects on frog jumping performance and overall locomotion. The hindlimbs are unable to completely form, which results in them being shorter and much weaker relative to a normal hatching froglet. Early hatching froglets may tend to depend on other forms of locomotion more often, such as swimming and walking.\nWalking and running.\nFrogs in the families Bufonidae, Rhinophrynidae, and Microhylidae have short back legs and tend to walk rather than jump. When they try to move rapidly, they speed up the rate of movement of their limbs or resort to an ungainly hopping gait. The Great Plains narrow-mouthed toad (\"Gastrophryne olivacea\") has been described as having a gait that is \"a combination of running and short hops that are usually only an inch or two in length\". In an experiment, Fowler's toad (\"Anaxyrus\" \"fowleri\") was placed on a treadmill which was turned at varying speeds. By measuring the toad's uptake of oxygen it was found that hopping was an inefficient use of resources during sustained locomotion but was a useful strategy during short bursts of high-intensity activity.\nThe red-legged running frog (\"Kassina maculata\") has short, slim hind limbs unsuited to jumping. It can move fast by using a running gait in which the two hind legs are used alternately. Slow-motion photography shows, unlike a horse that can trot or gallop, the frog's gait remained similar at slow, medium, and fast speeds. This species can also climb trees and shrubs, and does so at night to catch insects. The Indian skipper frog (\"Euphlyctis cyanophlyctis\") has broad feet and can run across the surface of the water for several metres (yards).\nSwimming.\nFrogs that live in or visit water have adaptations that improve their swimming abilities. The hind limbs are heavily muscled and strong. The webbing between the toes of the hind feet increases the area of the foot and helps propel the frog powerfully through the water. Members of the family Pipidae are wholly aquatic and show the most marked specialisation. They have inflexible vertebral columns, flattened, streamlined bodies, lateral line systems, and powerful hind limbs with large webbed feet. Tadpoles mostly have large tail fins which provide thrust when the tail is moved from side to side.\nBurrowing.\nSome frogs have become adapted for burrowing and a life underground. They tend to have rounded bodies, short limbs, small heads with bulging eyes, and hind feet adapted for excavation. An extreme example of this is the purple frog (\"Nasikabatrachus sahyadrensis\") from southern India which feeds on termites and spends almost its whole life underground. It emerges briefly during the monsoon to mate and breed in temporary pools. It has a tiny head with a pointed snout and a plump, rounded body. Because of this fossorial existence, it was first described in 2003, being new to the scientific community at that time, although previously known to local people.\nThe spadefoot toads of North America are also adapted to underground life. The Plains spadefoot toad (\"Spea bombifrons\") is typical and has a flap of keratinised bone attached to one of the metatarsals of the hind feet which it uses to dig itself backwards into the ground. As it digs, the toad wriggles its hips from side to side to sink into the loose soil. It has a shallow burrow in the summer from which it emerges at night to forage. In winter, it digs much deeper and has been recorded at a depth of . The tunnel is filled with soil and the toad hibernates in a small chamber at the end. During this time, urea accumulates in its tissues and water is drawn in from the surrounding damp soil by osmosis to supply the toad's needs. Spadefoot toads are explosive breeders, all emerging from their burrows at the same time and converging on temporary pools, attracted to one of these by the calling of the first male to find a suitable breeding location.\nThe burrowing frogs of Australia have a different lifestyle. The western spotted frog (\"Heleioporus albopunctatus\") digs a burrow beside a river or in the bed of an ephemeral stream and regularly emerges to forage. Mating takes place and eggs are laid in a foam nest inside the burrow. The eggs partially develop there but do not hatch until they are submerged following heavy rainfall. The tadpoles then swim out into the open water and rapidly complete their development. Madagascan burrowing frogs are less fossorial and mostly bury themselves in leaf litter. One of these, the green burrowing frog (\"Scaphiophryne marmorata\"), has a flattened head with a short snout and well-developed metatarsal tubercles on its hind feet to help with excavation. It also has greatly enlarged terminal discs on its fore feet that help it to clamber around in bushes. It breeds in temporary pools that form after rains.\nClimbing.\nTree frogs live high in the canopy, where they scramble around on the branches, twigs, and leaves, sometimes never coming down to earth. The \"true\" tree frogs belong to the family Hylidae, but members of other frog families have independently adopted an arboreal habit, a case of convergent evolution. These include the glass frogs (Centrolenidae), the bush frogs (Hyperoliidae), some of the narrow-mouthed frogs (Microhylidae), and the shrub frogs (Rhacophoridae). Most tree frogs are under in length, with long legs and long toes with adhesive pads on the tips. The surface of the toe pads is formed from a closely packed layer of flat-topped, hexagonal epidermal cells separated by grooves into which glands secrete mucus. These toe pads, moistened by the mucus, provide the grip on any wet or dry surface, including glass. The forces involved include boundary friction of the toe pad epidermis on the surface and also surface tension and viscosity. Tree frogs are very acrobatic and can catch insects while hanging by one toe from a twig or clutching onto the blade of a windswept reed. Some members of the subfamily Phyllomedusinae have opposable toes on their feet. The reticulated leaf frog (\"Phyllomedusa ayeaye\") has a single opposed digit on each fore foot and two opposed digits on its hind feet. This allows it to grasp the stems of bushes as it clambers around in its riverside habitat.\nGliding.\nDuring the evolutionary history of frogs, several different groups have independently taken to the air. Some frogs in the tropical rainforest are specially adapted for gliding from tree to tree or parachuting to the forest floor. Typical of them is Wallace's flying frog (\"Rhacophorus nigropalmatus\") from Malaysia and Borneo. It has large feet with the fingertips expanded into flat adhesive discs and the digits fully webbed. Flaps of skin occur on the lateral margins of the limbs and across the tail region. With the digits splayed, the limbs outstretched, and these flaps spread, it can glide considerable distances, but is unable to undertake powered flight. It can alter its direction of travel and navigate distances of up to between trees.\nLife history.\nReproduction.\nTwo main types of reproduction occur in frogs, prolonged breeding and explosive breeding. In the former, adopted by the majority of species, adult frogs at certain times of year assemble at a pond, lake or stream to breed. Many frogs return to the bodies of water in which they developed as larvae. This often results in annual migrations involving thousands of individuals. In explosive breeders, mature adult frogs arrive at breeding sites in response to certain trigger factors such as rainfall occurring in an arid area. In these frogs, mating and spawning take place promptly and the speed of larval growth is rapid in order to make use of the ephemeral pools before they dry up.\nAmong prolonged breeders, males usually arrive at the breeding site first and remain there for some time whereas females tend to arrive later and depart soon after they have spawned. This means that males outnumber females at the water's edge and defend territories from which they expel other males. They advertise their presence by calling, often alternating their croaks with neighbouring frogs. Larger, stronger males tend to have deeper calls and maintain higher quality territories. Females select their mates at least partly on the basis of the depth of their voice. In some species there are satellite males who have no territory and do not call. They may intercept females that are approaching a calling male or take over a vacated territory. Calling is an energy-sapping activity. Sometimes the two roles are reversed and a calling male gives up its territory and becomes a satellite.\nIn explosive breeders, the first male that finds a suitable breeding location, such as a temporary pool, calls loudly and other frogs of both sexes converge on the pool. Explosive breeders tend to call in unison creating a chorus that can be heard from far away. The spadefoot toads (\"Scaphiopus\" spp.) of North America fall into this category. Mate selection and courtship is not as important as speed in reproduction. In some years, suitable conditions may not occur and the frogs may go for two or more years without breeding. Some female New Mexico spadefoot toads (\"Spea multiplicata\") only spawn half of the available eggs at a time, perhaps retaining some in case a better reproductive opportunity arises later.\nAt the breeding site, the male mounts the female and grips her tightly round the body. Typically, amplexus takes place in the water, the female releases her eggs and the male covers them with sperm; fertilisation is external. In many species such as the Great Plains toad (\"Bufo cognatus\"), the male restrains the eggs with his back feet, holding them in place for about three minutes. Members of the West African genus \"Nimbaphrynoides\" are unique among frogs in that they are viviparous; \"Limnonectes larvaepartus\", \"Eleutherodactylus jasperi\" and members of the Tanzanian genus \"Nectophrynoides\" are the only frogs known to be ovoviviparous. In these species, fertilisation is internal and females give birth to fully developed juvenile frogs, except \"L. larvaepartus\", which give birth to tadpoles.\nLife cycle.\nEggs / frogspawn.\nFrogs may lay their eggs as clumps, surface films, strings, or individually. Around half of species deposit eggs in water, others lay eggs in vegetation, on the ground or in excavations. The tiny yellow-striped pygmy eleuth (\"Eleutherodactylus limbatus\") lays eggs singly, burying them in moist soil. The smoky jungle frog (\"Leptodactylus pentadactylus\") makes a nest of foam in a hollow. The eggs hatch when the nest is flooded, or the tadpoles may complete their development in the foam if flooding does not occur. The red-eyed treefrog (\"Agalychnis callidryas\") deposits its eggs on a leaf above a pool and when they hatch, the larvae fall into the water below.\nIn certain species, such as the wood frog (\"Rana sylvatica\"), symbiotic unicellular green algae are present in the gelatinous material. It is thought that these may benefit the developing larvae by providing them with extra oxygen through photosynthesis. The interior of globular egg clusters of the wood frog has also been found to be up to 6\u00a0\u00b0C (11\u00a0\u00b0F) warmer than the surrounding water and this speeds up the development of the larvae. The larvae developing in the eggs can detect vibrations caused by nearby predatory wasps or snakes, and will hatch early to avoid being eaten. In general, the length of the egg stage depends on the species and the environmental conditions. Aquatic eggs normally hatch within one week when the capsule splits as a result of enzymes released by the developing larvae.\nDirect development, where eggs hatch into juveniles like small adults, is also known in many frogs, for example, \"Ischnocnema henselii,\" \"Eleutherodactylus coqui\", and \"Raorchestes ochlandrae\" and \"Raorchestes chalazodes.\"\nTadpoles.\nThe larvae that emerge from the eggs are known as tadpoles (or occasionally polliwogs). Tadpoles lack eyelids and limbs, and have cartilaginous skeletons, gills for respiration (external gills at first, internal gills later), and tails they use for swimming. As a general rule, free-living larvae are fully aquatic, but at least one species (\"Nannophrys ceylonensis\") has semiterrestrial tadpoles which live among wet rocks.\nFrom early in its development, a gill pouch covers the tadpole's gills and front legs. The lungs soon start to develop and are used as an accessory breathing organ. Some species go through metamorphosis while still inside the egg and hatch directly into small frogs. Tadpoles lack true teeth, but the jaws in most species have two elongated, parallel rows of small, keratinized structures called keradonts in their upper jaws. Their lower jaws usually have three rows of keradonts surrounded by a horny beak, but the number of rows can vary and the exact arrangements of mouth parts provide a means for species identification. In the Pipidae, with the exception of \"Hymenochirus\", the tadpoles have paired anterior barbels, which make them resemble small catfish. Their tails are stiffened by a notochord, but does not contain any bony or cartilaginous elements except for a few vertebrae at the base which forms the urostyle during metamorphosis. This has been suggested as an adaptation to their lifestyles; because the transformation into frogs happens very fast, the tail is made of soft tissue only, as bone and cartilage take a much longer time to be broken down and absorbed. The tail fin and tip is fragile and will easily tear, which is seen as an adaptation to escape from predators which try to grasp them by the tail.\nTadpoles are typically herbivorous, feeding mostly on algae, including diatoms filtered from the water through the gills. Some species are carnivorous at the tadpole stage, eating insects, smaller tadpoles, and fish. The Cuban tree frog (\"Osteopilus septentrionalis\") is one of a number of species in which the tadpoles can be cannibalistic. Tadpoles that develop legs early may be eaten by the others, so late developers may have better long-term survival prospects.\nTadpoles are highly vulnerable to being eaten by fish, newts, predatory diving beetles, and birds, particularly water birds, such as storks and herons and domestic ducks. Some tadpoles, including those of the cane toad (\"Rhinella marina\"), are poisonous. The tadpole stage may be as short as a week in explosive breeders or it may last through one or more winters followed by metamorphosis in the spring.\nMetamorphosis.\nAt the end of the tadpole stage, a frog undergoes metamorphosis in which its body makes a sudden transition into the adult form. This metamorphosis typically lasts only 24 hours, and is initiated by production of the hormone thyroxine. This causes different tissues to develop in different ways. The principal changes that take place include the development of the lungs and the disappearance of the gills and gill pouch, making the front legs visible. The lower jaw transforms into the big mandible of the carnivorous adult, and the long, spiral gut of the herbivorous tadpole is replaced by the typical short gut of a predator. Homeostatic feedback control of food intake is largely absent, making tadpoles eat constantly when food is present. But shortly before and during metamorphosis the sensation of hunger is suppressed, and they stop eating while their gut and internal organs are reorganised and prepared for a different diet. Also the gut microbiota changes, from being similar to that of fish to resembling that of amniotes. Exceptions are carnivorous tadpoles like \"Lepidobatrachus laevis\", which has a gut already adapted to a diet similar to that of adults. These continue to eat during metamorphosis. The nervous system becomes adapted for hearing and stereoscopic vision, and for new methods of locomotion and feeding. The eyes are repositioned higher up on the head and the eyelids and associated glands are formed. The eardrum, middle ear, and inner ear are developed. The skin becomes thicker and tougher, the lateral line system is lost, and skin glands are developed. The final stage is the disappearance of the tail, but this takes place rather later, the tissue being used to produce a spurt of growth in the limbs. Frogs are at their most vulnerable to predators when they are undergoing metamorphosis. At this time, the tail is being lost and locomotion by means of limbs is only just becoming established.\nAdults.\nAdult frogs may live in or near water, but few are fully aquatic. Almost all frog species are carnivorous as adults, preying on invertebrates, including insects, crabs, spiders, mites, worms, snails, and slugs. A few of the larger ones may eat other frogs, small mammals and reptiles, and fish. A few species also eat plant matter; the tree frog \"Xenohyla truncata\" is partly herbivorous, its diet including a large proportion of fruit, floral structures and nectar. \"Leptodactylus mystaceus\" has been found to eat plants, and folivory occurs in \"Euphlyctis hexadactylus\", with plants constituting 79.5% of its diet by volume. Many frogs use their sticky tongues to catch prey, while others simply grab them with their mouths. Adult frogs are themselves attacked by many predators. The northern leopard frog (\"Rana pipiens\") is eaten by herons, hawks, fish, large salamanders, snakes, raccoons, skunks, mink, bullfrogs, and other animals.\nFrogs are primary predators and an important part of the food web. Being cold-blooded, they make efficient use of the food they eat with little energy being used for metabolic processes, while the rest is transformed into biomass. They are themselves eaten by secondary predators and are the primary terrestrial consumers of invertebrates, most of which feed on plants. By reducing herbivory, they play a part in increasing the growth of plants and are thus part of a delicately balanced ecosystem.\nLittle is known about the longevity of frogs and toads in the wild, but some can live for many years. Skeletochronology is a method of examining bones to determine age. Using this method, the ages of mountain yellow-legged frogs (\"Rana muscosa\") were studied, the phalanges of the toes showing seasonal lines where growth slows in winter. The oldest frogs had ten bands, so their age was believed to be 14 years, including the four-year tadpole stage. Captive frogs and toads have been recorded as living for up to 40 years, an age achieved by a European common toad (\"Bufo bufo\"). The cane toad (\"Rhinella marina\") has been known to survive 24 years in captivity, and the American bullfrog (\"Rana catesbeiana\") 14 years. Frogs from temperate climates hibernate during the winter, and four species are known to be able to withstand freezing during this time, including the wood frog (\"Rana sylvatica\").\nParental care.\nAlthough care of offspring is poorly understood in frogs, up to an estimated 20% of amphibian species may care for their young in some way. The evolution of parental care in frogs is driven primarily by the size of the water body in which they breed. Those that breed in smaller water bodies tend to have greater and more complex parental care behaviour. Because predation of eggs and larvae is high in large water bodies, some frog species started to lay their eggs on land. Once this happened, the desiccating terrestrial environment demands that one or both parents keep them moist to ensure their survival. The subsequent need to transport hatched tadpoles to a water body required an even more intense form of parental care.\nIn small pools, predators are mostly absent and competition between tadpoles becomes the variable that constrains their survival. Certain frog species avoid this competition by making use of smaller phytotelmata (water-filled leaf axils or small woody cavities) as sites for depositing a few tadpoles. While these smaller rearing sites are free from competition, they also lack sufficient nutrients to support a tadpole without parental assistance. Frog species that changed from the use of larger to smaller phytotelmata have evolved a strategy of providing their offspring with nutritive but unfertilised eggs. The female strawberry poison-dart frog (\"Oophaga pumilio\") lays her eggs on the forest floor. The male frog guards them from predation and carries water in his cloaca to keep them moist. When they hatch, the female moves the tadpoles on her back to a water-holding bromeliad or other similar water body, depositing just one in each location. She visits them regularly and feeds them by laying one or two unfertilised eggs in the phytotelma, continuing to do this until the young are large enough to undergo metamorphosis. The granular poison frog (\"Oophaga granulifera\") looks after its tadpoles in a similar way.\nMany other diverse forms of parental care are seen in frogs. The tiny male \"Colostethus subpunctatus\" stands guard over his egg cluster, laid under a stone or log. When the eggs hatch, he transports the tadpoles on his back to a temporary pool, where he partially immerses himself in the water and one or more tadpoles drop off. He then moves on to another pool. The male common midwife toad (\"Alytes obstetricans\") carries the eggs around with him attached to his hind legs. He keeps them damp in dry weather by immersing himself in a pond, and prevents them from getting too wet in soggy vegetation by raising his hindquarters. After three to six weeks, he travels to a pond and the eggs hatch into tadpoles. The tungara frog (\"Physalaemus pustulosus\") builds a floating nest from foam to protect its eggs from predation. The foam is made from proteins and lectins, and seems to have antimicrobial properties. Several pairs of frogs may form a colonial nest on a previously built raft. The eggs are laid in the centre, followed by alternate layers of foam and eggs, finishing with a foam capping.\nSome frogs protect their offspring inside their own bodies. Both male and female pouched frogs (\"Assa darlingtoni\") guard their eggs, which are laid on the ground. When the eggs hatch, the male lubricates his body with the jelly surrounding them and immerses himself in the egg mass. The tadpoles wriggle into skin pouches on his side, where they develop until they metamorphose into juvenile frogs. The female gastric-brooding frog (\"Rheobatrachus\" sp.) from Australia, now probably extinct, swallows her fertilised eggs, which then develop inside her stomach. She ceases to feed and stops secreting stomach acid. The tadpoles rely on the yolks of the eggs for nourishment. After six or seven weeks, they are ready for metamorphosis. The mother regurgitates the tiny frogs, which hop away from her mouth. The female Darwin's frog (\"Rhinoderma darwinii\") from Chile lays up to 40 eggs on the ground, where they are guarded by the male. When the tadpoles are about to hatch, they are engulfed by the male, which carries them around inside his much-enlarged vocal sac. Here they are immersed in a frothy, viscous liquid that contains some nourishment to supplement what they obtain from the yolks of the eggs. They remain in the sac for seven to ten weeks before undergoing metamorphosis, after which they move into the male's mouth and emerge.\nDefence.\nAt first sight, frogs seem rather defenceless because of their small size, slow movement, thin skin, and lack of defensive structures, such as spines, claws or teeth. Many use camouflage to avoid detection, the skin often being spotted or streaked in neutral colours that allow a stationary frog to merge into its surroundings. Some can make prodigious leaps, often into water, that help them to evade potential attackers, while many have other defensive adaptations and strategies.\nThe skin of many frogs contains mild toxic substances called bufotoxins to make them unpalatable to potential predators. Most toads and some frogs have large poison glands, the parotoid glands, located on the sides of their heads behind the eyes and other glands elsewhere on their bodies. These glands secrete mucus and a range of toxins that make frogs slippery to hold and distasteful or poisonous. If the noxious effect is immediate, the predator may cease its action and the frog may escape. If the effect develops more slowly, the predator may learn to avoid that species in future. Poisonous frogs tend to advertise their toxicity with bright colours, an adaptive strategy known as aposematism. The poison dart frogs in the family Dendrobatidae do this. They are typically red, orange, or yellow, often with contrasting black markings on their bodies. \"Allobates zaparo\" is not poisonous, but mimics the appearance of two different toxic species with which it shares a common range in an effort to deceive predators. Other species, such as the European fire-bellied toad (\"Bombina bombina\"), have their warning colour underneath. They \"flash\" this when attacked, adopting a pose that exposes the vivid colouring on their bellies.\nSome frogs, such as the poison dart frogs, are especially toxic. The native peoples of South America extract poison from these frogs to apply to their weapons for hunting, although few species are toxic enough to be used for this purpose. At least two non-poisonous frog species in tropical America (\"Eleutherodactylus gaigei\" and \"Lithodytes lineatus\") mimic the colouration of dart poison frogs for self-protection. Some frogs obtain poisons from the ants and other arthropods they eat. Others, such as the Australian corroboree frogs (\"Pseudophryne corroboree\" and \"Pseudophryne pengilleyi\"), can synthesize the alkaloids themselves. The chemicals involved may be irritants, hallucinogens, convulsants, nerve poisons or vasoconstrictors. Many predators of frogs have become adapted to tolerate high levels of these poisons, but other creatures, including humans who handle the frogs, may be severely affected.\nSome frogs use bluff or deception. The European common toad (\"Bufo bufo\") adopts a characteristic stance when attacked, inflating its body and standing with its hindquarters raised and its head lowered. The bullfrog (\"Rana catesbeiana\") crouches down with eyes closed and head tipped forward when threatened. This places the parotoid glands in the most effective position, the other glands on its back begin to ooze noxious secretions and the most vulnerable parts of its body are protected. Another tactic used by some frogs is to \"scream\", the sudden loud noise tending to startle the predator. The grey tree frog (\"Hyla versicolor\") makes an explosive sound that sometimes repels the shrew \"Blarina brevicauda\". Although toads are avoided by many predators, the common garter snake (\"Thamnophis sirtalis\") regularly feeds on them. The strategy employed by juvenile American toads (\"Bufo americanus\") on being approached by a snake is to crouch down and remain immobile. This is usually successful, with the snake passing by and the toad remaining undetected. If it is encountered by the snake's head, however, the toad hops away before crouching defensively.\nDistribution.\nFrogs live on every continent except Antarctica, but they are not present on certain islands, especially those far away from continental land masses. Many species are isolated in restricted ranges by changes of climate or inhospitable territory, such as stretches of sea, mountain ridges, deserts, forest clearance, road construction, or other human-made barriers. Usually, a greater diversity of frogs occurs in tropical areas than in temperate regions, such as Europe. Some frogs inhabit arid areas, such as deserts, and rely on specific adaptations to survive. Members of the Australian genus \"Cyclorana\" bury themselves underground where they create a water-impervious cocoon in which to aestivate during dry periods. Once it rains, they emerge, find a temporary pool, and breed. Egg and tadpole development is very fast compared with those of most other frogs, so breeding can be completed before the pond dries up. Some frog species are adapted to a cold environment. The wood frog (\"Rana sylvatica\"), whose habitat extends into the Arctic Circle, buries itself in the ground during winter. Although much of its body freezes during this time, it maintains a high concentration of glucose in its vital organs, which protects them from damage.\nConservation.\nIn 2006, of 4,035 species of amphibians that depend on water during some lifecycle stage, 1,356 (33.6%) were considered to be threatened. This is likely to be an underestimate because it excludes 1,427 species for which evidence was insufficient to assess their status. Frog populations have declined dramatically since the 1950s. More than one-third of frog species are considered to be threatened with extinction, and more than 120 species are believed to have become extinct since the 1980s. Among these species are the gastric-brooding frogs of Australia and the golden toad of Costa Rica. The latter is of particular concern to scientists because it inhabited the pristine Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve and its population crashed in 1987, along with about 20 other frog species in the area. This could not be linked directly to human activities, such as deforestation, and was outside the range of normal fluctuations in population size. Elsewhere, habitat loss is a significant cause of frog population decline, as are pollutants, climate change, increased UVB radiation, and the introduction of non-native predators and competitors. A Canadian study conducted in 2006 suggested heavy traffic in their environment was a larger threat to frog populations than was habitat loss. Emerging infectious diseases, including chytridiomycosis and ranavirus, are also devastating populations.\nMany environmental scientists believe amphibians, including frogs, are good biological indicators of broader ecosystem health because of their intermediate positions in food chains, their permeable skins, and typically biphasic lives (aquatic larvae and terrestrial adults). It appears that species with both aquatic eggs and larvae are most affected by the decline, while those with direct development are the most resistant.\nFrog mutations and genetic defects have increased since the 1990s. These often include missing legs or extra legs. Various causes have been identified or hypothesized, including an increase in ultraviolet radiation affecting the spawn on the surface of ponds, chemical contamination from pesticides and fertilizers, and parasites such as the trematode \"Ribeiroia ondatrae\". Probably all these are involved in a complex way as stressors, environmental factors contributing to rates of disease, and vulnerability to attack by parasites. Malformations impair mobility and the individuals may not survive to adulthood. An increase in the number of frogs eaten by birds may actually increase the likelihood of parasitism of other frogs, because the trematode's complex lifecycle includes the ramshorn snail and several intermediate hosts such as birds.\nIn a few cases, captive breeding programs have been established and have largely been successful. The World Association of Zoos and Aquariums named 2008 as the \"Year of the Frog\" in order to draw attention to the conservation issues faced by them.\nThe cane toad (\"Rhinella marina\") is a very adaptable species native to South and Central America. In the 1930s, it was introduced into Puerto Rico, and later various other islands in the Pacific and Caribbean region, as a biological pest control agent. In 1935, 3000 toads were liberated in the sugar cane fields of Queensland, Australia, in an attempt to control cane beetles such as \"Dermolepida albohirtum\", the larvae of which damage and kill the canes. Initial results in many of these countries were positive, but it later became apparent that the toads upset the ecological balance in their new environments. They bred freely, competed with native frog species, ate bees and other harmless native invertebrates, had few predators in their adopted habitats, and poisoned pets, carnivorous birds, and mammals. In many of these countries, they are now regarded both as pests and invasive species, and scientists are looking for a biological method to control them.\nHuman uses.\nCulinary.\nFrog legs are eaten by humans in many parts of the world. Indonesia is the world's largest exporter of frog meat, exporting more than 5,000 tonnes of frog meat each year, mostly to France, Belgium and Luxembourg. Originally, they were supplied from local wild populations, but overexploitation led to a diminution in the supply. This resulted in the development of frog farming and a global trade in frogs. The main importing countries are France, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the United States, while the chief exporting nations are Indonesia and China. The annual global trade in the American bullfrog (\"Rana catesbeiana\"), mostly farmed in China, varies between 1200 and 2400 tonnes.\nThe mountain chicken frog, so-called as it tastes of chicken, is now endangered, in part due to human consumption, and was a major food choice of the Dominicans. Raccoon, opossum, partridges, prairie chicken, and frogs were among the fare Mark Twain recorded as part of American cuisine.\nScientific research.\nIn November 1970, NASA sent two bullfrogs into space for six days during the Orbiting Frog Otolith mission to test weightlessness.\nFrogs are used for dissections in high school and university anatomy classes, often first being injected with coloured substances to enhance contrasts among the biological systems. This practice is declining due to animal welfare concerns, and \"digital frogs\" are now available for virtual dissection.\nFrogs have served as experimental animals throughout the history of science. Eighteenth-century biologist Luigi Galvani discovered the link between electricity and the nervous system by studying frogs. He created one of the first tools for measuring electric current out of a frog leg. In 1852, H. F. Stannius used a frog's heart in a procedure called a Stannius ligature to demonstrate the ventricle and atria beat independently of each other and at different rates. The African clawed frog or platanna (\"Xenopus laevis\") was first widely used in laboratories in pregnancy tests in the first half of the 20th century. A sample of urine from a pregnant woman injected into a female frog induces it to lay eggs, a discovery made by English zoologist Lancelot Hogben. This is because a hormone, human chorionic gonadotropin, is present in substantial quantities in the urine of women during pregnancy. In 1952, Robert Briggs and Thomas J. King cloned a frog by somatic cell nuclear transfer. This same technique was later used to create Dolly the sheep, and their experiment was the first time a successful nuclear transplantation had been accomplished in higher animals.\nFrogs are used in cloning research and other branches of embryology. Frogs of the genus \"Xenopus\" are used as a model organism in developmental biology because their embryos are large and easy to manipulate, they are readily obtainable, and can easily be kept in the laboratory. \"Xenopus laevis\" is increasingly being displaced by its smaller relative, \"Xenopus tropicalis\", which reaches its reproductive age in five months rather than the one to two years for \"X. laevis\", thus facilitating faster studies across generations.\nGenomes of \"Xenopus laevis\", \"X. tropicalis\", \"Rana catesbeiana\", \"Rhinella marina\", and \"Nanorana parkeri\" have been sequenced and deposited in the NCBI Genome database.\nPharmaceutical.\nBecause frog toxins are extraordinarily diverse, they have raised the interest of biochemists as a \"natural pharmacy\". The alkaloid epibatidine, a painkiller 200 times more potent than morphine, is made by some species of poison dart frogs. Other chemicals isolated from the skins of frogs may offer resistance to HIV infection. Dart poisons are under active investigation for their potential as therapeutic drugs.\nIt has long been suspected that pre-Columbian Mesoamericans used a toxic secretion produced by the cane toad as a hallucinogen, but more likely they used substances secreted by the Colorado River toad (\"Bufo alvarius\"). These contain bufotenin (5-MeO-DMT), a psychoactive compound that has been used in modern times as a recreational drug. Typically, the skin secretions are dried and then smoked. Illicit drug use by licking the skin of a toad has been reported in the media, but this may be an urban myth.\nExudations from the skin of the golden poison frog (\"Phyllobates terribilis\") are traditionally used by native Colombians to poison the darts they use for hunting. The tip of the projectile is rubbed over the back of the frog and the dart is launched from a blowgun. The combination of the two alkaloid toxins batrachotoxin and homobatrachotoxin is so powerful, one frog contains enough poison to kill an estimated 22,000 mice. Two other species, the Kokoe poison dart frog (\"Phyllobates aurotaenia\") and the black-legged dart frog (\"Phyllobates bicolor\") are also used for this purpose. These are less toxic and less abundant than the golden poison frog. They are impaled on pointed sticks and may be heated over a fire to maximise the quantity of poison that can be transferred to the dart.\nCultural significance.\nFrogs have been featured in mythology, fairy tales and popular culture. In traditional Chinese myths, the world rests on a giant frog, who would try to swallow the moon, causing the lunar eclipse. Frogs have been featured in religion, folklore, and popular culture. The ancient Egyptians depicted the god Heqet, protector of newborns, with the head of a frog. For the Mayans, frogs represented water, crops, fertility and birth and were associated with the god Chaac. In the Bible, Moses unleashes a plague of frogs on the Egyptians. Medieval Europeans associated frogs and toads with evil and witchcraft. The Brothers Grimm fairy tale \"The Frog Prince\" features a princess taking in a frog and it turning into a handsome prince. In modern culture, frogs may take a comedic or hapless role, such as Mr. Toad of the 1908 novel \"The Wind in the Willows\", Michigan J. Frog of Warner Bros. Cartoons, the Muppet Kermit the Frog and in the game \"Frogger\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38499", "revid": "45125032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38499", "title": "Toad", "text": "Common name for certain frogs, especially of the family Bufonidae\nToad (also known as a hoptoad) is a common name for certain frogs, especially of the family Bufonidae, that are characterized by dry, leathery skin, short legs, and large bumps covering the parotoid glands.\nIn popular culture (folk taxonomy), toads are distinguished from frogs by their drier, rougher skin and association with more terrestrial habitats. However, this distinction does not align precisely with scientific taxonomy.\nList of toad families.\nIn scientific taxonomy, toads include the true toads (Bufonidae) and various other terrestrial or warty-skinned frogs.\nNon-bufonid \"toads\" can be found in the families:\nBiology.\nUsually the largest of the bumps on a toad's skin are those that cover the parotoid glands. The bumps are commonly called warts, but they have nothing to do with pathologic warts, being fixed in size, present on healthy specimens, and not caused by infection. It is a myth that handling toads causes warts.\nToads travel from non-breeding to breeding areas of ponds and lakes. Bogert (1947) suggests that the toads' call is the most important cue in the homing to ponds.\nToads, like many amphibians, exhibit breeding site fidelity (philopatry). Individual American toads return to their natal ponds to breed, making it likely they will encounter siblings when seeking potential mates. Although inbred examples within a species are possible, siblings rarely mate. Toads recognize and avoid mating with close kin. Advertisement vocalizations given by males appear to serve as cues by which females recognize kin. Kin recognition thus allows avoidance of inbreeding and consequent inbreeding depression.\nHabitat.\nIn the United Kingdom, common toads often climb trees to hide in hollows or in nest boxes.\nCultural depictions.\nIn Kenneth Grahame's novel \"The Wind in the Willows\" (1908), Mr. Toad is a likeable and popular, if selfish and narcissistic, comic character. Mr. Toad reappears as the lead character in A. A. Milne's play \"Toad of Toad Hall\" (1929), based on the book.\nIn Chinese culture, the Money Toad (or Frog) Jin Chan appears as a feng shui charm for prosperity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38500", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38500", "title": "Anti-americanism", "text": ""}
{"id": "38501", "revid": "205204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38501", "title": "Knight's tour", "text": "Mathematical problem set on a chessboard\nA knight's tour is a sequence of moves of a knight on a chessboard such that the knight visits every square exactly once. If the knight ends on a square that is one knight's move from the beginning square (so that it could tour the board again immediately, following the same path), the tour is \"closed\", or \"re-entrant\"; otherwise, it is \"open\".\nThe knight's tour problem is the mathematical problem of finding a knight's tour. Creating a program to find a knight's tour is a common problem given to computer science students. Variations of the knight's tour problem involve chessboards of different sizes than the usual 8 \u00d7 8, as well as irregular (non-rectangular) boards.\nTheory.\nThe knight's tour problem is an instance of the more general Hamiltonian path problem in graph theory. The problem of finding a closed knight's tour is similarly an instance of the Hamiltonian cycle problem. Unlike the general Hamiltonian path problem, the knight's tour problem can be solved in linear time.\nHistory.\nThe earliest known reference to the knight's tour problem dates back to the 9th century AD. In Rudrata's (5.15), a Sanskrit work on Poetics, the pattern of a knight's tour on a half-board has been presented as an elaborate poetic figure () called the or 'arrangement in the steps of a horse'. The same verse in four lines of eight syllables each can be read from left to right or by following the path of the knight on tour. Since the Indic writing systems used for Sanskrit are syllabic, each syllable can be thought of as representing a square on a chessboard. Rudrata's example is as follows:\ntransliterated:\nFor example, the first line can be read from left to right or by moving from the first square to the second line, third syllable (2.3) and then to 1.5 to 2.7 to 4.8 to 3.6 to 4.4 to 3.2.\nThe Sri Vaishnava poet and philosopher Vedanta Desika, during the 14th century, in his 1,008-verse magnum opus praising the deity Ranganatha's divine sandals of Srirangam, Paduka Sahasram (in chapter 30: \"Chitra Paddhati\") has composed two consecutive Sanskrit verses containing 32 letters each (in Anushtubh meter) where the second verse can be derived from the first verse by performing a Knight's tour on a 4 \u00d7 8 board, starting from the top-left corner. The transliterated 19th verse is as follows:\nThe 20th verse that can be obtained by performing Knight's tour on the above verse is as follows:\nsThi thA sa ma ya rA ja thpA\nga tha rA mA dha kE ga vi |\ndhu ran ha sAm sa nna thA dhA\nsA dhyA thA pa ka rA sa rA ||\nIt is believed that Desika composed all 1,008 verses (including the special \"Chaturanga Turanga Padabandham\" mentioned above) in a single night as a challenge.\nA tour reported in the fifth book of Bhagavantabaskaraby by Bhat Nilakantha, a cyclopedic work in Sanskrit on ritual, law and politics, written either about 1600 or about 1700 describes three knight's tours. The tours are not only reentrant but also symmetrical, and the verses are based on the same tour, starting from different squares. Nilakantha's work is an extraordinary achievement being a fully symmetric closed tour, predating the work of Euler (1759) by at least 60 years.\nAfter Nilakantha, one of the first mathematicians to investigate the knight's tour was Leonhard Euler. The first procedure for completing the knight's tour was Warnsdorf's rule, first described in 1823 by H. C. von Warnsdorf.\nIn the 20th century, the Oulipo group of writers used it, among many others. The most notable example is the 10 \u00d7 10 knight's tour which sets the order of the chapters in Georges Perec's novel \"Life a User's Manual\".\nThe sixth game of the World Chess Championship 2010 between Viswanathan Anand and Veselin Topalov saw Anand making 13 consecutive knight moves (albeit using both knights); online commentators jested that Anand was trying to solve the knight's tour problem during the game.\nExistence.\nSchwenk proved that for any \"m\" \u00d7 \"n\" board with \"m\" \u2264 \"n\", a closed knight's tour is always possible \"unless\" one or more of these three conditions are met:\nCull \"et al.\" and Conrad \"et al.\" proved that on any rectangular board whose smaller dimension is at least 5, there is a (possibly open) knight's tour. For any \"m\" \u00d7 \"n\" board with \"m\" \u2264 \"n\", a (possibly open) knight's tour is always possible \"unless\" one or more of these three conditions are met: \nNumber of tours.\nOn an 8 \u00d7 8 board, there are exactly 26,534,728,821,064 directed closed tours (i.e. two tours along the same path that travel in opposite directions are counted separately, as are rotations and reflections). The number of \"undirected\" closed tours is half this number, since every tour can be traced in reverse. There are 9,862 undirected closed tours on a 6 \u00d7 6 board.\nFinding tours with computers.\nThere are several ways to find a knight's tour on a given board with a computer. Some of these methods are algorithms, while others are heuristics.\nBrute-force algorithms.\nA brute-force search for a knight's tour is impractical on all but the smallest boards. On an 8 \u00d7 8 board, for instance, there are knight's tours, and a much greater number of sequences of knight moves of the same length. It is well beyond the capacity of modern computers (or networks of computers) to perform operations on such a large set. However, the size of this number is not indicative of the difficulty of the problem, which can be solved \"by using human insight and ingenuity ... without much difficulty.\"\nDivide-and-conquer algorithms.\nBy dividing the board into smaller pieces, constructing tours on each piece, and patching the pieces together, one can construct tours on most rectangular boards in linear time \u2013 that is, in a time proportional to the number of squares on the board.\nWarnsdorf's rule.\nWarnsdorf's rule is a heuristic for finding a single knight's tour. The knight is moved so that it always proceeds to the square from which the knight will have the \"fewest\" onward moves. When calculating the number of onward moves for each candidate square, we do not count moves that revisit any square already visited. It is possible to have two or more choices for which the number of onward moves is equal; there are various methods for breaking such ties, including one devised by Pohl and another by Squirrel and Cull.\nThis rule may also more generally be applied to any graph. In graph-theoretic terms, each move is made to the adjacent vertex with the least degree. Although the Hamiltonian path problem is NP-hard in general, on many graphs that occur in practice this heuristic is able to successfully locate a solution in linear time. The knight's tour is such a special case.\nThe heuristic was first described in \"Des R\u00f6sselsprungs einfachste und allgemeinste L\u00f6sung\" by H. C. von Warnsdorf in 1823.\nA computer program that finds a knight's tour for any starting position using Warnsdorf's rule was written by Gordon Horsington and published in 1984 in the book \"Century/Acorn User Book of Computer Puzzles\".\nNeural network solutions.\nThe knight's tour problem also lends itself to being solved by a neural network implementation. The network is set up such that every legal knight's move is represented by a neuron, and each neuron is initialized randomly to be either \"active\" or \"inactive\" (output of 1 or 0), with 1 implying that the neuron is part of the solution. Each neuron also has a state function (described below) which is initialized to 0. \nWhen the network is allowed to run, each neuron can change its state and output based on the states and outputs of its neighbors (those exactly one knight's move away) according to the following transition rules:\nformula_1\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3 represents discrete intervals of time, formula_4 is the state of the neuron connecting square formula_5 to square formula_6, formula_7 is the output of the neuron from formula_5 to formula_6, and formula_10 is the set of neighbors of the neuron.\nAlthough divergent cases are possible, the network should eventually converge, which occurs when no neuron changes its state from time formula_3 to formula_12. When the network converges, either the network encodes a knight's tour or a series of two or more independent circuits within the same board.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38502", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38502", "title": "Thirteen colonies", "text": ""}
{"id": "38503", "revid": "19833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38503", "title": "Fiber optic", "text": ""}
{"id": "38504", "revid": "19833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38504", "title": "Fiber optics", "text": ""}
{"id": "38505", "revid": "19833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38505", "title": "Fibre optics", "text": ""}
{"id": "38506", "revid": "19833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38506", "title": "Fibre optic", "text": ""}
{"id": "38507", "revid": "19833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38507", "title": "Fibre-optic", "text": ""}
{"id": "38508", "revid": "19833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38508", "title": "Fiber-optic", "text": ""}
{"id": "38509", "revid": "15934163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38509", "title": "Fiber-optics", "text": ""}
{"id": "38510", "revid": "15934164", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38510", "title": "Fibre-optics", "text": ""}
{"id": "38512", "revid": "287849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38512", "title": "Plesiochronous digital hierarchy", "text": "Technology used in telecommunications networks\nThe plesiochronous digital hierarchy (PDH) is a technology used in telecommunications networks to transport large quantities of data over digital transport equipment such as fibre optic and microwave radio systems. The term \"plesiochronous\" is derived from Greek \"pl\u0113sios\", meaning near, and \"chronos\", time, and refers to the fact that PDH networks run in a state where different parts of the network are nearly, but not quite perfectly, synchronized.\nBackbone transport networks replaced PDH networks with synchronous digital hierarchy (SDH) or synchronous optical networking (SONET) equipment over the ten years ending around the turn of the millennium (2000), whose floating payloads relaxed the more stringent timing requirements of PDH network technology. The cost in North America was $4.5 billion in 1998 alone, p.\u00a0171.\nPDH allows transmission of data streams that are nominally running at the same rate, but allowing some variation on the speed around a nominal rate. By analogy, any two watches are nominally running at the same rate, clocking up 60 seconds every minute. However, there is no link between watches to guarantee that they run at exactly the same rate, and it is highly likely that one is running slightly faster than the other.\nImplementation.\nThe data rate is controlled by a clock in the equipment generating the data. The rate is allowed to vary by \u00b150\u00a0ppm of 2048\u00a0kbit/s (according to ITU-T recommendation). This means that different data streams can (and probably do) run at slightly different rates from one another.\nIn order to transport multiple data streams from one place to another over a common transmission medium, they are multiplexed in groups of four. Because each of the four data streams is not necessarily running at the same rate, some compensation has to be introduced. Typically, the multiplexer takes the data from the 4 incoming 2.048\u00a0Mbit/s data streams and feeds each into a 2.112\u00a0Mbit/s stream via a buffer store, leaving a series of fixed gaps in each frame.\nThe data rate is thus 2.112\u00a0Mbit/s\u00a0\u00d7 (number of bits in a frame \u2013 number of gaps)/(number of bits in a frame)\nThis is slightly greater than 2.048\u00a0Mbit/s + 50ppm. If an extra gap is added, this is slightly smaller than 2.048\u00a0Mbit/s \u2013 50ppm. Thus, on average, the data rate can be made exactly equal to the incoming rate by adding a gap in some frames and not others. This extra gap is in a fixed place in the frame and is referred to as the \"stuffable bit\". If it does not contain data, i.e. it is a gap, it is \"stuffed\". The data from the 4 data streams is now contained in 4 data streams of 2.112\u00a0Mbit/s which are synchronous and can easily be multiplexed to give a single stream of 8.448\u00a0Mbit/s by taking 1 bit from stream #1, followed by 1 bit from stream #2, then #3, then #4, etc. Some of the fixed gaps accommodate a synchronisation word which allows the demultiplexer to identify the start of each frame, and others contain control bits for each stream which say whether or not the stuffable bit is stuffed or not, i.e. contains data or not. The process can then be reversed by the demultiplexer and 4 data streams produced with exactly the same bit rate as previously. The timing irregularity is ironed out using a phase locked loop.\nThis scheme does not allow the addition of a stuffed bit as soon as it is required, because the stuffable bit is in a fixed point in the frame. Therefore, it is necessary to wait until the stuffable bit time slot. This wait results in \"waiting time jitter\" which can be arbitrarily low in frequency, i.e. down to zero, and so cannot be entirely eliminated by the filtering effects of the phase lock loop. The worst possible stuffing ratio would be 1 frame in 2, as this gives a theoretical 0.5 bit of jitter. Therefore, the stuffing ratio is carefully chosen to give theoretical minimum jitter. In a practical system however, the actual decision to stuff or not may be made by comparing the read address and write address of the input buffer store. The position in the frame when the decision is made varies and adds a second variable dependent on the length of the store.\nThe process is sometimes called \"pulse justification\" because \"justification\" in printing is adding gaps so that each line takes up a full column width. It is believed that this term was preferred because \"... stuffing stuffable bits\" and \"waiting time jitter is the jitter you get while waiting to stuff a stuffable bit\", though technically correct, do sound like a pleonasm.\nSimilar techniques are used to combine four \u00d7\u00a08\u00a0Mbit/s together, plus bit stuffing and frame alignment, giving 34\u00a0Mbit/s. Four \u00d7\u00a034\u00a0Mbit/s, gives 140. Four \u00d7\u00a0140 gives 565.\nIndependent clocks.\nIn telecommunications networks, independent clocks are free-running precision clocks located at the nodes which are used for synchronization.\nVariable storage buffers, installed to accommodate variations in transmission delay between nodes, are made large enough to accommodate small time (phase) departures among the nodal clocks that control transmission. Traffic may occasionally be interrupted to allow the buffers to be emptied of some or all of their stored data.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38513", "revid": "1063872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38513", "title": "Global telephone network", "text": ""}
{"id": "38514", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38514", "title": "Broadband Integrated Services Digital Network", "text": "High-speed Internet access standard\nIn the 1980s, the telecommunications industry expected that digital services would follow much the same pattern as voice services did on the public switched telephone network, and conceived an end-to-end circuit switched service, known as Broadband Integrated Services Digital Network (B-ISDN).\nHistory.\nBefore B-ISDN, the original ISDN attempted to substitute the analog telephone system with a digital system which was appropriate for both voice and non-voice traffic. Obtaining worldwide agreement on the basic rate interface standard was expected to lead to a large user demand for ISDN equipment, hence leading to mass production and inexpensive ISDN chips. However, the standardization process took years while computer network technology moved rapidly. Once the ISDN standard was finally agreed upon and products were available, it was already obsolete. For home use the largest demand for new services was video and voice transfer, but the ISDN basic rate lacks the necessary channel capacity.\nThis led to introduction of B-ISDN, by adding the word broadband. Although the term had a meaning in physics and engineering (similar to wideband), the CCITT defined it as: \"Qualifying a service or system requiring transmission channels capable of supporting rates greater than the primary rate\" referring to the primary rate which ranged from about 1.5 to 2\u00a0Mbit/s. Services envisioned included video telephone and video conferencing. Technical papers were published in early 1988. Standards were issued by the Comit\u00e9 Consultatif International T\u00e9l\u00e9phonique et T\u00e9l\u00e9graphique (CCITT, now known as ITU-T), and called \"Recommendations\". They included G.707 to G.709, and I.121 which defined the principal aspects of B-ISDN, with many others following through the 1990s.\nThe designated technology for B-ISDN was Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), which was intended to carry both synchronous voice and asynchronous data services on the same transport. The B-ISDN vision has been overtaken by other disruptive technologies used in the Internet. The ATM technology survived as a low-level layer in most digital subscriber line (DSL) technologies, and as a payload type in some wireless technologies such as WiMAX. The term \"broadband\" became a marketing term for any digital Internet access service.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38515", "revid": "48911350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38515", "title": "B-ISDN", "text": ""}
{"id": "38516", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38516", "title": "Synchronous", "text": ""}
{"id": "38517", "revid": "390477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38517", "title": "Asynchronous", "text": ""}
{"id": "38518", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38518", "title": "Lyrics", "text": "Set of words that accompany an instrumental\nLyrics are words that make up a song, usually consisting of verses and choruses. The writer of lyrics is a lyricist. The words to an extended musical composition such as an opera are, however, usually known as a \"libretto\" and their writer, as a \"librettist\". Rap songs and grime contain rap lyrics (often with a variation of rhyming words) that are meant to be spoken rhythmically rather than sung. The meaning of lyrics can either be explicit or implicit. Some lyrics are abstract, almost unintelligible, and, in such cases, their explication emphasizes form, articulation, meter, and symmetry of expression.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"lyric\" derives via Latin ' from the Greek ('), the adjectival form of \"lyre\". It first appeared in English in the mid-16th century in reference to the Earl of Surrey's translations of Petrarch and to his own sonnets. Greek lyric poetry had been defined by the manner in which it was sung accompanied by the lyre or cithara, as opposed to the chanted formal epics or the more passionate elegies accompanied by the flute. The personal nature of many of the verses of the Nine Lyric Poets led to the present sense of \"lyric poetry\" but the original Greek sense of \"lyric poetry\"\u2014\"poetry accompanied by the lyre\" i.e. \"words set to music\"\u2014eventually led to its use as \"lyrics\", first attested in Stainer and Barrett's 1876 \"Dictionary of Musical Terms\". Stainer and Barrett used the word as a singular substantive: \"\"Lyric\", poetry or blank verse intended to be set to music and sung\". By the 1930s, the present use of the plurale tantum \"lyrics\" had begun; it has been standard since the 1950s for many writers. The singular form \"lyric\" is still used to mean the complete words to a song by authorities such as Alec Wilder, Robert Gottlieb, and Stephen Sondheim. However, the singular form is also commonly used to refer to a specific line (or phrase) within a song's lyrics.\nPoems.\nThe differences between poem and song may become less meaningful where verse is set to music, to the point that any distinction becomes untenable. This is perhaps recognised in the way popular songs have \"lyrics\".\nHowever, the verse may pre-date its tune (in the way that \"Rule Britannia\" was set to music, and \"And did those feet in ancient time\" has become the hymn \"Jerusalem\"), or the tune may be lost over time but the words survive, matched by a number of different tunes (this is particularly common with hymns and ballads).\nPossible classifications proliferate (under anthem, ballad, blues, carol, folk song, hymn, libretto, lied, lullaby, march, praise song, round, spiritual). Nursery rhymes may be songs, or doggerel: the term does not imply a distinction. The ghazal is a sung form that is considered primarily poetic. See also rapping, roots of hip hop music.\nAnalogously, verse drama might normally be judged (at its best) as poetry, but not consisting of poems (see dramatic verse).\nIn Baroque music, melodies and their lyrics were prose. Rather than paired lines they consist of rhetorical sentences or paragraphs consisting of an opening gesture, an amplification (often featuring sequence), and a close (featuring a cadence); in German \"Vordersatz\"-\"Fortspinnung\"-\"Epilog\". For example:\n \"When I was a child,\" [opening gesture]\n \"I spoke as a child,\" [amplification...]\n \"I understood as a child,\" [...]\n \"I thought as a child;\" [...]\n \"But when I became a man, I put away childish things.\" [close]\n \"- 1 Corinthians 13:11\"\nShifter.\nIn the lyrics of popular music a \"shifter\" is a word, often a pronoun, \"where reference varies according to who is speaking, when and where\", such as \"I\", \"you\", \"my\", \"our\". For example, who is the \"my\" of \"My Generation\"?\n \"See Royalties\"\nCopyright and royalties.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], there are many websites featuring song lyrics. This offering, however, is controversial, since some sites include copyrighted lyrics offered without the holder's permission. The U.S. Music Publishers Association (MPA), which represents sheet music companies, launched a legal campaign against such websites in December 2005. The MPA's president, Lauren Keiser, said the free lyrics web sites are \"completely illegal\" and wanted some website operators jailed.\nLyrics licenses could be obtained worldwide through one of the two aggregators: LyricFind and Musixmatch. The first company to provide licensed lyrics was Yahoo!, quickly followed by MetroLyrics. Several lyric websites are providing licensed lyrics, such as SongMeanings and LyricWiki (defunct as of 2020).\nMany competing lyrics web sites are still offering unlicensed content, causing challenges around the legality and accuracy of lyrics. In an attempt to crack down unlicensed lyrics web sites, a U.S. federal court has ordered LiveUniverse, a network of websites run by MySpace co-founder Brad Greenspan, to cease operating four sites offering unlicensed song lyrics.\nAcademic study.\nLyrics can be studied from an academic perspective. For example, some lyrics can be considered a form of social commentary. Lyrics often contain political, social, and economic themes\u2014as well as aesthetic elements\u2014and so can communicate culturally significant messages. These messages can be explicit, or implied through metaphor or symbolism. Lyrics can also be analyzed with respect to the sense of unity (or lack of unity) it has with its supporting music. Analysis based on tonality and contrast are particular examples. Former Oxford Professor of Poetry Christopher Ricks famously published \"Dylan's Visions of Sin\", an in-depth and characteristically Ricksian analysis of the lyrics of Bob Dylan; Ricks gives the caveat that to have studied the poetry of the lyrics in tandem with the music would have made for a much more complicated critical feat.\nSearch engines.\nSearch risk.\nA 2009 report published by McAfee found that, in terms of potential exposure to malware, lyrics-related searches and searches containing the word \"free\" are the most likely to have risky results from search engines, both in terms of average risk of all results, and maximum risk of any result.\nGoogle.\nBeginning in late 2014, Google changed its search results pages to include song lyrics. When users search for a name of a song, Google can now display the lyrics directly in the search results page. When users search for a specific song's lyrics, most results show the lyrics directly through a Google search by using Google Play.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38520", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38520", "title": "Pas-de-Calais", "text": "Department of France\nThe Pas-de-Calais (, 'strait of Calais'; ; ) is a department in northern France named after the French designation of the Strait of Dover, which it borders. It has the most communes of all the departments of France, with 890, and is the 8th most populous. It had a population of 1,465,278 in 2019. The Calais Passage connects to the Port of Calais on the English Channel. The Pas-de-Calais borders the departments of Nord and Somme and is connected to the English county of Kent via the Channel Tunnel.\nHistory.\nInhabited since prehistoric times, the Pas-de-Calais region was populated in turn by the Celtic Belgae, the Romans, the Germanic Franks and the Alemanni. During the fourth and fifth centuries, the Roman practice of co-opting Germanic tribes to provide military and defence services along the route from Boulogne-sur-Mer to Cologne created a Germanic-Romance linguistic border in the region that persisted until the eighth century.\nSaxon colonization into the region from the fifth to the eighth centuries likely extended the linguistic border somewhat south and west so that by the ninth century most inhabitants north of the line between B\u00e9thune and Berck spoke a dialect of Middle Dutch, while the inhabitants to the south spoke Picard, a variety of Romance dialects.\nThis linguistic border is still evident today in the toponyms and patronyms of the region. Beginning in the ninth century, the linguistic border began a steady move to north and the east.\nPas-de-Calais is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790. It was created from parts of the former provinces of Calaisis, formerly English, Boulonnais, Ponthieu and Artois, this last formerly part of the Spanish Netherlands.\nSome of the costliest battles of World War I were fought in the region. The Canadian National Vimy Memorial, from Arras, commemorates the Battle of Vimy Ridge assault during the Battle of Arras (1917) and is Canada's most important memorial in Europe to its fallen soldiers.\nPas-de-Calais was also the target of Operation Fortitude during World War II, which was an Allied plan to deceive the Germans that the invasion of Europe at D-Day was to occur here, rather than in Normandy.\nGeography.\nPas-de-Calais is in the current region of Hauts-de-France and is surrounded by the departments of Nord and Somme, the English Channel, and the North Sea. It shares a maritime border with the English county of Kent in the United Kingdom halfway through the Channel Tunnel.\nThe principal rivers are the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrincipal towns.\nIts principal towns are, on the coast, Calais and Boulogne-sur-Mer, and in Artois, Arras, Lens, Li\u00e9vin, and B\u00e9thune. The most populous commune is Calais; the prefecture Arras is the second-most populous. As of 2019, there are 10 communes with more than 15,000 inhabitants:\nEconomy.\nThe economy of the department was long dependent on mining, primarily the coal mines near the town of Lens, Pas-de-Calais where coal was discovered in 1849. However, since World War II, the economy has become more diversified.\nDemographics.\nThe inhabitants of the department are called \"Pas-de-Calaisiens\".\nPas-de-Calais is one of the most densely populated departments of France, but has no cities with over 100,000 residents: Calais has about 73,000 inhabitants. The remaining population is primarily concentrated along the border with the department of Nord in the mining district, where a string of small towns constitutes an urban area with a population of about 1.2 million. The centre and south of the department are more rural, but still quite heavily populated, with many villages and small towns.\nAlthough the department saw some of the heaviest fighting of World War I, its population rebounded quickly after both world wars. However, many of the mining towns have seen dramatic decreases in population, some up to half of their population.\nPopulation development since 1801:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nLocal elections.\nThe president of the Departmental Council is Jean-Claude Leroy, elected in 2017.\nNational politics.\nIn the second round of the French presidential elections of 2017 Pas-de-Calais was one of only two departments in which the candidate of the Front National, Marine Le Pen, received a majority of the votes cast: 52.06%.\nEducation.\nThere are currently two public universities in the department. Although it is one of the most populous departments of France, Pas-de-Calais did not contain a university until 1991 when the French government created two universities: ULCO (Universit\u00e9 du Littoral C\u00f4te d'Opale) on the western part of the department, and Universit\u00e9 d'Artois on the eastern part."}
{"id": "38522", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38522", "title": "Bill Viola", "text": "American video and installation artist (1951\u20132024)\nWilliam John Viola Jr. ( , ; January 25, 1951 \u2013 July 12, 2024) was an American video artist whose artistic expression depended upon electronic, sound, and image technology in new media. His works focus on the ideas behind fundamental human experiences such as birth, death, and aspects of consciousness.\nEarly life and education.\nWilliam John Viola Jr. was born on January 25, 1951, in Flushing, Queens, New York, and grew up in Queens and Westbury. He attended P.S. 20, in Flushing, where he was captain of the TV Squad. On vacation in the mountains with his family, he nearly drowned in a lake, an experience he described as \"\u2026 the most beautiful world I've ever seen in my life\" and \"without fear,\" and \"peaceful.\"\nIn 1973, Viola graduated from Syracuse University with a Bachelor in Fine Arts in experimental studies. Viola described the school as traditional and considered himself to be \"one of the worst painters in the class.\" He studied in Syracuse University's College of Visual and Performing Arts, including the Synapse experimental program, which evolved into CitrusTV.\nCareer.\nFrom 1973 to 1980, Viola studied and performed with composer David Tudor in the new music group \"Rainforest\" (later named \"Composers Inside Electronics\"). From 1974 to 1976, Viola worked as technical director at Art/tapes/22, a pioneering video studio led by Maria Gloria Conti Bicocchi, in Florence, Italy where he encountered video artists Nam June Paik, Bruce Nauman, and Vito Acconci, before he became artist-in-residence at WNET Thirteen Television Laboratory in New York until 1983. In 1976 and 1977, he travelled to the Solomon Islands, Java, and Indonesia to record traditional performing arts.\nViola was invited to show work at La Trobe University (Melbourne, Australia) in 1977, by cultural arts director Kira Perov. Viola and Perov later married, beginning an important lifelong collaboration in working and traveling together. In 1980, they lived in Japan for a year and a half on a Japan/U.S. cultural exchange fellowship where they studied Buddhism with Zen Master Daien Tanaka. During this time, Viola was also an artist-in-residence at Sony Corporation's Atsugi Laboratories.\nIn 1983, he became an instructor in Advanced Video at the California Institute of the Arts, in Valencia, California. Viola received a Guggenheim Fellowship for fine arts in 1985. Since the early Seventies he had exhibited his works regularly in group and solo exhibitions at Everson Museum of Art in Syracuse, at The Kitchen, and the Museum of Modern Art, where Barbara London directed the exhibition series \"Projects\", where works by Viola were shown 17 times and featured in two solo exhibitions until 1991. He represented the United States at the 46th Venice Biennale in 1995 for which he produced a series of works called \"Buried Secrets\", including one of his best known works \"The Greeting\", a contemporary interpretation of Pontormo's \"The Visitation\". In 1997, the Whitney Museum of American Art organized and toured internationally a major 25-year retrospective of Viola's work.\nViola was the 1998, Getty Scholar-in-residence at the Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles. Later, in 2000, he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 2002, he completed \"Going Forth By Day\", a digital \"fresco\" cycle in high-definition video, commissioned by the Deutsche Guggenheim Berlin and the Guggenheim Museum, New York.\nIn 2003, \"The Passions\" was exhibited in Los Angeles, London, Madrid, and Canberra. This was a major collection of Viola's emotionally charged, slow-motion works inspired by traditions within Renaissance devotional painting.\nThe first biography of Viola, entitled \"Viola on V\u00eddeo\", was written by Federico Utrera (King Juan Carlos University) and published in Spain in 2011.\nBill Viola studio.\nBill Viola studio is run by his wife, Kira Perov, who is the executive director. She worked with Viola from 1978 managing and assisting him with his videotapes and installations. She documents their work in progress on location. All publications from the studio are edited by Perov.\nDeath.\nViola's wife and longtime creative collaborator was Kira Perov. He had two sons.\nViola died from complications of Alzheimer's disease at home in Long Beach, California, on July 12, 2024, at the age of 73.\nArtwork.\nStyle.\nViola's art deals largely with the central themes of human consciousness and experience \u2013 birth, death, love, emotion, and a kind of humanist spirituality. Throughout his career he drew meaning and inspiration from his deep interest in mystical traditions, especially Zen Buddhism, Christian mysticism, and Islamic Sufism, often evident in the transcendental quality of some of his works. Equally, the subject matter and manner of western medieval and renaissance devotional art informed his aesthetic.\nHe often explored dualism, or the idea that comprehension of a subject is impossible unless its opposite is known. For example, a lot of his work has themes such as life and death, light and dark, fire and water, stressed and calm, or loud and quiet.\nHis work can be divided into three types, conceptual, visual, and a unique combination of the two. Gardner feels that Viola's visual work, such as \"The Veiling\", and his combination of both the conceptual and visual, such as \"The Crossing,\" are impressive and memorable.\nViola's work often exhibits a painterly quality, with his use of ultra-slow motion video encouraging the viewer to sink into the image and connect deeply to the meanings contained within it. This quality makes his work perhaps unusually accessible within a contemporary art context. As a consequence, his work often receives mixed reviews from critics, some of whom have noted a tendency toward grandiosity and obviousness in some of his work.\nViola's interest in capturing the essence of emotion through recording of its extreme display began at least as early as his 1976 work, \"The Space Between the Teeth\", a video of himself screaming, and continued with such works as the 45-second \"Silent Mountain\" (2001), which shows two actors in states of anguish, which Viola described as \u201cprobably the loudest scream I\u2019ve recorded.\u201d\nIf Viola's depictions of emotional states with no objective correlative \u2014 emotional states for which the viewer has no external object or event to understand them by\u2014are one feature of many of his works, another, which has come to the forefront, is his reference to medieval and classical depictions of emotion. His subdued \"Catherine's Room\" 2001, has many scene by scene parallels with Andrea di Bartolo's 1393 \"St. Catherine of Siena Praying\".\nViola's work has received critical accolades. Critic Marjorie Perloff singles him out for praise. Writing at length about the necessity of poetic works responding to and taking advantage of contemporary computer technologies, Perloff sees Viola as an example of how new technology\u2014in his case, the video camera\u2014can create entirely new aesthetic criteria and possibilities that did not exist in previous incarnations of the genre \u2014 in this case, theater.\nVideo art projects.\nWhile many video artists have been quick to adopt new technologies to their medium, Viola relied little on digital editing. Perhaps the most technically challenging part of his work, and that which has benefited most from the advances since his earliest pieces, is his use of extreme slow motion.\nHis early works include \"The Reflecting Pool\" (1977\u201379), inspired by a lake drowning he experienced underwater before being saved by his uncle while on a family vacation that left a mark on his life and work.\n\"Reverse Television\".\n\"Reverse Television\" (1983) is a 15-minute montage of people watching video cameras as though they were televisions.\n\"The Quintet Series\".\n\"The Quintet Series\" (2000-2001) is a set of four separate videos that shows the unfolding expressions of five actors in slow motion so that details of their changing expressions can be detected. The work references European Renaissance Old Masters such as Hieronymous Bosch and Dieric Bouts\nCollaboration with Nine Inch Nails.\nIn 2000, Viola collaborated with the industrial rock band Nine Inch Nails and its lead singer Trent Reznor to create a video suite for the band's tour. The triptych mainly is focused on water imagery and was supposed to be integral with the songs that were played.\n\"An Ocean Without a Shore\".\nIn 2007, Viola was invited back to the 52nd Venice Biennale to present an installation called \"An Ocean Without a Shore\", which was named after a quote from Ibn \u02bfArab\u012b. The work consists of people standing in the foreground with nothing but black behind them. Each of them seem to produce gallons of water from themselves as if they were waterfalls. The water comes gushing out of their bodies as if they are being reborn. This main piece seems to creates the effect of appearing as a nearly transparent wall of glass. Viola described the piece in an interview as being \"about the fragility of life, like the borderline between life and death is actually not a hard wall; it\u2019s not to be opened with a lock and key, it's actually very fragile, very tenuous.\"\n\"Observance\".\n\"Observance\" (2002), is a work which may be taken partly as a response to the September 11 attacks. The installation involves about four or five individuals in a small frame. Although cramped in this small space, they seem to not want to move out of it. One of the youngest individuals in the group comes forward to the front center of the crowd looking at something with an air of solace. In this action, the actions of the other individuals makes more sense. There is something foreboding and tragic in front of them.\n\"The Tristan Project\".\nIn 2004, Viola embarked on \"The Tristan Project\". At the invitation of opera director Peter Sellars, he created video sequences to be shown as a backdrop to the action on stage during the performance of Wagner's opera Tristan und Isolde. Using his extreme slow motion, Viola's pieces used actors to portray the metaphorical story behind Wagner's story, seeing for example the first act as an extended ritual of purification in which the characters disrobe and wash themselves before finally plunging headlong into water together (in Wagner's story, the two characters maintain the facade of being indifferent to each other (necessary because Isolde is betrothed to Tristan's uncle) before, mistakenly believing they are going to die anyway, and reveal their true feelings). The piece was first performed in Los Angeles at Disney Hall on 3 separate evenings in 2004, one act at a time, then given complete performances at the Bastille Opera in Paris in April and in November 2005. The video pieces were later shown in London without Wagner's music in June to September 2006, at the Haunch of Venison Gallery and St. Olave's School, London. The Tristan project returned, both in music and video, to the Disney Hall in Los Angeles in April 2007, with further performances at New York City's Lincoln Center in May 2007 and at the Gergiev Festival in Rotterdam, The Netherlands, in September 2007.\n\"The Night Journey\".\nIn 2005, he began working with Tracy Fullerton and the Game Innovation Lab at USC on the art game, \"The Night Journey\", a project based on the universal story of an individual's mystic journey toward enlightenment. The game has presented at a number of exhibits worldwide as a work in progress. It was awarded Sublime Experience at IndieCade 2008.\n\"Bodies of Light\".\nIn October 2009, Viola's solo exhibition entitled \"Bodies of Light\" appeared at the James Cohan Gallery in New York. Featured in the exhibition was Pneuma (1994), a projection of alternating images evoking the concept of fleeting memories. Also on view were several pieces from the Viola's ongoing \"Transfiguration\" series, which he evolved from his 2007 installation Ocean Without a Shore.\nOther projects.\nIn 2004, Viola began work on a new production of Richard Wagner's opera \"Tristan und Isolde\", a collaboration with director Peter Sellars, conductor\nEsa-Pekka Salonen, and executive producer Kira Perov. The opera premiered at the Op\u00e9ra National de Paris in 2005 and Viola's video work was subsequently shown as \"LOVE/DEATH The Tristan Project\" at the Haunch of Venison Gallery and St Olave's School, London, in 2006 and at the Walt Disney Concert Hall, Los Angeles in 2007. During 2007, the Centro Andaluz de Arte Contempor\u00e1neo in Sevilla, organized an exhibition at the Palace of Charles V in la Alhambra- Granada- in which Viola's work dialogues with the Fine Arts Collection of the museum.\nViola's Three Structures.\nViola felt as if there are three different structures to describe patterns of data structures. There is the branching structure, matrix structure, and schizo structure.\n\"The most common structure is called branching. In this structure, the viewer proceeds from the top to bottom in time.\" The branching structure of presenting data is the typical narrative and linear structure. The viewer proceeds from a set point A to point B by taking an exact path, the same path any other reader would take. An example of this is Google because users go into this website with a certain mindset of what they want to search for, and they get a certain result as they branch off and end at another website.\nThe second structure is the Matrix structure. This structure describes media when it follows nonlinear progression through information. The viewer could enter at any point, move in any direction, at any speed, pop in and out at any place. Like the branching structure, this also has its set perimeters. However, the exact path that is followed is up to the user. The user has the option of participating in decision-making that affect the viewing experience of the media. An example of this is Public Secrets, a website that reveals secrets of the justice and the incarceration system within the U.S. for women. There is a set boundary of what users can and cannot do while presenting them with different themes and subjects users are able to view. Different users will find themselves taking different paths, using flash cues to guide themselves through the website. This vast selection of paths presents many users with a unique viewing experience (in relation to that of the previous persons). As well, they have the choice to read the excerpts from these women or hear it out loud. This connects to Borges' \"The Garden of Forking Paths\" where the participant has a variety of choices on how they see a story unfold before them. Each time, they can create a different path.\nThe last structure is called the schizo, or the spaghetti model. This form of data structure pertains to pure or mostly randomness. \"Everything is irrelevant and significant at the same time. Viewers may become lost in this structure and never find their way out.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38523", "revid": "12406635", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38523", "title": "Departments of France", "text": "Administrative subdivision in France\nIn the administrative divisions of France, the department (, ) is one of the three levels of government under the national level (\"territorial collectivities\"), between the administrative regions and the communes. There are a total of 101 departments, consisting of ninety-six departments in metropolitan France, and five overseas departments, which are also classified as overseas regions. Departments are further subdivided into 333 arrondissements and 2,054 cantons (as of 2023). These last two levels of government have no political autonomy, instead serving as the administrative basis for the local organisation of police, fire departments, and, in certain cases, elections.\nEach department is administered by an elected body called a departmental council (sg. , pl. ). From 1800 to April 2015, these were called general councils (sg. , pl. ). Each council has a president. Their main areas of responsibility include the management of a number of social and welfare allowances, of junior high school () buildings and technical staff, and local roads and school and rural buses, and a contribution to municipal infrastructures. Local services of the state administration are traditionally organised at departmental level, where the prefect represents the government; however, regions have gained importance since the 2000s, with some department-level services merged into region-level services.\nThe departments were created in 1790 as a rational replacement of Ancien R\u00e9gime provinces with a view to strengthen national unity; the title \"department\" is used to mean a part of a larger whole. Almost all of them were named after physical geographical features (rivers, mountains, or coasts), rather than after historical or cultural territories, which could have their own loyalties, or after their own administrative seats. The division of France into departments was a project particularly identified with the French revolutionary leader the Abb\u00e9 Siey\u00e8s, although it had already been frequently discussed and written about by many politicians and thinkers. The earliest known suggestion of it is from 1665 in the writings of d'Argenson. They have inspired similar divisions in many countries, some of them former French colonies. The 1822 territorial division of Spain (reverted due to the 1823 French intervention ending the trienio liberal) and the 1833 territorial division of Spain, which forms the basis of the present day provinces of Spain with minor modifications, are also based on the French model of departments of roughly equal size.\nMost French departments are assigned a two-digit number, the Official Geographical Code, allocated by the (). Overseas departments have a three-digit number. The number is used, for example, in the postal code and was, until the introduction of the SIV scheme in 2009, part of the vehicle registration plate number. Residents commonly use the numbers to refer to their own department or a neighbouring one, for example inhabitants of Loiret may refer to their department as \"the 45\". More distant departments are generally referred to by their names, as few people know the numbers of all the departments.\nIn 2014, President Fran\u00e7ois Hollande proposed abolishing departmental councils by 2020, which would have maintained the departments as administrative divisions, and transferring their powers to other levels of governance. This reform project has since been scrapped.\nHistory.\nThe first French territorial departments were proposed in 1665 by Marc-Ren\u00e9 d'Argenson to serve as administrative areas purely for the \"Ponts et Chauss\u00e9es\" (Bridges and Highways) infrastructure administration.\nBefore the French Revolution, France gained territory gradually through the annexation of a mosaic of independent entities. By the end of the Ancien R\u00e9gime it was organised into provinces. During the Revolution they were dissolved, partly in order to weaken old loyalties. The National Constituent Assembly decided to create a more uniform division into departments (\"d\u00e9partement\") and districts in late 1789. The process began on 4 August 1789 with the elimination of provincial privileges, and a 22 December 1789 decree (with letters patent in January 1790) provided for the termination of the provincial governments.\nThe modern department system, as all-purpose units of the government, was decreed on 26 February 1790 (with letters patent on 4 March 1790) by the National Constituent Assembly. Their boundaries served two purposes:\nThe old nomenclature was carefully avoided in naming the new departments. Most were named after an area's principal river or other physical features. Even Paris was in the department of Seine. Savoy, during its temporary occupation, became the department of Mont-Blanc. The provinces continued to exist administratively until 21 September 1791.\nThe number of departments, initially 83, had been increased to 130 by 1809 with the territorial gains of the Republic and of the First French Empire. Following the defeats of Napoleon in 1814\u20131815 the Congress of Vienna returned France to its pre-war size and the number of departments was reduced to 86 (three of the original departments having been split). In 1860 France acquired the County of Nice and Savoy, which led to the creation of three new departments. Two were added from the new Savoyard territory, while the department of Alpes-Maritimes was created from Nice and a portion of the Var department. The 89 departments were given numbers based on the alphabetical order of their names.\nThe department of Bas-Rhin and parts of Meurthe, Moselle, Vosges and Haut-Rhin were ceded to the German Empire in 1871 following France's defeat in the Franco-Prussian War. A small part of Haut-Rhin, however, remained French and became known as the Territoire de Belfort; the remaining parts of Meurthe and Moselle were merged into a new Meurthe-et-Moselle department. When France regained the ceded departments after World War I, the Territoire de Belfort was not reintegrated into Haut-Rhin. In 1922 it became France's 90th department. Likewise the Lorraine departments were not changed back to their original boundaries, and a new Moselle department was created in the regained territory, with slightly different boundaries from the pre-war department of the same name.\nThe reorganisation of \u00cele-de-France in 1968 and the division of Corsica in 1975 added six more departments, raising the total in Metropolitan France to 96. By 2011, when the overseas collectivity of Mayotte became a department, joining the earlier overseas departments of the Republic (all created in 1946) \u2013 French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique and R\u00e9union \u2013 the total number of departments in the French Republic had become 101. In 2015 the Urban Community of Lyon was split from Rh\u00f4ne to form the M\u00e9tropole de Lyon, a \"sui generis\" entity, with the powers of both an intercommunality and those of a department on its territory, formally classified as a \"territorial collectivity with particular status\" () and as such not belonging to any department. As of 2019 Corse-du-Sud and Haute-Corse are still administrative departments, although they no longer have the status of departmental \"territorial collectivities\": region and department functions have been managed by a \"single territorial collectivity\" since 2018.\nDespite the intention to avoid the old nomenclature, often the names of pre-1790 provinces remained in use. For example, the name of Berry, though no longer having an official status, remains in widespread use in daily life.\nGeneral characteristics.\nGovernment and administration.\nThe departmental seat of government is known as the prefecture () or and is generally a town of some importance roughly at the geographical centre of the department. This was determined according to the time taken to travel on horseback from the periphery of the department. The goal was for the prefecture to be accessible on horseback from any town in the department within 24 hours. The prefecture is not necessarily the largest city in the department: for instance, in Sa\u00f4ne-et-Loire department the capital is M\u00e2con, but the largest city is Chalon-sur-Sa\u00f4ne. Departments may be divided into . The capital of an arrondissement is called a subprefecture () or .\nEach department is administered by a departmental council (), an assembly elected for six years by universal suffrage, with the President of the Departmental Council as executive of the department. Before 1982, the chief executive of the department was the prefect (), who represents the Government of France in each department and is appointed by the President of the French Republic. The prefect is assisted by one or more sub-prefects () based in the subprefectures of the department. Since 1982, the prefect retains only the powers that are not delegated to the department councils. In practice, their role has been largely limited to preventing local policy from conflicting with national policy.\nThe departments are further divided into communes, governed by municipal councils. As of 2013, there were 36,681 communes in France. In the overseas territories, some communes play a role at departmental level. Paris, the country's capital city, is a commune as well as a department.\nIn mainland France (metropolitan France, excluding Corsica), the median land area of a department is , which is two-and-a-half times the median land area of the ceremonial counties of England and the preserved counties of Wales and slightly more than three-and-half times the median land area of a county of the United States. At the 2001 census, the median population of a department in continental France was 511,000 inhabitants, which is 21 times the median population of a United States county, but less than two-thirds of the median population of a ceremonial county of England and Wales. Most of the departments have an area of between 4,000 and 8,000\u00a0km2 (1500 to 3000 sq. mi), and a population between 320,000 and 1 million. The largest in area is Gironde (), while the smallest is the city of Paris (). The most populous is Nord (2,550,000) and the least populous is Loz\u00e8re (74,000).\nNumbering.\nThe departments are numbered: their two-digit numbers appear in postal codes, in INSEE codes (including \"social security numbers\") and on vehicle number plates. Initially the numbers corresponded to the alphabetical order of the names of the departments, but several changed their names and some have been divided, so the correspondence became less exact. Alphanumeric codes 2A and 2B were used for Corsica while it was split but it has since reverted to 20. The two-digit code \"98\" is used by Monaco. Together with the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country code FR, the numbers form the ISO 3166-2 country subdivision codes for the metropolitan departments. The overseas departments have three digits.\nRelation to national government.\nOriginally, the relationship between the departments and the central government was left somewhat ambiguous. While citizens in each department elected their own officials, the local governments were subordinated to the central government, becoming instruments of national integration. By 1793, however, the revolutionary government had turned the departments into transmission belts for policies enacted in Paris. With few exceptions, the departments had this role until the early 1960s.\nPolitical party preferences.\nThese maps cannot be used as a useful resource of voter preferences, because Departmental Councils are elected on a two-round system, which drastically limits the chances of fringe parties, if they are not supported on one of the two rounds by a moderate party. After the 1992 election, the left had a majority in only 21 of the 100 departments; after the 2011 election, the left dominated 61 of the 100 departments. (Mayotte only became a department after the election.)\nKey to the parties:\nFuture.\nThe removal of one or more levels of local government has been discussed for some years; in particular, the option of removing the departmental level. Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Lefebvre, spokesman for the UMP, said in December 2008 that the fusion of the departments with the regions was a matter to be dealt with soon. This was soon refuted by \u00c9douard Balladur and G\u00e9rard Longuet, members of the committee for the reform of local authorities, known as the Balladur Committee.\nIn January 2008, the Attali Commission recommended that the departmental level of government should be eliminated within ten years.\nNevertheless, the Balladur Committee has not retained this proposition and does not advocate the disappearance of the departments, but simply \"favors the voluntary grouping of departments\", which it suggests also for the regions, with the aim of reducing the number of regions to 15. This committee advocates, on the contrary, the suppression of the cantons.\nMaps and tables.\nCurrent departments.\nEach department has a coat of arms and a flag with which it is commonly associated, though not all are officially recognised or used.\nFormer departments.\nDepartments of Algeria ().\nUnlike the rest of the French possessions in Africa, Algeria was divided into departments just like Corsica or Normandy from 1848 until its independence in 1962. These departments were supposed to be \"assimilated\" or \"integrated\" to France sometime in the future.\nDepartments of the Napoleonic Empire in Europe.\nThere are a number of former departments in territories conquered by France during the French Revolution and Napoleonic Empire that are now not part of France:\nNotes for Table 7:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38524", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38524", "title": "Quality of Service", "text": ""}
{"id": "38526", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38526", "title": "Bayesian", "text": ""}
{"id": "38527", "revid": "46306269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38527", "title": "Gregory Benford", "text": "American science fiction author and astrophysicist\nGregory Benford (born January 30, 1941) is an American science fiction author and astrophysicist who is professor emeritus at the department of physics and astronomy at the University of California, Irvine. He is a contributing editor of \"Reason\" magazine.\nBenford wrote the Galactic Center Saga science fiction novels, beginning with \"In the Ocean of Night\" (1977). The series postulates a galaxy in which sentient organic life is in constant warfare with sentient electromechanical life.\nIn 1969, he wrote \"The Scarred Man\", the first story about a computer virus (based on a real computer virus he had spread), published in 1970.\nBiography.\nBenford was born in Mobile, Alabama and grew up in Robertsdale and Fairhope. Graduating Phi Beta Kappa, he received a Bachelor of Science in physics in 1963 from the University of Oklahoma in Norman, Oklahoma, followed by a Master of Science from the University of California, San Diego in 1965, and a doctorate there in 1967. That same year he married Joan Abbe, with whom he had two children. Benford modeled characters in several of his novels after his wife, most prominently the heroine of \"Artifact\". She died in 2002.\nBenford has an identical twin brother, James (Jim) Benford, with whom he has collaborated on science fiction stories. Both got their start in science fiction fandom, with Gregory being a co-editor of the science fiction fanzine \"Void\". At one point, Benford said he was an atheist because he could not reconcile the evil in the world with a benevolent God. However, he has returned to the Episcopal Church where he is a communicant at St. Mary's Episcopal Church in Laguna Beach.\nHe has been a long-time resident of Laguna Beach, California.\nWriting career.\nGregory Benford's first professional sale was the story \"Stand-In\" in the \"Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction\" (June 1965), which won second prize in a short story contest based on a poem by Doris Pitkin Buck. In 1969, he began writing a science column for \"Amazing Stories\".\nBenford tends to write hard science fiction which incorporates the research he is doing as a practical scientist. He has worked on collaborations with authors William Rotsler, David Brin and Gordon Eklund. His time-travel novel \"Timescape\" (1980) won both the Nebula Award and the John W. Campbell Memorial Award. This scientific procedural novel eventually lent its title to a line of science fiction published by Pocket Books. In the late 1990s, he wrote \"Foundation's Fear\", one of an authorized sequel trilogy to Isaac Asimov's \"Foundation\" series. Other novels published in that period include several near-future science thrillers: \"Cosm\" (1998), \"The Martian Race\" (1999) and \"Eater\" (2000).\nBenford has served as an editor of numerous alternate history anthologies, as well as collections of Hugo Award winners.\nHe has been nominated for four Hugo Awards (for two short stories and two novellas) and 13 Nebula Awards (in all categories). In addition to \"Timescape\", he won the Nebula for the novelette \"If the Stars Are Gods\" (with Eklund).\nBenford was a guest of honour at Aussiecon Three, the 1999 Worldcon. He remains a regular contributor to science fiction fanzines, for example \"Apparatchik\" (defunct as of 1997).\nIn 2016 Benford was the recipient of the Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society Forry Award Lifetime Achievement Award in the Field of Science Fiction.\nContributions to science and speculative science.\nGregory Benford is Professor Emeritus of Physics at the University of California, Irvine. With more than 200 scientific publications, his research encompassed both theory and experiments in the fields of astrophysics and plasma physics. His research has been supported by NSF, NASA, AFOSR, DOE and other agencies. He is an ongoing advisor to NASA, DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) and the CIA.\nBenford's work in physics at the University of California focused on theoretical and experimental plasma physics, including studies of extremely strong turbulence, particularly in astrophysical contexts, and studies of magnetic structures from the Galactic Center to large-scale galactic jets. Working in collaboration with, among others, science fiction writers Cramer, Forward, and Landis, Benford worked on a theoretical study of the physics of wormholes, which pointed out that wormholes, if formed in the early universe, could still exist in the present day if they were wrapped in a negative-mass cosmic string. Such wormholes could potentially be detected by gravitational lensing.\nIn 2004, Benford proposed that the harmful effects of global warming could be reduced by the construction of a rotating Fresnel lens 1,000 kilometres across, floating in space at the Lagrangian point L1. According to Benford, this lens would diffuse the light from the Sun and reduce the solar energy reaching the Earth by approximately 0.5% to 1%. He estimated that this would cost around US$10 billion. His plan has been commented on in a variety of forums. A similar space sunshade was proposed in 1989 by J. T. Early, and again in 1997 by Edward Teller, Lowell Wood, and Roderick Hyde. In 2006, Benford pointed out one possible danger in this approach: if this lens were built and global warming were avoided, there would be less incentive to reduce greenhouse gases, and humans might continue to produce too much carbon dioxide until it caused some other environmental catastrophe, such as a chemical change in ocean water that could be disastrous to ocean life.\nBenford serves on the board of directors and the steering committee of the Mars Society.\nHe has advocated human cryopreservation, for example by signing an open letter to support research into cryonics, being a member of Alcor, and by being an advisor to a UK cryonics and cryopreservation advocacy group.\nGregory Benford retired from the University of California in 2006 in order to found and develop Genescient Corporation. Genescient is a new generation biotechnology company that claims to combine evolutionary genomics with massive selective screening to analyze and exploit the genetics of model animal and human whole genomes.\nBenford's law of controversy.\nBenford's law of controversy is an adage from the 1980 novel \"Timescape\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe adage was quoted in an international drug policy article in a peer-reviewed social science journal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38528", "revid": "30645640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38528", "title": "Nord (French department)", "text": "Department of France\nNord (; officially ; ; , lit.\u2009'northern department') is a department in Hauts-de-France region, France bordering Belgium. It was created from the western halves of the historical counties of Flanders and Hainaut, and the Bishopric of Cambrai. The modern coat of arms was inherited from the County of Flanders.\nNord is the country's most populous d\u00e9partement. It had a population of 2,608,346 in 2019. It also contains the metropolitan region of Lille (the main city and the prefecture of the d\u00e9partement), the fourth-largest urban area in France after Paris, Lyon and Marseille. The department is the part of France where the French Flemish dialect of Dutch has historically been spoken as a native language. Similarly, the distinct French Picard dialect Ch'ti is spoken there.\nHistory.\nUntil the 17th century, the history of the North (Nord, French department) was largely in common with the history of Belgium (the Celtics Belgians during Antiquity were a multitude of Celtic peoples from the north of Gaul). The historical French provinces that preceded Nord are French Flanders, French Hainaut (part of Hainaut and Flanders is in the Kingdom of Belgium). Tribes of the Belgae, such as the Menapii and Nervii were the first peoples recorded in the area later known as Nord.\nDuring the 4th and 5th Centuries, Roman rulers of \"Gallia Belgica\" secured the route from the major port of Bononia (Boulogne) to Colonia (Cologne), by co-opting Germanic peoples north-east of this corridor, such as the Tungri. In effect, the area known later as Nord became an isogloss (linguistic border) between the Germanic and Romance languages. Saxon colonisation of the region from the 5th to the 8th centuries likely shifted the isogloss further south so that, by the 9th century, most people immediately north of Lille spoke a dialect of Old Dutch. This has remained evident in the place names of the region. After the County of Flanders became part of France in the 9th century, the isogloss moved north and east.\nDuring the 14th century, much of the area came under the control of the Duchy of Burgundy and in subsequent centuries was therefore part of the Habsburg Netherlands (from 1482) and the Spanish Netherlands (1581).\nAreas that later constituted Nord were ceded to France by treaties in 1659, 1668, and 1678, becoming the Counties of Flanders and Hainaut, and part of the Bishopric of Cambrai.\nOn 4 March 1790, during the French Revolution, Nord became one of the original 83 departments created to replace the counties.\nModern government policies making French the only official language have led to a decline in use of the Dutch West Flemish dialect. There are currently 20,000 speakers of a sub-dialect of West Flemish in the arrondissement of Dunkirk and it appears likely that this particular sub-dialect will be extinct within decades.\nGeography.\nNord is part of the current Hauts-de-France region and is surrounded by the French departments of Pas-de-Calais, Somme, and Aisne, as well as by Belgium and the North Sea. Its area is . It is the longest department in metropolitan France, measuring 184\u00a0km from Fort-Philippe in the north-west to Anor in the south-east.\nSituated in the north of the country along the western half of the Belgian frontier, the department is unusually long and narrow. The principal rivers are the following: Yser, Lys, Escaut, Scarpe, Sambre.\nPrincipal towns.\nThe most populous commune is Lille, the prefecture. With nearby Roubaix, Tourcoing and Villeneuve-d'Ascq, it constitutes the center of a cluster of industrial and former mining towns totalling slightly over a million inhabitants. As of 2019, there are 10 communes with more than 30,000 inhabitants:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWith a population of 2,608,346 in 2019, Nord is the department with the largest population.\nPolitics.\nThe President of the Departmental Council is the unaffiliated right-winger Christian Poiret.\nThe first President of the Fifth Republic, General Charles de Gaulle, was born in Lille in the department on 22 November 1890.\nEconomy.\nUntil recently, the department was dominated economically by coal mining, which extended through the heart of the department from neighbouring Artois into central Belgium.\nAt the forefront of France's 19th century industrialisation, the area suffered severely during World War I and now faces the economic, social and environmental problems associated with the decline of coal mining with its neighbours, following the earlier decline of the Lille-Roubaix textile industry.\nTransport.\nThe department is served by Lille Airport, provides scheduled air service to several cities in France, Europe and some North African countries. However, other airports such as Brussels Airport, and Paris's Charles de Gaulle Airport and Orly Airport are also used by air travellers from the department.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38529", "revid": "15934182", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38529", "title": "Indira ghandi", "text": ""}
{"id": "38530", "revid": "3727527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38530", "title": "International Morse code", "text": ""}
{"id": "38534", "revid": "48987217", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38534", "title": "Adoption", "text": "Parenting a child in place of the original parents\nAdoption is a process whereby a person assumes the parenting of another, usually a child, from that person's biological or legal parent or parents. Legal adoptions permanently transfer all rights and responsibilities, along with filiation, from the biological parents to the adoptive parents.\nUnlike guardianship or other systems designed for the care of the young, adoption is intended to effect a permanent change in status and as such requires societal recognition, either through legal or religious sanction. Historically, some societies have enacted specific laws governing adoption, while others used less formal means (notably contracts that specified inheritance rights and parental responsibilities without an accompanying transfer of filiation). Modern systems of adoption, arising in the 20th century, tend to be governed by comprehensive statutes and regulations.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nAdoption for the well-born.\nWhile the modern form of adoption emerged in the United States, forms of the practice appeared throughout history. The Code of Hammurabi, for example, details the rights of adopters and the responsibilities of adopted individuals at length. The practice of adoption in ancient Rome is well-documented in the Codex Justinianus.\nMarkedly different from the modern period, ancient adoption practices put emphasis on the political and economic interests of the adopter, providing a legal tool that strengthened political ties between wealthy families and created male heirs to manage estates. The use of adoption by the aristocracy is well-documented: many of Rome's emperors were adopted sons. Adrogation was a kind of Roman adoption in which the person adopted consented to be adopted by another. Some adoptions were even posthumous.\nInfant adoption during Antiquity appears rare. Abandoned children were often picked up for slavery and composed a significant percentage of the Empire's slave supply. Roman legal records indicate that foundlings were occasionally taken in by families and raised as a son or daughter. Although not normally adopted under Roman Law, the children, called \"alumni\", were reared in an arrangement similar to guardianship, being considered the property of the father who abandoned them.\nOther ancient civilizations, notably India and China, used some form of adoption as well. Evidence suggests the goal of this practice was to ensure the continuity of cultural and religious practices; in contrast to the Western idea of extending family lines. In ancient India, adoption was conducted in a limited and highly ritualistic form, so that an adopter might have the necessary funerary rites performed by a son. China had a similar idea of adoption with males adopted solely to perform the duties of ancestor worship.\nThe practice of adopting the children of family members and close friends was common among the cultures of Polynesia including Hawaii where the custom was referred to as \"h\u0101nai\".\nMiddle ages to modern period.\nAdoption and commoners.\nThe nobility of the Germanic, Celtic, and Slavic cultures that dominated Europe after the decline of the Roman Empire denounced the practice of adoption. In medieval society, bloodlines were paramount; a ruling dynasty lacking a \"natural-born\" heir apparent was replaced, a stark contrast to Roman traditions. The evolution of European law reflects this aversion to adoption. English common law, for instance, did not permit adoption since it contradicted the customary rules of inheritance. In the same vein, France's Napoleonic Code made adoption difficult, requiring adopters to be over the age of 50, sterile, older than the adopted person by at least 15 years, and to have fostered the adoptee for at least six years. Some adoptions continued to occur, however, but became informal, based on ad hoc contracts. For example, in the year 737, in a charter from the town of Lucca, three adoptees were made heirs to an estate. Like other contemporary arrangements, the agreement stressed the responsibility of the adopted rather than adopter, focusing on the fact that, under the contract, the adoptive father was meant to be cared for in his old age; an idea that is similar to the conceptions of adoption under Roman law.\nEurope's cultural makeover marked a period of significant innovation for adoption. Without support from the nobility, the practice gradually shifted toward abandoned children. Abandonment levels rose with the fall of the empire and many of the foundlings were left on the doorstep of the Church. Initially, the clergy reacted by drafting rules to govern the exposing, selling, and rearing of abandoned children. The Church's innovation, however, was the practice of oblation, whereby children were dedicated to lay life within monastic institutions and reared within a monastery. This created the first system in European history in which abandoned children did not have legal, social, or moral disadvantages. As a result, many of Europe's abandoned and orphaned children became alumni of the Church, which in turn took the role of adopter. Oblation marks the beginning of a shift toward institutionalization, eventually bringing about the establishment of the foundling hospital and orphanage.\nAs the idea of institutional care gained acceptance, formal rules appeared about how to place children into families: boys could become apprenticed to an artisan and girls might be married off under the institution's authority. Institutions informally adopted out children as well, a mechanism treated as a way to obtain cheap labor, demonstrated by the fact that when the adopted died their bodies were returned by the family to the institution for burial.\nThis system of apprenticeship and informal adoption extended into the 19th century, today seen as a transitional phase for adoption history. Under the direction of social welfare activists, orphan asylums began to promote adoptions based on sentiment rather than work; children were placed out under agreements to provide care for them as family members instead of under contracts for apprenticeship. The growth of this model is believed to have contributed to the enactment of the first modern adoption law in 1851 by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, unique in that it codified the ideal of the \"best interests of the child\". Despite its intent, though, in practice, the system operated much the same as earlier incarnations. The experience of the Boston Female Asylum (BFA) is a good example, which had up to 30% of its charges adopted out by 1888. Officials of the BFA noted that, although the asylum promoted otherwise, adoptive parents did not distinguish between indenture and adoption: \"We believe,\" the asylum officials said, \"that often, when children of a younger age are taken to be adopted, the adoption is only another name for service.\"\nModern period.\nAdopting to create a family.\nThe next stage of adoption's evolution fell to the emerging nation of the United States. Rapid immigration and the American Civil War resulted in unprecedented overcrowding of orphanages and foundling homes in the mid-nineteenth century. Charles Loring Brace, a Protestant minister, became appalled by the legions of homeless waifs roaming the streets of New York City. Brace considered the abandoned youth, particularly Catholics, to be the most dangerous element challenging the city's order. \nHis solution was outlined in \"The Best Method of Disposing of Our Pauper and Vagrant Children\" (1859), which started the Orphan Train movement. The orphan trains eventually shipped an estimated 200,000 children from the urban centers of the East to the nation's rural regions. The children were generally indentured, rather than adopted, to families who took them in. As in times past, some children were raised as members of the family while others were used as farm laborers and household servants. The sheer size of the displacement\u2014one of the largest migrations of children in history\u2014and the degree of exploitation that occurred, gave rise to new agencies and a series of laws that promoted adoption arrangements rather than indenture. The hallmark of the period is Minnesota's adoption law of 1917, which mandated investigation of all placements and limited record access to those involved in the adoption.\nDuring the same period, the Progressive movement swept the United States with a critical goal of ending the prevailing orphanage system. The culmination of such efforts came with the First White House Conference on the Care of Dependent Children called by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1909, where it was declared that the nuclear family represented \"the highest and finest product of civilization\" and was best able to serve as primary caretaker for the abandoned and orphaned. As late as 1923, only two percent of children without parental care were in adoptive homes, with the balance in foster arrangements and orphanages. Less than forty years later, nearly one-third were in adoptive homes.\nNevertheless, the popularity of eugenic ideas in America put up obstacles to the growth of adoption. There were grave concerns about the genetic quality of illegitimate and indigent children, perhaps best exemplified by the influential writings of Henry H. Goddard, who protested against adopting children of unknown origin, saying,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now it happens that some people are interested in the welfare and high development of the human race; but leaving aside those exceptional people, all fathers and mothers are interested in the welfare of their own families. The dearest thing to the parental heart is to have the children marry well and rear a noble family. How short-sighted it is then for such a family to take into its midst a child whose pedigree is absolutely unknown; or, where, if it were partially known, the probabilities are strong that it would show poor and diseased stock, and that if a marriage should take place between that individual and any member of the family the offspring would be degenerates. The period 1945 to 1974, the baby scoop era, saw rapid growth and acceptance of adoption as a means to build a family. Illegitimate births rose three-fold after World War II, as sexual mores changed. Simultaneously, the scientific community began to stress the dominance of nurture over genetics, chipping away at eugenic stigmas. In this environment, adoption became the obvious solution for infertile couples. Many of the mothers, however, were forced or coerced into relinquishing their children.\nTaken together, these trends resulted in a new American model for adoption. Following its Roman predecessor, Americans severed the rights of the original parents while making adopters the new parents in the eyes of the law. Two innovations were added: 1) adoption was meant to ensure the \"best interests of the child\", the seeds of this idea can be traced to the first American adoption law in Massachusetts, and 2) adoption became infused with secrecy, eventually resulting in the sealing of adoption and original birth records by 1945. The origin of the move toward secrecy began with Charles Loring Brace, who introduced it to prevent children from the Orphan Trains from returning to or being reclaimed by their parents. Brace feared the impact of the parents' poverty, in general, and Catholic religion, in particular, on the youth. This tradition of secrecy was carried on by the later Progressive reformers when drafting of American laws.\nThe number of adoptions in the United States peaked in 1970. The years of the late 1960s and early 1970s saw a dramatic change in society's view of illegitimacy and in the legal rights of those born outside of wedlock. In response, family preservation efforts grew so that few children born out of wedlock today are adopted. Ironically, adoption is far more visible and discussed in society today, yet it is less common.\nThe American model of adoption eventually proliferated globally. England and Wales established their first formal adoption law in 1926. The Netherlands passed its law in 1956. Sweden made adoptees full members of the family in 1959. West Germany enacted its first laws in 1977. Additionally, the Asian powers opened their orphanage systems to adoption, influenced as they were by Western ideas following colonial rule and military occupation. In France, local public institutions accredit candidates for adoption, who can then contact orphanages abroad or ask for the support of NGOs. The system does not involve fees, but gives considerable power to social workers whose decisions may restrict adoption to \"standard\" families (middle-age, medium to high income, heterosexual, Caucasian).\nAdoption is today practiced globally. The table below provides a snapshot of Western adoption rates. Adoption in the United States still occurs at rates nearly three times those of its peers even though the number of children awaiting adoption has held steady in recent years, between 100,000 and 125,000 during the period 2009 to 2018.\nContemporary adoption.\nForms of adoption.\nContemporary adoption practices can be open or closed.\nHow adoptions originate.\nAdoptions can occur between related or unrelated individuals. Historically, most adoptions occurred within a family. The most recent data from the U.S. indicates that about half of adoptions are currently between related individuals. A common example of this is a \"step-parent adoption\", where the new partner of a parent legally adopts a child from the parent's previous relationship. Intra-family adoption can also occur through surrender, as a result of parental death, or when the child cannot otherwise be cared for and a family member agrees to take over.\nAdoption is not always a voluntary process. In some countries, for example in the U.K., one of the main origins of children being placed for adoption is that they have been removed from the birth home, often by a government body such as the local authority. There are a number of reasons why children are removed including abuse and neglect, which can have a lasting impact on the adoptee. Social workers in many cases will be notified of a safeguarding concern in relation to a child and will make enquiries into the child's well-being. Social workers will often seek means of keeping a child together with the birth family, for example, by providing additional support to the family before considering removal of a child. A court of law will often then make decisions regarding the child's future, for example, whether they can return to the birth family, enter into foster care or be adopted.\nInfertility is the main reason parents seek to adopt children they are not related to. One study shows this accounted for 80% of unrelated infant adoptions and half of adoptions through foster care. Estimates suggest that 11\u201324% of Americans who cannot conceive or carry to term attempt to build a family through adoption, and that the overall rate of never-married American women who adopt is about 1.4%. Other reasons people adopt are numerous although not well documented. These may include wanting to cement a new family following divorce or death of one parent, compassion motivated by religious or philosophical conviction, to avoid contributing to overpopulation out of the belief that it is more responsible to care for otherwise parent-less children than to reproduce, to ensure that inheritable diseases (e.g., Tay\u2013Sachs disease) are not passed on, and health concerns relating to pregnancy and childbirth. Although there are a range of reasons, the most recent study of experiences of women who adopt suggests they are most likely to be 40\u201344 years of age, to be currently married, to have impaired fertility, and to be childless.\nUnrelated adoptions may occur through the following mechanisms:\nDisruption and dissolution.\nAlthough adoption is often described as forming a \"forever\" family, the relationship can be ended at any time. The legal termination of an adoption is called disruption. In U.S. terminology, adoptions are \"disrupted\" if they are ended before being finalized, and they are \"dissolved\" if the relationship is ended afterwards. It may also be called a \"failed adoption\". After legal finalization, the disruption process is usually initiated by adoptive parents via a court petition and is analogous to divorce proceedings. It is a legal avenue unique to adoptive parents as disruption/dissolution does not apply to biological kin, although biological family members are sometimes disowned or abandoned.\nAd hoc studies performed in the U.S., however, suggest that between 10 and 25 percent of adoptions through the child welfare system (e.g., excluding babies adopted from other countries or step-parents adopting their stepchildren) disrupt before they are legally finalized and from 1 to 10 percent are dissolved after legal finalization. The wide range of values reflects the paucity of information on the subject and demographic factors such as age; it is known that teenagers are more prone to having their adoptions disrupted than young children.\nAdoption by same-sex couples.\nJoint adoption by same-sex couples is legal in 34 countries as of March 2022, and additionally in various sub-national territories. Adoption may also be in the form of stepchild adoption (6 additional countries), wherein one partner in a same-sex couple adopts the child of the other. Most countries that have same-sex marriage allow joint adoption by those couples, the exceptions being Ecuador (no adoption by same-sex couples), Taiwan (stepchild adoption only) and Mexico (in one third of states with same-sex marriage). A few countries with civil unions or lesser marriage rights nonetheless allow step- or joint adoption. In 2019, the American Community Survey (ACS) enhanced its approach to measuring same-sex couple households, explicitly distinguishing between same-sex and opposite-sex spouses or partners.\nSame-sex parents, according to the ACS in 2022, were predominantly female. Notably, 26.8% of female same-sex couple households had children under 18, in contrast to 8.2% of male same-sex couple households. In homes with children, female same-sex couples were almost 12% more likely to have biological children compared with male same-sex couples; however, male same-sex couples were 18.5% more likely to adopt and were less likely to have stepchildren.\nParenting of adoptees.\nParenting.\nThe biological relationship between a parent and child is important, and the separation of the two has led to concerns about adoption. The traditional view of adoptive parenting received empirical support from a Princeton University study of 6,000 adoptive, step, and foster families in the United States and South Africa from 1968 to 1985; the study indicated that food expenditures in households with mothers of non-biological children (when controlled for income, household size, hours worked, age, etc.) were significantly less for adoptees, step-children, and foster children, causing the researchers to speculate that people are less interested in sustaining the genetic lines of others. This theory is supported in another more qualitative study wherein adoptive relationships marked by sameness in likes, personality, and appearance, were associated with both adult adoptees and adoptive parents reporting being happier with the adoption.\nOther studies provide evidence that adoptive relationships can form along other lines. A study evaluating the level of parental investment indicates strength in adoptive families, suggesting that parents who adopt invest more time in their children than other parents, and concludes \"...adoptive parents enrich their children's lives to compensate for the lack of biological ties and the extra challenges of adoption.\" Another recent study found that adoptive families invested more heavily in their adopted children, for example, by providing further education and financial support. Noting that adoptees seemed to be more likely to experience problems such as drug addiction, the study speculated that adoptive parents might invest more in adoptees not because they favor them, but because they are more likely than genetic children to need the help.\nPsychologists' findings regarding the importance of early mother-infant bonding created some concern about whether parents who adopt older infants or toddlers after birth have missed some crucial period for the child's development. However, research on The Mental and Social Life of Babies suggested that the \"parent-infant system\", rather than a bond between biologically related individuals, is an evolved fit between innate behavior patterns of all human infants and equally evolved responses of human adults to those infant behaviors. Thus nature \"ensures some initial flexibility with respect to the particular adults who take on the parental role.\"\nBeyond the foundational issues, the unique questions posed for adoptive parents are varied. They include how to respond to stereotypes, answering questions about heritage, and how best to maintain connections with biological kin when in an open adoption. One author suggests a common question adoptive parents have is: \"Will we love the child even though he/she is not our biological child?\" A specific concern for many parents is accommodating an adoptee in the classroom. Familiar lessons like \"draw your family tree\" or \"trace your eye color back through your parents and grandparents to see where your genes come from\" could be hurtful to children who were adopted and do not know this biological information. Numerous suggestions have been made to substitute new lessons, e.g., focusing on \"family orchards\".\nAdopting older children presents other parenting issues. Some children from foster care have histories of maltreatment, such as physical and psychological neglect, physical abuse, and sexual abuse, and are at risk of developing psychiatric problems. Such children are at risk of developing a disorganized attachment. Studies by Cicchetti et al. (1990, 1995) found that 80% of abused and maltreated infants in their sample exhibited disorganized attachment styles. Disorganized attachment is associated with a number of developmental problems, including dissociative symptoms, as well as depressive, anxious, and acting-out symptoms. \"Attachment is an active process\u2014it can be secure or insecure, maladaptive or productive.\" In the U.K., some adoptions fail because the adoptive parents do not get sufficient support to deal with difficult, traumatized children. This is a false economy as local authority care for these children is extremely expensive.\nConcerning developmental milestones, studies from the Colorado Adoption Project examined genetic influences on adoptee maturation, concluding that cognitive abilities of adoptees reflect those of their adoptive parents in early childhood but show little similarity by adolescence, resembling instead those of their biological parents and to the same extent as peers in non-adoptive families.\nSimilar mechanisms appear to be at work in the physical development of adoptees. Danish and American researchers conducting studies on the genetic contribution to body mass index found correlations between an adoptee's weight class and his biological parents' BMI while finding no relationship with the adoptive family environment. Moreover, about one-half of inter-individual differences were due to individual non-shared influences.\nThese differences in development appear to play out in the way young adoptees deal with major life events. In the case of parental divorce, adoptees have been found to respond differently from children who have not been adopted. While the general population experienced more behavioral problems, substance use, lower school achievement, and impaired social competence after parental divorce, the adoptee population appeared to be unaffected in terms of their outside relationships, specifically in their school or social abilities.\nRecent research has shown that adoptive parenting may have impacts on adoptive children, it has been shown that warm adoptive parenting reduces internalizing and externalizing problems of the adoptive children over time. Another study shows that warm adoptive parenting at 27 months predicted lower levels of child externalizing problems at ages 6 and 7.\nEffects on the original parents.\nSeveral factors affect the decision to release or raise the child. White adolescents tend to give up their babies to non-relatives, whereas black adolescents are more likely to receive support from their own community in raising the child and also in the form of informal adoption by relatives. Studies by Leynes and by Festinger and Young, Berkman, and Rehr found that, for pregnant adolescents, the decision to release the child for adoption depended on the attitude toward adoption held by the adolescent's mother. Another study found that pregnant adolescents whose mothers had a higher level of education were more likely to release their babies for adoption. Research suggests that women who choose to release their babies for adoption are more likely to be younger, enrolled in school, and have lived in a two-parent household at age 10, than those who kept and raised their babies.\nThere is limited research on the consequences of adoption for the original parents, and the findings have been mixed. One study found that those who released their babies for adoption were less comfortable with their decision than those who kept their babies. However, levels of comfort over both groups were high, and those who released their child were similar to those who kept their child in ratings of life satisfaction, relationship satisfaction, and positive future outlook for schooling, employment, finances, and marriage. Subsequent research found that adolescent mothers who chose to release their babies for adoption were more likely to experience feelings of sorrow and regret over their decision than those who kept their babies. However, these feelings decreased significantly from one year after birth to the end of the second year.\nMore recent research found that in a sample of mothers who had released their children for adoption four to 12 years prior, every participant had frequent thoughts of their lost child. For most, thoughts were both negative and positive in that they produced both feelings of sadness and joy. Those who experienced the greatest portion of positive thoughts were those who had open, rather than closed or time-limited mediated, adoptions.\nIn another study that compared mothers who released their children to those who raised them, mothers who released their children were more likely to delay their next pregnancy, to delay marriage, and to complete job training. However, both groups reached lower levels of education than their peers who were never pregnant. Another study found similar consequences for choosing to release a child for adoption. Adolescent mothers who released their children were more likely to reach a higher level of education and to be employed than those who kept their children. They also waited longer before having their next child. Most of the research that exists on adoption effects on the birth parents was conducted with samples of adolescents, or with women who were adolescents when carrying their babies\u2014little data exists for birth parents from other populations. Furthermore, there is a lack of longitudinal data that may elucidate long-term social and psychological consequences for birth parents who choose to place their children for adoption.\nDevelopment of adoptees.\nPrevious research on adoption has led to assumptions that indicate that there is a heightened risk in terms of psychological development and social relationships for adoptees. Yet, such assumptions have been clarified as flawed due to methodological failures. But more recent studies have been supportive in indicating more accurate information and results about the similarities, differences and overall lifestyles of adoptees. Adoptees are four times more likely to attempt suicide than other people.\nEvidence about the development of adoptees can be supported in newer studies. It can be said that adoptees, in some respect, tend to develop differently from the general population. This can be seen in many aspects of life, but usually can be found as a greater risk around the time of adolescence. For example, it has been found that many adoptees experience difficulty in establishing a sense of identity.\nIdentity.\nThere are many ways in which the concept of identity can be defined. It is true in all cases that identity construction is an ongoing process of development, change and maintenance of identifying with the self. Research has shown that adolescence is a time of identity progression rather than regression. One's identity tends to lack stability in the beginning years of life but gains a more stable sense in later periods of childhood and adolescence. Typically associated with a time of experimentation, there are endless factors that go into the construction of one's identity. As well as being many factors, there are many types of identities one can associate with. Some categories of identity include gender, sexuality, class, racial and religious, etc. For transracial and international adoptees, tension is generally found in the categories of racial, ethnic and national identification. Because of this, the strength and functionality of family relationships play a huge role in its development and outcome of identity construction. Transracial and transnational adoptees tend to develop feelings of a lack of acceptance because of such racial, ethnic, and cultural differences. Therefore, exposing transracial and transnational adoptees to their \"cultures of origin\" is important in order to better develop a sense of identity and appreciation for cultural diversity. Identity construction and reconstruction for transnational adoptees the instant they are adopted. For example, based upon specific laws and regulations of the United States, the Child Citizen Act of 2000 makes sure to grant immediate U.S. citizenship to adoptees.\nIdentity is defined both by what one is and what one is not. Adoptees born into one family lose an identity and then borrow one from the adopting family.\nThe formation of identity is a complicated process and there are many factors that affect its outcome. From a perspective of looking at issues in adoption circumstances, the people involved and affected by adoption (the biological parent, the adoptive parent and the adoptee) can be known as the \"triad members and state\".\nAdoption may threaten triad members' sense of identity. Triad members often express feelings related to confused identity and identity crises because of differences between the triad relationships.\nAdoption, for some, precludes a complete or integrated sense of self. Triad members may experience themselves as incomplete, deficient, or unfinished. They state that they lack feelings of well-being, integration, or solidity associated with a fully developed identity.\nInfluences.\nFamily plays a vital role in identity formation. This is not only true in childhood but also in adolescence. Identity (gender/sexual/ethnic/religious/family) is still forming during adolescence and family holds a vital key to this.\nThe research seems to be unanimous; a stable, secure, loving, honest and supportive family in which all members feel safe to explore their identity is necessary for the formation of a sound identity. Transracial and International adoptions are some factors that play a significant role in the identity construction of adoptees. Many tensions arise from relationships built between the adoptee(s) and their family. These include being \"different\" from the parent(s), developing a positive racial identity, and dealing with racial/ethnic discrimination. It has been found that multicultural and transnational youth tend to identify with their biological parents' culture of origin and ethnicity rather than their residing location, yet it is sometimes hard to balance an identity between the two because school environments tend to lack diversity and acknowledgment regarding such topics. These tensions also tend to create questions for the adoptee, as well as the family, to contemplate. Some common questions include what will happen if the family is more na\u00efve to the ways of socially constructed life? Will tensions arise if this is the case? What if the very people that are supposed to be modeling a sound identity are in fact riddled with insecurities? Ginni Snodgrass answers these questions in the following way.\nThe secrecy in an adoptive family and the denial that the adoptive family is different builds dysfunction into it. \"...\u00a0social workers and insecure adoptive parents have structured a family relationship that is based on dishonesty, evasions and exploitation. To believe that good relationships will develop on such a foundation is psychologically unsound\" (Lawrence). Secrecy erects barriers to forming a healthy identity.\nThe research says that the dysfunction, untruths and evasiveness that can be present in adoptive families not only makes identity formation impossible, but also directly works against it. What effect on identity formation is present if the adoptee knows they are adopted but has no information about their biological parents? Silverstein and Kaplan's research states that adoptees lacking medical, genetic, religious, and historical information are plagued by questions such as \"Who am I?\" \"Why was I born?\" \"What is my purpose?\" This lack of identity may lead adoptees, particularly in adolescent years, to seek out ways to belong in a more extreme fashion than many of their non-adopted peers. Adolescent adoptees are overrepresented among those who join sub-cultures, run away, become pregnant, or totally reject their families.\nConcerning developmental milestones, studies from the Colorado Adoption Project examined genetic influences on adoptee maturation, concluding that cognitive abilities of adoptees reflect those of their adoptive parents in early childhood but show little similarity by adolescence, resembling instead those of their biological parents and to the same extent as peers in non-adoptive families.\nSimilar mechanisms appear to be at work in the physical development of adoptees. Danish and American researchers conducting studies on the genetic contribution to body mass index found correlations between an adoptee's weight class and his biological parents' BMI while finding no relationship with the adoptive family environment. Moreover, about one-half of inter-individual differences were due to individual non-shared influences.\nThese differences in development appear to play out in the way young adoptees deal with major life events. In the case of parental divorce, adoptees have been found to respond differently from children who have not been adopted. While the general population experienced more behavioral problems, substance use, lower school achievement, and impaired social competence after parental divorce, the adoptee population appeared to be unaffected in terms of their outside relationships, specifically in their school or social abilities.\nThe adoptee population does, however, seem to be more at risk for certain behavioral issues. Researchers from the University of Minnesota studied adolescents who had been adopted and found that adoptees were twice as likely as non-adopted people to develop oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), with an 8% rate in the general population. Suicide risks were also significantly greater than the general population. Swedish researchers found both international and domestic adoptees undertook suicide at much higher rates than non-adopted peers; with international adoptees and female international adoptees, in particular, at highest risk.\nNevertheless, work on adult adoptees has found that the additional risks faced by adoptees are largely confined to adolescence. Young adult adoptees were shown to be alike with adults from biological families and scored better than adults raised in alternative family types including single parent and step-families. Moreover, while adult adoptees showed more variability than their non-adopted peers on a range of psychosocial measures, adult adoptees exhibited more similarities than differences with adults who had not been adopted. There have been many cases of remediation or the reversibility of early trauma. For example, in one of the earliest studies conducted, Professor Goldfarb in England concluded that some children adjust well socially and emotionally despite their negative experiences of institutional deprivation in early childhood. Other researchers also found that prolonged institutionalization does not necessarily lead to emotional problems or character defects in all children. This suggests that there will always be some children who fare well, who are resilient, regardless of their experiences in early childhood. Furthermore, much of the research on psychological outcomes for adoptees draws from clinical populations. This suggests that conclusions such that adoptees are more likely to have behavioral problems such as ODD and ADHD may be biased. Since the proportion of adoptees that seek mental health treatment is small, psychological outcomes for adoptees compared to those for the general population are more similar than some researchers propose.\nWhile adoption studies have shown that by adulthood the personalities of adopted siblings are little or no more similar than random pairs of strangers, the parenting style of adoptive parents may still play a role in the outcome of their adoptive children. Research has suggested that adoptive parents can have impacts on adoptees as well, several recent studies have shown that warm adoptive parenting can reduce behavioral problems of adopted children over time.\nMental health.\nAdopted children are more likely to experience psychological and behavioral problems than non-adopted peers. Children who were older than four at the time of their adoption experience more psychological problems than those who were younger.\nAccording to study in the UK, adopted children can have mental health problems that do not improve even four years after their adoption. Children with multiple adverse childhood experiences are more likely to have mental health problems. The study suggests that to identify and treat mental health problems early, care professionals and the adopting parents need detailed biographical information about the child's life. Another study in the UK suggests that adopted children are more likely to suffer from post-traumatic stress (PTS) than the general population. Their PTS symptoms depend on the type of adverse experiences they went through and knowledge of their history offers an option for tailored support.\nAdoptees of LGBT parents.\nThere is evidence that shows the adoptees of LGBT families and those in heterosexual families have no significant differences in development. One of the main arguments used against same-sex adoption is that a child needs a mother and a father in the home to develop properly.\u00a0However, a 2013 study of predictors for psychological outcomes of adoptees showed that family type (hetero, gay, lesbian) does not affect the child's adjustment; rather the preparedness of the adoptive parent(s), and health of relationship to partner, and other contextual factors predicted later adjustment in early placed adoptees.\u00a0Along with this, a 2009 study showed again that sexual orientation of parents does not affect externalizing and internalized problems, but family functioning and income can affect adjustment, especially for older adoptees.\nLate-Discovery Adoptees.\n\"Late-discovery adoption\" is a term used to describe the situation where an adopted individual first discovers that they are adopted at a later age than is universally considered to be appropriate, often well into adulthood. Adopted individuals who discover their adoption status at a later age are referred to as late-discovery adoptees (LDAs). Failure of the adoptive parent(s) to disclose adoption status to a child is an outdated adoption practice that was once fairly common for adoptees born in the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s. Since the 1970s, it has been socially unacceptable to keep the truth from adopted individuals regarding their genetic origins. The discovery of the deception regarding true parentage and that one is, in fact, a late-discovery adoptee can add \"layers of trauma, loss, betrayal, identity confusion, and disorganization upon learning the truth.\"\nPublic perception of adoption.\nIn Western culture, many see the common image of a family as being that of a heterosexual couple with biological children. This idea places alternative family forms outside the norm. As a consequence \u2013 research indicates \u2013 disparaging views of adoptive families exist, along with doubts concerning the strength of their family bonds.\nThe most recent adoption attitudes survey completed by the Evan Donaldson Institute provides further evidence of this stigma. Nearly one-third of the surveyed population believed adoptees are less-well adjusted, more prone to medical issues, and predisposed to drug and alcohol problems. Additionally, 40\u201345% thought adoptees were more likely to have behavior problems and trouble at school. In contrast, the same study indicated adoptive parents were viewed favorably, with nearly 90% describing them as \"lucky, advantaged, and unselfish\".\nThe majority of people state that their primary source of information about adoption comes from friends and family and the news media. Nevertheless, most people report the media provides them a favorable view of adoption; 72% indicated receiving positive impressions. There is, however, still substantial criticism of the media's adoption coverage. Some adoption blogs, for example, criticized \"Meet the Robinsons\" for using outdated orphanage imagery as did advocacy non-profit The Evan B. Donaldson Adoption Institute.\nThe stigmas associated with adoption are amplified for children in foster care. Negative perceptions result in the belief that such children are so troubled it would be impossible to adopt them and create \"normal\" families. A 2004 report from the Pew Commission on Children in Foster Care has shown that the number of children waiting in foster care doubled since the 1980s and now remains steady at about a half-million a year.\"\nAttitude toward Adoption Questionnaire (ATAQ): this questionnaire was first developed by Abdollahzadeh, Chaloyi and Mahmoudi(2019). Preliminary Edition: This questionnaire has 23 items based on the Likert scale of 1 (totally Disagree), up to 5 (Totally Agree) being obtained after refining the items designed to construct the present tool and per-study study. The analysis of item and initial psychometric analyses indicate that there are two factors in it. Items 3-10-11-12-14-15-16-17-19-20-21 are reversed and the rest are graded positively. The results of exploratory factor analysis by main components with varimax rotation indicated two components of attitude toward adoption being named respectively cognitive as the aspects of attitude toward adoption and behavioral-emotional aspects of attitude toward adoption. These two components explained 43.25% of the variance of the total sample. Cronbach's alpha coefficient was used to measure the reliability of the questionnaire. Cronbach's alpha coefficient was 0.709 for the whole questionnaire, 0.71 for the first component, and 0.713 for the second one. In addition, there was a significant positive relationship between desired social tendencies and the cognitive aspect of attitude toward adoption as well as the behavioral -emotional aspects of attitude toward adoption (P \u2264 0.01).\nForced adoption.\nFamily preservation is the emphasis that, if possible, mothers and children should be kept together. In the U.S., this was clearly illustrated by the shift in policy of the New York Foundling Home, an adoption-institution that is among the country's oldest and one that had pioneered sealed records. It established three new principles including \"to prevent placements of children...\", reflecting the belief that children would be better served by staying with their biological families, a striking shift in policy that remains in force today. In addition, groups such as Origins USA (founded in 1997) started to actively speak about family preservation and the rights of mothers. The intellectual tone of these reform movements was influenced by the publishing of \"The Primal Wound\" by Nancy Verrier. \"Primal wound\" is described as the \"devastation which the infant feels because of separation from its birth mother. It is the deep and consequential feeling of abandonment which the baby adoptee feels after the adoption and which may continue for the rest of his life.\"\nForced adoption has also been enforced with the rationale of child welfare. The children of unwed or single mothers are commonly the target of such forced adoption. This was prominent during baby scoop era in the 1950s through the 1970s in the anglosphere. The children of parents in poverty have also been targeted for forced adoption under the rationale of child welfare. This was often the case for Verdingkinder or \"contract children\" in Switzerland between the 1850s through the middle of the twentieth century.\nForced assimilation.\nRemoving children of ethnic minorities from their families to be adopted by those of the dominant ethnic group has been used as a method of forced assimilation. Forced adoption based on ethnicity occurred during World War II. In German-occupied Poland, it is estimated that 200,000 Polish children with purportedly Aryan traits were removed from their families and given to German or Austrian couples, and only 25,000 returned to their families after the war. The Stolen Generation of Aboriginal people in Australia were affected by similar policies, as were Native Americans in the United States and First Nations of Canada. These practices have become significant social and political issues in recent years, and in many cases the policies have changed. The United States, for example, now has the 1978 Indian Child Welfare Act, which allows the tribe and family of a Native American child to be involved in adoption decisions, with preference being given to adoption within the child's tribe. While forced assimilation usually revolves around ethnicity, assimilating children of political minorities has also occurred. In Spain under Francisco Franco's 1939\u20131975 dictatorship the newborns of some left-wing opponents of the regime, or unmarried or poor couples, were removed from their mothers and adopted. New mothers were frequently told their babies had died suddenly after birth and the hospital had taken care of their burials, when in fact they were given or sold to another family. It is believed that up to 300,000 babies were involved. These practices\u2014which allegedly involved doctors, nurses, nuns and priests\u2014outlived Franco's death in 1975 and carried on as an illegal baby trafficking network until 1987 when a new law regulating adoption was introduced.\nCommercialized adoption.\nAdoption is usually managed by judges, bureaucrats and social workers. Profiting from giving or receiving orphans has incentivized abusive practices.\nBaby farming.\nBaby farming is the practice of accepting custody of a child in return for payment. This was most common in Victorian Britain. Illegitimacy and its attendant social stigma were usually the impetus for a mother's decision to give her child to a baby farmer. Baby 'farmers' would sometimes neglect or murder the babies to keep costs down.\nChild harvesting.\nChild harvesting is the practice of rearing human children to be sold, typically for adoption. Poor mothers have used street clinics, known as \"baby factories\", to deliver babies to be adopted by richer women for payment. While this can be voluntary, baby factories have also coerced or abducted women into such facilities to be raped in order to sell their babies for adoption. Organized rings in Nairobi are known to abduct the children of homeless mothers sleeping on the street. During the One Child Policy in China, when women were only allowed to have one child, local governments would often allow the woman to give birth and then they would take the baby away. Child traffickers, often paid by the government, would sell the children to orphanages that would arrange international adoptions worth tens of thousands of dollars, turning a profit for the government.\nBirth and adoption records.\nAdoption practices have changed significantly over the course of the 20th century, with each new movement labeled, in some way, as reform. Beginning in the 1970s, efforts to improve adoption became associated with opening records and encouraging family preservation. These ideas arose from suggestions that the secrecy inherent in modern adoption may influence the process of forming an identity, create confusion regarding genealogy, and provide little in the way of medical history.\nBirth records: After a legal adoption in the United States, an adopted person's original birth certificate is usually amended and replaced with a new post-adoption birth certificate. The names of any birth parents listed on the original birth certificate are replaced on an amended certificate with the names of the adoptive parents, making it appear that the child was born to the adoptive parents. Beginning in the late 1930s and continuing through the 1970s, state laws allowed for the sealing of original birth certificates after an adoption and, except in Alaska and Kansas, made the original birth certificate unavailable to the adopted person even at the age of majority.\nAdopted people have long sought to undo these laws so that they can obtain their own original birth certificates. Movements to unseal original birth certificates and other adoption records for adopted people proliferated in the 1970s along with increased acceptance of illegitimacy. In the United States, Jean Paton founded Orphan Voyage in 1954, and Florence Fisher founded the Adoptees' Liberty Movement Association (ALMA) in 1971, calling sealed records \"an affront to human dignity\". While in 1975, Emma May Vilardi created the first mutual-consent registry, the International Soundex Reunion Registry (ISRR), allowing those separated by adoption to locate one another. and Lee Campbell and other birthmothers established CUB (Concerned United Birthparents). Similar ideas were taking hold globally with grass-roots organizations like Parent Finders in Canada and Jigsaw in Australia. In 1975, England and Wales opened records on moral grounds.\nBy 1979, representatives of 32 organizations from 33 states, Canada and Mexico gathered in Washington, DC, to establish the American Adoption Congress (AAC) passing a unanimous resolution: \"Open Records complete with all identifying information for all members of the adoption triad, birthparents, adoptive parents and adoptee at the adoptee's age of majority (18 or 19, depending on state) or earlier if all members of the triad agree.\" Later years saw the evolution of more militant organizations such as Bastard Nation (founded in 1996), groups that helped overturn sealed records in Alabama, Delaware, New Hampshire, Oregon, Tennessee, Maine, and Vermont. A coalition of New York and national adoptee rights activists successfully worked to overturn a restrictive 83-year-old law in 2019, and adult adopted people born in New York, as well as their descendants, today have the right to request and obtain their own original birth certificates. As of 2025, sixteen states in the United States recognize the right of adult adopted people to obtain their own original birth certificates, including Alabama, Alaska, Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Kansas, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota, and Vermont. In 2024, Minnesota became the fifteenth state to ensure adopted people have the legal right to obtain their original birth certificate. In 2025, Georgia enacted a law that restored the right to adult adopted people to request their own original birth records, becoming the sixteenth state in the United States to do so.\nLanguage of adoption.\nSince the 1970s, changes in social attitudes have resulted in examination of the language used in adoption and shifts in language use. Controversies in adoption reform efforts have been reflected in the varying terminology recommended by adoptive parents, birth parents, adoptees, and professionals involved in the adoption process such as social workers. Two of the contrasting sets of terms are commonly referred to as \"positive adoption language\" (PAL, sometimes called \"respectful adoption language\" or RAL), and \"honest adoption language\".\nAs adoption search and support organizations developed, there were challenges to the language in common use at the time. Books such as \"Adoption Triangle\" by Sorosky, Pannor and Baran (1978) and newly formed support groups such as CUB (Concerned United Birthparents) argued for a shift in language from \"natural parent\" to \"birthparent.\" In 1979, social worker Marietta Spencer wrote \"The Terminology of Adoption,\" introducing the idea of \"positive adoption language\" and arguing that \"[s]ocial service professionals and adoptive parents should take responsibility for providing informed and sensitive leadership in the use of words.\" Terms used in \"positive adoption language\" and the related \"respectful adoption language\" include the terms \"birth mother\" (to replace the terms \"natural mother\" and \"real mother\"), and \"placing\" (to replace the term \"surrender\").\nIn contrast, proponents of \"honest adoption language\" (HAL) emphasize the value of the family relationships that existed prior to legal adoption and note that mothers who have \"voluntarily surrendered\" children seldom view it as a choice that was freely made. Proponents of \"honest language adoption\" argue that the use of the term \"birth mother\" dehumanizes women who have given birth, likening them to an incubator, and does not reflect that mother-child relationships continue after the physical act of giving birth. Terms included in HAL include terms that were used before PAL, including \"natural mother\" and \"surrendered for adoption,\" as well as the use of language emphasizing the lifelong status of adoptees, such as \"is adopted\" instead of \"was adopted.\"\nReunion.\nEstimates for the extent of search behavior by adoptees have proven elusive; studies show significant variation. In part, the problem stems from the small adoptee population which makes random surveying difficult, if not impossible.\nNevertheless, some indication of the level of search interest by adoptees can be gleaned from the case of England and Wales which opened adoptees' birth records in 1975. The U.K. Office for National Statistics has projected that 33% of all adoptees would eventually request a copy of their original birth records, exceeding original forecasts made in 1975 when it was believed that only a small fraction of the adoptee population would request their records. The projection is known to underestimate the true search rate, however, since many adoptees of the era get their birth records by other means.\nThe research literature states adoptees give four reasons for desiring reunion: 1) they wish for a more complete genealogy, 2) they are curious about events leading to their conception, birth, and relinquishment, 3) they hope to pass on information to their children, and 4) they have a need for a detailed biological background, including medical information. It is speculated by adoption researchers, however, that the reasons given are incomplete: although such information could be communicated by a third-party, interviews with adoptees, who sought reunion, found they expressed a need to actually meet biological relations.\nIt appears the desire for reunion is linked to the adoptee's interaction with and acceptance within the community. Internally focused theories suggest some adoptees possess ambiguities in their sense of self, impairing their ability to present a consistent identity. Reunion helps resolve the lack of self-knowledge.\nExternally focused theories, in contrast, suggest that reunion is a way for adoptees to overcome social stigma. First proposed by Goffman, the theory has four parts: 1) adoptees perceive the absence of biological ties as distinguishing their adoptive family from others, 2) this understanding is strengthened by experiences where non-adoptees suggest adoptive ties are weaker than blood ties, 3) together, these factors engender, in some adoptees, a sense of social exclusion, and 4) these adoptees react by searching for a blood tie that reinforces their membership in the community. The externally focused rationale for reunion suggests adoptees may be well adjusted and happy within their adoptive families, but will search as an attempt to resolve experiences of social stigma.\nSome adoptees reject the idea of reunion. It is unclear, though, what differentiates adoptees who search from those who do not. One paper summarizes the research, stating, \"...attempts to draw distinctions between the searcher and non-searcher are no more conclusive or generalizable than attempts to substantiate ... differences between adoptees and nonadoptees.\"\nIn sum, reunions can bring a variety of issues for adoptees and parents. Nevertheless, most reunion results appear to be positive. In the largest study to date (based on the responses of 1,007 adoptees and relinquishing parents), 90% responded that reunion was a beneficial experience. This does not, however, imply ongoing relationships were formed between adoptee and parent nor that this was the goal.\nCultural variations.\nAttitudes and laws regarding adoption vary greatly. Whereas all cultures make arrangements whereby children whose birth parents are unavailable to rear them can be brought up by others, not all cultures have the concept of adoption, that is treating unrelated children as equivalent to biological children of the adoptive parents. Under Islamic Law, for example, adopted children must keep their original surname to be identified with blood relations, and, traditionally, women wear a hijab in the presence of males in their adoptive households. In Egypt, these cultural distinctions have led to making adoption illegal opting instead for a system of foster care.\nHomecoming Day.\nIn some countries, such as the United States, \"Homecoming Day\" is the day when an adoptee is officially united with their new adoptive family.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38535", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38535", "title": "Synchronous Digital Hierarchy", "text": ""}
{"id": "38536", "revid": "1317022702", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38536", "title": "Synchronous optical networking", "text": "Standardized protocol\nSynchronous Optical Networking (SONET) and Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) are standardized protocols that transfer multiple digital bit streams synchronously over optical fiber using lasers or highly coherent light from light-emitting diodes (LEDs). At low transmission rates, data can also be transferred via an electrical interface. The method was developed to replace the plesiochronous digital hierarchy (PDH) system for transporting large amounts of telephone calls and data traffic over the same fiber without the problems of synchronization.\nSONET and SDH, which are essentially the same, were originally designed to transport circuit mode communications, e.g. DS1, DS3, from a variety of different sources. However, they were primarily designed to support real-time, uncompressed, circuit-switched voice encoded in PCM format. The primary difficulty in doing this prior to SONET/SDH was that the synchronization sources of these various circuits were different. This meant that each circuit was actually operating at a slightly different rate and with different phase. SONET/SDH allowed for the simultaneous transport of many different circuits of differing origin within a single framing protocol. SONET/SDH is not a complete communications protocol in itself, but a transport protocol (not a \"transport\" in the OSI Model sense).\nDue to SONET/SDH's essential protocol neutrality and transport-oriented features, SONET/SDH was the choice for transporting the fixed length Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) frames also known as cells. It quickly evolved mapping structures and concatenated payload containers to transport ATM connections. In other words, for ATM (and eventually other protocols such as Ethernet), the internal complex structure previously used to transport circuit-oriented connections was removed and replaced with a large and concatenated frame (such as STS-3c) into which ATM cells, IP packets, or Ethernet frames are placed.\nBoth SDH and SONET are widely used today: SONET in the United States and Canada, and SDH in the rest of the world. Although the SONET standards were developed before SDH, it is considered a variation of SDH because of SDH's greater worldwide market penetration.\nSONET is subdivided into four sublayers with some factor such as the path, line, section and physical layer.\nThe SDH standard was originally defined by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), and is formalised as International Telecommunication Union (ITU) standards G.707, G.783, G.784, and G.803. The SONET standard was defined by Telcordia and American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard T1.105. which define the set of transmission formats and transmission rates in the range above 51.840\u00a0Mbit/s.\nDifference from PDH.\nSDH differs from Plesiochronous Digital Hierarchy (PDH) in that the exact rates that are used to transport the data on SONET/SDH are tightly synchronized across the entire network, using atomic clocks. This synchronization system allows entire inter-country networks to operate synchronously, greatly reducing the amount of buffering required between elements in the network.\nBoth SONET and SDH can be used to encapsulate earlier digital transmission standards, such as the PDH standard, or they can be used to directly support either Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) or so-called packet over SONET/SDH (POS) networking. Therefore, it is inaccurate to think of SDH or SONET as communications protocols in and of themselves; they are generic, all-purpose transport containers for moving both voice and data. The basic format of a SONET/SDH signal allows it to carry many different services in its virtual container (VC), because it is bandwidth-flexible.\nProtocol overview.\nSONET and SDH often use different terms to describe identical features or functions. This can cause confusion and exaggerate their differences. With a few exceptions, SDH can be thought of as a superset of SONET.\nSONET is a set of transport containers that allow for delivery of a variety of protocols, including traditional telephony, ATM, Ethernet, and TCP/IP traffic. SONET therefore is not in itself a native communications protocol and should not be confused as being necessarily connection-oriented in the way that term is usually used.\nThe protocol is a heavily multiplexed structure, with the header interleaved between the data in a complex way. This permits the encapsulated data to have its own frame rate and be able to \"float around\" relative to the SDH/SONET frame structure and rate. This interleaving permits a very low latency for the encapsulated data. Data passing through equipment can be delayed by at most 32\u00a0\u03bcs, compared to a frame rate of 125\u00a0\u03bcs; in many competing protocols, which buffer the data during such transits for at least one frame or packet before sending it on. Extra padding is allowed for the multiplexed data to move within the overall framing, as the data is clocked at a different rate than the frame rate. The protocol is made more complex by the decision to permit this padding at most levels of the multiplexing structure, but it improves all-around performance.\nBasic transmission unit.\nThe basic unit of framing in SDH is a STM-1 (Synchronous Transport Module, level 1), which operates at 155.520 megabits per second (Mbit/s). SONET refers to this basic unit as an STS-3c (Synchronous Transport Signal 3, concatenated). When the STS-3c is carried over OC-3, it is often colloquially referred to as OC-3c, but this is not an official designation within the SONET standard as there is no physical layer (i.e. optical) difference between an STS-3c and 3 STS-1s carried within an OC-3.\nSONET offers an additional basic unit of transmission, the STS-1 (Synchronous Transport Signal 1) or OC-1, operating at 51.84 Mbit/s\u2014exactly one third of an STM-1/STS-3c/OC-3c carrier. This speed is dictated by the bandwidth requirements for PCM-encoded telephonic voice signals: at this rate, an STS-1/OC-1 circuit can carry the bandwidth equivalent of a standard DS-3 channel, which can carry 672 64-kbit/s voice channels. In SONET, the STS-3c signal is composed of three multiplexed STS-1 signals; the STS-3c may be carried on an OC-3 signal. Some manufacturers also support the SDH equivalent of the STS-1/OC-1, known as STM-0.\nFraming.\nIn packet-oriented data transmission, such as Ethernet, a packet frame usually consists of a header and a payload. The header is transmitted first, followed by the payload (and possibly a trailer, such as a CRC). In synchronous optical networking, this is modified slightly. The header is termed the \"overhead\", and instead of being transmitted before the payload, is interleaved with it during transmission. Part of the overhead is transmitted, then part of the payload, then the next part of the overhead, then the next part of the payload, until the entire frame has been transmitted.\nIn the case of an STS-1, the frame is 810 octets in size, while the STM-1/STS-3c frame is 2,430 octets in size. For STS-1, the frame is transmitted as three octets of overhead, followed by 87 octets of payload. This is repeated nine times, until 810 octets have been transmitted, taking 125\u00a0\u03bcs. In the case of an STS-3c/STM-1, which operates three times faster than an STS-1, nine octets of overhead are transmitted, followed by 261 octets of payload. This is also repeated nine times until 2,430 octets have been transmitted, also taking 125\u00a0\u03bcs. For both SONET and SDH, this is often represented by displaying the frame graphically: as a block of 90 columns and nine rows for STS-1, and 270 columns and nine rows for STM1/STS-3c. This representation aligns all the overhead columns, so the overhead appears as a contiguous block, as does the payload.\nThe internal structure of the overhead and payload within the frame differs slightly between SONET and SDH, and different terms are used in the standards to describe these structures. Their standards are extremely similar in implementation, making it easy to interoperate between SDH and SONET at any given bandwidth.\nIn practice, the terms STS-1 and OC-1 are sometimes used interchangeably, though the OC designation refers to the signal in its optical form. It is therefore incorrect to say that an OC-3 contains 3 OC-1s: an OC-3 can be said to contain 3 STS-1s.\nSDH frame.\nThe Synchronous Transport Module, level 1 (STM-1) frame is the basic transmission format for SDH\u2014the first level of the synchronous digital hierarchy. The STM-1 frame is transmitted in exactly 125\u00a0\u03bcs, therefore, there are 8,000 frames per second on a 155.52\u00a0Mbit/s OC-3 fiber-optic circuit. The STM-1 frame consists of overhead and pointers plus information payload. The first nine columns of each frame make up the section overhead and administrative unit pointers, and the last 261 columns make up the information payload. The pointers (H1, H2, H3 bytes) identify administrative units (AU) within the information payload. Thus, an OC-3 circuit can carry 150.336\u00a0Mbit/s of payload, after accounting for the overhead.\nCarried within the information payload, which has its own frame structure of nine rows and 261 columns, are administrative units identified by pointers. Also within the administrative unit are one or more virtual containers (VCs). VCs contain path overhead and VC payload. The first column is for path overhead; it is followed by the payload container, which can itself carry other containers. Administrative units can have any phase alignment within the STM frame, and this alignment is indicated by the pointer in row four.\nThe section overhead (SOH) of a STM-1 signal is divided into two parts: the \"regenerator section overhead\" (RSOH) and the \"multiplex section overhead\" (MSOH). The overheads contain information from the transmission system itself, which is used for a wide range of management functions, such as monitoring transmission quality, detecting failures, managing alarms, data communication channels, service channels, etc.\nThe STM frame is continuous and is transmitted in a serial fashion: byte-by-byte, row-by-row.\nTransport overhead.\nThe transport overhead is used for signaling and measuring transmission error rates, and is composed as follows:\n;Section overhead: Called regenerator section overhead (RSOH) in SDH terminology: 27 octets containing information about the frame structure required by the terminal equipment.\n;Line overhead: Called multiplex section overhead (MSOH) in SDH: 45 octets containing information about error correction and Automatic Protection Switching messages (e.g., alarms and maintenance messages) as may be required within the network. The error correction is included for STM-16 and above.\n;Administrative unit (AU) pointer: Points to the location of the J1 byte in the payload (the first byte in the virtual container).\nPath virtual envelope.\nData transmitted from end to end is referred to as \"path data\". It is composed of two components:\n;Payload overhead (POH): 9 octets used for end-to-end signaling and error measurement.\n;Payload: User data (774 bytes for STM-0/STS-1, or 2,430 octets for STM-1/STS-3c)\nFor STS-1, the payload is referred to as the synchronous payload envelope (SPE), which in turn has 18 stuffing bytes, leading to the STS-1 payload capacity of 756 bytes.\nThe STS-1 payload is designed to carry a full PDH DS3 frame. When the DS3 enters a SONET network, path overhead is added, and that SONET network element (NE) is said to be a \"path generator and terminator\". The SONET NE is \"line terminating\" if it processes the line overhead. Note that wherever the line or path is terminated, the section is terminated also. SONET regenerators terminate the section, but not the paths or line.\nAn STS-1 payload can also be subdivided into seven \"virtual tributary groups\" (VTGs). Each VTG can then be subdivided into four VT1.5 signals, each of which can carry a PDH DS1 signal. A VTG may instead be subdivided into three VT2 signals, each of which can carry a PDH E1 signal. The SDH equivalent of a VTG is a TUG-2; VT1.5 is equivalent to VC-11, and VT2 is equivalent to VC-12.\nThree STS-1 signals may be multiplexed by time-division multiplexing to form the next level of the SONET hierarchy, the OC-3 (STS-3), running at 155.52\u00a0Mbit/s. The signal is multiplexed by interleaving the bytes of the three STS-1 frames to form the STS-3 frame, containing 2,430 bytes and transmitted in 125\u00a0\u03bcs.\nHigher-speed circuits are formed by successively aggregating multiples of slower circuits, their speed always being immediately apparent from their designation. For example, four STS-3 or AU4 signals can be aggregated to form a 622.08\u00a0Mbit/s signal designated OC-12 or STM-4.\nThe highest rate commonly deployed is the OC-768 or STM-256 circuit, which operates at rate of just under 38.5\u00a0Gbit/s. Where fiber exhaustion is a concern, multiple SONET signals can be transported over multiple wavelengths on a single fiber pair by means of wavelength-division multiplexing, including dense wavelength-division multiplexing (DWDM) and coarse wavelength-division multiplexing (CWDM). DWDM circuits are the basis for all modern submarine communications cable systems and other long-haul circuits.\nSONET/SDH and relationship to 10 Gigabit Ethernet.\nAnother type of high-speed data networking circuit is 10 Gigabit Ethernet (10GbE). The Gigabit Ethernet Alliance created two 10 Gigabit Ethernet variants: a local area variant (LAN PHY) with a line rate of 10.3125\u00a0Gbit/s, and a wide area variant (WAN PHY) with the same line rate as OC-192/STM-64 (9,953,280\u00a0kbit/s). \nThe WAN PHY variant encapsulates Ethernet data using a lightweight SDH/SONET frame, so as to be compatible at a low level with equipment designed to carry SDH/SONET signals, whereas the LAN PHY variant encapsulates Ethernet data using 64B/66B line coding.\nHowever, 10 Gigabit Ethernet does not explicitly provide any interoperability at the bitstream level with other SDH/SONET systems. This differs from WDM system transponders, including both coarse and dense wavelength-division multiplexing systems (CWDM and DWDM) that currently support OC-192 SONET signals, which can normally support thin-SONET\u2013framed 10 Gigabit Ethernet.\nSONET/SDH data rates.\nUser throughput must not deduct path overhead from the payload bandwidth, but path-overhead bandwidth is variable based on the types of cross-connects built across the optical system.\nNote that the data-rate progression starts at 155\u00a0Mbit/s and increases by multiples of four. The only exception is OC-24, which is standardized in ANSI T1.105, but not a SDH standard rate in ITU-T G.707. Other rates, such as OC-9, OC-18, OC-36, OC-96, and OC-1536, are defined but not commonly deployed; most are considered orphaned rates.\nPhysical layer.\nThe physical layer refers to the first layer in the OSI networking model. The ATM and SDH layers are the regenerator section level, digital line level, transmission path level, virtual path level, and virtual channel level. The physical layer is modeled on three major entities: transmission path, digital line and the regenerator section. The regenerator section refers to the section and photonic layers. The photonic layer is the lowest SONET layer and it is responsible for transmitting the bits to the physical medium. The section layer is responsible for generating the proper STS-N frames which are to be transmitted across the physical medium. It deals with issues such as proper framing, error monitoring, section maintenance, and orderwire. \nThe line layer ensures reliable transport of the payload and overhead generated by the path layer. It provides synchronization and multiplexing for multiple paths. It modifies overhead bits relating to quality control. The path layer is SONET's highest level layer. It takes data to be transmitted and transforms them into signals required by the line layer, and adds or modifies the path overhead bits for performance monitoring and protection switching.\nSONET/SDH network management protocols.\nOverall functionality.\nNetwork management systems are used to configure and monitor SDH and SONET equipment either locally or remotely.\nThe systems consist of three essential parts, covered later in more detail:\nThe main functions of network management thereby include:\nIn order to allocate bandwidth throughout a network, each network element must be configured. Although this can be done locally, through a craft interface, it is normally done through a network management system (sitting at a higher layer) that, in turn, operates through the SONET/SDH network management network.\nNetwork-element software upgrades are done mostly through the SONET/SDH management network in modern equipment.\nNetwork elements have a very large set of standards for performance management. The performance-management criteria allow not only monitoring the health of individual network elements, but isolating and identifying most network defects or outages. Higher-layer network monitoring and management software allows the proper filtering and troubleshooting of network-wide performance management, so that defects and outages can be quickly identified and resolved.\nConsider the three parts defined above:\nLocal \"craftspersons\" (telephone network engineers) can access a SDH/SONET network element on a \"craft port\" and issue commands through a dumb terminal or terminal emulation program running on a laptop. This interface can also be attached to a console server, allowing for remote out-of-band management and logging.\nNetwork management system terminal.\nThis will often consist of software running on a Workstation covering a number of SDH/SONET network elements\nTL1/Q3 Protocols.\nSONET equipment is often managed with the TL1 protocol. TL1 is a telecom language for managing and reconfiguring SONET network elements. The command language used by a SONET network element, such as TL1, must be carried by other management protocols, such as SNMP, CORBA, or XML.\nSDH has been mainly managed using the Q3 interface protocol suite defined in ITU recommendations Q.811 and Q.812. With the convergence of SONET and SDH on switching matrix and network elements architecture, newer implementations have also offered TL1.\nMost SONET NEs have a limited number of management interfaces defined:\nThe electrical interface, often a 50-ohm coaxial cable, sends SONET TL1 commands from a local management network physically housed in the central office where the SONET network element is located. This is for local management of that network element and, possibly, remote management of other SONET network elements.\n SONET and SDH have dedicated data communication channels (DCCs) within the section and line overhead for management traffic. Generally, section overhead (\"regenerator section\" in SDH) is used. According to ITU-T G.7712, there are three modes used for management:\n*IP-only stack, using PPP as data-link\n*OSI-only stack, using LAP-D as data-link\n*Dual (IP+OSI) stack using PPP or LAP-D with tunneling functions to communicate between stacks.\nDedicated embedded data communication channels (DCCs).\nTo handle all of the possible management channels and signals, most modern network elements contain a router for the network commands and underlying (data) protocols.\nEquipment.\nWith advances in SONET and SDH chipsets, the traditional categories of network elements are no longer distinct. Nevertheless, as network architectures have remained relatively constant, even newer equipment (including multi-service provisioning platforms) can be examined in light of the architectures they will support. Thus, there is value in viewing new, as well as traditional, equipment in terms of the older categories.\nRegenerator.\nTraditional regenerators terminate the section overhead, but not the line or path. Regenerators extend long-haul routes in a way similar to most regenerators, by converting an optical signal that has already traveled a long distance into electrical format and then retransmitting a regenerated high-power signal.\nSince the late 1990s, regenerators have been largely replaced by optical amplifiers. Also, some of the functionality of regenerators has been absorbed by the transponders of wavelength-division multiplexing systems.\nSTS multiplexer and demultiplexer.\nSTS multiplexer and demultiplexer provide the interface between an electrical tributary network and the optical network.\nAdd-drop multiplexer.\nAdd-drop multiplexers (ADMs) are the most common type of network elements. Traditional ADMs were designed to support one of the network architectures, though new generation systems can often support several architectures, sometimes simultaneously. ADMs traditionally have a \"high-speed side\" (where the full line rate signal is supported), and a \"low-speed side\", which can consist of electrical as well as optical interfaces. The low-speed side takes in low-speed signals, which are multiplexed by the network element and sent out from the high-speed side, or vice versa.\nDigital cross connect system.\nRecent digital cross connect systems (DCSs or DXCs) support numerous high-speed signals, and allow for cross-connection of DS1s, DS3s and even STS-3s/12c and so on, from any input to any output. Advanced DCSs can support numerous subtending rings simultaneously.\nNetwork architectures.\nSONET and SDH have a limited number of architectures defined. These architectures allow for efficient bandwidth usage as well as protection, i.e. the ability to transmit traffic even when part of the network has failed, and are fundamental to the worldwide deployment of SONET and SDH for moving digital traffic. Every SDH/SONET connection on the optical physical layer uses two optical fibers, regardless of the transmission speed.\nLinear Automatic Protection Switching.\nLinear Automatic Protection Switching (APS), also known as \"1+1\", involves four fibers: two working fibers (one in each direction), and two protection fibers. Switching is based on the line state, and may be unidirectional (with each direction switching independently), or bidirectional (where the network elements at each end negotiate so that both directions are generally carried on the same pair of fibers).\nUnidirectional path-switched ring.\nIn unidirectional path-switched rings (UPSRs), two redundant (path-level) copies of protected traffic are sent in either direction around a ring. A selector at the egress node determines which copy has the highest quality, and uses that copy, thus coping if one copy deteriorates due to a broken fiber or other failure. \nUPSRs tend to sit nearer to the edge of a network, and as such are sometimes called \"collector rings\". Because the same data is sent around the ring in both directions, the total capacity of a UPSR is equal to the line rate \"N\" of the OC-\"N\" ring. For example, in an OC-3 ring with 3 STS-1s used to transport 3 DS-3s from ingress node \"A\" to the egress node \"D\", 100 percent of the ring bandwidth (\"N\"=3) would be consumed by nodes \"A\" and \"D\". Any other nodes on the ring could only act as pass-through nodes. The SDH equivalent of UPSR is \"subnetwork connection protection\" (SNCP); SNCP does not impose a ring topology, but may also be used in mesh topologies.\nBidirectional line-switched ring.\nBidirectional line-switched ring (BLSR) comes in two varieties: two-fiber BLSR and four-fiber BLSR. BLSRs switch at the line layer. Unlike UPSR, BLSR does not send redundant copies from ingress to egress. Rather, the ring nodes adjacent to the failure reroute the traffic \"the long way\" around the ring on the protection fibers. BLSRs trade cost and complexity for bandwidth efficiency, as well as the ability to support \"extra traffic\" that can be pre-empted when a protection switching event occurs. In four-fiber ring, either single node failures, or multiple line failures can be supported, since a failure or maintenance action on one line causes the protection fiber connecting two nodes to be used rather than looping it around the ring.\nBLSRs can operate within a metropolitan region or, often, will move traffic between municipalities. Because a BLSR does not send redundant copies from ingress to egress, the total bandwidth that a BLSR can support is not limited to the line rate \"N\" of the OC-\"N\" ring, and can actually be larger than \"N\" depending upon the traffic pattern on the ring. \nIn the best case, all traffic is between adjacent nodes. The worst case is when all traffic on the ring egresses from a single node, i.e., the BLSR is serving as a collector ring. In this case, the bandwidth that the ring can support is equal to the line rate \"N\" of the OC-\"N\" ring. This is why BLSRs are seldom, if ever, deployed in collector rings, but often deployed in inter-office rings. The SDH equivalent of BLSR is called \"Multiplex Section-Shared Protection Ring\" (MS-SPRING).\nSynchronization.\nClock sources used for synchronization in telecommunications networks are rated by quality, commonly called a \"stratum\". Typically, a network element uses the highest quality stratum available to it, which can be determined by monitoring the synchronization status messages (SSM) of selected clock sources.\nSynchronization sources available to a network element are:\nThis is generated by an atomic cesium clock or a satellite-derived clock by a device in the same central office as the network element. The interface is often a DS1, with sync-status messages supplied by the clock and placed into the DS1 overhead.\nA network element can choose (or be configured) to derive its timing from the line-level, by monitoring the S1 sync-status bytes to ensure quality.\nAs a last resort, in the absence of higher quality timing, a network element can go into a \"holdover\" mode until higher-quality external timing becomes available again. In this mode, the network element uses its own timing circuits as a reference.\nTiming loops.\nA timing loop occurs when network elements in a network are each deriving their timing from other network elements, without any of them being a \"master\" timing source. This network loop will eventually see its own timing \"float away\" from any external networks, causing mysterious bit errors\u2014and ultimately, in the worst cases, massive loss of traffic. The source of these kinds of errors can be hard to diagnose. In general, a network that has been properly configured should never find itself in a timing loop, but some classes of silent failures could nevertheless cause this issue.\nNext-generation SONET/SDH.\nSONET/SDH development was originally driven by the need to transport multiple PDH signals\u2014like DS1, E1, DS3, and E3\u2014along with other groups of multiplexed 64\u00a0kbit/s pulse-code modulated voice traffic. The ability to transport ATM traffic was another early application. In order to support large ATM bandwidths, concatenation was developed, whereby smaller multiplexing containers (e.g., STS-1) are inversely multiplexed to build up a larger container (e.g., STS-3c) to support large data-oriented pipes.\nOne problem with traditional concatenation, however, is inflexibility. Depending on the data and voice traffic mix that must be carried, there can be a large amount of unused bandwidth left over, due to the fixed sizes of concatenated containers. For example, fitting a 100\u00a0Mbit/s Fast Ethernet connection inside a 155\u00a0Mbit/s STS-3c container leads to considerable waste. More important is the need for all intermediate network elements to support newly introduced concatenation sizes. This problem was overcome with the introduction of Virtual Concatenation.\nVirtual concatenation (VCAT) allows for a more arbitrary assembly of lower-order multiplexing containers, building larger containers of fairly arbitrary size (e.g., 100\u00a0Mbit/s) without the need for intermediate network elements to support this particular form of concatenation. Virtual concatenation leverages the X.86 or Generic Framing Procedure (GFP) protocols in order to map payloads of arbitrary bandwidth into the virtually concatenated container.\nThe Link Capacity Adjustment Scheme (LCAS) allows for dynamically changing the bandwidth via dynamic virtual concatenation, multiplexing containers based on the short-term bandwidth needs in the network.\nThe set of next-generation SONET/SDH protocols that enable Ethernet transport is referred to as Ethernet over SONET/SDH (EoS).\nEnd of life and retirement.\nSONET/SDH was used by internet access providers for large customers, and is no longer competitive in the supply of private circuits. Development has stagnated for the last decade (2020) and both suppliers of equipment and operators of SONET/SDH networks are migrating to other technologies such as OTN and wide area Ethernet.\nBritish Telecom has recently (March 2020) closed down their KiloStream and Mega Stream products which were the last large scale uses of the BT SDH. BT has also ceased new connections to their SDH network which indicates withdrawal of services soon.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38537", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38537", "title": "Yorkshire pudding", "text": "Traditional English side dish\nYorkshire pudding is a baked pudding made from a batter of eggs, flour, and milk or water. A common British side dish, it is a versatile food that can be served in numerous ways depending on its ingredients, size, and the accompanying components of the meal. As a first course, it can be served with onion gravy. For a main course, it may be served with meat and gravy (historically roast beef but in recent years with other meats), as part of the traditional Sunday roast, but can also be filled with foods such as bangers and mash to make a meal. Sausages can be added to make toad in the hole. In some parts of England, (especially the Midlands) the Yorkshire pudding can be eaten as a dessert, with a sweet sauce. The 18th-century cookery writer Hannah Glasse was the first to use the term \"Yorkshire pudding\" in print.\nYorkshire puddings are similar to Dutch baby pancakes, and to popovers, an American light roll made from an egg batter.\nHistory.\nWhen wheat flour began to come into common use for making cakes and puddings, cooks in northern England (Yorkshire) devised a means of making use of the fat that dropped into the dripping pan to cook a batter pudding while the meat roasted. In 1737, a recipe for \"a dripping pudding\" was published in Sir Alexander William George Cassey's book \"The Whole Duty of a Woman\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Make a good batter as for pancakes; put in a hot toss-pan over the fire with a bit of butter to fry the bottom a little then put the pan and butter under a shoulder of mutton, instead of a dripping pan, keeping frequently shaking it by the handle and it will be light and savoury, and fit to take up when your mutton is enough; then turn it in a dish and serve it hot.\nSimilar instructions were published during 1747 in the book \"The Art of Cookery made Plain and Easy\" by Hannah Glasse, with the name 'Yorkshire pudding'. It was she who renamed the original version, known as Dripping Pudding, which had been cooked in England for centuries, although these puddings were much flatter than the puffy versions made in modern times. William Sitwell suggests that the pudding got the name 'Yorkshire' due to the region's association with coal and the higher temperatures this produced which helped to make the batter crisper.\nOriginally, the Yorkshire pudding was served as a first course with thick gravy to dull the appetite with the low-cost ingredients so that the diners would not eat so much of the more expensive meat in the next course. Because the rich gravy from the roast meat drippings was used with the first course, the main meat and vegetable course was often served with a parsley or white sauce. In poorer households, the pudding was often served as the only course. Using dripping, a simple meal was made with flour, eggs and milk. This was traditionally eaten with a gravy or sauce, to moisten the pudding.\nThe Yorkshire pudding is meant to rise. The Royal Society of Chemistry suggested in 2008 that \"A Yorkshire pudding isn't a Yorkshire pudding if it is less than tall\".\nBaking method.\nYorkshire pudding is made by pouring a batter \u2014 made from milk, flour and eggs \u2014 into hot beef dripping, lard, or other rendered fat, (from which it gains its flavour), in a preheated baking pan (ramekins or muffin tins in the case of miniature puddings) and baking in a hot oven. They can also be baked in cast-iron frying pans or similar. \nA basic equal-part batter recipe uses 200 ml flour and 200 ml milk with four eggs (also 200 ml). Sometimes a small quantity of baking powder is added to aid the pudding to rise during baking. Replacing the milk with water produces a lighter, crisper, but less sweet pudding. \nA 1926 recipe involves covering the pudding with greaseproof paper to steam it and then serving it with jam, butter and sugar.\nYorkshire Pudding Day.\nNational Yorkshire Pudding Day has been celebrated on the first Sunday in February in Britain since 2007. It is celebrated on 13 October in the United States.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38538", "revid": "15934190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38538", "title": "Lamda calculus", "text": ""}
{"id": "38539", "revid": "50829425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38539", "title": "Reality television", "text": "Genre of television programming\nReality television is a genre of television programming that documents purportedly unscripted real-life situations, often starring ordinary people rather than professional actors. Reality television emerged as a distinct genre in the early 1990s with shows such as \"The Real World\", then achieved prominence in the early 2000s with the success of the series \"Survivor\", \"Idol\", and \"Big Brother\", all of which became global franchises. Reality television shows tend to be interspersed with \"confessionals\", short interview segments in which cast members reflect on or provide context for the events being depicted on-screen; this is most commonly seen in American reality television. Competition-based reality shows typically feature the gradual elimination of participants, either by a panel of judges, by the viewership of the show, or by the contestants themselves.\nDocumentaries, television news, sports television, talk shows, and traditional game shows are generally not classified as reality television. Some genres of television programming that predate the reality television boom have been retroactively classified as reality television, including hidden camera shows, talent-search shows, documentary series about ordinary people, high-concept game shows, home improvement shows, and court shows featuring real-life cases and issues.\nReality television has faced significant criticism since its rise in popularity. Critics argue that by placing the participants in artificial situations, coaching them on behavior, generating storylines ahead of time, staging the scenes and editing footage in misleading ways, reality television shows do not accurately reflect reality. Some shows have been accused of rigging the favorite or underdog to win. Other criticisms of reality television shows include that they humiliate or exploit participants; that they make stars out of either untalented people or infamous figures or both; and that they glamorize vulgarity.\nHistory.\nTelevision formats portraying ordinary people in unscripted situations are almost as old as the television medium itself. Producer-host Allen Funt's \"Candid Camera\", in which unsuspecting people were confronted with funny, unusual situations and filmed with hidden cameras, first aired in 1948. In the 21st century, the series is often considered a prototype of reality television programming.\n1940s\u20131950s.\nIn the early 1940s the German television station Fernsehsender Paul Nipkow had staged a show in which a young couple acted as model Aryans and presented their everyday lives without a script to the camera\n(\"Familienchroniken - Ein Abend mit Hans und Gelli\"). Even though it was clearly Nazi propaganda and the episodes were certainly affected by censorship, in recent years the show has been presented more frequently as the oldest reality TV show in the world.\nPrecedents for television that portrayed people in unscripted situations began in the late 1940s. \"Queen for a Day\" (1945\u20131964) was an early example of reality-based television. The 1946 television game show \"Cash and Carry\" sometimes featured contestants performing stunts. Debuting in 1948, Allen Funt's hidden camera show \"Candid Camera\" (based on his previous 1947 radio show, \"The Candid Microphone\") broadcast unsuspecting ordinary people reacting to pranks. In 1948, talent search shows, such as \"Ted Mack's Original Amateur Hour\" and \"Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts\", featured amateur competitors and audience voting. In the 1950s, game shows \"Beat the Clock\" and \"Truth or Consequences\" involved contestants in wacky competitions, stunts, and practical jokes. \"Confession\" was a crime and police show that aired from June 1958 to January 1959, with interviewer Jack Wyatt questioning criminals from assorted backgrounds. The radio series \"Nightwatch\" (1951\u20131955) tape-recorded the daily activities of Culver City, California police officers. The series \"You Asked for It\" (1950\u20131959) incorporated audience involvement by basing episodes around requests sent in by postcard from viewers.\n1960s\u20131970s.\nFirst broadcast in the United Kingdom in 1964, the Granada Television documentary \"Seven Up!\" broadcast interviews with 14 ordinary 7-year-olds from a broad cross-section of society and inquired about their reactions to everyday life. Every seven years, the filmmaker Michael Apted created a new film documenting the lives of the same individuals during the intervening period. Titled the Up Series, episodes included \"7 Plus Seven\", \"21 Up\", etc.; it is still ongoing. Structured as a series of candid interviews with no scripted plot, the films chronicle how the participants navigated personal milestones such as education, career, marriage, and family. Over time, by virtue of the sustained public attention, the participants became notable figures in British culture, effectively turning ordinary people into a type of celebrity.\nThe series \"The American Sportsman\", which ran from 1965 to 1986 on ABC in the United States, would typically feature one or more celebrities, and sometimes their family members, being accompanied by a camera crew on an outdoor adventure, such as hunting, fishing, hiking, scuba diving, rock climbing, wildlife photography, horseback riding, race car driving, and the like, with most of the resulting action and dialogue being unscripted, except for the narration.\nIn the 1966 Direct Cinema film \"Chelsea Girls\", Andy Warhol filmed various acquaintances with no direction given. The \"Radio Times Guide to Film 2007\" said that the film was \"to blame for reality television\".\nIn 1969, the British rock group the Beatles were filmed for a month during the recording sessions which would become their album \"Let It Be\" and released the homonymous film the following year. In 2021, director Peter Jackson created an eight-hour, three-episode television series entitled \"\".\nThe 12-part 1973 PBS series \"An American Family\" showed a nuclear family (filmed in 1971) going through a divorce; unlike many later reality shows, it was more or less documentary in purpose and style. In 1974 a counterpart program, \"The Family\", was made in the UK, following the working-class Wilkins family of Reading. Other forerunners of modern reality television were the 1970s productions of Chuck Barris: \"The Dating Game\", \"The Newlywed Game\", and \"The Gong Show\", all of which featured participants who were eager to sacrifice some of their privacy and dignity in a televised competition.\nThe 1976\u20131980 BBC series \"The Big Time\" featured a different amateur in some field (cooking, comedy, football, etc.) trying to succeed professionally in that field, with help from notable experts. The 15-episode series is credited with starting the career of Sheena Easton, who was selected to appear in the episode showing an aspiring pop singer trying to enter the music business.\nIn 1978, \"Living in the Past\" had amateurs participating in a re-enactment of life in an Iron Age English village.\n1980s\u20131990s.\nProducer George Schlatter capitalized on the advent of videotape to create \"Real People\", a surprise hit for NBC, and it ran from 1979 to 1984. The success of \"Real People\" was quickly copied by the television company ABC with \"That's Incredible\", a stunt show produced by Alan Landsburg and co-hosted by Fran Tarkenton; CBS's entry into the genre was \"That's My Line\", a series hosted by Bob Barker. The Canadian series \"Thrill of a Lifetime\", a fantasies-fulfilled reality show, originally ran from 1982 to 1988. It was revived from 2001 to 2003. In 1985, underwater cinematographer Al Giddings teamed with former Miss Universe Shawn Weatherly on the NBC series \"Oceanquest\", which chronicled Weatherly's adventures scuba diving in various exotic locales. Weatherly was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Achievement in informational programming.\n\"COPS\", which first aired in the spring of 1989 on Fox and was developed due to the need for new programming during the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike, showed police officers on duty apprehending criminals. It introduced the camcorder look and cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 feel of much of later reality television. The 1991 television documentary on \"typical American high schoolers\", \"Yearbook\", focused on seniors attending Glenbard West High School, in Glen Ellyn, Illinois and broadcast prime-time on Fox.\nThe series \"Nummer 28\", which aired on Dutch television in 1991, originated the concept of putting strangers together in a limited environment for an extended period of time and recording the drama that ensued. \"Nummer 28\" also pioneered many of the stylistic conventions that have since become standard in reality television shows, including extensive use of soundtrack music and the interspersing of events on screen with after-the-fact \"confessionals\" recorded by cast members, which serve as narration. \"Nummer 28\" became the model for many later series of \"Big Brother\" and its clones, and Peter Weir's full-length film \"The Truman Show\". One year later, the same concept was used by MTV in its new series \"The Real World\". \"Nummer 28\" creator Erik Latour has long claimed that \"The Real World\" was directly inspired by his show. But the producers of \"The Real World\" have said that their direct inspiration was \"An American Family\". According to television commentator Charlie Brooker, this type of reality television was enabled by the advent of computer-based non-linear editing systems for video (such as produced by Avid Technology) in 1989. These systems made it easy to quickly edit hours of video footage into a usable form, something that had been very difficult to do before (film, which was easy to edit, was too expensive to use in shooting enough hours on a regular basis).\n\"Sylvania Waters\" (1992) was an Australian show that depicted a family, similar in concept to \"An American Family\".\nThe 1994\u201395 O. J. Simpson murder case, during which live network television followed suspect Simpson for 90 minutes being chased by police, has been described as a seminal moment in reality television. Networks interrupted their regular television programming for months for coverage of the trial and related events. Because of Simpson's status as a top athlete and celebrity, the brutal nature of the murders, and issues of race and class in Los Angeles celebrity culture, the sensational case dominated ratings and the public conversation.\nMany reality television stars of the 2000s and 2010s have direct or indirect connections to people involved in the case, most notably Kim Kardashian, daughter of defense attorney Robert Kardashian, and several of her relatives and associates.\nThe series \"Expedition Robinson\", created by television producer Charlie Parsons, which first aired in 1997 in Sweden (and was later produced in a large number of other countries as \"Survivor\"), added to the \"Nummer 28\"/\"Real World\" template the idea of competition and elimination. Cast members or contestants battled against each other and were removed from the show until only one winner remained (these shows are now sometimes called elimination shows). \"Changing Rooms\", a program that began in the UK in 1996, showed couples redecorating each other's houses, and was the first reality show with a self-improvement or makeover theme. The dating reality show \"Streetmate\" premiered in the UK in 1998. Originally created by Gabe Sachs as \"Street Match\", it was a flop in the United States. But the show was revamped in the UK by Tiger Aspect Productions and became a cult hit. The production team from the original series later created the popular reality shows \"Strictly Come Dancing\", \"Location, Location, Location\", and the revamped \"MasterChef\", among others. The 1980s and 1990s were also a time when tabloid talk shows became more popular. Many of these featured the same types of unusual or dysfunctional guests who would later become popular as cast members of reality shows.\n2000s.\nReality television became globally popular at the turn of the century. \"Survivor/Expedition Robinson\" debuted in Sweden in 1997, while \"Big Brother\" debuted in the Netherlands in 1999. The American version of \"Survivor\" began airing in 2000 becoming a major success. The \"Big Brother\" franchise especially became a major success and is credited for \"changing\" television and celebrity status. The franchise expanded from the Netherlands to many other countries in the year 2000, and that same year Endemol (the Dutch TV company behind \"Big Brother\") was purchased by Spanish corporation Telef\u00f3nica for what was considered a large sum.\nIn the United States, reality television programs suffered a temporary decline in viewership, especially following the September 11 terrorist attacks, leading some entertainment industry columnists to speculate that the genre was a temporary fad that had run its course. Reality shows that suffered from low ratings included \"The Amazing Race\" (although the show has since recovered and is in its 37th edition), \"Lost\" (unrelated to the better-known serial drama of the same name) and \"The Mole\" (which was successful in other countries). But stronghold show \"Survivor\" remained resilient, leading the ratings in 2001\u201302. On the other hand, \"American Idol\", which debuted in 2002, would go on to top the U.S. season-average television ratings in the 2000s. \"Idol\" has the longest hold on the No. 1 rank in the American television ratings, dominating over all other primetime programs and other television series in the overall viewership tallies for eight consecutive years, from the 2003\u20132004 to the 2010\u20132011 television seasons.\nAnother trend was to combine reality TV with a social history angle usually by having contestants taken back to various time periods primarily to see how millennials would cope without modern technology. Examples included \"The 1900 House\", \"Bad Lads' Army\" and \"That'll Teach 'Em\". In addition to those was a series consisting of archeologists and historians running a farm though various historical periods, most notably \"Victorian Farm\".\nInternationally, a number of shows created in the late 1990s and 2000s have had massive global success. Reality-television franchises created during that time that have had more than 30 international adaptations each include the singing competition franchises \"Idols\", \"Star Academy\" and \"The X Factor\", other competition franchises \"Survivor/Expedition Robinson\", \"Big Brother\", \"The Biggest Loser\", \"Come Dine with Me\", \"Got Talent\", \"Top Model\", \"MasterChef\", \"Project Runway\" and \"Dancing with the Stars\", and the investment franchise \"Dragons' Den\". Several \"reality game shows\" from the same period have had even greater success, including \"Deal or No Deal\", \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?\", and \"Weakest Link\", with over 50 international adaptions each. (All but four of these franchises, \"Top Model\", \"Project Runway\", \"The Biggest Loser\" and \"Dragons' Den\", were created by either British producers or the Dutch production company Endemol. Although \"Dragons' Den\" originated in Japan, most of its adaptations are based on the British version.) In India, the competition show \"Indian Idol\" was the most popular television program for its first six seasons.\nDuring the 2000s, several cable networks, including Bravo, A&amp;E, E!, TLC, History, VH1, and MTV, changed their programming to feature mostly reality television series. \"The Osbournes\" is considered to be a pioneering reality television show which ushered in an era of series focusing on celebrity family life. In addition, three cable channels were started around that time that were devoted exclusively to reality television: Fox Reality in the United States, which operated from 2005 to 2010; Global Reality Channel in Canada, which lasted two years from 2010 to 2012; and CBS Reality (formerly known as Reality TV and then Zone Reality) in Europe, the Middle East and Africa, which has run from 1999 to the present.\nDuring the early part of the 2000s, network executives expressed concern that reality-television programming was limited in its appeal for DVD reissue and syndication. But DVDs for reality shows sold briskly; \"\", \"The Amazing Race\", \"Project Runway\", and \"America's Next Top Model\" all ranked in the top DVDs sold on Amazon.com. In the mid-2000s, DVDs of \"The Simple Life\" outranked scripted shows such as \"The O.C.\" and \"Desperate Housewives\". Syndication, however, has been problematic; shows such as \"Fear Factor\", \"COPS\", and \"Wife Swap\", in which each episode is self-contained, can be rerun fairly easily, but usually only on cable television or during the daytime (\"COPS\" and \"America's Funniest Home Videos\" being exceptions). Season-long competitions, such as \"The Amazing Race\", \"Survivor\", and \"America's Next Top Model\" generally perform more poorly and usually must be rerun in marathons to draw the necessary viewers to make it worthwhile. (Even in these cases, it is not always successful: the first ten seasons of \"Dancing with the Stars\" were picked up by GSN in 2012 and was run in marathon format, but attracted low viewership and had very poor ratings). Another option is to create documentaries around series, including extended interviews with the participants and outtakes not seen in the original airings; the syndicated series \"American Idol Rewind\" is an example of this strategy.\n\"COPS\" has had huge success in syndication, direct response sales, and DVD. A Fox staple since 1989, \"COPS\" has, as of 2013 (when it moved to cable channel Spike), outlasted all competing scripted police shows. Another series that had wide success is \"Cheaters\", which has been running since 2000 in the U.S. and is syndicated in over 100 countries worldwide. In 2001, the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences added the reality genre to the Emmy Awards in the category of Outstanding Reality Program. In 2003, to better differentiate between competition and informational reality programs, a second category, Outstanding Reality-Competition Program, was added. In 2008, a third category, Outstanding Host for a Reality or Reality-Competition Program, was added. In 2007, the web series \"The Next Internet Millionaire\" appeared; it was a competition show based in part on \"The Apprentice\", and was billed as the world's first Internet reality show.\n2010s.\nIn 2010, the Dutch singing competition show \"The Voice of Holland\", created by John de Mol Jr., premiered; it added to the singing competition template the twist that judges could not see contestants during the initial audition round, and could judge them only by their voice. The show was an instant success, and spawned an entire franchise, \"The Voice\", which has been highly successful, with almost 50 international adaptations.\n\"The Tester\" (2010\u20132012) was the first reality television show aired over a video game console.\nBy 2012, many of the long-running reality television show franchises in the United States, such as \"American Idol\", \"Dancing with the Stars\" and \"The Bachelor\", had begun to see declining ratings. However, reality television as a whole remained durable in the U.S., with hundreds of shows across many channels. In 2012, \"New York\" Magazine's \"Vulture\" blog published a humorous Venn diagram showing popular themes across American reality shows then running, including shows set in the U.S. states of Alaska, Louisiana and Texas, shows about cakes, weddings and pawnbrokers, and shows, usually competition-based, whose title includes the word \"Wars\".\n\"Duck Dynasty\" (2012\u20132017), which focused on the Robertson family that founded Duck Commander, in 2013 became the most popular reality series in U.S. cable television history. Its fourth-season premiere was viewed by nearly 12\u00a0million viewers in the United States, most of which were in rural markets. Its rural audience share ranked in the 30s, an extremely high number for any series, broadcast or cable.\nFollowing from the \"1900 House\" format, the BBC produced a series called \"Back in Time for Tea\" in which a family would experience tea time for various decades.\nIn 2014, \"Entertainment Weekly\" and \"Variety\" again noted a stagnation in reality television programs' ratings in the U.S., which they attributed to \"The diminishing returns of cable TV's sea of reality sameness\". They noted that a number of networks that featured reality programming, including Bravo and E!, were launching their first scripted shows, and others, including AMC, were abandoning plans to launch further reality programs; though they clarified that the genre as a whole \"isn't going anywhere.\" Ratings and profits from reality TV continued to decline in the late 2010s.\nIn the mid-2010s, South Korean variety formats began to see increased international attention within the reality television market; the reality travelogue \"Grandpas Over Flowers\" was adapted by U.S. network NBC as \"Better Late Than Never\", becoming the first Korean variety format to ever be adapted by an American broadcaster.\"\" The Korean music competition series \"King of Mask Singer\" (2015)\u2014which features celebrity contestants concealed by elaborate costume masks, and only revealing their identity once eliminated\u2014was initially imported to other Asian territories such as Thailand. Its American adaptation by Fox was the third highest-rated series overall of both the 2018\u201319 and 2019\u201320 television seasons. \n2020s.\nTelevision development across all genres was impacted in 2020 by the COVID-19 pandemic, which forced many reality competition series to suspend production (and in some cases curtail a competition already in progress, such as Canadian and Malayalam versions of \"Big Brother\"), until such time that production could recommence with appropriate health and safety protocols approved by local authorities. Due to their quicker turnaround times, the U.S. networks used reality series and other unscripted content (including those delayed from their summer lineups) to fill gaps in their schedules while the production of scripted programming resumed. \nThe popularity of \"The Masked Singer\" led to Fox greenlighting other guesswork-based game and reality shows in the early-2020s, such as the spinoff \"The Masked Dancer\", fellow South Korean series \"I Can See Your Voice\" (where participants guess who among a group of contestants are good singers without ever hearing them sing), \"Game of Talents\" (where contestants guessed the talent of a variety act via clues),\"\" \"We Are Family\" (where contestants identified performers who are relatives of celebrities), and \"Crime Scene Kitchen\" (where contestants must identify the dessert that was prepared in a kitchen based on clues, and then attempt to recreate the dish themselves).\nAt the same time, reality television continued to evolve in response to broader platform shifts and changing audience behaviors. The rise of streaming services such as Netflix, Amazon Prime Video, and HBO Max led to a new wave of reality formats, including dating shows like \"Love Is Blind\" (2020\u2013present) and \"Too Hot to Handle\" (2020\u2013present), competitive series like \"The Circle\" (2020\u2013present), and docu-soaps such as \"Dubai Bling\" (2022\u2013present). Short-form platforms like TikTok also influenced traditional reality programming, with many new shows integrating viral challenges and social media interactions into their formats. Reality competitions centered around specialized skills, such as \"Is It Cake?\" (2022\u2013present), gained popularity for offering cozy, niche viewing experiences that appealed to audiences seeking lighter, feel-good content. The demand for escapism and creativity during a period of global uncertainty led networks and streaming platforms alike to invest in more experimental and genre-blending formats.\nInternationally, there was also a surge in non-Western reality content gaining global traction, particularly from South Korea, Japan, and India. Shows like \"Single's Inferno\" (South Korea, 2021\u2013present), \"\" (South Korea, 2023\u2013present), \"Indian Matchmaking\" (India/USA, 2020\u2013present showcased a blend of competition, romance, and cultural elements that resonated with worldwide audiences through platforms like Netflix. \nSubgenres.\nThere have been various attempts to classify reality television shows into different subgenres:\nAnother categorization divides reality television into two types: shows that purport to document real life, and shows that place participants in new circumstances. In a 2003 paper, theorists Elisabeth Klaus and Stephanie L\u00fccke referred to the former category as \"docusoaps\", which consist of \"narrative reality\", and the latter category as \"reality soaps\", which consist of \"performative reality\". Since 2014, the Primetime Emmy Awards have used a similar classification, with separate awards for \"unstructured reality\" and \"structured reality\" programs, as well as a third award for \"reality-competition\" programs.\nDocumentary-style.\nIn many reality television programs, camera shooting and footage editing give the viewer the impression that they are passive observers following people going about their daily personal and professional activities; this style of filming is sometimes referred to as fly on the wall, observational documentary or factual television. Story \"plots\" are often constructed via editing or planned situations, with the results resembling soap operas \u2013 hence the terms \"docusoap\" and \"docudrama\". Documentary-style programs give viewers a private look into the lives of the subjects.\nWithin documentary-style reality television are several subcategories or variants:\nSoap-opera style.\nAlthough the term \"docusoap\" has been used for many documentary-style reality television shows, there have been shows that have deliberately tried to mimic the appearance and structure of soap operas. Such shows often focus on a close-knit group of people and their shifting friendships and romantic relationships. One highly influential such series was the American 2004\u20132006 series \",\" which attempted to specifically mimic the primetime soap opera \"The O.C.\", which had begun airing in 2003. \"Laguna Beach\" had a more drama-like feel than any previous reality television show, through the use of higher-quality lighting and cameras, voice-over narration instead of on-screen \"confessionals\", and slower pacing. \"Laguna Beach\" led to several spinoff series, most notably the 2006\u20132010 series \"The Hills\". It also inspired various other series, including the highly successful British series \"The Only Way Is Essex\" and \"Made in Chelsea\", and the Australian series \"Freshwater Blue\".\nDue to their dramatized feel, many of these shows have been accused of being pre-scripted, more so than other reality television shows have. The producers of \"The Only Way Is Essex\" and \"Made in Chelsea\" have admitted to coaching cast members on what to say in order to draw more emotion from each scene, although they insist that the underlying stories are real.\nAnother highly successful group of soap-opera-style shows is the \"Real Housewives\" franchise, which began with \"The Real Housewives of Orange County\" in 2006 and has since spawned nearly twenty other series, in the U.S. and internationally. The franchise has an older cast and different personal dynamics than that of \"Laguna Beach\" and its imitators, as well as lower production values, but similarly is meant to resemble scripted soap operas \u2013 in this case, the television series \"Desperate Housewives\" and \"Peyton Place\".\nA notable subset of such series focus on a group of women who are romantically connected to male celebrities; these include \"Basketball Wives\" (2010), \"Love &amp; Hip Hop\" (2011), \"Hollywood Exes\" (2012), \"Ex-Wives of Rock\" (2012) and \"WAGS\" (2015). Most of these shows have had spin-offs in multiple locations.\nThere are also fly-on-the-wall-style shows directly involving celebrities. Often these show a celebrity going about their everyday life: notable examples include \"The Anna Nicole Show\", \"The Osbournes\", \"Gene Simmons Family Jewels\", \"\", \"Keeping Up with the Kardashians\" and \"Hogan Knows Best\". VH1 in the mid-2000s had an entire block of such shows, known as \"Celebreality\". Shows such as these are often created with the idea of promoting a celebrity product or upcoming project.\nSubcultures.\nSome documentary-style shows shed light on rarely seen cultures and lifestyles. One example is shows about people with disabilities or people who have unusual physical circumstances, such as the American series \"Push Girls\" and \"Little People, Big World\", and the British programmes \"Beyond Boundaries\", \"Britain's Missing Top Model\", \"The Undateables\" and \"Seven Dwarves\".\nAnother example is shows that portray the lives of ethnic or religious minorities. Examples include \"All-American Muslim\" (Lebanese-American Muslims), \"Shahs of Sunset\" (affluent Persian-Americans), \"Sister Wives\" (polygamists from a Mormon splinter group), \"Breaking Amish\" and \"Amish Mafia\" (the Amish), and \"Big Fat Gypsy Weddings\" and its spinoffs (Romani people).\nThe \"Real Housewives\" franchise offers a window into the lives of social-striving urban and suburban housewives. Many shows focus on wealth and conspicuous consumption, including \"Platinum Weddings\", and \"My Super Sweet 16\", which documented huge coming of age celebrations thrown by wealthy parents. Conversely, the highly successful \"Here Comes Honey Boo Boo\" and \"Duck Dynasty\" are set in poorer rural areas of the Southern United States.\nProfessional activities.\nSome documentary-style shows portray professionals either going about day-to-day business or performing an entire project over the course of a series. One early example (and the longest running reality show of any genre) is \"Cops\", which debuted in 1989. Other such shows specifically relating to law enforcement include \"The First 48\", \"Dog the Bounty Hunter\", \"Police Stop!\", \"Traffic Cops\", \"\" and \"Motorway Patrol\".\nShows set at a specific place of business include \"American Chopper\", \"Miami Ink\" and its spinoffs, \"Bikini Barbershop\" and \"Lizard Lick Towing\".\nShows that show people working in the same non-business location include \"Airport\" and \"Bondi Rescue\".\nShows that portray a set of people in the same line of work, occasionally competing with each other, include \"Deadliest Catch\", \"Ice Road Truckers\" and \"Million Dollar Listing Los Angeles\" and its spinoffs.\nFinancial transactions and appraisals.\nOne notable subset of shows about professional activities is those in which the professionals haggle and engage in financial transactions, often over unique or rare items whose value must first be appraised. Two such shows, both of which have led to multiple spinoff shows, are \"Pawn Stars\" (about pawn shops) and \"American Pickers\". Other shows, while based around such financial transactions, also show elements of its main cast members' personal and professional lives; these shows include \"Hardcore Pawn\" and \"Comic Book Men\". Such shows have some antecedent in the British series \"Antiques Roadshow\", which began airing in 1979 and has since spawned numerous international versions, although that show includes only appraisals and does not include bargaining or other dramatic elements.\nSpecial living environment.\nSome documentary-style programs place cast members, who in most cases previously did not know each other, in staged living environments; \"The Real World\" was the originator of this format. In almost every other such type of programming, cast members are given specific challenges or obstacles to overcome. \"Road Rules\", which first aired in 1995 as a spin-off of \"The Real World\", created a show structure where the cast would travel to various countries performing challenges for prizes.\n\"Big Brother\" is probably the best-known program of this type in the world, with around 50 international versions having been produced. Other shows in this category, such as \"The 1900 House\" and \"Lads' Army\", involve historical re-enactment, with cast members living and working as people of a specific time and place. 2001's \"Temptation Island\" achieved some notoriety by placing several couples on an island surrounded by single people in order to test the couples' commitment to each other. \"The Challenge\" has contestants living together in an overseas residence, and has been around for over 30 seasons. The format of each season changes, however the main premise of the series involves a daily challenge, nomination process and elimination round. \"\" combined the \"special living environment\" format with the \"professional activity\" format noted earlier; in addition to living together in a loft, each member of the show's cast was hired to host a television program for a Canadian cable channel.\n\"The Simple Life\", \"Tommy Lee Goes to College\" and \"The Surreal Life\" are all shows in which celebrities are put into an unnatural environment.\nCourt shows.\nOriginally, court shows were all dramatized and staged programs, with actors playing the litigants, witnesses and lawyers. The cases were either reenactments of real-life cases or cases that were fictionalized altogether. Among examples of staged courtroom dramas are \"Famous Jury Trials\", \"Your Witness\", and the first two eras of \"Divorce Court\". \"The People's Court\" revolutionized the genre by introducing the arbitration-based \"reality\" format in 1981, later adopted by the vast majority of court shows. The genre experienced a lull in programming after \"The People's Court\" was canceled in 1993, but then soared after the emergence of \"Judge Judy\" in 1996. This led to a slew of other reality court shows, such as \"Judge Mathis\", \"Judge Joe Brown\", \"Judge Alex\", \"Judge Mills Lane\" and \"Judge Hatchett\".\nThough the litigants are legitimate, the \"judges\" in such shows are actually arbitrators, as these pseudo-judges are not actually presiding in a court of law. Typically, however, they are retired judges or at least individuals who have had some legal experience.\nCourtroom programs are typically daytime television shows that air on weekdays.\nInvestments.\nThe globally syndicated format \"Dragons' Den\" shows a group of wealthy investors choosing whether or not to invest in a series of pitched startup companies and entrepreneurial ventures. The series \"Restaurant Startup\" similarly involves investors, but involves more of a game show element in which restaurant owners compete to prove their worth. The British series \"Show Me the Monet\" offers a twist in which artworks' artistic value, rather than their financial value, is appraised by a panel of judges, who determine whether each one will be featured at an exhibition.\nOutdoor survival.\nAnother subgenre places people in wild and challenging natural settings. This includes such shows as \"Survivorman\", \"Man vs. Wild\", \"Marooned with Ed Stafford\", \"Naked and Afraid\" and \"Alaskan Bush People\". The shows \"Survivor\" and \"Get Out Alive with Bear Grylls\" combine outdoor survival with a competition format, although in \"Survivor\" the competition also involves social dynamics.\nSelf-improvement or makeover.\nSome reality television shows cover a person or group of people improving their lives. Sometimes the same group of people are covered over an entire season (as in \"The Swan\" and \"Celebrity Fit Club\"), but usually there is a new target for improvement in each episode. Despite differences in the content, the format is usually the same: first the show introduces the subjects in their current, less-than-ideal environment. Then the subjects meet with a group of experts, who give the subjects instructions on how to improve things; they offer aid and encouragement along the way. Finally, the subjects are placed back in their environment and they, along with their friends and family and the experts, appraise the changes that have occurred. Other self-improvement or makeover shows include \"The Biggest Loser\", \"Extreme Weight Loss\" and \"Fat March\" (which cover weight loss), \"Extreme Makeover\" (entire physical appearance), \"Queer Eye\", \"What Not to Wear\", \"How Do I Look?\", \"Trinny &amp; Susannah Undress...\" and \"Snog Marry Avoid?\" (style and grooming), \"Supernanny\" (child-rearing), \"Made\" (life transformation), \"Tool Academy\" (relationship building) and \"Charm School\" and \"From G's to Gents\" (self-improvement and manners).\nThe concept of self-improvement was taken to its extreme with the British show \"Life Laundry\", in which people who had become hoarders, even living in squalor, were given professional assistance. The American television series \"Hoarders\" and \"\" follow similar premises, presenting interventions in the lives of people who suffer from compulsive hoarding. The British series \"Sort Your Life Out\", presented by Stacey Solomon, is similar, but it also redesigns the participants' houses.\nIn one study, participants who admitted to watching more reality television were more likely to proceed with a desired plastic surgery than those who watched less.\nRenovation.\nSome shows makeover part or all of a person's living space, workspace, or vehicle. The American series \"This Old House\", which debuted in 1979, features the start-to-finish renovation of different houses through a season; media critic Jeff Jarvis has speculated that it is \"the original reality TV show.\" The British show \"Changing Rooms\", beginning in 1996 (later remade in the U.S. as \"Trading Spaces\") was the first such renovation show that added a game show feel with different weekly contestants.\nHouse renovation shows are a mainstay on the American and Canadian cable channel HGTV, whose renovation shows include the successful franchises \"Flip or Flop\", \"Love It or List It\" and \"Property Brothers\", as well as shows such as \"Debbie Travis' Facelift\", \"Designed to Sell\" and \"Holmes on Homes\". Non-HGTV shows in this category include \"\" and \"While You Were Out\".\n\"Pimp My Ride\" and \"Overhaulin\"' show vehicles being rebuilt in a customized way.\nBusiness improvement.\nIn some shows, one or more experts try to improve a failing small business over the course of each episode. Examples that cover many types of business include \"We Mean Business\" and \"The Profit\". Shows geared for a specific type of business include \"Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares\" and \"\" (for restaurants), \"Bar Rescue\" (for bars) and \"Hotel Hell\" (for hotels).\nSocial experiment.\nAnother type of reality program is the social experiment which produces drama, conflict, and sometimes transformation. British TV series \"Wife Swap\", which began in 2003, and had many spinoffs in the UK and other countries, is a notable example. In the show, people with different values agree to live by each other's social rules for a period of time. Other shows in this category include \"Trading Spouses\", \"Bad Girls Club\" and \"Holiday Showdown\". \"Faking It\" was a series where people had to learn a new skill and pass themselves off as experts. \"Shattered\" was a controversial 2004 UK series in which contestants competed to see how long they could go without sleep. \"Solitary\" was a controversial 2006-2010 Fox Reality series which isolated contestants for weeks in solitary confinement pods with limited sleep, food and information while competing in elimination challenges which could be ended by pressing a 'quit' button, causing winners to go on for much longer than needed in a blind gamble to win.\nThe Dutch series \"De Verraders\", adapted internationally as \"The Traitors\", features contestants divided into two factions\u2014the \"traitors\" and the \"faithful\"\u2014and competing in challenges to build a cash jackpot awarded in the finale; three contestants designated as \"traitors\" (who are known to the viewers) have the ability to secretly eliminate (\"murder\") other contestants each night, while the remaining contestants are tasked with figuring out the identities of the traitors so they can attempt to \"banish\" them in elimination votes. The jackpot is split among the faithful if they eliminate all of the traitors, but is split among the traitors if they fail.\nHidden cameras.\nAnother type of reality programming features hidden cameras rolling when random passers-by encounter a staged situation. \"Candid Camera\", which first aired on television in 1948, pioneered the format. Modern variants of this type of production include \"Punk'd\", \"Trigger Happy TV\", \"Primetime: What Would You Do?\", \"The Jamie Kennedy Experiment\" and \"Just for Laughs Gags\". The series \"Scare Tactics\" and \"Room 401\" are hidden-camera programs in which the goal is to frighten contestants rather than just befuddle or amuse them. The Belgian hidden camera series \"Sorry voor alles\" subjects a contestant to various staged situations over a month-long period, designed to analyze their personality and how they respond. After the contestant is taken to a studio and let off the hook, they then answer observation questions related to the events for a chance to win prizes.\nNot all hidden camera shows use strictly staged situations. For example, the syndicated program \"Cheaters\" purports to use hidden cameras to record suspected cheating partners, although the authenticity of the show has been questioned, and even refuted by some who have been featured on the series. Once the evidence has been gathered, the accuser confronts the cheating partner with the assistance of the host. In many special-living documentary programs, hidden cameras are set up all over the residence in order to capture moments missed by the regular camera crew, or intimate bedroom footage.\nSupernatural and paranormal.\nSupernatural and paranormal reality shows such as \"MTV's Fear\", place participants into frightening situations which ostensibly involve paranormal phenomena such as ghosts, telekinesis or haunted houses. In series such as \"Celebrity Paranormal Project\", the stated aim is investigation, and some series like \"Scariest Places on Earth\" challenge participants to survive the investigation; whereas others such as \"Paranormal State\" and \"Ghost Hunters\" use a recurring crew of paranormal researchers. In general, the shows follow similar stylized patterns of night vision, surveillance, and hand held camera footage; odd angles; subtitles establishing place and time; desaturated imagery; and non-melodic soundtracks. Noting the trend in reality shows that take the paranormal at face value, \"New York Times\" culture editor Mike Hale characterized ghost hunting shows as \"pure theater\" and compared the genre to professional wrestling or softcore pornography for its formulaic, teasing approach.\nReality competition or game shows.\nAnother subgenre of reality television is \"reality competition\", \"reality playoffs\", or so-called \"reality game shows\", which follow the format of non-tournament elimination contests. Typically, participants are filmed competing to win a prize, often while living together in a confined environment. In many cases, participants are removed until only one person or team remains, who is then declared the winner. Usually this is done by eliminating participants one at a time (or sometimes two at a time, as an episodic twist due to the number of contestants involved and the length of a given season), through either disapproval voting or by voting for the most popular to win. Voting is done by the viewing audience, the show's own participants, a panel of judges, or some combination of the three.\nA well-known example of a reality-competition show is the globally syndicated \"Big Brother\", in which cast members live together in the same house, with participants removed at regular intervals by either the viewing audience or, in the American version, by the participants themselves. There remains disagreement over whether talent-search shows such as the \"Idol\" series, the \"Got Talent\" series and the \"Dancing with the Stars\" series are truly reality television or just newer incarnations of shows such as \"Star Search\". Although the shows involve a traditional talent search, the shows follow the reality-competition conventions of removing one or more contestants in every episode, allowing the public to vote on who is removed, and interspersing performances with video clips showing the contestants' \"back stories\", their thoughts about the competition, their rehearsals and unguarded behind-the-scenes moments. Additionally, there is a good deal of unscripted interaction shown between contestants and judges. The American Primetime Emmy Awards have nominated both \"American Idol\" and \"Dancing with the Stars\" for the Outstanding Reality-Competition Program Emmy.\nGame shows like \"Weakest Link\", \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?\", \"American Gladiators\" and \"Deal or No Deal\", which were popular in the 2000s, also lie in a gray area: like traditional game shows (e.g., \"The Price Is Right\", \"Jeopardy!\"), the action takes place in an enclosed television studio over a short period of time; however, they have higher production values, more dramatic background music, and higher stakes than traditional shows (done either through putting contestants into physical danger or offering large cash prizes). In addition, there is more interaction between contestants and hosts, and in some cases, they feature reality-style contestant competition or elimination as well. These factors, as well as these shows' rise in global popularity at the same time as the arrival of the reality craze, have led to such shows often being grouped under both the reality television and game show umbrellas. \nThere have been various hybrid reality-competition shows, like the worldwide-syndicated \"Star Academy\", which combines the \"Big Brother\" and \"Idol\" formats, \"The Biggest Loser\", which combines competition with the self-improvement format, and \"American Inventor\", which uses the \"Idol\" format for products instead of people. Some reality shows that aired mostly during the early 2000s, such as \"Popstars\", \"Making the Band\" and \"Project Greenlight\", devoted the first part of the season to selecting a winner, and the second part to showing that person or group of people working on a project. \nPopular variants of the competition-based format include the following:\nDating-based competition.\nDating-based competition shows follow a contestant choosing one out of a group of suitors. Over the course of either a single episode or an entire season, suitors are eliminated until only the contestant and the final suitor remains. In the early 2000s, this type of reality show dominated the other genres on the major U.S. networks. Examples include \"The Bachelor\", its spin-off \"The Bachelorette\", \"Temptation Island\", \"Average Joe\", \"Flavor of Love\" (a dating show featuring rapper Flavor Flav that led directly and indirectly to over 10 spinoffs), \"The Cougar\" and \"Love in the Wild\". In \"Married by America\", contestants were chosen by viewer voting. This is one of the older variants of the format; shows such as \"The Dating Game\" that date to the 1960s had similar premises (though each episode was self-contained, and not the serial format of more modern shows). One of the more recent hits was \"Farmer Wants a Wife\".\nJob search.\nIn this category, the competition revolves around a skill that contestants were pre-screened for. Competitors perform a variety of tasks based on that skill, are judged, and are then kept or removed by a single expert or a panel of experts. The show is usually presented as a job search of some kind, in which the prize for the winner includes a contract to perform that kind of work and an undisclosed salary, although the award can simply be a sum of money and ancillary prizes, like a cover article in a magazine. The show also features judges who act as counselors, mediators and sometimes mentors to help contestants develop their skills further or perhaps decide their future position in the competition. \"Popstars\", which debuted in 1999, may have been the first such show, while the \"Idol\" series has been the longest-running and, for most of its run, the most popular such franchise. The first job-search show which showed dramatic, unscripted situations may have been \"America's Next Top Model\", which premiered in May 2003. Other examples include \"The Apprentice\" (which judges business skills); \"Hell's Kitchen\", \"MasterChef\" and \"Top Chef\" (for chefs), \"The Great British Bake Off\" (for bakers), \"Shear Genius\" (for hair styling), \"Project Runway\" (for clothing design), \"Top Design\" and \"The Great Interior Design Challenge\" (for interior design), \"American Dream Builders\" (for home builders), \"Stylista\" (for fashion editors), \"Last Comic Standing\" (for comedians), \"I Know My Kid's a Star\" (for child performers), \"On the Lot\" (for filmmakers), \"RuPaul's Drag Race\" (for drag queens), \"The Shot\" (for fashion photographers), \"So You Think You Can Dance\" (for dancers), \"MuchMusic VJ Search\" and \"Food Network Star\" (for television hosts), \"Dream Job\" (for sportscasters), \"American Candidate\" (for aspiring politicians), \"\" (for artists), \"Face Off\" (for prosthetic makeup artists), \"Ink Master\" and \"Best Ink\" (for tattoo artists), \"Platinum Hit\" (for songwriters), \"Top Shot\" (for marksmen) and \"The Tester\" (for game testers).\nOne notable subset, popular from approximately 2005 to 2012, consisted of shows in which the winner gets a specific part in a known film, television show, musical or performing group. Examples include \"Scream Queens\" (where the prize was a role in the \"Saw\" film series), \"The Glee Project\" (for a role on the television show \"Glee\") and \"How Do You Solve a Problem like Maria?\" (the lead role in a revival of the musical \"The Sound of Music\"). The most extreme prize for such a show may have been for one of the first such shows, 2005's \"\", where the winner became the lead singer of the rock band INXS. J.D. Fortune, who won the show, went on to be INXS's lead singer until 2011.\nSome shows use the same format with celebrities: in this case, there is no expectation that the winner will continue this line of work, and prize winnings often go to charity. The most popular such shows have been the \"Dancing with the Stars\" and \"Dancing on Ice\" franchises. Other examples of celebrity competition programs include \"Deadline\", \"Celebracadabra\" and \"Celebrity Apprentice\".\nDifferent contestants per episode.\nSome job-related competition shows have a different set of contestants competing on every episode, and thus more closely resemble game shows, although the \"confessional\" commentary provided by contestants gives them a reality TV aspect. The 1993-1999 Japanese cooking competition \"Iron Chef\" could be considered an early example, although it does not include commentary by the participants, only by announcers and judges. Cooking competition shows with different contestants per episode that are considered reality shows include the \"Chopped\", \"Come Dine with Me\" and \"Nailed It!\" franchises, along with \"Cupcake Wars\", \"Cutthroat Kitchen\", and \"Guy's Grocery Games\".\nNon-cooking competition shows with a similar format include \"Forged in Fire\" and \"The Butcher\".\nImmunity.\nOne concept pioneered by, and unique to, reality competition shows is the idea of immunity, in which a contestant can win the right to be exempt the next time contestants are eliminated from the show. Possibly the first instance of immunity in reality TV was on \"Survivor\", which premiered in 1997 in Sweden as \"Expedition Robinson\", before gaining international prominence after the American edition (titled \"Survivor\") premiered in 2000. On that show, there are complex rules around immunity: a player can achieve it by winning challenges (either as a team in the tribal phase or individually in the merged phase), or, in more recent seasons, through finding a hidden totem. They can also pass on their immunity to someone else and in the latter case, they can keep their immunity secret from other players. \nOn most shows, immunity is quite a bit simpler: it is usually achieved by winning a task, often a relatively minor task during the first half of the episode; the announcement of immunity is made publicly and immunity is usually non-transferable. At some point in the season, immunity ceases to be available, and all contestants are susceptible to elimination. Competition shows that have featured immunity include the \"Apprentice\", \"Big Brother\", \"Biggest Loser\", \"Top Model\", \"Project Runway\", \"Lego Masters\", and \"Top Chef\" franchises. Immunity may come with additional power as well, such as in the American version of \"Big Brother\" where the winning contestant usually has influence over deciding who faces an elimination vote later in the week. In one \"Apprentice\" episode, a participant chose to waive his earned immunity and was immediately \"fired\" for giving up this \"powerful asset\".\nSports.\nSport-related reality shows can fall within the aforementioned sub-genres, either using it as the basis of competition, or by following sport as a profession:\nParodies and hoaxes.\nSome reality shows aim to satirize and deconstruct the conventions and cliches of the genre for comedic effect; in such cases, a fictitious premise is usually presented to one or more of the participants, with the rest of the cast consisting of actors and other figures that are in on the joke.\nCriticism and analysis.\n\"Reality\" as misnomer.\nThe authenticity of reality television is often called into question by its detractors. The genre's title of \"reality\" is often criticized as being inaccurate because of claims that the genre frequently includes elements such as premeditated scripting (including a practice called \"soft-scripting\"), acting, urgings from behind-the-scenes crew to create specified situations of adversity and drama, and misleading editing. It has often been described as \"scripting without paper\".\nIn many cases, the entire premise of the show is contrived, based around a competition or another unusual situation. Some shows have been accused of using fakery in order to create more compelling television, such as having premeditated storylines and in some cases feeding participants lines of dialogue, focusing only on participants' most outlandish behavior, and altering events through editing and re-shoots.\nShows such as \"Survivor\" and \"Amazing Race\" that offer a monetary prize are regulated in the United States by federal \"game show\" law, \u00a0https://, and are monitored during the filming by the legal staff and standards and practice staff of the parent network. These shows cannot be manipulated in any way that affects the outcome of the game. However, misleading editing does not fall into altering the fairness of the competition. \nBeyond concerns about authenticity, media critics have argued that reality television may have broader societal consequences. In 2022, Time magazine TV critic Judy Berman wrote that \"to the extent that the U.S. has become a harsher, shallower, angrier, more divided place in the 21st century, reality TV, which has helped normalize cruelty, belligerence, superficiality, and disloyalty, and rewarded people who weaponize those traits, bears a share of the blame.\"\nReality television shows that have been accused of, or admitted to, deception include \"The Real World\", the American version of \"Survivor\", \"Joe Millionaire\", \"The Hills\", \"A Shot at Love with Tila Tequila\", \"Hogan Knows Best\", ', \"The Bachelor\" and \"The Bachelorette\", \"Pawn Stars\", \"Storage Wars\", ' and \"Keeping Up with the Kardashians\".\nIn contrast, critic Matt Zoller Seitz praised \"Deadliest Catch\" as having \"brought old-school documentary sobriety to a genre more often known for shamelessness.\"\nPolitical and cultural impact.\nReality television's global success has become, in the view of some analysts, an important political phenomenon. In some authoritarian countries, reality-television voting has provided the first opportunity for many citizens to vote in any free and fair wide-scale \"elections\". In addition, the frankness of the settings on some reality shows presents situations that are often taboo in certain conservative cultures, like \"Star Academy Arab World\", which began airing in 2003, and which shows male and female contestants living together. A Pan-Arab version of \"Big Brother\" was cancelled in 2004 after less than two weeks on the air after a public outcry and street protests. In 2004 journalist Matt Labash, noting both of these issues, wrote that \"the best hope of little Americas developing in the Middle East could be Arab-produced reality TV\".\nIn 2007, Abu Dhabi TV began airing \"Million's Poet\", a show featuring \"Pop Idol\"-style voting and elimination, but for the writing and oration of Arabic poetry. The show became popular in Arab countries, with around 18\u00a0million viewers, partly because it was able to combine the excitement of reality television with a traditional, culturally relevant topic. In April 2010, however, the show also became a subject of political controversy, when Hissa Hilal, a 43-year-old female Saudi competitor, read out a poem criticizing her country's Muslim clerics. Both critics and the public reacted favorably to Hilal's poetry; she received the highest scores from the judges throughout the competition and came in third place overall.\nIn India, in the summer of 2007, coverage of the third season of \"Indian Idol\" focused on the breaking down of cultural and socioeconomic barriers as the public rallied around the show's top two contestants.\nThe Chinese singing competition \"Super Girl\" (a local imitation of \"Pop Idol\") has similarly been cited for its political and cultural impact. After the finale of the show's 2005 season drew an audience of around 400\u00a0million people, and eight million text-message votes, the state-run English-language newspaper \"Beijing Today\" ran the front-page headline: \"Is Super Girl a Force for Democracy?\" The Chinese government criticized the show, citing both its democratic nature and its excessive vulgarity, or \"worldliness\", and in 2006 banned it outright. It was later reintroduced in 2009, before being banned again in 2011. \"Super Girl\" has also been criticized by non-government commentators for creating seemingly impossible ideals that may be harmful to Chinese youth.\nIn Indonesia, reality television shows have surpassed soap operas as the most-watched broadcast programs. One popular program, \"Jika Aku Menjadi\" (\"If I Were\"), follows young, middle-class people as they are temporarily placed into lower-class life, where they learn to appreciate their circumstances back home by experiencing daily life for the less fortunate. Critics have claimed that this and similar programs in Indonesia reinforce traditionally Western ideals of materialism and consumerism. However, Eko Nugroho, reality-show producer and president of Dreamlight World Media, insists that these reality shows are not promoting American lifestyles but rather reaching people through their universal desires.\nReality television has also received criticism in Britain and the United States for its ideological relationship with surveillance societies and consumerism. Writing in \"The New York Times\" in 2012, author Mark Andrejevic characterised the role of reality television in a post-9/11 society as the normalisation of surveillance in participatory monitoring, the \"logic of the emerging surveillance economy\", and in the promise of a societal self-image that is contrived. An LSE paper by Nick Couldry associates reality television with neoliberalism, condemning the ritualised enactment and consumption of what must be legitimised for the society it serves.\nAs a substitute for scripted drama.\nReality television generally costs less to produce than scripted series.\nVH1 executive vice president Michael Hirschorn wrote in 2007 that the plots and subject matters on reality television are more authentic and more engaging than in scripted dramas, writing that scripted network television \"remains dominated by variants on the police procedural... in which a stock group of characters (ethnically, sexually, and generationally diverse) grapples with endless versions of the same dilemma. The episodes have all the ritual predictability of Japanese Noh theater,\" while reality television is \"the liveliest genre on the set right now. It has engaged hot-button cultural issues \u2013 class, sex, race \u2013 that respectable television... rarely touches.\"\nTelevision critic James Poniewozik wrote in 2008 that reality shows like \"Deadliest Catch\" and \"Ice Road Truckers\" showcase working-class people of the kind that \"used to be routine\" on scripted network television, but that became a rarity in the 2000s: \"The better to woo upscale viewers, TV has evicted its mechanics and dockworkers to collect higher rents from yuppies in coffeehouses.\"\nIn a 2021 interview, filmmaker Mike White (who had previously competed on \"The Amazing Race\" and \"Survivor\") said that reality competition shows like \"Survivor\" accurately conveyed how, in real life, \"so much of self is situational\", so that, as circumstances change, \"the oppressed becomes the oppressor, the bully becomes the bullied.\" In contrast, he felt that in scripted drama \"there's a lot of religiosity around humanity.\"\nInstant celebrity.\nReality television has the potential to turn its participants into national celebrities, at least for a short period. This is most notable in talent-search programs such as \"Idol\" and \"The X Factor\", which have spawned music stars in many of the countries in which they have aired. Many other shows, however, have made mostly temporary celebrities out of their participants; some participants have then been able to parlay this fame into media and merchandising careers. Participants of non-talent-search programs who have had subsequent acting careers include Lilian Afegbai, Jacinda Barrett, Jamie Chung, Stephen Colletti, David Giuntoli, Vishal Karwal, NeNe Leakes and Angela Trimbur; though Barrett and Trimbur were already aspiring actresses when they appeared on reality television. Reality TV participants who have become television hosts and personalities include Nabilla Benattia, Rachel Campos-Duffy, Kristin Cavallari, Colby Donaldson, Raffaella Fico, Elisabeth Hasselbeck, Katie Hopkins, Rebecca Jarvis, Jodie Marsh, Heidi Montag, Tiffany Pollard and Whitney Port; some of them have had acting careers as well. Reality TV participants who have become television personalities as well as successful entrepreneurs include Gemma Collins, Lauren Conrad, Jade Goody, Bethenny Frankel and Spencer Matthews. Several cast members of MTV's \"Jersey Shore\" have had lucrative endorsement deals, and in some cases their own product lines. Wrestlers Mike \"The Miz\" Mizanin and David Otunga got their start on non-athletic reality shows.\nIn Australia, various reality TV personalities have later served as radio hosts, including Fitzy and Rachel Corbett from \"Big Brother\", Mick Newell from \"My Kitchen Rules\", Heather Maltman from \"The Bachelor\", and Sam Frost from \"The Bachelorette\".\nSome reality-television alumni have parlayed their fame into paid public appearances.\nSeveral socialites, or children of famous parents, who were somewhat well known before they appeared on reality television shows have become much more famous as a result, including Paris Hilton, Nicole Richie, Kelly Osbourne, Kim Kardashian, and many of the rest of the Kardashian family.\nReality television personalities often get derided as \"Z-list celebrities\". Some have been lampooned for exploiting an undeserved \"15 minutes of fame\". The Kardashian family is one such group of reality television personalities who were subject to this criticism in the 2010s, Kim Kardashian in particular.\nSpringboard for political success.\nTwo international franchises, \"The Apprentice\" and \"Dragons' Den\", are notable for having some of the business people who appeared there as judges and investors go on to win political office. The prime example is President of the United States Donald Trump: his stint as host of the original \"The Apprentice\" from 2004 to 2015 has been credited by some commentators as a factor in his political success, since it greatly increased his fame, and showcased him as a tough and experienced authority figure. Lado Gurgenidze, who hosted the Georgian version of \"The Apprentice\" in 2005, was appointed Prime Minister of Georgia from 2007, and served until 2008. Harry Harkimo, who hosted the Finnish version of \"The Apprentice\" from 2009 to 2013, has been a member of the Parliament of Finland since 2015. Jo\u00e3o Doria, who hosted seasons 7-8 of the Brazilian version of \"The Apprentice\", \"O Aprendiz\", from 2010 to 2011, served as Mayor of S\u00e3o Paulo from 2017 to 2018, and as Governor of S\u00e3o Paulo from 2018 to 2022. Bruno Bonnell, who hosted the short-lived French version of \"The Apprentice\" in 2015, was a member of France's National Assembly from 2017 to 2022.\n\"Dragons' Den\" investors who have gone on to hold political office after appearing on their country's version of the program include Tommy Ahlers of Denmark, Nir Barkat of Israel, Anne Berner of Finland, Tomio Okamura of the Czech Republic, and Lencke Wischhusen of Germany.\nIn a rare case of a previously unknown reality television alumnus succeeding in the political arena, \"\" cast member Sean Duffy was a U.S. Representative from Wisconsin from 2010 to 2019.\nYouth audience.\nIn 2006, four of the ten most popular programs among viewers under 17 were reality shows. Studies have shown that young people emulate the behavior displayed on these programs, gathering much of their knowledge of the social world, particularly about consumer practices, from television. Some critics have decried the positive representation of sexually objectified women in shows like \"The Girls Next Door\".\nIn 2007, according to the Learning and Skills Council, one in seven UK teenagers hoped to gain fame by appearing on reality television.\nAppeal.\nA number of studies have tried to pinpoint the appeal of reality television. Factors that have been cited in its appeal include personal identification with the onscreen participants; pure entertainment; diversion from scripted TV; vicarious participation; a feeling of self-importance compared to onscreen participants; enjoyment of competition; and an appeal to voyeurism, especially given \"scenes which take place in private settings, contain nudity, or include gossip\".\nA 2012 survey by Today.com found that Americans who watch reality television regularly are more extroverted, more neurotic, and have lower self-esteem than those who do not.\nSimilar works in popular culture.\nA number of fictional works since the 1940s have contained elements similar to elements of reality television. They tended to be set in a dystopian future, with subjects being recorded against their will and often involved violence.\nPop culture references.\nSome scripted and written works have used reality television as a plot device:\nOther influences on popular culture.\nA number of scripted television comedy and satire shows have adopted the format of the documentary-type reality television show, in \"mockumentary\" style. The first such show was the BBC series \"Operation Good Guys\", which premiered in 1997. Arguably the best-known and most influential such show is the BBC's \"The Office\" (2001), which spawned numerous international remakes, including a successful American version. Other examples include \"People Like Us\" (BBC UK, 1998), \"The Games\" (ABC Australia, 1999), \"Trailer Park Boys\" (2001), \"Reno 911!\" (2003), \"The Naked Brothers Band\" (2006), \"Summer Heights High\" (2007), \"Parks and Recreation\" (2009), \"Modern Family\" (2009), \"Come Fly with Me\" (2010), \"Real Husbands of Hollywood\" (2013), \"Trial &amp; Error\" (2017), \"\" (2017) and \"Abbott Elementary\" (2021). The genre has even encompassed cartoons (\"Drawn Together\" (2004) and \"Total Drama\" (2007)) and a show about puppets (\"The Muppets\", 2015).\nNot all reality-television-style mockumentary series are comedic: the 2013 American series \"Siberia\" has a science fiction-horror bent, while the 2014 Dutch series \"The First Years\" is a drama.\nThe 2013\u20132015 American sketch comedy series \"Kroll Show\" set most of its sketches as excerpts from various fictional reality television shows, which one critic wrote \"aren't far off from the lineups at E!, Bravo, and VH1\", and parodied those shows' participants' \"lack of self-awareness\". The show also satirized the often incestuous nature of reality television, in which some series lead to a cascade of spinoffs. \"Kroll Show\" executive producer John Levenstein said in an interview that reality TV \"has so many tools for telling stories in terms of text and flashbacks and ways to show things to the audience that it's incredibly convenient for comedy and storytelling if you use the full reality show toolkit.\"\nSome feature films have been produced that use some of the conventions of reality television; such films are sometimes referred to as reality films, and sometimes simply as documentaries. Allen Funt's 1970 hidden camera movie \"What Do You Say to a Naked Lady?\" was based on his reality-television show \"Candid Camera\". The series \"Jackass\" spawned five feature films, starting with \"\" in 2002. A similar Finnish show, \"The Dudesons\", was adapted for the film \"The Dudesons Movie\", and a similar British show, \"Dirty Sanchez\", was adapted for \"Dirty Sanchez: The Movie\", both in 2006. The producers of \"The Real World\" created \"The Real Cancun\" in 2003. The Chinese reality show \"Keep Running\" was adapted for the 2015 film \"Running Man\".\nThe 2003 BBC film \"The Other Boleyn Girl\" incorporated reality TV-style confessionals in which the two main characters talked directly to the camera.\nIn 2007, broadcaster Krishnan Guru-Murthy stated that reality television is \"a firm and embedded part of television's vocabulary, used in every genre from game-shows and drama to news and current affairs.\"\nThe mumblecore film genre, which began in the mid-2000s, and uses video cameras and relies heavily on improvisation and non-professional actors, has been described as influenced in part by what one critic called \"the spring-break psychodrama of MTV's \"The Real World\"\". Mumblecore director Joe Swanberg has said, \"As annoying as reality TV is, it's been really good for filmmakers because it got mainstream audiences used to watching shaky camerawork and different kinds of situations.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38540", "revid": "48442598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38540", "title": "IsoImage", "text": ""}
{"id": "38542", "revid": "12580852", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38542", "title": "Multiplexer", "text": "Device that selects between several analog or digital input signals\nIn electronics, a multiplexer (or mux; spelled sometimes as multiplexor), also known as a data selector, is a device that selects between several analog or digital input signals and forwards the selected input to a single output line. The selection is directed by a separate set of digital inputs known as select lines. A multiplexer of formula_1 inputs has formula_2 select lines, which are used to select which input line to send to the output.\nA multiplexer makes it possible for several input signals to share one device or resource, for example, one analog-to-digital converter or one communications transmission medium, instead of having one device per input signal. Multiplexers can also be used to implement Boolean functions of multiple variables.\nConversely, a demultiplexer (or demux) is a device that takes a single input signal and selectively forwards it to one of several output lines. A multiplexer is often used with a complementary demultiplexer on the receiving end.\nAn electronic multiplexer can be considered as a multiple-input, single-output switch, and a demultiplexer as a single-input, multiple-output switch. The schematic symbol for a multiplexer is an isosceles trapezoid with the longer parallel side containing the input pins and the short parallel side containing the output pin. The schematic on the right shows a 2-to-1 multiplexer on the left and an equivalent switch on the right. The formula_3 wire connects the desired input to the output.\nApplications.\nMultiplexers are part of computer systems to select data from a specific source, be it a memory chip or a hardware peripheral. A computer uses multiplexers to control the data and address buses, allowing the processor to select data from multiple data sources.\nIn digital communications, multiplexers allow several connections over a single channel by connecting the multiplexer's single output to the demultiplexer's single input (Time-Division Multiplexing). The image to the right demonstrates this benefit. In this case, the cost of implementing separate channels for each data source is higher than the cost and inconvenience of providing the multiplexing/demultiplexing functions.\nAt the receiving end of the data link a complementary \"demultiplexer\" is usually required to break the single data stream back down into the original streams. In some cases, the far end system may have functionality greater than a simple demultiplexer, and while the demultiplexing still occurs technically, it may never be implemented discretely. This would be the case when, for instance, a multiplexer serves a number of IP network users; and then feeds directly into a router, which immediately reads the content of the entire link into its routing processor; and then does the demultiplexing in memory from where it will be converted directly into IP sections.\nOften, a multiplexer and demultiplexer are combined into a single piece of equipment, which is simply referred to as a \"multiplexer\". Both circuit elements are needed at both ends of a transmission link because most communications systems transmit in both directions.\nIn analog circuit design, a multiplexer is a special type of analog switch that connects one signal selected from several inputs to a single output.\nDigital multiplexers.\nIn digital circuit design, the selector wires are of digital value. In the case of a 2-to-1 multiplexer, a logic value of 0 would connect formula_4 to the output, while a logic value of 1 would connect formula_5 to the output.\nIn larger multiplexers, the number of selector pins is equal to formula_6 where formula_7 is the number of inputs.\nFor example, 9 to 16 inputs would require no fewer than 4 selector pins and 17 to 32 inputs would require no fewer than 5 selector pins. The binary value expressed on these selector pins determines the selected input pin.\nA 2-to-1 multiplexer has a Boolean equation where formula_8 and formula_9 are the two inputs, formula_10 is the selector input, and formula_11 is the output:\n formula_12 or\n formula_13\nWhich can be expressed as a truth table:\nOr, in simpler notation:\nThese tables show that when formula_14 then formula_15 but when formula_16 then formula_17. A straightforward realization of this 2-to-1 multiplexer would need 2 AND gates, an OR gate, and a NOT gate. While this is mathematically correct, a direct physical implementation would be prone to race conditions that require additional gates to suppress.\nLarger multiplexers are also common and, as stated above, require formula_6 selector pins for formula_2 inputs. Other common sizes are 4-to-1, 8-to-1, and 16-to-1. Since digital logic uses binary values, powers of 2 are used (4, 8, 16) to maximally control a number of inputs for the given number of selector inputs.\nThe Boolean equation for a 4-to-1 multiplexer is:\nformula_20 or\nformula_21\nWhich can be expressed as a truth table:\nThe following 4-to-1 multiplexer is constructed from 3-state buffers and AND gates (the AND gates are acting as the decoder):\nThe subscripts on the formula_22 inputs indicate the decimal value of the binary control inputs at which that input is let through.\nChaining multiplexers and mux trees.\nLarger Multiplexers can be constructed by using smaller multiplexers by chaining them together in what are called \"mux trees\". For example, an 8:1 multiplexer can be made with two 4:1 multiplexers and one 2:1 multiplexer. The two 4:1 multiplexer outputs are fed into the 2:1 with the selector pins on the 4:1's put in parallel giving a total number of selector inputs to 3, which is equivalent to an 8:1.\nList of ICs which provide multiplexing.\nFor 7400 series part numbers in the following table, \"x\" is the logic family.\nDigital demultiplexers.\nDemultiplexers take one data input and a number of selection inputs, and they have several outputs.\nThey forward the data input to one of the outputs depending on the values of the selection inputs.\nDemultiplexers are sometimes convenient for designing general-purpose logic because if the demultiplexer's input is always true, the demultiplexer acts as a binary decoder.\nThis means that any function of the selection bits can be constructed by logically OR-ing the correct set of outputs.\nIf X is the input and S is the selector, and A and B are the outputs:\nformula_23\nformula_24\nList of ICs which provide demultiplexing.\nFor 7400 series part numbers in the following table, where \"x\" is the logic family.\nBi-directional multiplexers.\nBi-directional multiplexers are built using analog switches or transmission gates controlled by the select pins. This allows the roles of input and output to be swapped so that a bi-directional multiplexer can function both as a demultiplexer and multiplexer.\nMultiplexers as PLDs.\nMultiplexers can also be used as programmable logic devices, to implement Boolean functions. Any Boolean function of \"n\" variables and one result can be implemented with a multiplexer with \"n\" selector inputs. The variables are connected to the selector inputs, and the function result, 0 or 1, for each possible combination of selector inputs is connected to the corresponding data input. If one of the variables (for example, \"D\") is also available inverted, a multiplexer with \"n\"\u22121 selector inputs is sufficient; the data inputs are connected to 0, 1, \"D\", or ~\"D\", according to the desired output for each combination of the selector inputs.\nUnconventional use of multiplexers for arithmetic.\nMultiplexers have found application in unconventional stochastic computing (SC), particularly in facilitating arithmetic addition. In this paradigm, data is represented as a probability bitstream where the number of '1' bits signifies the magnitude of a value. Thus, the function of a 2-to-1 multiplexer can be conceptualized as a probability function denoted as:\nformula_25\n, where a and b are the input bitstream and s is the select input. Using the select input = 0.5 yields:\nformula_26\nWhile this approach doesn't yield exact addition but rather scaled addition, it is deemed acceptable in most SC studies. Multiplexers are extensively utilized for tasks such as average addition, average pooling, and median filtering within SC circuits. Moreover, more sophisticated applications of multiplexers include serving as Bernstein polynomial function generator, capable of producing arbitrary mathematical functions within the SC domain. Recent research has also revealed that combinations of multiplexers can facilitate large-scale multiply-accumulate operation, demonstrating feasibility in accelerating convolutional neural network on field-programmable gate arrays.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38543", "revid": "4677237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38543", "title": "The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas", "text": "1973 short story by Ursula K. Le Guin\n\"The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas\" () is a 1973 short work of philosophical fiction by American writer Ursula K. Le Guin. With deliberately both vague and vivid descriptions, the narrator depicts a summer festival in the utopian city of Omelas, whose prosperity depends on the perpetual misery of a single child. \"The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas\" was nominated for the Locus Award for Best Short Fiction in 1974 and won the Hugo Award for Best Short Story in 1974.\nPlot.\nThe only chronological element of the work is that it begins by describing the first day of summer in Omelas, a shimmering city of unbelievable happiness and delight. In Omelas, the summer solstice is celebrated with a glorious festival and a race featuring young people on horseback. The vibrant festival atmosphere, however, seems to be an everyday characteristic of the blissful community, whose citizens, though limited in their technology and resources, are still intelligent, sophisticated, and cultured. Omelas has no kings, soldiers, priests, or slaves. The specific socio-politico-economic setup of the community is not mentioned; the narrator merely claims not to be sure of every particular.\nThe narrator reflects that, \"Omelas sounds in my words like a city in a fairy tale, long ago and far away, once upon a time. Perhaps it would be best if you imagined it as your own fancy bids, assuming it will rise to the occasion, for certainly I cannot suit you all.\" Everything about Omelas is so abundantly pleasing that the narrator decides the reader is not truly convinced of its existence and so elaborates upon the final element of the city: its one atrocity. The city's constant state of serenity and splendor requires that a single unfortunate child be kept in perpetual filth, darkness, and misery.\nOnce citizens are old enough to know the truth, most, though initially shocked and disgusted, ultimately acquiesce to this one injustice that secures the happiness of the rest of the city. However, some citizens, young and old, walk away from the city after seeing the child. Each is alone, and no one knows where they go, but none come back. The story ends by stating, \"The place they go towards is a place even less imaginable to most of us than the city of happiness. I cannot describe it at all. It is possible it does not exist. But they seem to know where they are going, the ones who walk away from Omelas.\"\nInspiration and themes.\nLe Guin\u2019s short story explores the ideas of utilitarianism. Le Guin stated that the city's name is pronounced \"OH-meh-lahss\". Le Guin chose the name after seeing a road sign for Salem, Oregon, in a car mirror. \"[\u2026 People ask me] 'Where \"do\" you get your ideas from, Ms. Le Guin?' From forgetting Dostoyevsky and reading road signs backwards, naturally. Where else?\"\nThe central idea of the scapegoat was posed by author Fyodor Dostoyevsky in \"The Brothers Karamazov\" in 1880. Le Guin gave credit to William James, who mentioned the idea in 1891, and she later wrote: \"The fact is, I haven't been able to re-read Dostoyevsky, much as I loved him, since I was twenty-five, and I'd simply forgotten he used the idea.\"\nThe original Dostoyevsky quote appears in \"The Brothers Karamazov\":\n\"I challenge you: let\u2019s assume that you were called upon to build the edifice of human destiny so that men would finally be happy and would find peace and tranquility. If you knew that, in order to attain this, you would have to torture just one single creature, let\u2019s say the little girl who beat her chest so desperately in the outhouse, and that on her unavenged tears you could build that edifice, would you agree to do it?\"\nThe quote by William James in \"The Moral Philosopher and the Moral Life\", an 1891 essay:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Or if the hypothesis were offered us of a world in which Messrs. Fourier's and Bellamy's and Morris's utopias should all be outdone, and millions kept permanently happy on the one simple condition that a certain lost soul on the far-off edge of things should lead a life of lonely torture, what except a sceptical and independent sort of emotion can it be which would make us immediately feel, even though an impulse arose within us to clutch at the happiness so offered, how hideous a thing would be its enjoyment when deliberately accepted as the fruit of such a bargain?\n refers to the doctrine of salvation through the crucifixion of Jesus.\nPublication history.\nLe Guin's piece was originally published in \"New Dimensions 3\", a hardcover science fiction anthology edited by Robert Silverberg, in October 1973. It was reprinted in Le Guin's \"The Wind's Twelve Quarters\" in 1975, and has been frequently anthologized elsewhere. It has also appeared as an independently published, 31-page hardcover book for young adults in 1993.\nIt was republished in the second volume of the short-story anthology \"The Unreal and the Real\" in 2012. Le Guin noted in that collection that \"The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas\" \"has a long and happy career of being used by teachers to upset students and make them argue fiercely about morality.\"\nCultural legacy.\n\"The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas\" has inspired a variety of follow-up works and cultural references.\nRicardo Bare and Harvey Smith, designers of the \"Dishonored\" video game series, drew on the story as inspiration for The Outsider, an omnipotent immortal being who is reviled as an avatar of evil.\nArtist Andrew DeGraff illustrated a map visualizing Le Guin's story in the 2015 book \"Plotted: A Literary Atlas\". DeGraff wrote: \"Le Guin provides us with the building blocks to construct the city of Omelas, but if we want to forsake it afterward, then we too have to strike out alone.\"\nThe 2017 music video for \"Spring Day\" by South Korean band BTS references Le Guin's short story thematically. It also shows a hotel named 'Omelas'.\nN. K. Jemisin's 2018 collection \"How Long 'til Black Future Month?\" opens with a piece titled \"The Ones Who Stay and Fight\", which is a direct response to Le Guin's story. In an interview with \"The Paris Review\", Jemisin stated that many readers misunderstand Le Guin as arguing that the only way to create a better society is to leave, and that in fact Le Guin was arguing that one has to \"fix\" the current society, \"especially when there's nowhere to walk away to.\" Jemisin's 2022 novel \"The World We Make\" alludes to the story as well, using the descriptor \"Omelasian\" in reference to children held captive in a basement. \nJoe George argued that the 2019 film \"Us\" was influenced by both Le Guin's short story as well as Octavia E. Butler's \"Speech Sounds\".\nCatherine Lacey's 2020 novel \"Pew\" begins with an epigraph from \"The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas\", quoting the last paragraph of the story. The novel itself is heavily tied to Le Guin's work, with several key similarities.\nExecutive producers and co-showrunners Michelle Paradise and Alex Kurtzman cited Le Guin's short story as inspiration for the plot line of the third season of , with Kurtzman noting that both were interested in the central dilemma being solely caused by a child. Several reviewers also noted a strong similarity between the story and the episode \"Lift Us Where Suffering Cannot Reach\" of \"\" first season\".\" Reviewer Anthony Pascale called the episode \"almost a beat-for-beat recreation\" of Le Guin's work. On the satirical website Cracked, JM McNab pointed out the long history of Le Guin's influence on the Star Trek franchise and wrote that while the writers of \"Star Trek: Discovery\" did name a ship after her, that honor is \"still not as good as being credited\".\nThe 2022 fantasy novel \"The Golden Enclaves\" by Naomi Novik features a dilemma similar to the one presented in \"The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas.\"\nIsabel J. Kim's short story \"Why Don't We Just Kill the Kid In the Omelas Hole\", published in \"Clarkesworld Magazine\" in February 2024, is set after the events of Le Guin's story. It discusses a third option besides staying in Omelas or walking away: killing the suffering child (an act described by one of the murderers as a form of accelerationism).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38544", "revid": "33328895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38544", "title": "Ursula LeGuin", "text": ""}
{"id": "38546", "revid": "2885250", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38546", "title": "Nutmeg", "text": "Spice from Myristica fragrans\nNutmeg is the seed, or the ground spice derived from the seed, of several tree species of the genus \"Myristica\"; fragrant nutmeg or true nutmeg (\"M. fragrans\") is a dark-leaved evergreen tree cultivated for two spices derived from its fruit: nutmeg, from its seed, and mace, from the seed covering. It is also a commercial source of nutmeg essential oil and nutmeg butter. The Banda Islands, in Maluku, Indonesia, are the main producer of nutmeg and mace, and the true nutmeg tree is native to the islands.\nNutmeg and mace, commonly used as food spices, have been traditionally employed for their psychoactive and aphrodisiac effects, though clinical evidence is lacking. High doses can cause serious toxic effects including acute psychosis, with risks heightened during pregnancy and with psychiatric conditions.\nConifers of the genus \"Torreya\", commonly known as the nutmeg yews, have edible seeds of similar appearance, but are not closely related to \"M. fragrans\", and are not used as a spice.\nCommon nutmeg.\nNutmeg is the spice made by grinding the seed of the fragrant nutmeg tree (\"Myristica fragrans\") into powder. The spice has a distinctive pungent fragrance and a warm, slightly sweet taste; it is used to flavor many kinds of baked goods, confections, puddings, potatoes, meats, sausages, sauces, and vegetables, and beverages such as eggnog.\nThe seeds are dried gradually in the sun over a period of 15 to 30 weeks. During this time, the nutmeg shrinks away from its hard seed coat until the kernels rattle in their shells when shaken. The shell is then broken with a wooden club and the nutmegs are picked out. Dried nutmegs are greenish brown ovoids with furrowed surfaces. The nutmegs are roughly egg-shaped, about long and wide, weighing dried.\nTwo other species of genus \"Myristica\" with different flavors, \"M. malabarica\" and \"M. argentea\", are sometimes used to adulterate nutmeg as a spice.\nMace.\nMace is the spice made from the reddish seed covering (aril) of the nutmeg seed. Its flavour is similar to that of nutmeg but more delicate; it is used to flavour baked goods, meat, fish, and vegetables, and in preserving and pickling.\nIn the processing of mace, the crimson-colored aril is removed from the nutmeg seed that it envelops and is flattened out and dried for 10 to 14 days. Its color changes to pale yellow, orange, or tan. Whole dry mace consists of flat pieces\u2014smooth, horn-like, and brittle\u2014about long.\nBotany and cultivation.\nThe most important commercial species is the common, true or fragrant nutmeg, \"M. fragrans\" (Myristicaceae), native to the Moluccas (or Spice Islands) of Indonesia. It is also cultivated on Penang Island in Malaysia, in the Caribbean, especially in Grenada, and in Kerala, a state formerly known as Malabar in ancient writings as the hub of spice trading, in southern India. In the 17th-century work \"Hortus Botanicus Malabaricus\", Hendrik van Rheede records that Indians learned the usage of nutmeg from the Indonesians through ancient trade routes.\nNutmeg trees are dioecious plants (individual plants are either male or female), which are propagated sexually from seeds and asexually from cuttings or grafting. Sexual propagation yields 50% male seedlings, which are unproductive. Because no reliable method has been found for determining plant sex before flowering in the sixth to eighth year, and sexual reproduction bears inconsistent yields, grafting is the preferred method of propagation. Epicotyl grafting (a variation of cleft grafting using seedlings), approach grafting, and patch budding have proved successful, with epicotyl grafting being the most widely adopted standard. Air layering is an alternative though not preferred method because of its low (35\u201340%) success rate.\nThe first harvest of nutmeg trees takes place 7\u20139 years after planting, and the trees reach full production after 20 years.\nIn the Banda Islands to which the nutmeg is native, there is a symbiotic relationship between the Kenari nut tree (\"Canarium indicum\") and the nutmeg (\"Myristica fragrans\"), the former providing the nutmeg with shade and serving as a wind-break from the strong winds.\nUses.\nSpice.\nNutmeg and mace have similar sensory qualities, with nutmeg having a slightly sweeter and mace a more delicate flavour. Mace is often preferred in light dishes for the bright orange, saffron-like hue it imparts. Nutmeg is used for flavouring many dishes. Whole nutmeg can also be ground at home using a grater specifically designed for nutmeg or a multi-purpose grating tool.\nIn Indonesian cuisine, nutmeg is used in dishes such as spicy soups including variants of \"soto\", \"konro\", oxtail soup, \"sup iga\" (ribs soup), \"bakso\", and \"sup kambing\". It is also used in gravy for meat dishes, such as \"semur\", beef stew, ribs with tomato, and European derived dishes such as \"bistik\" (beef steak), \"rolade\" (minced meat roll), and \"bistik lidah\" (beef tongue steak).\nIn Indian cuisine, nutmeg is used in many sweet, as well as savoury, dishes. In Kerala Malabar region, grated nutmeg is used in meat preparations and also sparingly added to desserts for the flavour. It may also be used in small quantities in \"garam masala\".\nIn traditional European cuisine, nutmeg and mace are used especially in potato and spinach dishes and in processed meat products; they are also used in soups, sauces, and baked goods. It is also commonly used in rice pudding. In Dutch cuisine, nutmeg is added to vegetables such as Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, and string beans. Nutmeg is a traditional ingredient in mulled cider, mulled wine, junket and eggnog. In Scotland, mace and nutmeg are usually both ingredients in haggis. In Italian cuisine, nutmeg is used as part of the stuffing for many regional meat-filled dumplings like tortellini, as well as for the traditional meatloaf. \nNutmeg is a common spice for pumpkin pie and in recipes for other winter squashes, such as baked acorn squash. In the Caribbean, nutmeg is often used in drinks, such as the Bushwacker, Painkiller, and Barbados rum punch. Typically, it is a sprinkle on top of the drink.\nFruit.\nThe pericarp (fruit covering) is used to make jam, or is finely sliced, cooked with sugar, and crystallised to make a fragrant candy. Sliced nutmeg fruit flesh is made as \"manisan\" (sweets), either wet, which is seasoned in sugary syrup liquid, or dry coated with sugar, a dessert called \"manisan pala\" in Indonesia. In Penang cuisine, dried, shredded nutmeg rind with sugar coating is used as toppings on the uniquely Penang \"ais kacang\". The flesh of the nutmeg fruit is also blended, in the fresh state, into a type of smoothie (white in colour and having a fresh, \u2018green\u2019, tangy taste); or boiled, resulting in a brown liquid, much sweeter in taste, which is used in the preparation of iced drinks. In Kerala Malabar region of India, it is used for juice, pickles and chutney.\nEssential oil.\nThe essential oil obtained by steam distillation of ground nutmeg is used in the perfumery and pharmaceutical industries. The volatile fraction contains dozens of terpenes and phenylpropanoids, including D-pinene, limonene, D-borneol, L-terpineol, geraniol, safrole, and myristicin. In its pure form, myristicin is a toxin, and consumption of excessive amounts of nutmeg can result in myristicin poisoning.\nThe oil is colorless or light yellow, and smells and tastes of nutmeg. It is used as a natural food flavoring in baked goods, syrups, beverages, and sweets. It is used to replace ground nutmeg, as it leaves no particles in the food. The essential oil is also used in the manufacturing of toothpaste and cough syrups.\nNutmeg butter.\nNutmeg butter is obtained from the nut by expression, yielding a semisolid, reddish-brown oil having the taste and aroma of nutmeg itself. About 77% (by weight) of nutmeg butter is trimyristin, which can be manufactured into myristic acid, a 14-carbon fatty acid, with possible uses as a replacement for cocoa butter; it can be mixed with other fats like cottonseed oil or palm oil, and has applications as a lubricant.\nHistory.\nThe earliest evidence of use of nutmeg comes in the form of 3,500-year-old potsherd residues from the island of Pulau Ai, one of the Banda Islands in eastern Indonesia. The Banda Islands consist of eleven small volcanic islands, and are part of the larger Maluku Islands group. These islands were the only source of nutmeg and mace production until the mid-19th century. It was one of the spices traded over the Austronesian maritime spice trade network since at least 1500 BCE.\nIn the sixth century AD, nutmeg use spread to India, then further west to Constantinople. By the 13th century, Arab traders had pinpointed the origin of nutmeg to the Banda Islands, but kept this location a secret from European traders.\nColonial era.\nThe Banda Islands became the scene of the earliest European ventures in Asia, to get a grip on the spice trade. In August 1511, Afonso de Albuquerque conquered Malacca, which at the time was the hub of Asian trade, on behalf of the king of Portugal. In November of the same year, after having secured Malacca and learning of Banda's location, Albuquerque sent an expedition of three ships led by his friend Ant\u00f3nio de Abreu to find it. Malay pilots guided them via Java, the Lesser Sundas, and Ambon to the Banda Islands, arriving in early 1512. The first Europeans to reach the Banda Islands, the expedition remained for about a month, buying and filling their ships with Banda's nutmeg and mace, and with cloves in which Banda had a thriving \"entrep\u00f4t\" trade. An early account of Banda is in \"Suma Oriental\", a book written by the Portuguese apothecary Tom\u00e9 Pires, based in Malacca from 1512 to 1515. Full control of this trade by the Portuguese was not possible, and they remained participants without a foothold in the islands.\nIn order to obtain a monopoly on the production and trade of nutmeg, the Dutch East India Company (VOC) waged a bloody battle with the Bandanese in 1621. Historian Willard Hanna estimated that before this struggle the islands were populated by approximately 15,000 people, and only 1,000 were left (the Bandanese were killed, starved while fleeing, exiled, or sold as slaves). The Company constructed a comprehensive nutmeg plantation system on the islands during the 17th century.\nAs a result of the Dutch interregnum during the Napoleonic Wars, the British invaded and temporarily took control of the Banda Islands from the Dutch and transplanted nutmeg trees, complete with soil, to Sri Lanka, Penang, Bencoolen, and Singapore. From these locations they were transplanted to their other colonial holdings elsewhere, notably Zanzibar and Grenada. The national flag of Grenada, adopted in 1974, shows a stylised split-open nutmeg fruit. The Dutch retained control of the Spice Islands until World War II.\nConnecticut may have received its nickname (\"the Nutmeg State\", \"Nutmegger\") from the claim that some unscrupulous Connecticut traders would whittle \"nutmeg\" out of wood, creating a \"wooden nutmeg\", a term which later came to mean any type of fraud. This narrative may have to do with the issue that one has to grate to obtain the spice powder, not crack a nutmeg, and this may not have been widely known by some purchasers of the product.\nProduction.\nIn 2023, world production of nutmeg was 219,223 tonnes, led by Guatemala with 95,211 tonnes and India and Indonesia as secondary producers; combined, the three countries accounted for 89% of the world total.\nPsychoactivity and toxicity.\nAlthough used as a folk treatment for some ailments, nutmeg has no proven medicinal value.\nEffects.\nIngested in small amounts as a spice, nutmeg produces no noticeable physiological or neurological response, but in large doses, both raw nutmeg freshly ground from kernels and nutmeg oil have psychoactive effects. Such effects appear to derive from anticholinergic-like hallucinogenic mechanisms attributed to myristicin and elemicin. Myristicin\u2014a monoamine oxidase inhibitor and psychoactive substance\u2014can cause convulsions, palpitations, nausea, eventual dehydration, and generalized body pain when consumed in large amounts. Nutmeg may interact with anxiolytic drugs, produce allergic reactions, cause contact dermatitis, and evoke acute episodes of psychosis.\nVarying considerably from person to person, nutmeg intoxication may occur with side effects, such as delirium, anxiety, confusion, headaches, nausea, dizziness, dry mouth, eye irritation, and amnesia. Intoxication takes several hours to reach maximum effect, and may last for several days. Incidents of fatal poisoning from nutmeg and myristicin individually are uncommon.\nNutmeg poisonings occur by accidental consumption in children and by intentional recreational use. It is used recreationally with the intention of achieving a low-cost high resembling psychedelics, particularly by adolescents, drug users, college students, and prisoners. Relatively large doses of nutmeg are required to produce effects; a majority of reported nutmeg intoxication cases appear to result from recreational use.\nThe pharmacology of nutmeg and its constituents has been reviewed.\nToxicity during pregnancy.\nNutmeg was once considered an abortifacient, but may be safe during pregnancy if used only in flavoring amounts. If consumed in large amounts, nutmeg could cause premature labor and miscarriage. Nutmeg may also interact with pain relievers such as pethidine, so avoiding it during pregnancy is recommended.\nToxicity to pets.\nThe scent of nutmeg may attract pets, but it can be poisonous if consumed in excess.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38550", "revid": "43271534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38550", "title": "1714", "text": "Calendar year\n1714 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "38551", "revid": "561624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38551", "title": "Mental-skill game", "text": ""}
{"id": "38553", "revid": "50724392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38553", "title": "People Inc.", "text": "American digital media company\nPeople Inc. (formerly The Mining Company, About.com, Dotdash and Dotdash Meredith) is an American digital media company based in New York City. It publishes online articles and videos about various subjects across categories including health, home, food, finance, tech, beauty, lifestyle, travel, and education.\nOverview.\nThe firm operates 40 brands, including the flagship title \"People\", \"Life\", \"Food &amp; Wine\", \"Travel + Leisure\", \"Better Homes and Gardens\", Verywell, Allrecipes, \"Real Simple\", Investopedia, \"Southern Living\", Byrdie, Serious Eats, The Spruce, EatingWell, \"Health\", \"Parents\", \"InStyle\", Simply Recipes, \"Entertainment Weekly\", and \"Martha Stewart Living\".\nIn August 2012, About.com became a property of IAC, owner of Ask.com and numerous other online brands, and its revenue is generated by advertising. In addition to its Manhattan headquarters, Dotdash Meredith maintains offices elsewhere in the New York metropolitan area, as well as in Des Moines, Iowa, and Birmingham, Alabama. \nIt took its Dotdash Meredith name in 2021 after IAC acquired Meredith Corporation and Time Inc. Time had merged with Warner Communications in 1990 to form Time Warner (TW), but was spun off as a publicly traded company in 2014. TW kept its legal name until being acquired by AT&amp;T in 2018 and being renamed WarnerMedia (and Warner Bros. Discovery in 2022).\nHistory.\n1997\u20132005: Launch, renaming, Primedia acquisition.\nFounded in 1996 as The Mining Company, the site was launched on April 21, 1997, by Scott Kurnit, owner of General Internet, Bill Day, and a group of other entrepreneurs in New York City. The original goal was to maintain 1,800 topic areas, but after five years of operation, this number was reduced to around 700.\nIn May 1999, the company changed its name to \"About Inc.\" and the website name from \"miningco.com\" to \"about.com\". The company was acquired by Primedia (now Rent Group), in 2000 through a deal valued at US$690\u00a0million, whereby Primedia swapped 45.2\u00a0million shares for About, Inc.'s 18.1\u00a0million shares. At the time of the acquisition announcement, About Inc. was measured at US$133\u00a0million in cash and no debt (Sept. 30, 2000), while the Media Metrix company tallied 21\u00a0million unique monthly visitors\u2014making it the seventh-most-visited \"network of sites\" at the time\u2014a network of over 700 topic sites, sorted into 36 areas and 50,000 subjects, and approximately 4,000 advertisers. Following the purchase, which was finalized in the first quarter of 2001, the combined company was called \"Primedia\" and Kurnit remained chief executive officer (CEO).\n2005\u20132012: Times Co. acquisition, Abang.com, About en Espa\u00f1ol.\nIn February 2005, The New York Times Company (Times Co.) announced it was buying About.com, a purchase that was completed in the first half of the year for US$410\u00a0million. Google and Yahoo! were reportedly among the other bidders. Following the Times Co. acquisition, Peter C. Horan was appointed as About Inc.'s president and CEO, but he was soon replaced by Scott Meyer in May 2005.\nIn March 2007, About.com's patronage was measured at 33.5\u00a0million unique visitors. On May 7, 2007, About Inc. acquired ConsumerSearch.com\u2014a site that generated 3\u00a0million unique monthly visitors during the first quarter of 2007\u2014for US$33\u00a0million in cash following two other purchases that were made in the preceding eight-month period: UCompareHealthCare.com and Calorie-Count.com.\nInitially conceived of in January 2007, About.com's first fully owned foreign venture, the China-based Abang.com, debuted in December 2007. At the time of the launch, the company had a Japan-based online entity, Allabout.co.jp, but it functioned under a licensing agreement. By January 2008, the China site consisted of around 25 employees, as well as 80 guides who were responsible for article production within seven categories: Fashion, Food, Health, Hobbies, Pets, Digital, and Travel. As part of the localization process, the China initiative\u2014led by Matt Roberts, who became the CEO of Abang.com, and Wen-Wei Wang, the vice president of technology for the launch\u2014was named \"Abang\" because the Chinese character \"bang\" refers to the concept of a group or community.\nThe About Group generated US$102.7\u00a0million in 2007, which represented a 135-percent increase from the time of the Times Co. acquisition. Meyer stepped down from the chief executive role in March 2008 and was replaced by Cella Irvine, who previously worked for Hearst Corp. and Microsoft Corp. In April 2011, Irvine launched the About en Espa\u00f1ol website, which was About's first Spanish-language channel and initially featured nine topics, including movies and makeup, that were to be expanded by around 100 by the start of 2012. The launch was part of an overall strategy that included a redesigned About.com homepage, a doubling of the number of \"how-to\" and do-it-yourself videos on About.com's 24 channels, and new outlets on About.com for advertisers.\nThe significant impact of the Great Recession upon online advertising was experienced shortly after Irvine's appointment, and she was removed from the CEO role after three years and three consecutive quarters in which revenue decreased. Martin Nisenholtz, SVP of digital operations, temporarily replaced Irvine following her departure in May 2011.\nIn July 2011, Darline Jean was named CEO of the About Group, after the company's second-quarter revenues totalled US$27.8\u00a0million. Jean previously served as About's chief financial officer (CFO) and was promoted on September 1, 2011.\n2012\u20132017: IAC acquisition, Neil Vogel appointment, relaunch.\nA media report published in August 2012 indicated that Answers.com had reached a preliminary agreement to acquire About.com for US$270\u00a0million. However, on August 26, Barry Diller's IAC announced that it would acquire About.com instead for US$300\u00a0million in cash. A source for TechCrunch later confirmed that Answers.com's offer was reportedly valued at US$270\u00a0million, but consisted of debt and equity in Answers.com.\nIn the corresponding press release, IAC explained that the acquisition would help bolster and accompany its existing properties, such as the Ask.com web search engine. Jean fulfilled her role as chief executive during the transition period, while ownership was transferred to IAC, and then left About.com shortly after the sale was finalized. At the time of the IAC acquisition, which was signed on August 26, 2012, About.com consisted of nearly 1,000 topic sites and over three million unique articles, while, in traffic terms, Alexa Internet ranked the site as number 37 in the U.S. and 80 in the global context.\nOn April 2, 2013, Neil Vogel became the new CEO of About.com. Up until March 2003, Vogel was a key executive member of the marketing and media company Alloy Inc., a role that he left to cofound the Recognition Media marketing business that is responsible for producing the annual Webby Awards event, as well as the Internet Week NY and Europe events. Vogel was selected by \"Business Insider\" for its 2012 \"The Coolest People In New York Tech This Year\" list, for his work as a venture partner of FirstMark Capital. As of May\u00a02013[ [update]], About.com was receiving about 84 million unique monthly visitors.\nFollowing his appointment, Vogel's overall plan for About focused on social, mobile, and user experience, with an emphasis on increasing the amount of time that users remain on the site, rather than attracting people in the first instance. Vogel also stressed the importance of monetization in his numerous post-appointment interviews, and he included a summary of About's revenue model as part of his discussion of the future with \"Bloomberg\":\n[We make money] one way, in general: we're advertising-supported. And that's monetized two ways: we do a lot of display advertising, and we do a lot of people clicking on links that we get paid for from Google and others... If we have all this traffic, and we have all this content, if we can make people engage with content more, and spend more time here [About.com], and do more things, we're going to have more page views and much more of an opportunity to monetize About.\nVogel further explained that IAC has been able to create \"compelling\" content that manages to successfully engage Internet users, while About's content, in particular, is favoured by the Google search engine. Furthermore, Vogel stated that native advertising is a marketing initiative that he would like to explore with caution, as \"it's a really big opportunity to let marketers talk to our audience in the voice that they're already comfortable with.\"\nIn April 2014, Vogel revealed to the media that the About.com team had grown from 100 employees to 176, and the number of site contributors had increased by 20 percent. The company's developers updated the website's backend to be capable of handling a greater degree of interactivity at the front end, while a major emphasis was placed on responsive web design, as the traffic from mobile devices and tablets was measured at nearly 40 percent.\nThe About.com website was relaunched in September 2014, following a significant redesign that expanded upon the new homepage that debuted in July 2014. Based on an analysis of the needs of both users and advertisers, the redesign sought to create an improved user experience and facilitate social sharing, including the addition of social media buttons that were not featured at the time of Vogel's appointment.\n2017\u20132025: rebranding to Dotdash and merger with Meredith.\nOn May 2, 2017, IAC announced the completed rebranding of About.com to Dotdash, after about a year of transition. CEO Neil Vogel said that the company had lost mind share and needed to change its marketing strategy. According to \"WIRED\", the About.com brand was retired, despite its profitability, to make way for a new business model. The company refocused on vertical markets through its niche websites: \"The Balance\" (personal finance), \"Lifewire\" (tech), \"The Spruce\" (home and food), \"VeryWell\" (health), \"TripSavvy\" (travel), and \"ThoughtCo\" (education).\nOn March 29, 2018, Dotdash won Digiday's Publisher of the Year. In July of the same year, Dotdash acquired \"Investopedia\". On October 15, TripSavvy launched the Editors' Choice Awards.\nOn January 8, 2019, Dotdash announced the acquisition of \"Byrdie\" (beauty) and \"MyDomaine\" (women's lifestyle) from Clique Brands. On May 15, Dotdash announced the acquisition of \"Brides\" from Conde Nast. In the spring of 2019, Dotdash's home site, \"The Spruce\", announced the launch of its first-ever paint collection, The Spruce Best Home, in partnership with KILZ and sold exclusively on Amazon. On October 1, Dotdash announced the acquisition of Liquor.com.\nOn February 4, 2020, Dotdash announced the acquisition of \"TreeHugger\" and Mother Nature Network. In June, Dotdash was named Digiday's Publisher of the Year in Digiday's Media Awards 2020. \"The Spruce\" won for Best User Experience and CEO Neil Vogel won Executive of the Year. On September 22, Dotdash announced that it acquired \"Simply Recipes\" and \"Serious Eats\" from Fexy Media.\nOn October 6, 2021, Dotdash announced the acquisition of Meredith's magazine and other non-broadcast assets (including the former Time Inc. assets) for $2.7 billion, forming a new entity called Dotdash Meredith. The transaction was finalized on December 1. On February 9, 2022, Dotdash CEO Neil Vogel issued a memo revealing that six former Meredith Corporation magazines (\"Entertainment Weekly\", \"InStyle\", \"EatingWell\", \"Health\", \"Parents\", and \"People en Espa\u00f1ol\") would cease print circulation and switch to a digital-only format.\n2025: Rebrand to People Inc..\nOn July 31, 2025, the company announced it had rebranded as People Inc. Vogel explained that the company wanted a simpler name that was more reflective of its business (suggesting that Dotdash Meredith sounded like a law firm or oil company), and chose to name it after \"People\" to reflect its position as both their flagship property, and to symbolize that amid the growth of artificial intelligence, \"People\" was \"a really good representation of our narrative and what we do in this world.\"\nAssets.\nAssets of People, Inc.:\nHealth&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFinance&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFood &amp; Drink&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHome&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBeauty &amp; Style&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTravel&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTech &amp; Sustainability&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEntertainment&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPremium Publishing&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOffices.\nPeople Inc. has offices at three locations in the USA including New York, Des Moines, and Birmingham.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38554", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38554", "title": "Swedis Monarchs", "text": ""}
{"id": "38555", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38555", "title": "Swedish Monarchs", "text": ""}
{"id": "38556", "revid": "45799485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38556", "title": "List of monarchs of Sweden", "text": "This list records the monarchs of Sweden, from the late Viking Age to the present day. Sweden has continuously been a monarchy since the country's consolidation in the Viking Age and early Middle Ages, for over a thousand years. The incumbent royal dynasty of Sweden is the House of Bernadotte, established on the throne in 1818.\nHistory.\nThere were organized political structures in Sweden before the kingdom was unified; based on archaeological evidence, early tribal societies are believed to have transitioned into organized chiefdoms in the first few centuries AD, perhaps spurred by contacts with the Roman Empire and the rest of Europe. In the period AD 500\u2013800, Scandinavian societies began adopting cultural elements from the newly established Germanic kingdoms in Europe, transitioning further into petty kingdoms.\nArchaeological evidence suggests that were numerous petty kingdoms throughout modern-day Sweden. Foreign sources and later native sources describe the later medieval kingdom as being composed of two main regions: Svealand (particularly around Lake M\u00e4laren) and G\u00f6taland. Sources from as early as the Roman author Tacitus (c. 56\u2013126) mention two main peoples or tribes in modern Sweden: the \"Svear\" (Swedes) and \"G\u00f6tar\" (Geats); the \"Svear\" are mentioned in more foreign sources than the \"G\u00f6tar\", credited with military activities at sea. The securely attested Swedish rulers in the Viking Age, predecessors of the later line of Swedish kings, ruled from the religious and political center of Old Uppsala; though its history before the Viking Age is poorly attested, it is probable that Old Uppsala had been a political and religious center since the Migration Period. \nThe earliest historically attested Swedish rulers are 9th-century petty kings from the \"Vita Ansgarii\", an account written c. 870 by Rimbert partly concerning Saint Ansgar's visit to Svealand. Some kings of Old Uppsala are also mentioned in later Icelandic texts and sagas. The line of legendary Swedish kings from Icelandic tradition, called \"sagokungar\" in Swedish, are not generally treated as historical figures, though some may be based on actual chieftains or petty kings. Some later king-lists deliberately extended the sequence of kings for nationalistic purposes, such as Johannes Magnus's \"Historia de omnibus Gothorum Sueonumque regibus\" (1554); supposed ancient kings mentioned in such sources are clearly fictional.\nThe petty kingdoms eventually gave rise to more complex political structures and what is today considered the beginning of the Swedish kingdom developed over the course of the Viking Age and the subsequent Middle Ages. For a consecutive list from then, the first Swedish king of whom anything definite is known is the 10th-century Eric the Victorious, though the information reported about him in different sources is scarce. Eric's son Olof Sk\u00f6tkonung was the first king to be baptized in Sweden and is credited with founding a Christian kingdom. The early and then medieval Swedish kingdom was an elective monarchy, with kings being elected from particularly prominent families; this practice did however often result in \"de facto\" dynastic succession and the formation of royal dynasties, such as those of Eric (intermittently c. 1157\u20131250) and Bj\u00e4lbo (1250\u20131364) as well as infighting between rival families.\nFrom 1389 to 1523, Sweden was often united with Denmark and Norway under the kings of the Kalmar Union. Sweden's full independence was restored under Gustav I in 1523. He is often credited as the founder of modern Sweden, and in 1544 he formally abandoned the previous elective monarchy in favor of hereditary succession. Initially adopting the medieval \"King of Swedes and Geats\", Gustav I later adopted the lengthier title \"rex Svecorum Gothorum Vandalorumque\" (\"king of the Swedes, Geats and Wends\"). The last monarch to be titled as king of the Swedes, Geats and Wends was Gustaf VI Adolf (r.\u20091950\u00a0\u2013\u00a01973) since his successor, the present king Carl XVI Gustaf, upon his accession adopted the shortened title \"King of Sweden\".\nIn 1980, the rule of succession was changed from agnatic to absolute primogeniture, to the benefit of Princess Victoria (born 1977), the current heir apparent.\nMonarchs and regents of Sweden.\nHouse of Muns\u00f6 (970\u20131060).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Muns\u00f6 dynasty\nHouse of Stenkil (1060\u20131125/1130).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Stenkil dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Muns\u00f6 dynasty\nHouses of Sverker and Eric (1125/1130\u20131250).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Estridsen dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Sverker dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Eric dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Bj\u00e4lbo dynasty\nHouse of Bj\u00e4lbo (1250\u20131364).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Bj\u00e4lbo dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Estridsen dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Wittelsbach dynasty\nMonarchs and regents during the Kalmar Union (1389\u20131523).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Estridsen dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Wittelsbach dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Oldenburg dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Bj\u00e4lbo dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Vasa dynasty\nHouse of Vasa (1523\u20131654).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Vasa dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Wittelsbach dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Oldenburg dynasty\nHouse of Palatinate-Zweibr\u00fccken (1654\u20131720).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Wittelsbach dynasty\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Oldenburg dynasty\nHouse of Hesse (1720\u20131751).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Wittelsbach dynasty\nHouse of Holstein-Gottorp (1751\u20131818).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Oldenburg dynasty\nHouse of Bernadotte (1818\u2013present).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Bernadotte dynasty\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38557", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38557", "title": "Outpatient commitment", "text": "Legal power to control behavior of mental health patients while in the community\nOutpatient commitment\u2014also called assisted outpatient treatment (AOT) or community treatment orders (CTO)\u2014refers to a civil court procedure wherein a legal process orders an individual diagnosed with a severe mental disorder to adhere to an outpatient treatment plan designed to prevent further deterioration or recurrence that is harmful to themselves or others.\nThis form of involuntary treatment is distinct from involuntary commitment in that the individual subject to the order continues to live in their home community rather than being detained in hospital or incarcerated. The individual may be subject to rapid recall to hospital, including medication over objections, if the conditions of the order are broken, and the person's mental health deteriorates. This generally means taking psychiatric medication as directed and may also include attending appointments with a mental health professional, and sometimes even not to take non-prescribed illicit drugs and not associate with certain people or in certain places deemed to have been linked to a deterioration in mental health in that individual.\nThe criteria and process for outpatient commitment are established by law, which vary among nations and, in the U.S. and Canada, among states or provinces. Some jurisdictions require court hearings, where a judge will make a court order, and others require that treating psychiatrists comply with a set of requirements before compulsory treatment is instituted. When a court process is not required, there is usually a form of appeal to the courts or appeal to or scrutiny by tribunals set up for that purpose. Community treatment laws have generally followed the worldwide trend of community treatment. See mental health law for details of countries which do not have laws that regulate compulsory treatment.\nTerminology.\nIn the United States the term \"assisted outpatient treatment\" (AOT) is often used and refers to a process whereby a judge orders a qualifying person with symptoms of severe untreated mental illness to adhere to a mental health treatment plan while living in the community. The plan typically includes medication and may include other forms of treatment as well. Patients are often monitored and assigned to case managers or a community dedicated to treating mental health known as assertive community treatment (ACT).\nAustralia, Canada, England, and New Zealand use the term \"community treatment order\" (CTO).\nComparison to inpatient commitment.\nThe terminology, \"outpatient commitment\", and legal construction often equate outpatient commitment with inpatient commitment but providing the patient more freedom. In practice, outpatient commitment may be used in situations where commitment would not be used because it is cheaper than inpatient commitment; seen as less draconian; and protects mental health professionals from moral, civil or criminal liability.\nPreventive use.\nOutpatient commitment is used in some countries to prevent relapse of mental disorders, as many mental disorders are episodic in nature (for example bipolar disorder or schizophrenia) and it can be difficult to predict whether a mental disorder will reoccur. Some countries use outpatient commitment for first episode psychosis (FEP).\nImplementation.\nDiscussions of \"outpatient commitment\" began in the psychiatry community in the 1980s following deinstitutionalization, a trend that led to the widespread closure of public psychiatric hospitals and resulted in the discharge of large numbers of people with mental illness to the community.\nEurope.\nDenmark.\nDenmark introduced outpatient commitment in 2010 with the \"Mental Health Act\" ().\nGermany.\nIn Germany, CTOs were resumed in 2015 (formerly only for forensic psychiatry).\nLaws regarding implementations are distincts between lander.\nFrance.\nThe CTOs are renewed every month. They were introduced under Nicolas Sarkozy presidency. Persons committed are registered on a national file accessible by police, even if they are not suspected of breaking the law.\nThe Netherlands.\nAs of 2014,[ [update]] Dutch law provides for community treatment orders, and an individual who does not comply with the terms of their CTO may be subject to immediate involuntary commitment.\nNorway.\nWhen Norway introduced outpatient commitment in the 1961 \"Mental Health Act\", it could only be mandated for individuals who had previously been admitted for inpatient treatment. Revisions in 1999 and 2006 provided for outpatient commitment without previous inpatient treatment, but this provision is seldom used.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, the \"Compulsory Psychiatric Care Act\" () provides for an administrative court to mandate psychiatric treatment to prevent harm to the individual or others. The law was created in 1991 and revised in 2008.\nEngland and Wales.\nChanges in service provision and amendments to the Mental Health Act in England and Wales have increased the scope for compulsion in the community. The Mental Health Act 2007 introduced community treatment orders (CTOs). CTOs are legally defined as a form of outpatient leave for individuals detained under section 3 of the Mental Health Act. As such, only members of the medical community are involved in issuing a CTO, though both the section 3 detention underlying the CTO and the CTO itself can be appealed to the Mental Health Tribunal where a panel consisting of medical doctors and a judge will make a decision.The legislation in the UK specifically allows CTOs to be issued after a single admission to hospital for treatment. However, the Royal College of Psychiatrists suggested limiting CTOs to patients with a history of noncompliance and hospitalization, when it reviewed the current mental health legislation.\nJohn Mayer Chamberlain argues that this legislation was triggered by the Killing of Jonathan Zito by an individual who had interactions with mental health services prior this event, which led the then conservative government to argue for CTOs.\nA review of patient data in London found that the average duration of a CTO in the UK was 3 years. Black people in the UK are more than ten times as likely to be under a CTO as white people. Concerns have been raised about the inability of Independent mental health advocates (IHMAs) to provide services to those under CTOs, since IMHAs cannot make contact with service users under CTOs and case workers could act as gatekeepers not providing referrals.6\nIn a 2021 paper reviewing the mental health act, the UK government proposed a new form of indefinite outpatient commitment allowing for deprivation of liberties an continuous supervision termed supervised discharge. This discharge would be reviewed yearly, and only apply to individuals who would not benefit from treatment in a hospital setting and would be based on risk. Further, this legislation would only apply to restricted patients who have been diverted to the mental health care system from courts.\nScotland.\nScotland has a different community commitment regime from England and Wales introduced in the 2003 Mental Health Act. There is ongoing debate in the UK on the place of coercion and compulsion in community mental health care.\nLuxembourg.\nPatients may be recalled if they don't abide to conditions on residence or medical supervision decided by a psychiatrist on discharge for 3 months after having been released from an involuntary commitment.5.27\nNorth America.\nIn the last decade of the 20th century and the first of the 21st, \"outpatient commitment\" laws were passed in a number of U.S. states and jurisdictions in Canada.\nCanada.\nIn the mid-1990s, Saskatchewan became the first Canadian province to implement community treatment orders, and Ontario followed in 2000. As of \u00a02016,[ [update]] New Brunswick was the only province without legislation that provided for either CTOs or extended leave.\nUnited States.\nBy the end of 2010,[ [update]] 44 U.S. states had enacted some version of an outpatient commitment law. In some cases, passage of the laws followed widely publicized tragedies, such as the murders of Laura Wilcox and Kendra Webdale.\nOceania.\nAustralia and New Zealand introduced community treatment orders in the 1980s and 1990s.\nAustralia.\nIn the Australian state of Victoria, community treatment orders last for a maximum of twelve months but can be renewed after review by a tribunal.\nControversy.\nProponents have argued that outpatient commitment improves mental health, increases the effectiveness of treatment, lowers the incidence of homelessness, arrest, incarceration, and hospitalization, and reduces costs. Opponents of outpatient commitment laws argue that they unnecessarily limit freedom, force people to ingest dangerous medications, impede their human rights, or are applied with racial and socioeconomic biases.\nArguments for and proponents.\nWhile many outpatient commitment laws have been passed in response to violent acts committed by people with mental illness, most proponents involved in the outpatient commitment debate also make arguments based on the quality of life and cost associated with untreated mental illness and \"revolving door patients\" who experience a cycle of hospitalization, treatment and stabilization, release, and decompensation. While the cost of repeated hospitalizations is indisputable, quality-of-life arguments rest on an understanding of mental illness as an undesirable and dangerous state of being. Outpatient commitment proponents point to studies performed in North Carolina and New York that have found some positive impact of court-ordered outpatient treatment. Proponents include: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), U.S. Department of Justice, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), U. S Department of Health and Human Services, American Psychiatric Association, National Alliance on Mental Illness, International Association of Chiefs of Police. SAMHSA included Assisted Outpatient Treatment in their National Registry of Evidence Based Program and Practices. Crime Solutions: Management Strategies to Reduce Psychiatric Readmissions. The Treatment Advocacy Center are an advocacy group that campaign for the use of outpatient commitment.\nA systematic review in 2016 looked at around 200 papers investigating the effectiveness of CTOs for patient outcomes. It found that non-randomized trials had dramatically varying results and that no randomized controlled trials showed any benefits to the patient for outpatient commitment apart from a reduction in the risk of being the victim of crime.\nDue to legal, bureaucratic, and social factors, the same interventions can have different effects in different countries.\nCost.\nResearch published in 2013 showed that Kendra's Law in New York, which served about 2,500 patients at a cost of $32 million, had positive results in terms of net cost and reduced arrests. About $125 million is also spent annually on improved outpatient treatment for patients who are not subject to the law. In contrast to New York, despite the wide adoption of outpatient commitment, the programs were generally not adequately funded.\n\"Although numerous AOT programs currently operate across the United States, it is clear that the intervention is vastly underutilized.\"\nArrests, danger, and violence.\nThe National Institute of Justice considers assisted outpatient treatment an effective crime prevention program. Some studies in the US have found that AOT programs have reduced the chances of arrest. Kendra's Law has lowered the risk of violent behaviors and reduced thoughts about suicide.\nOutcomes and hospital admissions.\nAOT \"programs improve adherence with outpatient treatment and have been shown to lead to significantly fewer emergency commitments, hospital admissions, and hospital days as well as a reduction in arrests and violent behavior.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA significant reduction in adverse outcomes was observed among participants, including a 74% decrease in experiences of homelessness and a 77% reduction in psychiatric hospitalizations. Moreover, the average length of hospitalization decreased by 56%, while arrests and incarcerations fell by 83% and 87%, respectively. Substance abuse also declined, with a 49% reduction in alcohol abuse and a 48% reduction in drug abuse.\nNotably, consumer participation and medication compliance showed marked improvement, with a 51% increase in individuals demonstrating good adherence to medication regimens. Additionally, those exhibiting strong engagement with services rose by 103%. Consumer feedback was largely positive; 75% of participants indicated that AOT contributed to their ability to regain control over their lives, while 81% reported that AOT facilitated their recovery and well-being. Furthermore, 90% of participants expressed a higher likelihood of attending appointments and adhering to the medication prescribed. Confidence in case management was also reflected, with 87% of participants affirming their trust in their case manager's capabilities. Finally, 88% of participants indicated alignment between themselves and their case managers regarding prioritized areas for intervention.\nIn Nevada County, CA, AOT (\"Laura's Law\") decreased the number of psychiatric hospital days by 46.7%, incarceration days by 65.1%, homeless days by 61.9%, and emergency interventions by 44.1%. Laura's Law implementation saved $1.81\u2013$2.52 for every dollar spent, and receiving services under Laura's Law caused a \"reduction in actual hospital costs of $213,300\" and a \"reduction in actual incarceration costs of $75,600.\"\nIn New Jersey, Kim Veith, director of clinical services at Ocean Mental Health Services, noted the AOT pilot program performed \"beyond wildest dreams.\" AOT reduced hospitalizations, shortened inpatient stays, reduced crime and incarceration, stabilized housing, and reduced homelessness. Of clients who were homeless, 20% are now in supportive housing, 40% are in boarding homes, and 20% are living successfully with family members.\nWriting in the \"British Journal of Psychiatry\" in 2013, Jorun Rugk\u00e5sa and John Dawson stated, \"The current evidence from RCTs suggests that CTOs do not reduce readmission rates over 12 months.\"\n\"We find that New York State's AOT Program improves a range of important outcomes for its recipients, apparently without feared negative consequences to recipients.\"\n\"The increased services available under AOT clearly improve recipient outcomes; however, the AOT court order, itself, and its monitoring do appear to offer additional benefits in improving outcomes.\"\nEffect on mental illness system.\nAccess to services.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"AOT has been instrumental in increasing accountability at all system levels regarding delivery of services to high need individuals. Community awareness of AOT has resulted in increased outreach to individuals who had previously presented engagement challenges to mental health service providers.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Improved treatment plan development, discharge planning, and coordination of service planning. Processes and structures developed for AOT have resulted in improvements to treatment plans that more appropriately match the needs of individuals who have had difficulties using mental health services in the past.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Improved collaboration between mental health and court systems. As AOT processes have matured, professionals from the two systems have improved their working relationships, resulting in greater efficiencies, and ultimately, the conservation of judicial, clinical, and administrative resources. There is now an organized process to prioritize and monitor individuals with the greatest need; AOT ensures greater access to services for individuals whom providers have previously been reluctant to serve; There is now increased collaboration between inpatient and community-based providers.\"\nIn New York City, net costs declined 50% in the first year after assisted outpatient treatment began and an additional 13% in the second year. In non-NYC counties, costs fell 62% in the first year and an extra 27% in the second year. This was even though psychotropic drug costs increased during the first year after initiation of assisted outpatient treatment, by 40% and 44% in the city and five-county samples, respectively. The increased community-based mental health costs were more than offset by the reduction in inpatient and incarceration costs. Cost declines associated with assisted outpatient treatment were about twice as large as those seen for voluntary services.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"In tandem with New York's AOT program, enhanced services increased among involuntary recipients, whereas no corresponding increase was initially seen for voluntary recipients. In the long run, however, overall service capacity was increased, and the focus on enhanced services for AOT participants appears to have led to greater access to enhanced services for both voluntary and involuntary recipients.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"It is also important to recognize that the AOT order exerts a critical effect on service providers stimulating their efforts to prioritize care for AOT recipients.\"\nRace.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"We find no evidence that the AOT Program is disproportionately selecting African Americans for court orders, nor is there evidence of a disproportionate effect on other minority populations. Our interviews with key stakeholders across the state corroborate these findings.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"We found no evidence of racial bias. Defining the target population as public-system clients with multiple hospitalizations, the rate of application to white and black clients approaches parity.\"\nService engagement.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"After 12 months or more on AOT, service engagement increased such that AOT recipients were judged to be more engaged than voluntary patients. This suggests that after 12 months or more, when combined with intensive services, AOT increases service engagement compared to voluntary treatment alone.\"\nConsumers approve. Despite being under a court order to participate in treatment, current AOT recipients feel neither more positive nor more negative about their treatment experiences than comparable individuals who are not under AOT.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn Los Angeles, CA, the AOT pilot program reduced incarceration 78%, hospitalization 86%, hospitalization after discharge from the program by 77%, and cut taxpayer costs by 40%.\nIn North Carolina, AOT reduced the percentage of persons refusing medications to 30%, compared to 66% of patients not under AOT.\nIn Ohio, AOT increased attendance at outpatient psychiatric appointments from 5.7 to 13.0 per year. It increased attendance at day treatment sessions from 23 to 60 per year. \"During the first 12 months of outpatient commitment, patients experienced significant reductions in visits to the psychiatric emergency service, hospital admissions, and lengths of stay compared with the 12 months before commitment.\"\nIn Arizona, \"71% [of AOT patients] ... voluntarily maintained treatment contacts six months after their orders expired\" compared with \"almost no patients\" who were not court-ordered to outpatient treatment.\nIn Iowa, \"it appears as though outpatient commitment promotes treatment compliance in about 80% of patients... After commitment is terminated, about \u00be of that group remain in treatment on a voluntary basis.\"\nArguments against and opponents.\nSome human rights advocates consider involuntary commitment a potential violation of freedom of thought or opinion. They view the use of neuroleptics as a form of degrading treatment, which may impede individuals' right to work due to side effects that can be physically and mentally debilitating. There is a discussion surrounding the concept of self-determination or self-ownership, with some arguing that involuntary commitment represents a paternalistic approach that may be applied subjectively, as evidenced by studies questioning the reliability of psychiatric diagnoses, such as the Rosenhan experiment. Additionally, concerns have been raised regarding the indefinite duration of commitment and the lack of clear endpoints for treatment. Opponents of compulsory treatment challenge the positive effects often cited in studies, pointing to potential methodological flaws and disparities in applying related laws. The brain's physical size may be reduced during antipsychotic therapy long-term.\nThe slippery slope argument of \"if government bodies are given power, they will use it in excess\" was proven when 350\u2013450 CTOs were expected to be issued in 2008, and more than five times that number were issued in the first few months. Every year, there are increasing numbers of people subject to CTOs.\nThe psychiatric survivors movement opposes involuntary commitment on the basis that the ordered drugs often have serious or unpleasant adverse effects, such as tardive dyskinesia, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, akathisia, excessive weight gain leading to diabetes, addiction, sexual side effects, increased risk of suicide and QT prolongation. The New York Civil Liberties Union has denounced what it sees as racial and socioeconomic biases in the issuing of outpatient commitment orders. The main opponents to any kind of coercion, including outpatient commitment and any other form of involuntary commitment, are Giorgio Antonucci and Thomas Szasz.\nSee also.\nUS specific:\nGeneral:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38562", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38562", "title": "H Bar", "text": ""}
{"id": "38563", "revid": "49688659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38563", "title": "Eileen Heckart", "text": "American actress (1919\u20132001)\nAnna Eileen Heckart (n\u00e9e Herbert; March 29, 1919 \u2013 December 31, 2001) was an American stage and screen actress whose career spanned nearly 60 years.\nEarly life.\nHeckart was born Anna Eileen Herbert in Columbus, Ohio. Her mother Esther (n\u00e9e\u00a0Stark) wed Leo Herbert (not the child's father) at her own mother's insistence so her child would not be born with the stigma of illegitimacy. Eileen was soon after legally adopted by her maternal grandmother's wealthy second husband, J.W. Heckart, providing her with the surname by which she would be known throughout the remainder of her life. She had two stepsisters, Anne and Marilyn. She graduated from Ohio State University with a B.A. in drama. She additionally studied drama at HB Studio in New York City.\nCareer.\nStage.\nHeckart acted with the Blackfriars Guild and studied for four years at the American Theatre Wing.\nHeckart began her Broadway career as the assistant stage manager and an understudy for \"The Voice of the Turtle\" in 1943. Her many credits include \"Picnic\", \"The Bad Seed\", \"A View from the Bridge\", \"A Memory of Two Mondays\", \"The Dark at the Top of the Stairs\", \"A Family Affair\", \"And Things That Go Bump in the Night\", \"Barefoot in the Park\", \"Butterflies Are Free\", \"You Know I Can't Hear You When the Water's Running\", and \"The Cemetery Club\". \nHeckart won the 1953 Theatre World Award for \"Picnic\". Her nominations include Tony Award nominations for \"Butterflies Are Free\", \"Invitation to a March\", and \"The Dark at the Top of the Stairs\".\nIn 2000, at age 81, she appeared off-Broadway in Kenneth Lonergan's \"The Waverly Gallery\". For this performance, she won several awards, including the Drama Desk Award, the Lucille Lortel Award, the Drama League Award and the Outer Critics Circle Award. That same year, she was inducted into the American Theatre Hall of Fame and received an honorary Tony Award for lifetime achievement. \nShe was granted three honorary doctorates by Sacred Heart University, Niagara University, and Ohio State University.\nFilm and television.\nHeckart's television debut came in the mid-1940s when she had two lines in an episode of \"Suspense\".\nHeckart won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her work in the 1972 movie adaptation of \"Butterflies Are Free\" and was nominated in 1957 for her performance as the bereaved, besotted Mrs. Daigle in \"The Bad Seed\" (1956), both of which were roles Heckart originated on Broadway. Heckart appeared in \"The Hiding Place\" (1976) as nurse, \"Katje\", working inside \"Kamp Vught\", the Dutch Concentration Camp. In 1977, Heckart played Bertha Hayden, mother of Sam Hayden in NBC's made for TV Christmas movie, \"Sunshine Christmas\". 1n 1978, Heckart appeared in the Resorts International Atlantic City New Jersey Christmas production, \"Jackie Gleason Presents The Honeymooners\", as Alice's mother, Mrs Gibson. She later appeared as a Vietnam War widow in the Clint Eastwood film \"Heartbreak Ridge\" (1986). She played Diane Keaton's meddling mother in the 1996 comedy film \"The First Wives Club\".\nOn television, Heckart had starring roles in \"The 5 Mrs. Buchanans\", \"Out of the Blue\", \"Partners in Crime\", and \"Backstairs at the White House\" (Emmy nomination as Eleanor Roosevelt). In 1994, she won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for her appearance as Rose Stein on \"Love &amp; War\". In 1988, she appeared as Ruth in the \"Tales from the Darkside\" episode \"Do Not Open This Box\". Her other guest roles included \"The Fugitive\" (where she appeared in three episodes as a nun, \"Sister Veronica\"), \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" (two Emmy nominations as journalist Flo Meredith, a role she carried over to a guest appearance on MTM's spinoff \"Lou Grant\"), \"Love Story\", \"Rhoda\", \"Alice\", \"Murder One\", \"Hawaii Five-O\", \"Gunsmoke\", \"Cybill\", \"The Cosby Show\" (one Emmy nomination as Mrs. Hickson), and many others.\nShe appeared on two episodes of \"Gunsmoke\". In 1965, Heckart appeared as Hattie Silks on the episode \"The Lady.\" In 1969, Heckart appeared as Athena Partridge Royce on the episode \"The Innocent\".\nHeckart played two unrelated characters on the daytime soap opera \"One Life to Live\". During the 1980s, she played Ruth Perkins, the mother of Allison Perkins, who had kidnapped the newborn baby of heroine Viki Lord Buchanan under orders from phony evangelist and mastermind criminal Mitch Laurence. During the early 1990s, she played the role of Wilma Bern, mother of upstate Pennsylvania mob boss Carlo Hesser and his meek twin, Mortimer Bern. She appeared in the 1954 legal drama \"Justice\", based on case files of New York's Legal Aid Society. She appeared in an episode of the medical drama \"The Eleventh Hour\", titled \"There Should Be an Outfit Called 'Families Anonymous!'\" (1963), and an episode of \"Home Improvement\", titled \"Losing My Religion\". She also played the role of spinster Amanda Cooper on season 5 episode 17 in the \"Little House on the Prairie\" episode \"Dance With Me\".\nHeckart has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6140 Hollywood Blvd.\nPersonal life and death.\nIn 1942, Heckart married insurance broker John Harrison Yankee Jr., her college sweetheart. They had three sons. Her son Luke Yankee is the author of her 2006 biography \"Just Outside the Spotlight: Growing Up with Eileen Heckart\". In February 2024, Luke Yankee's play \"Marilyn, Mom, and Me\" debuted at the International City Theater.\nHeckart was a Democrat. She met President Lyndon B. Johnson at the White House in 1967.\nOn December 31, 2001, Heckart died of lung cancer at her home in Norwalk, Connecticut, at the age of 82. She was cremated with her ashes scattered outside the Music Box Theatre in Manhattan, New York.\nSelected television appearances.\nHighway to Heaven (1985) Helen Season 1\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38565", "revid": "43650713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38565", "title": "Royal and noble styles", "text": "Styles represent the fashion by which monarchs and noblemen are properly addressed. Throughout history, many different styles were used, with little standardization. This page will detail the various styles used by royalty and nobility in Europe, in the final form arrived at in the nineteenth century.\nImperial, royal, and princely styles.\nOnly those classified within the social class of royalty and upper nobility have a style of \"Highness\" attached before their titles. Reigning bearers of forms of Highness included grand princes, grand dukes, reigning princes, reigning dukes, and princely counts, their families, and the agnatic (of the male bloodline) descendants of emperors and kings. Royalty (usually emperors to princely counts) are all considered sovereign princes ().\nIn addition to their national royal styles, many monarchs have or had \"treaty styles\" to distinguish one monarch from another in international settings. For example, the sovereign of France was styled \"Most Christian Majesty\", the King of Hungary as \"Apostolic Majesty\", of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation as \"August Majesty\". The sovereign of the United Kingdom is customarily referred to as \"Britannic Majesty\", the king of Spain as His \"Catholic Majesty\", etc. Monarchs also typically have a longer style than other princely members within the same royal house. For example, the monarch of the United Kingdom has a much longer style than that of other members of the British royal family. The full style and titles of King Charles III in the United Kingdom are \"His Majesty Charles the Third, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of His other Realms and Territories King, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38566", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38566", "title": "Inverse multiplexer", "text": "Breaks a data stream into multiple lower data rate streams\nAn inverse multiplexer (often abbreviated to inverse MUX or IMUX) allows a data stream to be broken into multiple lower data rate communication links. An inverse multiplexer differs from a demultiplexer because the multiple output streams from the former stay inter-related, whereas those from the latter are unrelated. An inverse multiplexer is the opposite of a multiplexer in that it divides one high-speed link into multiple low-speed links, whereas a multiplexer combines multiple low-speed links into one high-speed link.\nThis provides an end to end connection of several times the data rate available on each of the low rate data links. Note that, as with multiplexers, links are often used in bi-directional pairs and, at either end of the link, an inverse multiplexer will be combined with its reverse (an inverse demultiplexer) and still be called an \"inverse MUX\".\nInverse multiplexers are used, for example, to combine a number of ISDN channels together into one high rate circuit, where a higher rate connection than is available from a single ISDN connection is needed. This is typically useful in areas where higher rate circuits are not available.\nAn alternative to an inverse multiplexer is to use separate links and load sharing of data between them. In the case of IP, network packets could be sent in round-robin mode between each separate link. Advantages of using inverse multiplexing over separate links include:\nA simple analogy to transport can help explain the distinction between multiplexing and inverse multiplexing. When small cargoes such as pencils are shipped overseas, they are generally not carried one at a time, but are assembled into small boxes, which are grouped into larger cartons, which go into intermodal containers, which are packed onto a container ship. Each step is analogous to a multiplexing process. Conversely a large cargo, for example in structure relocation, may be disassembled for carriage on multiple vehicles and reassembled at the destination. This is analogous to inverse multiplexing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38567", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38567", "title": "Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon", "text": "British princess (1930\u20132002)\nPrincess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon (Margaret Rose; 21 August 1930 \u2013 9 February 2002), was the younger daughter of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother. She was the younger sister and only sibling of Queen Elizabeth\u00a0II.\nMargaret was born when her parents were the Duke and Duchess of York, and she spent much of her childhood with them and her elder sister. Her life changed at the age of six, when her father succeeded to the British throne following the abdication of his brother Edward\u00a0VIII. Margaret's sister became heir presumptive, with Margaret second in line to the throne. Her position in the line of succession diminished over the following decades as Elizabeth's children and grandchildren were born. During the Second World War, the two sisters stayed at Windsor Castle despite suggestions to evacuate them to Canada. During the war years, Margaret was too young to perform official duties and continued her education, being nine years old when the war broke out and turning fifteen just after hostilities ended.\nFrom the 1950s onwards, Margaret became one of the world's most celebrated socialites, famed for her glamorous lifestyle and reputed romances. Most famously, she fell in love in the early 1950s with Peter Townsend, a married RAF officer in the royal household. In 1952, her father died, her sister became queen, and Townsend divorced his wife. He proposed to Margaret early in the following year. Many in the government believed that he would be an unsuitable husband for the Queen's 22-year-old sister, and the Archbishop of Canterbury refused to countenance her marriage to a divorced man. Margaret abandoned her plans with Townsend. In 1960, she married Antony Armstrong-Jones, whom Elizabeth created Earl of Snowdon. The couple had two children, David and Sarah. Margaret's marriage to Lord Snowdon became strained, with both of them engaging in extramarital affairs. They separated in 1976 and divorced in 1978. Margaret did not remarry.\nMargaret was a controversial member of the British royal family. Her divorce received much negative publicity, and her private life was for many years the subject of speculation by media and royal correspondents. Her health deteriorated in the last twenty years of her life. She was a heavy smoker for most of her adult life, and had a lung operation in 1985 and a bout of pneumonia in 1993, as well as three strokes between 1998 and 2001. Margaret died in 2002 aged 71, after suffering her fourth stroke.\nEarly life.\nMargaret was born at 9:22pm on 21 August 1930 at Glamis Castle in Scotland, her mother's ancestral home, and was affectionately known within the royal family as Margot. She was the first member of the royal family in direct line of succession to be born in Scotland since the 1600s. She was delivered by Sir Henry Simson, the royal obstetrician. The Home Secretary, J. R. Clynes, was present to verify the birth. The registration of her birth was delayed for several days to avoid her being numbered thirteen in the parish register. Margaret was baptised in the private chapel at Buckingham Palace on 30 October 1930 by Cosmo Lang, the Archbishop of Canterbury.\nAt the time of her birth, Margaret was fourth in the line of succession to the British throne. She was the younger daughter of Prince Albert, Duke of York (later King George VI), and Elizabeth, Duchess of York (later Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother). Her father was the second son of King George V and Queen Mary, and her mother was the youngest daughter of Claude Bowes-Lyon, 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne, and Cecilia Bowes-Lyon, Countess of Strathmore and Kinghorne. The Duchess of York originally wanted to name her second daughter Ann Margaret, as she explained to Queen Mary in a letter: \"I am very anxious to call her Ann Margaret, as I think Ann of York sounds pretty, &amp; Elizabeth and Ann go so well together.\" George V disliked the name Ann but approved of the alternative, Margaret Rose.\nMargaret's early life was spent primarily at the Yorks' residences at 145 Piccadilly (their town house in London) and Royal Lodge in Windsor. The Yorks were perceived by the public as an ideal family, but unfounded rumours that Margaret was deaf and mute were not completely dispelled until her first main public appearance at her uncle Prince George's wedding in 1934.\nMargaret was educated alongside her sister, Elizabeth, by their Scottish governess, Marion Crawford. Margaret's education was mainly supervised by her mother, who in the words of Randolph Churchill \"never aimed at bringing her daughters up to be more than nicely behaved young ladies\". When Queen Mary insisted upon the importance of education, the Duchess of York commented, \"I don't know what she meant. After all I and my sisters only had governesses and we all married well \u2014 one of us \"very\" well\". Margaret was resentful about her limited education, especially in later years, and aimed criticism at her mother. However, Margaret's mother told a friend that she \"regretted\" that her daughters did not go to school like other children, and the employment of a governess rather than sending the girls to school may have been done only at the insistence of their grandfather George V. J. M. Barrie, author of \"Peter Pan\", read stories to the sisters as children.\nMargaret's grandfather died in January 1936, and her uncle acceded to the throne as Edward VIII. Less than a year later, in December 1936, Edward abdicated to marry Wallis Simpson, a twice-divorced American, whom neither the Church of England nor the Dominion governments would accept as queen. The Church did not recognise the marriage of a divorced woman with a living ex-husband as valid. Edward's abdication made Margaret's father reluctantly assume the throne, and Margaret became second in line to the throne, with the title \"The Princess Margaret\" to indicate her status as a child of the sovereign. The family moved into Buckingham Palace; Margaret's room overlooked The Mall.\nMargaret was a Brownie in the 1st Buckingham Palace Brownie Pack, formed in 1937. She was also a Girl Guide and later a Sea Ranger. She served as President of Girlguiding UK from 1965 until her death on 9 February 2002.\nAt the outbreak of World War II, Princesses Margaret and Elizabeth were at Birkhall, on the Balmoral Castle estate, where they stayed until Christmas 1939, enduring nights so cold that drinking water in carafes by their bedside froze. They spent Christmas at Sandringham House before moving to Windsor Castle, just outside London, for much of the remainder of the war. Lord Hailsham wrote to Winston Churchill to advise the evacuation of the princesses to the greater safety of Canada, to which their mother famously replied, \"The children won't go without me. I won't leave without the King. And the King will never leave.\" At Windsor, the princesses staged pantomimes at Christmas in aid of the Queen's Wool Fund, which bought yarn to knit into military garments. In 1940, Margaret sat next to Elizabeth during their radio broadcast for the BBC's \"Children's Hour\", addressing other children who had been evacuated from cities. Margaret spoke at the end by wishing all the children goodnight.\nUnlike other members of the royal family, Margaret was not expected to undertake any public or official duties during the war. She developed her skills at singing and playing the piano, often show tunes from stage musicals. Her contemporaries thought she was spoiled by her parents, especially her father, who allowed her to take liberties not usually permissible, such as being allowed to stay up to dinner at the age of thirteen.\nCrawford despaired at the attention Margaret received, writing to friends: \"Could you this year only ask Princess Elizabeth to your party?\u00a0... Princess Margaret does draw all the attention and Princess Elizabeth lets her do that.\" Elizabeth, however, did not mind this, and commented, \"Oh, it's so much easier when Margaret's there\u2014everybody laughs at what Margaret says\". Their father described Elizabeth as his pride and Margaret as his joy. When Elizabeth joined the Auxiliary Territorial Service in 1945, Margaret became extremely jealous, lamenting, \"I was born too late!\" as she was too young to join herself.\nPost-war years.\nAt the end of the war in 1945, Margaret appeared on the balcony at Buckingham Palace with her family and Winston Churchill. Afterwards, both Elizabeth and Margaret joined the crowds outside the palace, incognito, chanting, \"We want the King, we want the Queen!\" They both joined the festivities with their fellow British citizens, such as dancing the \"hokey cokey\", \"Lambeth Walk\" and conga. \"I remember lines of unknown people linking arms and walking down Whitehall, and all of us were swept along by tides of happiness and relief,\" Elizabeth later recalled. Margaret and Elizabeth were \"terrified\" of being recognised, so they did their best to stay hidden in plain sight.\nOn 15 April 1946, Margaret was confirmed into the Church of England. On 1 February 1947, she, Elizabeth and their parents embarked on a state tour of Southern Africa. The three-month-long visit was Margaret's first visit abroad. She later claimed that she remembered \"every minute of it\", including rides on horseback taken by her and Elizabeth using horses lent by locals near the royal train. Her chaperon on those occasions was Peter Townsend, the King's equerry, who it was noticed could be quite sharp with Margaret. In November 1947, Margaret was a bridesmaid at the wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Philip Mountbatten. In the next three years, Elizabeth and Philip had two children, Prince Charles and Princess Anne, whose births moved Margaret further down the line of succession.\nIn 1950, the former royal governess, Marion Crawford, published an unauthorised biography of Elizabeth's and Margaret's childhood years, titled \"The Little Princesses\", in which she described Margaret's \"light-hearted fun and frolics\" and her \"amusing and outrageous\u00a0... antics\".\nThe Margaret Set.\nAround the time of Elizabeth's wedding, the press started to follow the social life of \"unconventional\" Margaret and her reputation for vivacity and wit. A young woman with \"vivid blue eyes\", Margaret enjoyed socialising with high society and young aristocrats, including Sharman Douglas, the daughter of the American ambassador, Lewis Williams Douglas. A celebrated beauty known for her glamour and fashion sense, Margaret was often featured in the press at balls, parties, and nightclubs with friends who became known as the Margaret Set. The number of her official engagements increased (they included a tour of Italy, Switzerland, and France), and she joined a growing number of charitable organisations as president or patron.\nFavoured haunts of the Margaret Set were The 400 Club, the Caf\u00e9 de Paris and the Mirabelle restaurant. Anticipation of an engagement or romance between Margaret and a member of her set were often reported. In 1948, international news grew that her engagement to the Marquess of Blandford would be announced on her 18th birthday. Similar speculation moved to the Hon. Peter Ward, then Billy Wallace and others. The set also mixed with celebrities, including Danny Kaye, whom she met after watching him perform at the London Palladium in February 1948. He was soon accepted by the royal social circle. In July 1949, at a fancy dress ball at the US ambassador's residence, Margaret performed the can-can on stage, accompanied by Douglas and ten other costumed girls. A press frenzy ensued, with Kaye denying he had taught Margaret the dance. Press interest could be intrusive. During a private visit to Paris in 1951, Margaret and Prince Nicholas of Yugoslavia were followed into a nightclub by a paparazzo who took photographs of them until British detectives physically removed him from the club.\nIn 1952, although Margaret attended parties and debutante balls with friends such as Douglas and Mark Bonham Carter, the set were seen infrequently together. They regrouped in time for Coronation season social functions. In May 1953, Margaret met singer Eddie Fisher when he performed at the Red, White and Blue Ball. She asked him to her table and he was \"invited to all sorts of parties\". Margaret fell out with him in 1957, but years later, Fisher still claimed the night he was introduced to her was the greatest thrill of his lifetime. In June 1954, the Set performed the Edgar Wallace play \"The Frog\" at the Scala Theatre. It was organised by Margaret's close friend Judy Montagu with Margaret as assistant director. It drew praise for raising \u00a310,500 for charity, but criticism for incompetent performances. By the mid-1950s, although still seen at fashionable nightspots and theatre premieres, the set was depleted by its members getting married. As she reached her late twenties unmarried, the press increasingly turned from predicting whom she might marry to suspecting she would remain a spinster.\n'Romances' and the press (1947\u20131959).\nThe press avidly discussed \"the world's most eligible bachelor-girl\" and her alleged romances with more than 30 bachelors, including David Mountbatten, Michael I of Romania, Dominic Elliot, Colin Tennant (later Baron Glenconner), Prince Henry of Hesse-Kassel, and future Canadian prime minister John Turner. Most had titles and almost all were wealthy. Lord Blandford and Lord Dalkeith, both wealthy sons of dukes, were the likeliest potential husbands. Her family reportedly hoped that Margaret would marry Dalkeith, but, unlike him, Margaret was uninterested in the outdoors. Billy Wallace, sole heir to a \u00a32.8 million (\u00a3 million today) fortune and an old friend, was reportedly Margaret's favourite date during the mid-1950s. During her 21st birthday party at Balmoral in August 1951, the press was disappointed to only photograph Margaret with Townsend, frequently seen in the background of pictures of royal appearances, and to her parents a trusted companion as Elizabeth's duties increased. The following month her father underwent surgery for lung cancer, and Margaret was appointed one of the Counsellors of State who undertook the King's official duties while he was incapacitated. Her father died five months later, on 6 February 1952, and her sister acceded as Elizabeth II.\nRomance with Peter Townsend.\nEarly relationship.\nDuring the war, the King suggested choosing palace aides who were highly qualified men from the military, instead of only aristocrats. Told that a handsome war hero had arrived, the princesses met Townsend, the new equerry, on his first day at Buckingham Palace in 1944; Elizabeth reportedly told her sister, 13 years old, \"Bad luck, he's married\". A temporary assignment of three months from the RAF became permanent. The King and Queen were fond of Townsend; the King is said to have seen the calm and efficient war veteran as the son he never had. He may have been aware of Margaret's infatuation with the non-titled and non-wealthy Townsend, reportedly seeing the courtier reluctantly obey the princess's order to carry her up the stairs at the Palace after a party.\nTownsend was so often near Margaret that gossip columnists overlooked him as a suitor for the princess. When their relationship began is unclear. Margaret told friends she fell in love with him during the 1947 South Africa tour, where they often went riding together. Her biographer Craig Brown stated that, according to a National Trust curator, Townsend requested the bedroom next to hers during a trip to Belfast in October 1947. In November 1948, they attended the inauguration of Queen Juliana of the Netherlands. In later life, Townsend admitted at this point there was an attraction between them, but neither of them ever acknowledged it to one another. Not long after, he discovered his wife Rosemary was involved in an extramarital affair, which ended. Contemporary anecdotes about their closeness then dissipated until late 1950, when friendship seems to have rekindled, coinciding with Townsend's appointment as Deputy Master of the Household and the breakdown of his marriage.\nFrom spring 1951, several accounts described a growing romantic attraction. A footman told how the King diverted the pair's picnic plans, adding that whatever the King and Queen knew about the developing relationship, most royal staff noticed as it was obvious to them. Townsend said that his love for her began in Balmoral in 1951, and recalled an incident there in August when the princess woke him from a nap after a picnic lunch while the King watched, suggesting the King was aware. Townsend and his wife separated in 1951, which was noticed by the press by July.\nMargaret was grief-stricken by her father's death and was prescribed sedatives to help her sleep. Of her father she wrote, \"He was such a wonderful person, the very heart and centre of our happy family.\" She was consoled by her deeply held Christian beliefs, sometimes attending church twice daily. She resumed attending events with her family in April and returned to royal engagements and social appearances when official mourning ended in June. American newspapers noted her increasing vitality and speculated that she must be in love. With the widowed Queen Mother, Margaret moved out of Buckingham Palace and into Clarence House in May 1953, while the new queen and her family moved out of Clarence House and into Buckingham Palace. After George\u00a0VI's death, Townsend was appointed Comptroller of the Queen Mother's household.\nIn June 1952, the estranged Townsends hosted Margaret, along with her sister Elizabeth and brother-in-law Philip, at a cocktail party at their home. A month later, Rosemary Townsend and her new partner John de L\u00e1szl\u00f3 attended the Royal Windsor Horse Show. It is thought the romance between Margaret and Townsend began around this time. The first reports that Townsend and Margaret wished to marry began in August 1952, but these remained uncommon. The Townsend divorce in November received little coverage in Britain and in greater detail abroad. After the divorce was finalized in December 1952, however, rumours spread about him and Margaret; the divorce, and shared grief over the King's death in February 1952, likely helped them come together within the privacy of Clarence House, where Margaret had her own apartment.\nMarriage proposal.\nPrivate Secretary to the Queen Sir Alan Lascelles wrote that Townsend told Lascelles he had asked Margaret to marry him shortly before Christmas 1952. Other sources claim it occurred in February or April 1953. He was 15 years her senior and had two children from his previous marriage. Margaret accepted and informed her sister, the Queen, whose consent was required by the Royal Marriages Act 1772. During the abdication crisis, the Church of England had refused to countenance the remarriage of the divorced. Queen Mary had recently died, and, after the coronation of Elizabeth II, the new queen planned to tour the Commonwealth for six months. She told her sister, \"Under the circumstances, it isn't unreasonable for me to ask you to wait a year\", and to keep the relationship secret until after the coronation.\nAlthough foreign media speculated on Margaret and Townsend's relationship, the British press did not. After reporters saw her plucking fluff from his coat during the coronation on 2 June 1953\u2014\"I never thought a thing about it, and neither did Margaret\", Townsend later said; \"After that the storm broke\"\u2014\"The People\" first mentioned the relationship in Britain on 14 June. With the headline \"They Must Deny it NOW\", the front-page article warned that \"scandalous rumours about Princess Margaret are racing around the world\", which the newspaper stated were \"of course, utterly untrue\". The foreign press believed that the Regency Act 1953\u2014which made Prince Philip regent instead of Margaret on the Queen's death\u2014was enacted to allow Margaret to marry Townsend, but as late as 23 July most other British newspapers except the \"Daily Mirror\" did not discuss the rumours. Acting Prime Minister Rab Butler asked that the \"deplorable speculation\" end, without mentioning Margaret or Townsend.\nThe constitutional crisis that the proposed marriage caused was public. The Queen was advised by Lascelles to post Townsend abroad, but she refused and instead transferred him from the Queen Mother's household to her own, although Townsend did not accompany Margaret as planned on a tour of Southern Rhodesia. Winston Churchill personally approved of \"a lovely young royal lady married to a gallant young airman\", but Clementine Churchill reminded her husband that he had made the same mistake during the abdication crisis. The Cabinet refused to approve the marriage, and Geoffrey Fisher, Archbishop of Canterbury, did not approve of Margaret marrying a divorced man; opponents said that the marriage would threaten the monarchy as Edward VIII's had. The \"Church of England Newspaper\" said that Margaret \"is a dutiful churchwoman who knows what strong views leaders of the church hold in this matter\", but the \"Sunday Express\"\u2014which had supported Edward and Wallis\u2014asked, \"IF THEY WANT TO MARRY, WHY SHOULDN'T THEY?\".\nChurchill discussed the marriage at the 1953 Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference held with the coronation; the Statute of Westminster 1931 requires Dominion parliaments to also approve any Bill of Renunciation changing the line of succession. The Canadian government stated that altering the line twice in 25 years would harm the monarchy. Churchill informed the Queen that both his cabinet and Dominion prime ministers were against the marriage, and that Parliament would not approve a marriage that would be unrecognised by the Church of England unless Margaret renounced her rights to the throne.\nPhilip was reportedly the most opposed to Townsend in the royal family, while Margaret's mother and sister wanted her to be happy but could not approve of the marriage. Besides Townsend's divorce, two major problems were financial and constitutional. Margaret did not possess her sister's large fortune and would need the \u00a36,000 annual civil list allowance and \u00a315,000 additional allowance Parliament had provided for her upon a suitable marriage. She did not object to being removed from the line of succession to the throne, as Elizabeth and all her children dying was unlikely, but receiving parliamentary approval for the marriage would be difficult and uncertain. At the age of 25 Margaret would not need the Queen's permission under the 1772 Act; she could, after notifying the Privy Council of the United Kingdom, marry in one year if Parliament did not prevent her. Churchill told Elizabeth, however, that if one could easily leave the line of succession, another could easily enter the line, dangerous for a hereditary monarchy.\nElizabeth told the couple to wait until 1955, when Margaret would be 25, avoiding the Queen having to publicly disapprove of her sister's marriage. Lascelles\u2014who compared Townsend to Theudas \"boasting himself to be somebody\"\u2014hoped that separating him and Margaret would end their romance. Churchill arranged for Townsend's assignment as air attach\u00e9 at the British Embassy in Brussels; he was sent on 15 July 1953, before Margaret's return from Rhodesia on 30 July. The assignment was so sudden that the British ambassador learnt about it from a newspaper. Although Margaret and Townsend knew about his new job, they had reportedly been promised a few days together before his departure.\nPress coverage.\nFor two years, press speculation continued. In Brussels, Townsend only said that \"The word must come from somebody else\". He avoided parties and being seen with women. With few duties (the sinecure was abolished after him), Townsend improved his French and horsemanship. He joined a Belgian show jumping club and rode in races around Europe. Margaret was told by the Church that she would be unable to receive communion if she married a divorced man. Three quarters of \"Sunday Express\" readers opposed the relationship, and Mass-Observation recorded criticism of the \"silly little fool\" as a poor example for young women who emulated her. Other newspaper polls showed popular support for Margaret's personal choice, regardless of Church teaching or government. Ninety-seven per cent of \"Daily Mirror\" readers supported marriage, and a \"Daily Express\" editorial stated that even if the Archbishop of Canterbury was displeased, \"she would best please the vast majority of ordinary folk [by finding] happiness for herself\".\nThe couple were not restricted on communicating by mail and telephone. Margaret worked with friends on charity productions of \"Lord and Lady Algy\" and \"The Frog\", and publicly dated men such as Tennant and Wallace. In January 1955, she made the first of many trips to the Caribbean, perhaps to distract, and as a reward for being apart from Townsend. The attach\u00e9 secretly travelled to Britain; while the palace was aware of one visit, he reportedly made other trips for nights and weekends with the princess at Clarence House\u2014her apartment had its own front door\u2014and friends' homes.\nThat spring Townsend for the first time spoke to the press: \"I am sick of being made to hide in my apartment like a thief\", but whether he could marry \"involves more people than myself\". He reportedly believed that his exile from Margaret would soon end, their love was strong, and that the British people would support marrying. Townsend received a bodyguard and police guard around his apartment after the Belgian government received threats on his life, but the British government still said nothing. Stating that people were more interested in the couple than the recent 1955 United Kingdom general election, on 29 May the \"Daily Express\" published an editorial demanding that Buckingham Palace confirm or deny the rumours.\nThe press described Margaret's 25th birthday, 21 August 1955, as the day she was free to marry, and expected an announcement about Townsend soon. Three hundred journalists waited outside Balmoral, four times as many as those later following Diana, Princess of Wales. \"COME ON MARGARET!\", the \"Daily Mirror\"'s front page said two days earlier, asking her to \"please make up your mind!\". On 12 October Townsend returned from Brussels as Margaret's suitor. The royal family devised a system in which it did not host Townsend, but he and Margaret formally courted each other at dinner parties hosted by friends such as Mark Bonham Carter. A Gallup poll found that 59% of Britons approved of their marrying, with 17% opposed. Women in the East End of London shouted \"Go on, Marg, do what you want\" at the princess. Although the couple was never seen together in public during this time, the general consensus was that they would marry. Crowds waited outside Clarence House, and a global audience read daily updates and rumours on newspaper front pages.\n\"Nothing much else than Princess Margaret's affairs is being talked of in this country\", \"The Manchester Guardian\" said on 15 October. \"NOW \u2013 THE NATION WAITS\" was a typical headline. Observers interpreted Buckingham Palace's request to the press to respect Margaret's privacy\u2014the first time the palace discussed the princess's recent personal life\u2014as evidence of an imminent betrothal announcement, probably before the Opening of Parliament on 25 October. As no announcement occurred\u2014the \"Daily Mirror\" on 17 October showed a photograph of Margaret's left hand with the headline \"NO RING YET!\"\u2014the press wondered why. Parliamentarians \"are frankly puzzled by the way the affair has been handled\", the \"News Chronicle\" wrote. \"If a marriage is on, they ask, why not announce it quickly? If there is to be no marriage, why allow the couple to continue to meet without a clear denial of the rumours?\"\nWhy a betrothal did not occur is unclear. Margaret may have been uncertain of her desire, having written to Prime Minister Anthony Eden in August that \"It is only by seeing him in this way that I feel I can properly decide whether I can marry him or not\". Margaret's authorized biographer Christopher Warwick said that the letter was evidence that her love for Townsend was not as strong as the public believed, and that she wanted only the prime minister and Elizabeth to know of her uncertainty. Margaret may have told Townsend as early as 12 October that governmental and familial opposition to their marriage had not changed; it is possible that neither they nor Elizabeth fully understood until that year how difficult the 1772 Act made a royal marriage without the monarch's permission. An influential 26 October editorial in \"The Times\" stating that \"The QUEEN's sister married to a divorced man (even though the innocent party) would be irrevocably disqualified from playing her part in the essential royal function\" represented The Establishment's view of what it considered a possibly dangerous crisis. It convinced many, who had believed that the media were exaggerating, that Margaret really might defy the Church and royal standards. Leslie Weatherhead, President of the Methodist Conference, now criticized the proposed marriage.\nTownsend recalled that \"we felt mute and numbed at the centre of this maelstrom\"; Elizabeth also wanted the media circus to end. Townsend only had his RAF income and, other than a talent for writing, had no experience in other work. He wrote in his autobiography that Margaret \"could have married me only if she had been prepared to give up everything \u2013 her position, her prestige, her privy purse. I simply hadn't the weight, I knew it, to counterbalance all she would have lost\" for what Kenneth Rose described as \"life in a cottage on a Group Captain's salary\". Royal historian Hugo Vickers wrote that \"Lascelles's separation plan had worked and the love between them had died\". Warwick said that \"having spent two years apart, they were no longer as in love as they had been. Townsend was not the love of her life \u2013 the love of her life was her father, King George VI, whom she adored\".\nMore than 100 journalists waited at Balmoral when Eden arrived to discuss the marriage with Elizabeth and Margaret on 1 October 1955. Lord Kilmuir, the Lord Chancellor, that month prepared a secret government document on the proposed marriage. According to a 1958 biography of Townsend by Norman Barrymaine and other accounts, Eden said that his government would oppose in Parliament Margaret retaining her royal status. Parliament might pass resolutions opposing the marriage, which the people would see as a disagreement between government and monarchy; Lord Salisbury, a High Anglican, might resign from the government rather than help pass a Bill of Renunciation. While the government could not prevent the marriage when Margaret became a private individual after a Bill of Renunciation, she would no longer be a Counsellor of State and would lose her civil list allowance; otherwise, taxpayers would subsidise a divorced man and his sons. The Church would consider any children from the marriage to be illegitimate. Eden recommended that, like her uncle Edward and his wife Wallis, Margaret and Townsend leave Britain for several years.\nPapers released in 2004 to the National Archives disagree. They show that Elizabeth and Eden (who had been divorced and remarried himself) planned to amend the 1772 Act. Margaret would have been able to marry Townsend by removing her and any children from the marriage from the line of succession, and thus the Queen's permission would no longer be necessary. Margaret would be allowed to keep her royal title and her allowance, stay in the country, and even continue with her public duties. Eden described Elizabeth's attitude in a letter on the subject to the Commonwealth prime ministers as \"Her Majesty would not wish to stand in the way of her sister's happiness\". Eden himself was sympathetic; \"Exclusion from the Succession would not entail any other change in Princess Margaret's position as a member of the Royal Family\", he wrote.\nOn 28 October 1955 final draft of the plan, Margaret would announce that she would marry Townsend and leave the line of succession. As prearranged by Eden, the Queen would consult with the British and Commonwealth governments, and then ask them to amend the 1772 Act. Eden would have told Parliament that the Act was \"out of harmony with modern conditions\". Kilmuir had advised Eden that the 1772 Act was flawed and might not apply to Margaret anyway. Kilmuir estimated that 75% of Britons would approve of allowing the marriage. The August letter to Eden is evidence, Warwick said, that Margaret was aware of the government's intention to preserve her title and allowance.\nThe decision not to marry was made on the 24th and for the following week, Margaret worked on the wording of her statement, which was released on the 31st. It is unclear what or when she was told about the government proposal, drafted on the 28th. By the early 1980s she was still protesting to biographers that the couple had been given false hope marriage was possible and she would have ended the relationship sooner had she been informed otherwise.\nThe \"Daily Mirror\" on 28 October discussed \"The Times\"'s editorial with the headline \"THIS CRUEL PLAN MUST BE EXPOSED\". Although Margaret and Townsend had read the editorial the newspaper denounced as from \"a dusty world and a forgotten age\", they had earlier made their decision and written an announcement.\nEnd of relationship.\nOn 31 October 1955, Margaret issued a statement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would like it to be known that I have decided not to marry Group Captain Peter Townsend. I have been aware that, subject to my renouncing my rights of succession, it might have been possible for me to contract a civil marriage. But mindful of the Church's teachings that Christian marriage is indissoluble, and conscious of my duty to the Commonwealth, I have resolved to put these considerations before others. I have reached this decision entirely alone, and in doing so I have been strengthened by the unfailing support and devotion of Group Captain Townsend.\n\"Thoroughly drained, thoroughly demoralized\", Margaret later said, she and Townsend wrote the statement together. She refused when Oliver Dawnay, the Queen Mother's private secretary, asked to remove the word \"devotion\". The written statement, signed \"Margaret\", was the first official confirmation of the relationship. Some Britons were disbelieving or angry while others, including clergy, were proud of Margaret for choosing duty and faith; newspapers were evenly divided on the decision. Mass-Observation recorded indifference or criticism of the couple among men, but great interest among women, whether for or against. Kenneth Tynan, John Minton, Ronald Searle, and others signed an open letter from \"the younger generation\". Published in the \"Daily Express\" on 4 November, the letter said that the end of the relationship had exposed The Establishment and \"our national hypocrisy\".\nTownsend recalled that \"We had reached the end of the road, our feelings for one another were unchanged, but they had incurred for us a burden so great that we decided together to lay it down\". The Associated Press said that Margaret's statement was almost \"a rededication of her life to the duties of royalty, making unlikely any marriage for her in the near future\"; the princess may have expected to never marry after the long relationship ended, because most of her eligible male friends were no longer bachelors. Barrymaine agreed that Margaret intended the statement to mean that she would never marry, but wrote that Townsend likely did not accept any such vow to him by the princess, and his subsequent departure from Britain for two years was to not interfere with her life. \"We both had a feeling of unimaginable relief. We were liberated at last from this monstrous problem\", Townsend said.\nAfter resigning from the RAF and travelling around the world for 18 months Townsend returned in March 1958; he and Margaret met several times, but could not avoid the press (\"TOGETHER AGAIN\") or royal disapproval. Townsend again left Britain to write a book about his trip; Barrymaine concluded in 1958 that \"none of the fundamental obstacles to their marriage has been overcome \u2013 or shows any prospects of being overcome\". Townsend said during a 1970 book tour that he and Margaret did not correspond and they had not seen each other since a \"friendly\" 1958 meeting, \"just like I think a lot of people never see their old girl friends\". Their love letters are in the Royal Archives and will not be available to the public until 100 years after Margaret's birth, August 2030. These are unlikely to include Margaret's letters. In 1959, she wrote to Townsend in response to him informing her of his remarriage plans, accusing him of betraying their vow not to marry anyone else and requesting her love letters to him be destroyed. He claimed he complied with her wishes, but kept this letter and an envelope of burned shards of the vow she had sent, eventually destroying these also. He was apparently unaware Margaret had already broken the pact by her engagement to Billy Wallace as it was not revealed until many years later.\nIn October 1993, a friend of Margaret revealed she had met Townsend for what turned out to be the last time before his death in 1995. She had not wanted to attend the reunion they'd both been invited to, in 1992, for fear it might be picked up by the press, so she asked to see him privately instead. Margaret said that he looked \"exactly the same, except he had grey hair\". Guests said he had not really changed, and that they just sat chatting like old friends. They also found him disgruntled and had convinced himself that in agreeing to part, he and Margaret had set a noble example which seemed to have been in vain.\nBilly Wallace later said that \"The thing with Townsend was a girlish nonsense that got out of hand. It was never the big thing on her part that people claim\".\nMarriage to Antony Armstrong-Jones.\nMargaret accepted one of Wallace's many proposals to marry in 1956, but the engagement ended before an official announcement when he admitted to a romance in the Bahamas; \"I had my chance and blew it with my big mouth\", Wallace said. Margaret did not reveal this publicly until an interview and subsequent biography with Nigel Dempster in 1977.\nMargaret met the photographer Antony Armstrong-Jones at a supper party in 1958. They became engaged in October 1959. Armstrong-Jones proposed to Margaret with a ruby engagement ring surrounded by diamonds in the shape of a rosebud. She reportedly accepted his proposal a day after learning from Townsend that he intended to marry a young Belgian woman, Marie-Luce Jamagne, who was half his age and greatly resembled Margaret. Margaret's announcement of her engagement, on 26 February 1960, surprised the press, as she had concealed the romance from reporters.\nMargaret married Armstrong-Jones at Westminster Abbey on 6 May 1960. The ceremony was the first royal wedding to be broadcast on television, and it attracted viewing figures of 300 million worldwide. 2,000 guests were invited for the wedding ceremony. Margaret's wedding dress was designed by Norman Hartnell and worn with the Poltimore tiara. She had eight young bridesmaids, led by her niece, Princess Anne. The Duke of Edinburgh escorted the bride, and the best man was Roger Gilliatt. Archbishop of Canterbury Geoffrey Fisher conducted the marriage service. Following the ceremony, the couple made the traditional appearance on the balcony of Buckingham Palace. The honeymoon was a six-week Caribbean cruise aboard the royal yacht \"Britannia\". As a wedding present, Colin Tennant gave her a plot of land on his private Caribbean island, Mustique. The newlyweds moved into rooms in Kensington Palace.\nIn 1961, Margaret's husband was created Earl of Snowdon. The couple had two children (both born by Caesarean section at Margaret's request): David, born 3 November 1961, and Sarah, born 1 May 1964. The marriage widened Margaret's social circle beyond the court and aristocracy to include show business celebrities and bohemians. At the time, it was thought to reflect the breaking down of British class barriers. The Snowdons experimented with the styles and fashions of the 1960s.\nSeparation and divorce.\nBoth parties in the marriage regularly engaged in extramarital relationships. Lord Snowdon had a series of affairs, including with long-term mistress, Ann Hills, and Lady Jacqueline Rufus-Isaacs, daughter of the 3rd Marquess of Reading. Anne De Courcy's 2008 biography summarises the situation with a quote from a close friend: \"If it moves, he'll have it.\"\nReportedly, Margaret had her first extramarital affair in 1966, with her daughter's godfather Anthony Barton, a Bordeaux wine producer. A year later she had a one-month liaison with Robin Douglas-Home, a nephew of former British prime minister Alec Douglas-Home. Margaret claimed that her relationship with Douglas-Home was platonic, but her letters to him (which were later sold) were intimate. Douglas-Home, who suffered from depression, died by suicide 18 months after the split with Margaret. Claims that she was romantically involved with musician Mick Jagger, actor Peter Sellers, and Australian cricketer Keith Miller are unproven. According to biographer Charlotte Breese, entertainer Leslie Hutchinson had a \"brief liaison\" with Margaret in 1955. A 2009 biography of actor David Niven included assertions, based on information from Niven's widow and a good friend of Niven's, that he had had an affair with Margaret, who was 20 years his junior. In 1975, Margaret was listed among women with whom actor Warren Beatty had had romantic relationships. John Bindon, an actor from Fulham, who had spent time in prison, sold his story to the \"Daily Mirror\", boasting of a close relationship with Margaret.\nBeyond extramarital relationships, the marriage was accompanied by drugs, alcohol, and bizarre behaviour by both parties, such as Snowdon's leaving lists of \"things I hate about you\" for Margaret to find between the pages of books she read. According to biographer Sarah Bradford, one note read: \"You look like a Jewish manicurist and I hate you\".\nBy the early 1970s, the couple had drifted apart. In September 1973, Colin Tennant introduced Margaret to Roddy Llewellyn. Llewellyn was 17 years her junior. In 1974, she invited him as a guest to \"Les Jolies Eaux\", the holiday home she had built on Mustique. It was the first of several visits. Margaret described their relationship as \"a loving friendship\". Once, when Llewellyn left on an impulsive trip to Turkey, Margaret became emotionally distraught and took an overdose of sleeping tablets. \"I was so exhausted because of everything\", she later said, \"that all I wanted to do was sleep\". As she recovered, her ladies-in-waiting kept Snowdon away from her, afraid that seeing him would distress her further.\nIn February 1976, a picture of Margaret and Llewellyn in swimsuits on Mustique was published on the front page of a tabloid, the \"News of the World\". The press portrayed Margaret as a predatory older woman and Llewellyn as her toyboy lover. On 19 March 1976, Margaret and Snowdon publicly acknowledged that their marriage had irretrievably broken down and that they had decided to separate. Some politicians suggested removing Margaret from the civil list. Labour MPs denounced her as \"a royal parasite\" and a \"floosie\". On 24 May 1978, the decree nisi for the couple's divorce was granted. In the same month, Margaret was taken ill, and diagnosed as suffering from gastroenteritis and alcoholic hepatitis, although Warwick denied that she was ever an alcoholic. On 11 July 1978, the divorce was finalised. It was the first divorce of a senior member of the British royal family since that of Princess Victoria Melita of Edinburgh and Ernest Louis, Grand Duke of Hesse in 1901. Allegedly, Margaret did not want a divorce: she tried to make her marriage succeed, but there were \"too many challenges\". Devastated by the divorce, Margaret never remarried. On 15 December 1978, Snowdon married Lucy Lindsay-Hogg, but he and Margaret remained close friends.\nIn 1981, Llewellyn married Tatiana Soskin, whom he had known for 10 years. Margaret remained close friends with them both.\nPublic life.\nAmong Margaret's first official engagements was launching the ocean liner \"Edinburgh Castle\" in Belfast in 1947. Subsequently, Margaret went on multiple tours of various places; in her first major tour she joined her parents and sister for a tour of South Africa in 1947. Her tour aboard \"Britannia\" to the British colonies in the Caribbean in 1955 created a sensation throughout the West Indies, and calypsos were dedicated to her. As colonies of the British Commonwealth of Nations sought nationhood, Margaret represented the Crown at independence ceremonies in Jamaica in 1962 and Tuvalu and Dominica in 1978. Her visit to Tuvalu was cut short by an illness, which may have been viral pneumonia, and she was flown to Australia to recuperate. Other overseas tours included East Africa and Mauritius in 1956, the United States in 1965, Japan in 1969 and 1979, the United States and Canada in 1974, Australia in 1975, the Philippines in 1980, Swaziland in 1981, and China in 1987.\nIn August 1979, Margaret's second cousin once-removed Lord Mountbatten and members of his family were killed by a bomb planted by the Provisional Irish Republican Army. That October, while on a fundraising tour of the United States on behalf of the Royal Opera House, Margaret was seated at a dinner reception in Chicago with columnist Abra Anderson and Mayor Jane Byrne. Margaret told them that the royal family had been moved by the many letters of condolence from Ireland. The following day, Anderson's rival Irv Kupcinet published a claim that Margaret had referred to the Irish as \"pigs\". Margaret, Anderson, and Byrne all issued immediate denials, but the damage was already done. The rest of the tour drew demonstrations, and Margaret's security was doubled in the face of physical threats.\nCharity work.\nMargaret's main interests were welfare charities, music and ballet. She was president of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC), the Royal Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (Children 1st), and Invalid Children's Aid Nationwide (also called 'I CAN'). She was also Grand President of the St John Ambulance Brigade. Margaret was president or patron of numerous organisations, such as the West Indies Olympic Association, the Girl Guides, Northern Ballet Theatre, Birmingham Royal Ballet, Scottish Ballet, Tenovus Cancer Care, the Royal College of Nursing, and the London Lighthouse (an AIDS charity that has since merged with the Terrence Higgins Trust). In her capacity as president of the Royal Ballet, she played a key role in launching a fund for Dame Margot Fonteyn, who was experiencing financial troubles. With the help of the Children's Royal Variety Performance, she also organised yearly fundraisers for NSPCC. At some points Margaret was criticised for not being as active as other members of the royal family.\nIllness and death.\nMargaret's later life was marred by illness and disability. She began smoking cigarettes in her late teens and had continued to smoke heavily for many years thereafter. In the 1970s, she suffered a nervous breakdown and was treated for depression by a psychiatrist from the Priory Clinic. Later on, she suffered from migraines, laryngitis, and bronchitis. In January 1980, she was operated on at the London Clinic to remove a benign skin lesion. On 5 January 1985, she had part of her left lung removed; the operation drew parallels with that of her father 34 years earlier. She quit smoking in 1991 or January 1993, although servants still claimed they smelt cigarette smoke in her apartment and she continued to drink heavily.\nIn January 1993, Margaret was admitted to hospital for pneumonia. She experienced a mild stroke on 23 February 1998 at her holiday home in Mustique. Early the following year, she suffered severe scalds to her feet in a bathroom accident, which affected her mobility in that she required support when walking and sometimes used a wheelchair. She was hospitalised on 10 January 2001, due to loss of appetite and swallowing problems after a further stroke. By March 2001, strokes had left her with partial vision and paralysis on the left side. Margaret's last public appearances were at the 101st birthday celebrations of her mother in August 2001, and the 100th birthday celebration of her aunt Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, that December.\nMargaret died in her sleep at King Edward VII's Hospital, London, at 6:30\u00a0am on 9 February 2002, aged 71, three days after the 50th anniversary of her father's death. She was 11th in line to the throne at the time of her death. The previous day, she had suffered another stroke that was followed by cardiac problems. Prince Charles paid tribute to his aunt in a television broadcast. UK politicians and foreign leaders sent their condolences as well. Following her death, private memorial services were held at St Mary Magdalene Church and Glamis Castle.\nMargaret's coffin, draped in her personal standard, was taken from Kensington Palace to St James's Palace before her funeral. Her funeral was held on 15 February 2002, the 50th anniversary of her father's funeral. In line with her wishes, the ceremony was a private service at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, for family and friends. Unlike most other members of the royal family, she was cremated, at Slough Crematorium. Her lady-in-waiting, Lady Glenconner, stated that Margaret found the Royal Burial Ground at Frogmore \"very gloomy\" and would have wanted to be where her father was buried. Margaret's ashes were temporarily placed in the Royal Vault of St George's Chapel. Following the Queen Mother's death seven weeks later and after her funeral, they were interred in the King George VI Memorial Chapel to rest alongside her parents. A service of thanksgiving and remembrance for Margaret was held at Westminster Abbey on 19 April 2002. A memorial service marking the tenth anniversary of the deaths of both Margaret and the Queen Mother was held on 30 March 2012 at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, attended by Queen Elizabeth II and other members of the royal family.\nLegacy.\nImage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;We thank thee Lord who by thy spirit doth our faith restore\nWhen we with worldly things commune &amp; prayerless close our door\nWe lose our precious gift divine to worship and adore\nThen thou our Saviour, fill our hearts to love thee evermore&lt;/poem&gt;\nPrincess Margaret's epitaph, which she wrote herself, is carved on a memorial stone in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle\nObservers often characterised Margaret as a spoiled snob capable of cutting remarks and hauteur. Critics claimed that she even looked down on her grandmother Queen Mary because Mary was born a princess with the lower \"Serene Highness\" style, whereas Margaret was a \"Royal Highness\" by birth. Their letters, however, provide no indication of friction between them.\nMargaret could also be charming and informal. People who came into contact with her could be perplexed by her swings between frivolity and formality. Marion Crawford wrote in her memoir: \"Impulsive and bright remarks she made became headlines and, taken out of their context, began to produce in the public eye an oddly distorted personality that bore little resemblance to the Margaret we knew.\"\nMargaret's acquaintance Gore Vidal, the American writer, wrote: \"She was far too intelligent for her station in life\". He recalled a conversation with Margaret in which, discussing her public notoriety, she said: \"It was inevitable, when there are two sisters and one is the Queen, who must be the source of honour and all that is good, while the other must be the focus of the most creative malice, the evil sister\".\nAs a child, Margaret enjoyed pony shows, but unlike other family members she did not express interest in hunting, shooting, and fishing in adulthood. She became interested in ballet from a very young age and enjoyed participating in amateur plays. She directed one such play, titled \"The Frogs\", with her aristocratic friends as cast members. Actors and film stars were among the regular visitors to her residence at Kensington Palace. In January 1981, she was the guest for an episode of BBC Radio 4's \"Desert Island Discs\". Her musical choices included \"Sixteen Tons\" by Tennessee Ernie Ford which she said had entertained her in a traffic jam. Her favourite was Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's \"Swan Lake\". In 1984, she appeared as herself in an episode of the radio drama \"The Archers\", becoming the first member of the royal family to take part in a BBC drama.\nMargaret's private life was for many years the subject of intense speculation by media and royalty watchers. Her house on Mustique, designed by her husband's uncle Oliver Messel, a stage designer, was her favourite holiday destination. Allegations of wild parties and drug taking also surfaced in the media.\nMargaret was a devout Anglican her whole life, though \"she had desires that often conflicted with her faith\". At one point, she considered becoming Roman Catholic.\nFollowing Margaret's death, her lady-in-waiting, Lady Glenconner, said that \"[Margaret] was devoted to the Queen and tremendously supportive of her\". Margaret was described by her cousin Lady Elizabeth Shakerley as \"somebody who had a wonderful capacity for giving a lot of people pleasure and she was making a very, very, very good and loyal friend\". Another cousin, Lord Lichfield, said that \"[Margaret] was pretty sad towards the end of her life because it was a life unfulfilled\".\n\"The Independent\" wrote in Townsend's 1995 obituary that \"The immense display of popular sentiment and interest [in the relationship] can now be seen to have constituted a watershed in the nation's attitude towards divorce\". The Archbishop of Canterbury and the Church received much of the popular anger toward the end of the relationship. Randolph Churchill believed that rumours \"that Fisher had intervened to prevent the Princess from marrying Townsend has done incalculable harm to the Church of England\"; a Gallup poll found that 28% agreed, and 59% disagreed, with the Church's refusal to remarry a divorced person while the other spouse was alive. Biographer Warwick suggests that Margaret's most enduring legacy is an accidental one. Perhaps unwittingly, Margaret paved the way for public acceptance of royal divorce. Her life, if not her actions, made the decisions and choices of her sister's children, three of whom divorced, easier than they otherwise would have been.\nEden reportedly told Elizabeth in Balmoral when discussing Margaret and Townsend that, regardless of outcome, the monarchy would be damaged. In 1995, Harold Brooks-Baker was quoted in Townsend's obituary: \"In my opinion, this was the turning point to disaster for the royal family. After Princess Margaret was denied marriage, it backfired and more or less ruined Margaret's life. The Queen decided that from then on, anyone someone in her family wanted to marry would be more or less acceptable. The royal family and the public now feel that they've gone too far in the other direction\".\nFashion and style.\nDuring her lifetime, Margaret was considered a fashion icon. Her fashion earned the nickname 'The Margaret Look'. The princess, dubbed a 'royal rebel', styled herself in contrast to her sister's prim and timeless style, adopting trendy mod accessories, such as brightly coloured headscarves and glamorous sunglasses. Margaret developed a close relationship with fashion designer Christian Dior, wearing his designs throughout her life and becoming one of his most prominent customers. In 1950, he designed a cream gown worn for her 21st birthday, which has been cited as an iconic part of fashion history. Throughout the decade, Margaret was known for wearing floral-print dresses, bold-hued ballgowns and luxurious fabrics, accessorising with diamonds, pearls, and fur stoles. \"British Vogue\" wrote that Margaret's style 'hit her stride' in the mid-60s, where she was photographed alongside celebrities like The Beatles, Frank Sinatra and Sophia Loren. Margaret was also known for her \"magnificent\" hats and headdresses, including a canary feather hat worn on a 1962 Jamaica visit and a peacock feather pillbox hat to the 1973 Royal Ascot. \"Marie Claire\" stated that the princess \"refused to compromise\" on her style later in life, continuing with trends of big sleeves and strapless evening gowns.\nIn April 2007, an exhibition titled \"Princess Line \u2013 The Fashion Legacy of Princess Margaret\" opened at Kensington Palace, showcasing contemporary fashion from British designers such as Vivienne Westwood inspired by Margaret's legacy of style. Christopher Bailey's Spring 2006 collection for Burberry was inspired by Margaret's look from the 1960s.\nFinances.\nIn her lifetime, Margaret's fortune was estimated to be around \u00a320 million, with most of it being inherited from her father. She also inherited pieces of art and antiques from Queen Mary, and Dame Margaret Greville left her \u00a320,000 in 1943. In 1999, her son, Lord Linley, sold his mother's Caribbean residence Les Jolies Eaux for a reported \u00a32.4 million. At the time of her death Margaret received \u00a3219,000 from the civil list. Following her death, she left a \u00a37.6 million estate to her two children, which was cut down to \u00a34.5 million after inheritance tax. In June 2006, much of Margaret's estate was auctioned by Christie's to meet the tax and, in her son's words, \"normal family requirements such as educating her grandchildren\", though some of the items were sold in aid of charities such as the Stroke Association. Reportedly, Elizabeth had made it clear that the proceeds from any item that was given to her sister in an official capacity must be donated to charities. A world record price of \u00a31.24\u00a0million was set by a Faberg\u00e9 clock. The Poltimore Tiara, which she wore for her wedding in 1960, sold for \u00a3926,400. A portrait of Margaret by Pietro Annigoni was purchased back by her son at the price of \u00a3680,000\u2013more than three times the original estimate\u2013once it became apparent that the sale had far exceeded expectations. The sale of her effects totalled \u00a313,658,000.\nIn popular culture.\nActresses who have portrayed Margaret include Lucy Cohu (\"The Queen's Sister\", 2005), Katie McGrath (\"The Queen\", 2009), Ramona Marquez (\"The King's Speech\", 2010), Bel Powley (\"A Royal Night Out\", 2015), Olivia Benjamin (\"Father Brown\", 2023), and Vanessa Kirby, Helena Bonham Carter, and Lesley Manville, who all played different stages of Margaret's life during \"The Crown\", 2016\u20132023. The young Princess Margaret was played by Beau Gadsdon. The 2008 heist film, \"The Bank Job\", revolves around alleged photos of Margaret. A character, \"Pantomime Princess Margaret\", made regular appearances in the BBC's 1970s comedy show \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
