{"id": "39622", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39622", "title": "Shiraz", "text": "City in Fars province, Iran\nShiraz is the fifth-most-populous city of Iran and the capital of Fars province, historically known by the exonym Persia proper. As of the 2016 national census, the population of the city was 1,565,572 people, and its built-up area with Sadra was home to almost 1,800,000 inhabitants. A census in 2021 showed an increase in the city's population to 1,995,500 people. Shiraz is located in southwestern Iran on the (lit.\u2009'dry river') seasonal river. The city has a moderate climate and has been a regional trade center for over a thousand years.\nThe earliest reference to the city, as \"Tirazi\u0161\", is on Elamite clay tablets dated to 2000 BCE. The modern city was founded by the Sasanian dynasty and restored by the Umayyad Caliphate in 693 CE and grew prominent under the successive Iranian Saffarid and Buyid dynasties in the 9th and 10th\u201311th centuries, respectively. In the 13th century, Shiraz became a leading center of the arts and letters, due to the encouragement of its ruler and the presence of many Persian scholars and artists. Two famous poets of Iran, Hafez and Saadi, are from Shiraz, whose tombs are located on the north side of the current city boundaries.\nShiraz is one of the top tourist cities in Iran, visited by people from around the world, and is known as the city of poets, literature, and flowers. It is also considered by many Iranians to be the city of gardens due to the presence of many gardens and fruit trees that can be seen throughout the city, such as Eram Garden. Shiraz has historically had major Jewish and Christian communities. The crafts of Shiraz consist of inlaid mosaic work of triangular design; silverware; pile carpet-weaving and weaving of kilim, called and in the villages and among the tribes. Dominant industries in the city include the production of cement, sugar, fertilizers, textile products, wood products, metalwork, and rugs. Shiraz also has a major oil refinery and is a major centre for Iran's electronic industries: 53 percent of Iran's electronic investment has been centred in Shiraz. The city is home to Iran's first solar powerplant.\nEtymology.\nThe earliest reference to the city is on Elamite clay tablets dated to 2000 BCE, found in June 1970, while digging to make a kiln for a brick factory in the south western corner of the city. The tablets written in ancient Elamite name a city called Tirazi\u0161. Phonetically, this is interpreted as /tira\u010dis/ or /\u0107ira\u010dis/. This name became Old Persian /\u0161ir\u0101ji\u0161/; through regular sound change comes the modern Persian name \"Shir\u0101z\". The name Shiraz also appears on clay sealings found at a 2nd-century CE Sassanid ruin, east of the city. By some of the native writers, the name Shiraz has derived from a son of Tahmuras, the third Sh\u0101h (King) of the world according to Ferdowsi's Sh\u0101hn\u0101ma.\nHistory.\nPre-Islamic era.\nThough, there is no definitive record of its existence prior to the late 7th century CE, few archaeological finds dating from 1933 and beyond indicate that the site or vicinity of Shiraz was likely settled in the pre-Islamic era as early as the 6th century BCE. A number of Achaemenid and Sasanian-era remains have been discovered around the city, including reliefs at Barm-e Delak to the east and Guyim to the northwest, and ruins of Sasanian fortresses at Qasr-e Abu Nasr to the east and Fahandezh. The latter is identified with the fortress of Shahmobad mentioned as being in Shiraz by the 10th-century geographical work, \"Hudud al-'alam\". the Sasanian and early Islamic-era clay seals found at Qasr-e-Abu Nasr mention the name \"Shiraz\" alongside the name of the Sasanian administrative district of the area, Ardashir-Khwarrah. According to the diplomat and academic John Limbert, this indicates that the name \"Shiraz\" is traced back to the Elamite \"Shirrazish\" and that both refer to a settlement that existed at the site of Qasr-e-Abu Nasr.\nInterpretations of what type of settlement ancient Shiraz was vary. According to Berney and Ring, the lack of references to Shiraz in early Persian sources suggests the city could not have been more than a way-station in the plain in which it lies. On the other hand, according to Abdolmajed Arfaee, Achaemenid-era Shiraz must have been one of the most important settlements in the area. He bases this on its frequent appearance in the Persepolis Administrative Archives (84 different tablets) as well as the number of workers present \u2013 in groups as large as 490. Most textual references to Shiraz involve rations for workers; it is never mentioned as a travel destination. Arfaee says that Sasanian Shiraz was relatively insignificant before its re-foundation in the early Islamic period. According to John Limbert, however, Shiraz prospered between the 6th and 8th-centuries CE and was possibly the administrative center for the Shiraz plain until the modern city of Shiraz was founded.\nEarly Islamic era.\nShiraz was founded or restored in 693 by Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Thaqafi, the brother of the Umayyad viceroy of the eastern half of the caliphate, al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf, or the latter's kinsman Muhammad ibn Qasim. The Arab Muslim army had conquered the wider region of Fars, where the site of Shiraz is located, in several expeditions launched from their garrison town of Basra between 640 and 653, and specifically captured the immediate area around Shiraz early on, in 641. This area did not possess any cities, though there were a number of forts which were forced to pay tribute to the Arabs. The Sasanians held firm in Istakhr, their capital in Fars, until the Arabs captured it in a heavy battle in 653, during which the plain of Shiraz had been utilized as an Arab campground. Because of Istakhr's deep association with the Sasanian Empire and the Zoroastrian religion, the Arabs sought to establish in nearby Shiraz a rival cultural and administrative center. Thus, during its initial founding in 693, the city was planned to be much larger than Isfahan. However, the initial ambitions were not realized and Shiraz remained a \"provincial backwater\" in the shadow of Istakhr until at least the late 9th century, according to Limbert. This is partly attributed to the reticence of the largely Zoroastrian population of Fars to inhabit the Islamic Arab city. As the population gradually shifted to Islam from Zoroastrianism and Istakhr concurrently declined, Shiraz grew into the practical center of Fars.\nAccording to Muslim traditional sources, Shiraz was used as a hideout by three of the brothers of the Shia Muslim imam Ali al-Ridha following the latter's death in 817/18 and later by one of the brothers' sons, Ali ibn Hamza ibn Musa, until he was found and executed by the Abbasid authorities in c.\u2009835. As Abbasid authority waned during this period, regional dynasties emerged with considerable autonomy. In the late 9th century, the Iranian Muslim Saffarid dynasty under Ya'qub ibn al-Layth made Shiraz the capital of their autonomous state, which encompassed most of modern-day Iran. In 894, Ya'qub's brother and successor, Amr, founded the city's first congregational mosque, today known as the Atigh Jame' Mosque.\nThe Iranian Buyid dynasty under Imad al-Dawla Ali ibn Buya ousted the Saffarids in 933 and his nephew and successor, 'Adud al-Dawla Fana Khusraw, took over and ruled Fars between 949 and 983, and added Iraq, the seat of the Abbasid Caliphate, to his Shiraz-based domains in 977; the Abbasids thenceforth became a puppet state of the Shiraz-based dynasty. Shiraz developed into the largest and most prosperous city of Fars and an important economic and cultural center of the caliphate. Adud al-Dawla had a large library, a hospital and several mosques, bazaars, caravanserais, palaces and gardens built in the city, while south of it he erected a fortified camp for his troops, known as Kard Fana Khusraw, in 974. One of the congregational mosques built by Adud al-Dawla has survived until the present day. Two Zoroastrian fire temples also existed in Shiraz, catering to the Persians who had not converted to Islam. One of Adud al-Dawla's palaces stretched out for nearly three miles and consisted of 360 rooms.\nUnder the Buyids, Shiraz was divided into twelve quarters and had eight gates. It owed its economic prosperity to the booming agricultural trade of Fars. The city largely consumed the agricultural products of the province, including grapes, linen, wool, cotton, collyrium, rose, violet and palm-blossom water. It was also a market for rug weavers and painters to sell their pricey products, a testament to the residents' wealth. At the time, wine, grains, gold and silver were exported from the Farsi port cities of Siraf and Najairam. Adud al-Dawla patronized scientific, medical and Islamic religious research in Shiraz.\nThe city was spared destruction by the invading Mongols, when its local ruler offered tributes and submission to Genghis Khan. Shiraz was again spared by Tamerlane, when in 1382 the local monarch, Shah Shoja agreed to submit to the invader. In the 13th century, Shiraz became a leading center of the arts and letters, thanks to the encouragement of its ruler and the presence of many Persian scholars and artists. For this reason the city was named by classical geographers \"Dar al-'Elm\", the House of Knowledge. Among the Iranian poets, mystics and philosophers born in Shiraz were the poets Sa'di and Hafiz, the mystic Ruzbehan, and the philosopher Mulla Sadra. Thus Shiraz has been nicknamed \"The Athens of Iran\".\nAs early as the 11th century, several hundred thousand people inhabited Shiraz. In the 14th century Shiraz had sixty thousand inhabitants. During the 16th century it had a population of 200,000 people, which by the mid-18th century had decreased to only 55,000.\nSafavids and later dynasties.\nIn 1504, Shiraz was captured by the forces of Ismail I, the founder of the Safavid Dynasty. Throughout the Safavid Empire (1501\u20131722) Shiraz remained a provincial capital and Emam Qoli Khan, the governor of Fars under Abbas the Great, constructed many palaces and ornate buildings in the same style as those built during the same period in Isfahan, the capital of the Empire. After the fall of the Safavids, Shiraz suffered a period of decline, worsened by the raids of the Afghans and the rebellion of its governor against Nader Shah; the latter sent troops to suppress the revolt. The city was besieged for many months and eventually sacked. At the time of Nader Shah's murder in 1747, most of the historical buildings of the city were damaged or ruined, and its population fell to 50,000, one-quarter of that during the 16th century.\nShiraz soon returned to prosperity under the rule of Karim Khan Zand, who made it his capital in 1762. Employing more than 12,000 workers, he constructed a royal district with a fortress, many administrative buildings, a mosque, and one of the finest covered bazaars in Iran. He had a moat built around the city, constructed an irrigation and drainage system, and rebuilt the city walls. However, Karim Khan's heirs failed to secure his gains. When Agha Mohammad Khan, the founder of the Qajar dynasty, eventually came to power, he wreaked his revenge on Shiraz by destroying the city's fortifications and moving the national capital to Tehran. Although lowered to the rank of a provincial capital, Shiraz maintained a level of prosperity as a result of the continuing importance of the trade route to the Persian Gulf. Its governorship was a royal prerogative throughout the Qajar dynasty. Many of the famous gardens, buildings and residences built during this time contribute to the city's present skyline.\nShiraz is the birthplace of the co-founder of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, the B\u00e1b (Siyyid 'Ali-Muhammad, 1819\u20131850). In this city, on the evening of 22 May 1844, he first declared his mission as the bearer of a new divine revelation. For this reason Shiraz is a holy city for Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, and the city, particularly the house of the B\u00e1b, was identified as a place of pilgrimage. Due to the hostile climate towards Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in Iran, the house has been the target of repeated attacks; the house was destroyed in 1979, to be paved over two years later and made into a public square.\nIn 1910, a pogrom of the Jewish quarter started after false rumours that the Jews had ritually murdered a Muslim girl. In the course of the riots, 12 Jews were murdered and about 50 were injured, and the 6,000 Jews of Shiraz were robbed of all their possessions.\nDuring the Pahlavi dynasty, Shiraz became the center of attention again. Many important landmarks like Tombs of Poets' such as Sa'di and Hafiz, were constructed and presented to the public.\nLacking any great industrial, religious or strategic importance, Shiraz became an administrative center, although its population has nevertheless grown considerably since the Iranian Revolution.\nModern times.\nThe city's municipality and other related institutions have initiated restoration and reconstruction projects.\nSome of the most recent projects have been the complete restoration of the Arg of Karim Khan and of the Vakil Bath, as well as a comprehensive plan for the preservation of the old city quarters. Other noteworthy initiatives include the total renovation of the Qur'an Gate and the mausoleum of the poet Khwaju Kermani, both located in the Allah-u-Akbar Gorge, as well as the restoration and expansion of the mausoleum of the famous Shiraz-born poets Hafiz and Saadi.\nSeveral different construction projects are currently underway that will modernize and develop the city's infrastructure.\nDemographics.\nEthnicity.\nThe majority of the population are Persian. Most of the population of Shiraz are Muslim. Shiraz also was home to a 20,000-strong Jewish community, although most emigrated to the United States and Israel in the latter half of the 20th century. Along with Tehran and Isfahan, Shiraz is one of the handful of Iranian cities with a sizable Jewish population and more than one active synagogue. Shiraz also has a significant Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith population, the largest in the country after Tehran. There are currently two functioning churches in Shiraz, one Armenian and the other Anglican.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAt the time of the 2006 National Census, the city's population was 1,204,882 in 265,637 households. The following census in 2011 counted 1,460,665 people in 416,141 households. The 2016 census measured the population of the city as 1,565,572 people in 477,916 households.\nGeography.\nThe city of Shiraz, the capital of Fars province, is located at 52 degrees 32 minutes east longitude and 29 degrees 36 minutes north latitude, and is 919 kilometers from Tehran. In the first official census of Iran in 1335, the city of Shiraz with a population of 170,659 people was the sixth most populous city in Iran. Shiraz is located in the south of Iran and the northwest of Fars province. It is built in a green plain at the foot of the Zagros Mountains above sea level. Shiraz is south of Tehran.\nA seasonal river, Dry River, flows through the northern part of the city and on into Maharloo Lake. As of 1920, the area had a large forest of oak trees.\nGardens.\nShiraz contains a considerable number of gardens. Due to population growth in the city, many of these gardens may be lost to give way to new developments. Although some measures have been taken by the Municipality to preserve these gardens, many illegal developments still endanger them.\nClimate.\nShiraz's climate has distinct seasons, and is overall classed as a semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BSh\", bordering \"BSk\"). Summers are hot, with a July average high of . Winters are cool, with average low temperatures below freezing in January. Around of rain falls each year, almost entirely in the winter months, though in some cases as much as this has fallen in a single month (as in January 1965 and December 2004), whilst in the year from July 1965 to June 1966 as little as fell. The wettest year has been 1955/1956 with as much as , though since 1959 the highest has been around in each of 1995/1996 and 2004/2005. Due to Shiraz' high elevation and low latitude, the UV index is extremely high during summer which is further exacerbated by the high frequency of sunshine.\nDespite being in a relatively dry climate, extreme weather is not a rare occasion. On 25 March 2019, flash floods from heavy rains has resulted in 19 deaths and over 200 injuries.\nThe highest record temperature was on 3 July 2022 and the lowest record temperature was on 5 January 1973.\nNeighborhoods.\nList of neighborhoods in Shiraz:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nShiraz is the economic center of southern Iran. The second half of the 19th century witnessed certain economic developments that greatly changed the economy of Shiraz. The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 allowed the extensive import into southern Iran of inexpensive European factory-made goods, either directly from Europe or via India. Farmers in unprecedented numbers began planting cash crops such as opium poppy, tobacco, and cotton. Many of these export crops passed through Shiraz on their way to the Persian Gulf. Iranian long-distance merchants from Fars developed marketing networks for these commodities, establishing trading houses in Bombay, Calcutta, Port Said, Istanbul and even Hong Kong.\nShiraz's economic base is in its provincial products, which include grapes, citrus fruits, cotton and rice. Industries such as cement production, sugar, fertilizers, textile products, wood products, metalwork and rugs dominate. Shir\u0101z also has a major oil refinery and is also a major center for Iran's electronic industries. 53% of Iran's electronic investment has been centered in Shiraz.\nThe Shiraz Special Economic Electronic Zone or the SEEZ was established in 2000 with the purpose of boosting manufacturing in electronics and communications.\nShiraz is a major shopping destination in Iran and the Middle East, with more than 25 malls and 10 bazaars.\nThe Persian Gulf Complex, located at the north end of the city, is the largest mall in the world in terms of the number of shops.\nThe city is served by Refah Chain Stores Co., Iran Hyper Star, Isfahan City Center, Shahrvand Chain Stores Inc., and .\nCulture.\nShiraz is known as the city of poets, gardens, wine, nightingales and flowers.\nThe garden is an important part of Iranian culture. There are many old gardens in Shiraz such as the Eram garden and the Afif abad garden. According to some people, Shiraz \"disputes with Xeres [or Jerez] in Spain the honour of being the birthplace of sherry.\" Shirazi wine originates from the city; however, under the current Islamic regime, liquor cannot be consumed except by religious minorities.\nShiraz was the birthplace of the poet Hafiz Shirazi. Shiraz is a center for Iranian culture and has produced a number of famous poets. Saadi, a 12th- and 13th-century poet, was born in Shiraz. He left his native town at a young age for Baghdad to study Arabic literature and Islamic sciences at Al-Nizamiyya of Baghdad. When he reappeared in his native Shiraz, he was an elderly man. Shiraz, under Atabak Abubakr Sa'd ibn Zangy (1231\u20131260) was enjoying an era of relative tranquility. Saadi was not only welcomed to the city but he was highly respected by the ruler and enumerated among the greats of the province. He seems to have spent the rest of his life in Shiraz. A number of scientists also originate from Shiraz. Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi, a 13th-century astronomer, mathematician, physician, physicist and scientist was from Shiraz. In his \"The Limit of Accomplishment concerning Knowledge of the Heavens\", he also discussed the possibility of heliocentrism.\nTourism.\nThe city holds significant importance as a tourism destination in Iran, with its cultural heritage being globally recognized. \nHigher education.\nShiraz is home to a vibrant academic community. The Shiraz University of Medical Sciences was the first university in Shiraz and was founded in 1946. Much older is the august Madrasa-e-Khan, or Khan Theological School, with about 600 students; its tile-covered buildings date from 1627.\nToday Shiraz University is the largest university in the province, and one of Iran's best academic centers. Other major universities in or nearby Shiraz are the Islamic Azad University of Shiraz, Shiraz University of Technology, and Shiraz University of Applied Science and Technology.\nThe Shiraz Regional Library of Science and Technology is a provincial library serving the public. Virtual University of Shiraz is one of the sub colleges of Shiraz University.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nShiraz International Airport, also known as Shiraz Shahid Dastgheib International Airport, serves as the largest airport in southern Iran.\nMetro.\nConstruction of a metro system was started in 2001 by the Shiraz Urban Railway Organization. The plan is to create six lines. The length of the first Line is , the length of the second line will be approximately .\nThe first three lines, when completed, will have 32 stations below ground, six above, and one special station connected to the railway station. The first line was started in October 2014 between Shahid Dastgheib (airport) Metro Station and Ehsan stations.\nBus.\nThe Shiraz and suburbs bus organization was established in 1966. In that year, the company purchased 10 buses from the Iran National Company using both cash and installments. The company had a staff of 10 drivers, 40 assistant drivers, 50 ticket sellers, and 10 repairmen and inspectors. The daily salary of each full-time driver (6 am to 10 pm) was set at 160 rials, while assistant drivers and ticket sellers were set at 83 rials. With the purchased buses, the company launched lines one, two, and three, which were welcomed by the people. Now Shiraz has 71 bus lines.\nRail.\nShiraz is connected with the rest of Iran's railway network. The trains arrive and leave from Shiraz railway station, Iran's largest railway station according to surface area.\nRoads.\nThere are 700,000 cars in the city of Shiraz.\nSports.\nHafezieh Stadium can hold up to 20,000 people and Pars Stadium, which was completed in 2017, can host up to 50,000 spectators.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nShiraz is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39623", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39623", "title": "Syrah", "text": "Dark-skinned grape variety\nSyrah (), also known as Shiraz, is a dark-skinned grape variety grown throughout the world and used primarily to produce red wine. In 1999, Syrah was found to be the offspring of two obscure grapes from southeastern France, Dureza and Mondeuse Blanche. Syrah should not be confused with Petite Sirah, a cross of Syrah with Peloursin dating from 1880.\nThe style and flavor profile of wines made from Syrah are influenced by the climate where the grapes are grown. In moderate climates (such as the northern Rhone Valley and parts of the Walla Walla AVA in Washington State), they tend to produce medium to full-bodied wines with medium-plus to high levels of tannins and notes of blackberry, mint and black pepper.\nIn hot climates (such as Crete, and the Barossa Valley and McLaren Vale regions of Australia), Syrah is more consistently full-bodied with softer tannin, jammier fruit and spice notes of licorice, anise and earthy leather.\nIn many regions the acidity and tannin levels of Syrah allow the wines produced to have favorable aging potential.\nSyrah is used as a single varietal or as a blend. Following several years of strong planting, Syrah was estimated in 2004 to be the world's 7th most grown grape at .\nIt can be found throughout the globe from France to New World wine regions such as: Chile, South Africa, the Hawke's Bay and Waiheke in New Zealand, California and Washington.\nIt can also be found in several Australian wine regions such as the Barossa Valley, Heathcote, Coonawarra, Hunter Valley, Margaret River, Adelaide Hills, Clare Valley and McLaren Vale.\nHistory.\nOrigin.\nSyrah has a long documented history in the Rh\u00f4ne region of southeastern France, but it was not known if it had originated in that region.\nA 1998 study conducted by Carole Meredith's research group in the Department of Viticulture and Enology at University of California, Davis used DNA typing and extensive grape reference material from the viticultural research station in Montpellier, France to conclude that Syrah was the offspring of the grape varieties Dureza (father) and Mondeuse blanche (mother).\nDureza, a dark-skinned grape variety from the Ard\u00e8che region in France, has all but disappeared from the vineyards, and the preservation of such varieties is a speciality of Montpellier. Mondeuse blanche is a white grape variety cultivated in the Savoie region, and is still found in small amounts in that region's vineyards today.\nBoth varieties are somewhat obscure today, and have never achieved anything near Syrah's fame or popularity, and there is no record of them ever having been cultivated at long distances from their present homes. Thus, both of Syrah's parents come from a limited area in southeastern France, close to northern Rh\u00f4ne. Based on these findings, the researchers have concluded Syrah originated from northern Rh\u00f4ne.\nThe DNA typing leaves no room for doubt in this matter, and the numerous other hypotheses of the grape's origin which have been forwarded during the years all completely lack support in the form of documentary evidence or ampelographic investigations, be it by methods of classical botany or DNA.\nInstead, they seem to have been based primarily or solely on the name or synonyms of the variety. Varying orthography for grape names render dubious any name-based evidence of origins. Nevertheless, origins such as Syracuse or the famous Iranian city of Shiraz had been proposed while the genomic studies had yet to be done.\nThe parentage information, however, does not reveal how old the grape variety is, i.e., when the pollination of a Mondeuse blanche vine by Dureza took place, leading to the original Syrah seed plant. In the year 77 CE, Pliny the Elder wrote in his \"Naturalis Historia\" about the wines of Vienne (which today would be called C\u00f4te-R\u00f4tie), where the Allobroges made famous and prized wine from a dark-skinned grape variety that had not existed some 50 years earlier, in Virgil's age.\n Pliny called the vines of this wine \"Allobrogica\", and it has been speculated that it could be today's Syrah. However, the description of the wine would also fit, for example, Dureza, and Pliny's observation that vines of Allobrogica were resistant to cold is not entirely consistent with Syrah.\nThe names Syrah and Shiraz.\nThe grape's many other synonyms are used in various parts of the world, including \"Antourenein noir\", \"Balsamina\", \"Candive\", \"Entournerein\", \"Hignin noir\", \"Marsanne noir\", \"Schiras\", \"Sirac\", \"Syra\", \"Syrac\", \"Serine\", and \"Sereine\".\nLegends of Syrah's origins often connect it with the city of Shiraz in ancient Iran. The former capital of the Persian Empire under the Achaemenid dynasty produced the well-known Shirazi wine, and legends claim the original grape was later brought to the Rh\u00f4ne. At least two significantly different versions of the myth are reported, giving different accounts of how the grape variety is supposed to have travelled, differing up to 1,800 years in dating the event. \nIn one version, the Phocaeans could have brought Syrah to their colony around Marseille, then known as Massilia, an ancient Greek colony (\"apoikia\") on the Mediterranean coast, east of the Rh\u00f4ne, which was founded around 600 BCE by the ancient Greeks. The grape would then later have spread to the northern Rh\u00f4ne, which was never colonized by the Phocaeans. No documentary evidence exists to back up this legend, and it also requires the variety to later vanish from the Marseille region without leaving any trace.\nThe legend connecting Syrah's origins with the city of Shiraz in ancient Iran may, however, be of French origin. James Busby wrote in his \"Journal of a recent visit to the principal vineyards of Spain and France\" an excerpt from the 1826 book \"\u0152nologie Fran\u00e7aise\"; \"according to the tradition of the neighbourhood, the plant [Scyras] was originally brought from Shiraz in Persia, by one of the hermits of the mountain\" called Gaspare de St\u00e9rimberg.\nThere is a connection between the name \"Syrah\" and the Persian word \"\u0633\u06cc\u0627\u0647\" (pronounced \"siah\" or \"syah\", meaning \"black\"). It refers to the origin of this grape, which comes from black grapes and shows connection between the city of Shiraz and this grape. Another legend of the grape variety's origin, based on the name \"Syrah\", is that it was brought from Syracuse by the legions of Roman Emperor Probus sometime after 280 CE. This legend also lacks documentary evidence and is inconsistent with ampelographic findings.\nAnother proposed etymology links it with the Proto-Celtic word *\"serra\" 'billhook', presumably because the billhook was used in pruning.\nThe name \"Shiraz\" has been used primarily in Australia in modern times, where it has long been established as the most grown dark-skinned variety. In Australia, it was also commonly called Hermitage up to the late 1980s, but since that name became a French Protected Designation of Origin, this naming practice caused a problem in some export markets and was dropped. The name \"Scyras\" was used to describe the grape in the earliest Australian documents, and \"Shiraz\" has been speculated (among others by Jancis Robinson) to have come about through the bastardisation of the original word. However, while the names \"Shiraz\" and \"Hermitage\" gradually replaced \"Scyras\" in Australia from the mid-19th century, the spelling \"Shiraz\" has also been documented in British sources back to at least the 1830s. So while the name or spelling \"Shiraz\" may be an effect of the English language on a French name, there is no evidence that it actually originated in Australia, although it was definitely the Australian usage and the Australian wines that made the use of this name popular.\nRise to fame.\nThe wines that made Syrah famous were those from Hermitage, the hill above the town Tain-l'Hermitage in northern Rh\u00f4ne, where an hermitage (chapel) was built on the top, and where De St\u00e9rimberg is supposed to have settled as a hermit after his crusades. Hermitage wines have for centuries had a reputation for being powerful and excellent. While Hermitage was quite famous in the 18th and 19th centuries, and attracted interest from foreign oenophiles, such as Bordeaux enthusiast Thomas Jefferson, it lost ground and foreign attention in the first half of the 20th century.\nIn the 18th and the first half of the 19th centuries, most Hermitage wine that left France did so as a blending component in Bordeaux wines. In an era when \"clarets\" were less powerful than today, and before appellation rules, red wines from warmer regions would be used for improvement (or adulteration, depending on the point of view) of Bordeaux wines. While Spanish and Algerian wines are also known to have been used for this purpose, top Bordeaux ch\u00e2teaux would use Hermitage to improve their wines, especially in weaker vintages.\nArrival in Australia.\nIn 1831, the Scotsman James Busby, often called \"the Father of Australian viticulture\", made a trip back to Europe to collect cuttings from vines (primarily from France and Spain) for introduction to Australia. One of the varieties collected by him was Syrah, although Busby used the two spellings \"Scyras\" and \"Ciras\". The cuttings were planted in the Royal Botanic Garden, and in Hunter Valley, and in 1839 brought from Sydney to South Australia. By the 1860s, Syrah was established as an important variety in Australia.\nModern history.\nSyrah continues to be the main grape of the northern Rh\u00f4ne and is associated with classic wines such as Hermitage, Cornas and C\u00f4te-R\u00f4tie. In the southern Rh\u00f4ne, it is used as a blending grape in such wines as Ch\u00e2teauneuf-du-Pape, Gigondas and C\u00f4tes du Rh\u00f4ne, where Grenache usually makes up the bulk of the blend. Although its best incarnations will age for decades, less-extracted styles may be enjoyed young for their lively red and blueberry characters and smooth tannin structure. Syrah has been widely used as a blending grape in the red wines of many countries due to its fleshy fruit mid-palate, balancing the weaknesses of other varieties and resulting in a \"complete\" wine.\nFrom the 1970s and even more from the 1990s, Syrah has enjoyed increased popularity, and plantings of the variety have expanded significantly in both old and new locations. In the early 2000s, it broke into the top 10 of varieties planted worldwide for the first time.\nShiraz wines.\nThe name \"Shiraz\", from Shiraz in Iran, was historically applied to a wine unrelated to contemporary Shiraz wines and was made from a grape or grapes entirely different from the Syrah that has been proven to originate in southeastern France.\nSmaller amounts of Syrah are also used in the production of other wine styles, such as ros\u00e9 wine, fortified wine in Port wine style, and sparkling red wine. While Australian sparkling Shiraz traditionally have had some sweetness, a number of Australian winemakers also make a full-bodied sparkling dry Shiraz, which contains the complexity and sometimes earthy notes that are normally found in still wine.\nDue to their concentrated flavours and high tannin content, many premium Syrah wines are at their best after some considerable bottle aging. In exceptional cases, this may be 15 years or longer.\nSyrah has one of the highest recommended wine serving temperatures at 18\u00a0\u00b0C (65\u00a0\u00b0F).\nTaste and flavours.\nWines made from Syrah are often powerfully flavoured and full-bodied. The variety produces wines with a wide range of flavor notes, depending on the climate and soils where it is grown, as well as other viticultural practices chosen. Aroma characters can range from violets to berries (usually dark as opposed to red), chocolate, and black pepper. No one aroma can be called typical though blackberry, coffee and pepper are often noticed. With time in the bottle these primary notes are moderated and then supplemented with earthy or savory tertiary notes such as leather and truffle. Secondary flavor and aroma notes are those associated with several things, generally winemakers' practices (such as oak barrel and yeast treatment).\nC13-Norisoprenoids such as 7,8-dihydroionone derivatives, such as megastigmane-3,9-diol and 3-oxo-7,8-dihydro-\u03b1-ionol, are found in Shiraz leaves.\nSyrah or Shiraz on labels.\nThe Syrah-dominated appellations (AOCs) of northern Rh\u00f4ne have, like most other French appellations and regions, no tradition of varietal labeling of their wines. Indeed, such practices are generally disallowed under AOC rules, and only the AOC name (such as Cote-Rotie, Crozes-Hermitage or Hermitage) appears on the label. Varietal labeling of Syrah/Shiraz wines is therefore a practice that has emerged in the New World, primarily in Australia.\nTo confuse matters, in northern Rh\u00f4ne, different clones of genuine Syrah are referred to as \"Petite Syrah\" (small Syrah) or \"Gros Syrah\" (large Syrah) depending on the size of their berries, with \"Petite Syrah\" being considered the superior version, giving wines higher in phenolics.\nAs a general rule, most Australian and South African wines are labeled \"Shiraz\", and most European wines (from such regions where varietal labeling is practiced) are labeled \"Syrah\". In other countries, practices vary and winemakers (or wine marketers) sometimes choose either \"Syrah\" or \"Shiraz\" to signify a stylistic difference in the wine they have made. \"Syrah\"-labelled wines are sometimes thought to be more similar to classic Northern Rh\u00f4ne reds; presumably more elegant, tannic, smoke-flavoured and restrained with respect to their fruit component. \"Shiraz\"-labelled wines, on the other hand, would then be more similar to archetypical Australian or other New World examples, presumably made from riper berries, more fruit-driven, higher in alcohol, less obviously tannic, peppery rather than smokey, usually more easily approached when young, and possibly slightly sweetish in impression. It must, however, be realized that this rule of thumb is unevenly applied.\nSyrah in different countries.\nSyrah is a variety that during the last few decades has been imported for cultivation in several countries. It is primarily grown in warmer regions. Worldwide plantations of Syrah have increased considerably in the late 1990s and early 2000s, and both \"Syrah\"-labelled and \"Shiraz\"-labelled wines are on the increase.\nIt is grown in many wine producing regions around the world, with concentrations in Australia, The Rhone Valley in France, and the US. It is often used as a blending grape in Spain and Italy as well. It is also planted in Portugal, which favor making varietal Syrah wine, and not only blending with other types.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, Syrah is grown in Tuscany (i.e. Cortona DOC), Lazio (Pontine Agro), and Apulia (Syrah Tarantino IGT). Also a DOC Sirah Piedmont exists. The region though which has made one of the best uses of Syrah, by blending it with Nero d'Avola grapes, is Sicily.\nFrance.\nSyrah, as it is known in France, is grown throughout the Rh\u00f4ne valley. The wines that are made from it vary greatly, even over small changes in the location of the vines. The differences in the soil quality as well as the changes in the slope of the terrain tend to produce different styles of wine. Ranging from the mineral and tannic nature of Hermitage, to fruity and perfumed in the case of C\u00f4te-R\u00f4tie.\nSyrah is also a key component to many blends. It may be used to add structure and color to Grenache in southern Rh\u00f4ne blends, including C\u00f4tes-du-Rh\u00f4ne and Ch\u00e2teauneuf-du-Pape. Syrah is also the only red grape used in the wines of the northern Rh\u00f4ne.\nIn 1968, there existed only of Syrah vineyards in France, primarily in the traditional appellations of northern Rh\u00f4ne, which at that time had not received much attention in the wine world for several decades, and the vineyards of which were not planted to full capacity. After the wines of northern Rh\u00f4ne were \"rediscovered\" by wine writers in the 1970s, plantings expanded considerably. This trend received an extra boost in the 1980s and 1990s, when influential wine writer Robert M. Parker Jr. awarded high scores, up to the \"perfect\" score of 100 points, to wines of some Rh\u00f4ne producers. The popularity of Australian Shiraz on the export market may also have played a role. In 1988, total French plantings stood at , and the 1999 viticultural survey found of Syrah vineyards. France thus has the world's largest plantations of Syrah.\nWhile previously unused parts of the northern Rh\u00f4ne vineyards have been planted with Syrah as part of the expansion, the major part of the new French Syrah plantations are located in southern Rh\u00f4ne (which covers a much larger vineyard area than the northern part) and Languedoc-Roussillon. While southern Rh\u00f4ne produces relatively few wines where Syrah is in the majority, the proportion of Syrah in the blended wines of this region has been on the rise. Languedoc-Roussillon uses Syrah to produce both Southern Rh\u00f4ne-like blends with Grenache, Australian-style blends with Cabernet Sauvignon, and varietal Syrah.\nSyrah vines in France often suffer from a form of dieback characterised by the leaves turning red in late summer, deep cracks developing in the stem above the graft, and the premature death of the vine. The syndrome was first observed in 1990s in the Gard and H\u00e9rault departments of Southern of France, but is now widespread. It is believed to be caused by mismatch between the rootstock and scion rather than an infection by a fungus or a virus.\nSpain.\nIn Spain there was an increase in the area cultivated in Syrah grapes from in 1990 to in 2009. It is grown primarily in Castilla-La Mancha, with lesser amounts in Aragon and Catalonia. As of 2015 it was the seventh most grown red grape in Spain, with accounting for 4% of the red grape total.\nSwitzerland.\nThe Syrah grape was introduced into Switzerland in 1926 and in 2009 was the 6th most common red wine grape in Switzerland (181 hectares). Mostly grown in Valais, along the upper Rh\u00f4ne valley above Lake Geneva, it produces \"unexpectedly concentrated wine from mature vines\".\nArgentina.\nSyrah plantations in Argentina increased from less than in 1990 to in 2002. Syrah has occasionally been used as a blending component with Argentina's signature dark-skinned grape Malbec to provide an \"Argentinian take\" on the Australian Cabernet-Shiraz blend.\nAustralia.\nThe Syrah grape was introduced into Australia in 1832 by James Busby, an immigrant who brought vine clippings from Europe with him, and it is almost invariably called \"Shiraz\". Today it is Australia's most popular red grape, but has not always been in such favour; in the 1970s, white wine was so popular that growers were ripping out unprofitable Shiraz and Grenache vineyards, even those with old vines. In the Barossa Valley, the world's oldest continually producing commercial vineyard is believed to be the Shiraz vines at Turkey Flat in Tanunda that were originally planted in 1847.\nMany factors, including the success of brands like Lindemans (part of Treasury Wine Estates) and Jacob's Creek in the UK, as well as Rosemount in the US and UK, were responsible for a dramatic expansion of plantings during the 1980s and 1990s; a similar trajectory occurred in California. However, the biggest factor in this expansion during the 1990s was a steady increase in exports due to the historically low value of the Australian dollar.\nIn the 2005\u20132006 growing season, total Shiraz plantations in Australia stood at , of which were old enough to be productive. These vines yielded a total of 422,430 tonnes of Shiraz grapes for wine production. This made Shiraz the most planted variety in Australia and Australia the world's second largest Syrah/Shiraz grower, after France.\nVictorian regions include Heathcote, roughly 1.5 hours north of Melbourne. Cooler climate regions such as Western Australia's Margaret River produce Shiraz with marginally less alcohol content and often in a more traditional French style.\nA well-known example of the Shiraz grape in Australian viticulture is the Penfolds \"Grange\". This wine was created by winemaker Max Schubert in 1951 and has a reputation for aging well. The Penfolds Grange is predominantly Shiraz but often includes a small quantity of Cabernet Sauvignon. It is usually a multi-regional blend of quality South Australian Shiraz, with the Barossa Valley playing an important role, and matured in new American Oak. Other well-known Australian Shiraz wines include the Henschke \"Hill of Grace\" and the Penfolds \"RWT\".\nRecently, Australian Shiraz producers have started to add up to 4% Viognier to their Shiraz to add apricot tones to the wine's nose and palate. With such a small percentage added, the producer wasn't obliged to declare the blend on the label. In the past 5 years, however, it's becoming increasingly fashionable to label the wine \"Shiraz Viognier\" as Viognier gains consumer acceptance in the marketplace. The practise of blending Viognier with Syrah has actually been common for years in the Northern Rh\u00f4ne Valley region of Cote-Rotie.\n\"Shiraz\" is also the S in \"GSM\" (Grenache-Shiraz-Mourv\u00e8dre), which is common Australian designation for a Ch\u00e2teneuf-du-Pape-like blend.\nSouth Africa.\nSouth African plantations have expanded significantly, from 1% of the vineyard area in 1995 to 9.7% in 2007 making up a total area under cultivation of . In South Africa, the variety is predominately known as \"Shiraz\", but the designation \"Syrah\" is used for \"Rh\u00f4ne-style\" wines. Some see this variety as the \"great hope\" for South African wines.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, wine produced from the grape is normally called by its French name, \"Syrah\". However, in cases where winemakers choose to follow a New World style, similar to Penfolds Grange, they may choose to label their wines as \"Shiraz\". Under American wine laws, either name may appear on the label. Syrah first appeared as a wine grape in California in the 1970s, where it was planted by a group of viticulturists who called themselves \"Rhone rangers\". Although most plantings of the grape are in California, there are increasing amounts of it being grown in Washington state. Syrah makes up a significant percentage of wine produced in several Washington AVAs such as the Naches Heights AVA and the Walla Walla AVA. Syrah is increasingly being grown and produced in Oregon. Syrah is also found in small regions in Ohio.\nCalifornia Syrahs, much like those in France, vary a great deal based on the climate and \"terroir\" that they inhabit. In exceptionally warm regions, such as parts of Napa, the wine is often blended with other Rh\u00f4ne varieties. Other appellations, primarily mountainous ones, tend to produce varietal-based wines that can stand on their own. Syrah was introduced into Washington state in 1986 by Red Willow Vineyard through their partnership with Woodinville, Washington-based Columbia Winery and Master of Wine David Lake. Expanding at a significant rate, it is used to produce single-varietial wines as well as being blended with grapes such as Grenache, Mourv\u00e8dre, Cinsault and Viognier.\nChile.\nAround 2005, there were of Syrah in Chile.\nDurif.\nDurif, or Petite Sirah, is a descendant of Syrah and Peloursin. It was propagated by and named after Dr. Francois Durif. Durif is a cross breed between the lesser known Peloursin and Syrah. Regions such as Rutherglen have achieved international regard for their Durif. This varietal is similar to Shiraz but is even more full-bodied and tannic because of the smaller, thicker-skinned grapes used. Petite Sirah is widely planted in California, where it is popular as a varietal (for example, by Bogle Vineyards), and especially blended with Zinfandel, which results in a rich, bold and fruity wine.\nSynonyms.\nSynonyms for Syrah include Antourenein noir, Candive, Entournerein, Hermitage, Hignin noir, Marsanne noir, Shiraz, Sira, Sirac, Sirah, Syra, and Syrac.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39626", "revid": "1096239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39626", "title": "Symbiosis", "text": "Close, long-term biological interaction between distinct organisms (usually species)\nSymbiosis is any close and long-term biological interaction between two organisms of different species. In 1879, Heinrich Anton de Bary defined symbiosis as \"the living together of unlike organisms\". The term is sometimes more exclusively used in a restricted, mutualistic sense, where both symbionts contribute to each other's subsistence. This means that they benefit each other in some way.\nSymbiosis is diverse and can be classified in multiple ways. It can be \"obligate\", meaning that one or both of the organisms depend on each other for survival, or \"facultative\", meaning that they can subsist independently. When one organism lives on the surface of another, such as head lice on humans, it is called ectosymbiosis; when one partner lives inside the tissues of another, such as \"Symbiodinium\" within coral, it is termed endosymbiosis. Where the interaction reduces both parties' fitness, it is called competition; where just one party's fitness is reduced, it is called amensalism. Where one benefits but the other is largely unaffected, this is termed commensalism. Where one benefits at the other's expense, it is called parasitism. Finally, where both parties benefit, the relationship is described as \nmutualistic.\nSymbiosis has often driven the evolution of species; mutualism has enabled species for example to colonise new environments. Symbiogenesis is thought to have helped to create the eukaryotes as bacteria were incorporated as mitochondria and chloroplasts within cells. Major co-evolutionary relationships include mycorrhiza, the pollination of flowers by insects, the protection of acacia trees by ants, seed dispersal by animals, nitrogen fixation by bacteria in the root nodules of legumes, and the mutualistic partnership of algae and fungi to form lichens.\nDefinition.\nThe term \"symbiosis\" is derived from Ancient Greek : living with, companionship &lt; : together; and \"b\u00ed\u014dsis\": living.\nThe definition of \"symbiosis\" was a matter of debate for 130 years. In 1877, Albert Bernhard Frank used the term \"symbiosis\" to describe the mutualistic relationship found in lichens. In 1878, the German mycologist Heinrich Anton de Bary defined it more broadly as \"the living together of unlike organisms\". Over time, the definition has varied among scientists. Some have argued that it should refer only to persistent mutualisms, while others have proposed that it should include all long-term biological interactions (i.e., mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism), but exclude brief interactions such as predation.\nIn 1949, Edward Haskell proposed an integrative approach with a classification of \"co-actions\", which was later adopted by biologists as \"interactions\".\nTypes.\nObligate versus facultative.\nRelationships can be obligate, meaning that one or both of the symbionts entirely depend on each other for survival. For example, in lichens, which consist of fungal and photosynthetic symbionts, the fungal partners cannot live on their own. The algal or cyanobacterial symbionts (e.g. \"Trentepohlia\") can usually survive alone, so their involvement is considered facultative (optional) rather than obligate. When one of the participants in a symbiotic relationship is capable of photosynthesis, as with lichens, it is called photosymbiosis.\nEcto- and endosymbiosis.\nEctosymbiosis is a symbiotic relationship where the symbiont lives on the surface of the host, including its digestive tract or exocrine gland ducts. Examples include ectoparasites such as lice, and commensals such as barnacles on baleen whales.\nContrastingly, endosymbiosis is a symbiotic relationship in which one symbiont lives within the tissues of the other, either within or between its cells. Examples include diverse microbiomes: rhizobia, nitrogen-fixing bacteria that live in root nodules on legume roots; actinomycetes, nitrogen-fixing bacteria such as \"Frankia\", which live in alder root nodules; single-celled algae inside reef-building corals; and bacterial endosymbionts that provide essential nutrients to about 10%\u201315% of insects. Endosymbionts gain nutrients from their hosts, sometimes modifying the host's genome in their favour. Endosymbionts adapt to the environment inside their hosts. They often have a much reduced genome, losing protein-coding gene for metabolism and DNA repair. When insects' endosymbiotic bacteria are passed on to the insects' offspring, populations of intracellular bacteria are reduced, as compared to free-living bacteria. The endosymbiotic bacteria are unable to reinstate their wild type phenotype via a recombination process called \"Muller's ratchet\". This, together with reduced population, leads to an accretion of deleterious mutations in the non-essential genes of the intracellular bacteria.\nCompetition.\nCompetition is an interaction in which one organism's fitness is reduced by another's presence. Competition can also occur between cells within the same organism, which is why older cells are usually eliminated from tissues. This allows the organism to stay as healthy as possible by constantly eliminating old cells and making new ones. Limited supply of at least one resource (such as food, water, and territory) used by both usually facilitates this type of interaction, although the competition can also be for other resources.\nAmensalism.\nAmensalism is a non-mutualistic, asymmetric interaction where one species is harmed or killed by the other, and one is unaffected by the other. There are two types of amensalism, competition and antagonism (or antibiosis). Competition is where a larger or stronger organism deprives a smaller or weaker one of a resource. Antagonism occurs when one organism is damaged or killed by another through a chemical secretion. An example of competition is a sapling growing under the shadow of a mature tree. The mature tree can rob the sapling of necessary sunlight and, if the mature tree is very large, it can take up rainwater and deplete soil nutrients. Throughout the process, the mature tree is unaffected by the sapling. Indeed, if the sapling dies, the mature tree gains nutrients from the decaying sapling. An example of antagonism is \"Juglans nigra\" (black walnut), secreting juglone, a substance which destroys many herbaceous plants within its root zone.\nAn example is the relationship between the Spanish ibex and weevils of the genus \"Timarcha\" which feed upon the same type of shrub. Whilst the presence of the weevil has almost no influence on food availability, the presence of ibex has a detrimental effect on weevil numbers, as they consume significant quantities of plant matter and incidentally ingest the weevils upon it.\nCommensalism.\nCommensalism describes a relationship between two living organisms where one benefits and the other is not significantly harmed or helped. It is derived from the English word commensal, used of human social interaction. It derives from a medieval Latin word meaning sharing food, formed from \"com-\" (with) and \"mensa\" (table).\nCommensal relationships may involve one organism using another for transportation (phoresy) or for housing (inquilinism), or it may also involve one organism using something another created, after its death (metabiosis). Examples of metabiosis are hermit crabs using gastropod shells to protect their bodies, and spiders building their webs on plants.\nMutualism.\nMutualism or interspecies reciprocal altruism is a long-term relationship between individuals of different species where both individuals benefit. Mutualistic relationships may be either obligate for both species, obligate for one but facultative for the other, or facultative for both.\nMany herbivores have mutualistic gut flora to help them digest plant matter, which is more difficult to digest than animal prey. This gut flora comprises cellulose-digesting protozoans or bacteria living in the herbivores' intestines. Coral reefs result from mutualism between coral organisms and various algae living inside them. Most land plants and land ecosystems rely on mutualism between the plants, which fix carbon from the air, and mycorrhyzal fungi, which help in extracting water and minerals from the ground.\nAn example of mutualism is the relationship between the ocellaris clownfish that dwell among the tentacles of Riterri sea anemones. The territorial fish protects the anemone from anemone-eating fish, and in turn, the anemone stinging tentacles protect the clownfish from its predators. A special mucus on the clownfish protects it from the stinging tentacles.\nA further example is the goby, a fish which sometimes lives together with a shrimp. The shrimp digs and cleans up a burrow in the sand in which both the shrimp and the goby fish live. The shrimp is almost blind, leaving it vulnerable to predators when outside its burrow. In case of danger, the goby touches the shrimp with its tail to warn it, and both quickly retreat into the burrow. Different species of gobies (\"Elacatinus spp.\") also clean up ectoparasites in other fish, possibly another kind of mutualism.\nAn example of obligate mutualism is the relationship between the siboglinid tube worms and bacteria in hydrothermal vents and cold seeps. The worm has no digestive tract and is therefore wholly reliant on its internal symbionts for nutrition. The bacteria oxidize either hydrogen sulfide or methane, which the host supplies to them.\nMutualism improves both organisms' competitive ability, enabling them to outperform members of the same species that lack the symbiont.\nA facultative symbiosis is seen in encrusting bryozoans and hermit crabs. The bryozoan colony (\"Acanthodesia commensale\") develops a cirumrotatory growth and offers the crab (\"Pseudopagurus granulimanus\") a helicospiral-tubular extension of its living chamber that initially was situated within a gastropod shell.\nParasitism.\nIn a parasitic relationship, the parasite benefits while the host is harmed. Parasitism takes many forms, from endoparasites that live within the host's body to ectoparasites and parasitic castrators that live on its surface and micropredators like mosquitoes that visit intermittently. Parasitism is a successful and common mode of life. About 40% of all animal species are parasites, and the average mammal species is host to 4 nematodes, 2 cestodes, and 2 trematodes.\nMimicry.\nMimicry is a form of symbiosis in which a species adopts distinct characteristics of another species to alter its relationship dynamic with the species being mimicked, to its own advantage. Among the many types of mimicry are Batesian and M\u00fcllerian, the first involving one-sided exploitation, the second providing mutual benefit. Batesian mimicry is an exploitative three-party interaction where one species, the mimic, has evolved to mimic another, the model, to deceive a third, the dupe. In terms of signalling theory, the mimic and model have evolved to send a signal; the dupe has evolved to receive it from the model. This is to the advantage of the mimic but to the detriment of both the model, whose protective signals are effectively weakened, and the dupe, which is deprived of an edible prey. For example, a wasp is a strongly defended model, which signals with its conspicuous black and yellow coloration that it is an unprofitable prey to predators such as birds which hunt by sight; many hoverflies are Batesian mimics of wasps, and any bird that avoids these hoverflies is a dupe. In contrast, M\u00fcllerian mimicry is mutually beneficial as all participants are both models and mimics. For example, different species of bumblebee mimic each other, with similar warning coloration in combinations of black, white, red, and yellow, and all of them benefit from the relationship.\nCleaning symbiosis.\nCleaning symbiosis is an association between individuals of two species, where one (the cleaner) removes and eats parasites and other materials from the surface of the other (the client). It is putatively mutually beneficial, but biologists have long debated whether it is mutual selfishness, or simply exploitative. Cleaning symbiosis is well known among marine fish, where some small species of cleaner fish \u2013 notably wrasses, but also species in other genera \u2013 are specialized to feed almost exclusively by cleaning larger fish and other marine animals. Typically, the host visits a specific 'cleaning station' and adopts a stationary posture while cleaners remove parasites.\nCleaner fish play an essential role in the reduction of parasitism on marine animals. Some shark species participate in cleaning symbiosis, where cleaner fish remove ectoparasites from the body of the shark. Sharks display specific behaviours in interactions with cleaner wrasse (\"Labroides dimidiatus\"). For example, the lemon shark remains passive and the wrasse swims to it. It scans the shark's body, inspecting the gills, labial regions, and skin. When it enters the shark's mouth, the shark ceases breathing for the inspection. When the shark begins to close its mouth, the wrasse leaves.\nRole in evolution.\nSymbiosis is increasingly recognized as an important selective force behind evolution; many species have a long history of interdependent co-evolution.\nAlthough symbiosis was once discounted as an anecdotal evolutionary phenomenon, evidence is now overwhelming that obligate or facultative associations among microorganisms and between microorganisms and multicellular hosts had crucial consequences in many landmark events in evolution and in the generation of phenotypic diversity and complex phenotypes able to colonise new environments.\nMutualistic symbiosis can sometimes evolve from parasitism or commensalism, Fungi's relationship to plants in the form of mycelium evolved from parasitism and commensalism. Under certain conditions, species of fungi previously in a state of mutualism can turn parasitic on weak or dying plants. Likewise the symbiotic relationship of clown fish and sea anemones emerged from a commensalist relationship.\nHologenome development and evolution.\nEvolution originated from changes in development where variations within species are selected for or against because of the symbionts involved. The hologenome theory relates to the holobiont and symbionts genome together as a whole. Microbes live everywhere in and on every multicellular organism. Many organisms rely on their symbionts in order to develop properly, which is known as co-development. In cases of co-development, the symbionts send signals to their host which determine developmental processes. Co-development is commonly seen in both arthropods and vertebrates.\nSymbiogenesis.\nOne hypothesis for the origin of the nucleus in eukaryotes is that it developed from a symbiogenesis between bacteria and archaea. It is hypothesized that the symbiosis originated when ancient archaea, similar to modern methanogenic archaea, invaded and lived within bacteria similar to modern myxobacteria, eventually forming the early nucleus. This theory is analogous to the accepted theory for the origin of eukaryotic mitochondria and chloroplasts, which are thought to have developed from a similar endosymbiotic relationship between proto-eukaryotes and bacteria. Evidence for this includes the fact that mitochondria and chloroplasts divide independently of the cell, and that these organelles have their own genome.\nThe biologist Lynn Margulis, famous for her work on endosymbiosis, contended that symbiosis is a major driving force behind evolution. She considered Darwin's notion of evolution, driven by competition, to be incomplete and claimed that evolution is strongly based on co-operation, interaction, and mutual dependence among organisms. According to Margulis and her son Dorion Sagan, \"Life did not take over the globe by combat, but by networking.\"\nMajor examples of co-evolutionary relationships.\nMycorrhiza.\nAbout 80% of vascular plants worldwide form symbiotic relationships with fungi, in particular in arbuscular mycorrhizas. The mutualism evolved due to the limitation of plant root capacity for absorbing soil nutrients, especially phosphate and nitrogen, which are crucial for plant growth.\nPollination.\nFlowering plants and the animals that pollinate them have co-evolved. Many plants that are pollinated by insects (in entomophily), bats, or birds (in ornithophily) have highly specialized flowers modified to promote pollination by a specific pollinator that is correspondingly adapted. The first flowering plants in the fossil record had relatively simple flowers. Adaptive speciation quickly gave rise to many diverse groups of plants, and, at the same time, corresponding speciation occurred in certain insect groups. Some groups of plants developed nectar and large sticky pollen, while insects evolved more specialized morphologies to access and collect these rich food sources. In some taxa of plants and insects, the relationship has become dependent, where the plant species can only be pollinated by one species of insect.\nAcacia ants and acacias.\nThe acacia ant (\"Pseudomyrmex ferruginea\") is an obligate plant ant that protects several species of \"Acacia\" (\"Vachellia\") from preying insects and from other plants competing for sunlight, and the tree provides nourishment and shelter for the ant and its larvae.\nSeed dispersal.\nSeed dispersal is the movement, spread or transport of seeds away from the parent plant. Plants have limited mobility and rely upon a variety of dispersal vectors to transport their propagules, including both abiotic vectors such as the wind and living (biotic) vectors like birds. In order to attract animals, these plants evolved a set of morphological characters such as fruit colour, mass, and persistence correlated to particular seed dispersal agents. For example, plants may evolve conspicuous fruit colours to attract avian frugivores, and birds may learn to associate such colours with a food resource.\nNitrogen fixation in legumes.\nRhizobia are bacteria that fix nitrogen inside the root nodules of legumes such as beans and clover. To express genes for nitrogen fixation, rhizobia require a plant host; they cannot independently fix nitrogen. \nRhizobia infect the legume's roots and produce nodules where they fix nitrogen gas (N2) from the atmosphere, turning it into a more readily useful form of nitrogen. From here, the nitrogen is exported and used for growth in the legume.\nLichens.\nA lichen is a hybrid colony of algae or cyanobacteria living symbiotically among the hyphal filaments of multiple species of fungi and other micro-organisms embedded in the outer layer or cortex, in a mutualistic relationship. Lichens are able to flourish in harsh environments such as bare rocks.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39628", "revid": "4071608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39628", "title": "Cymbeline", "text": "Play by William Shakespeare\nCymbeline (), also known as The Tragedie of Cymbeline or Cymbeline, King of Britain, is a play by William Shakespeare set in Ancient Britain (c.\u200910\u201314 AD) and based on legends that formed part of the Matter of Britain concerning the early historical Celtic British King Cunobeline. Although it is listed as a tragedy in the First Folio, modern critics often classify \"Cymbeline\" as a romance or even a comedy. Like \"Othello\" and \"The Winter's Tale\", it deals with the themes of innocence and jealousy. While the precise date of composition remains unknown, the play was certainly produced as early as 1611.\nSummary.\n Cymbeline is the Roman Empire's vassal king of Britain. Twenty years earlier, Cymbeline's two infant sons, Guiderius and Arvirargus, were kidnapped by an exiled traitor named Belarius. Cymbeline discovers his daughter, Imogen (or Innogen), has secretly married her lover Posthumus Leonatus, a member of Cymbeline's court. The lovers have exchanged jewellery as tokens: Imogen with a bracelet, and Posthumus with a ring. Cymbeline dismisses the marriage and banishes Posthumus since Imogen\u2014as Cymbeline's only remaining child\u2014must produce a fully royal-blooded heir to succeed to the British throne. In the meantime, Cymbeline's Queen is conspiring to have Cloten (her cloddish and arrogant son by an earlier marriage) marry Imogen to secure her bloodline. The Queen is also plotting to murder both Imogen and Cymbeline, procuring what she believes is deadly poison from the court doctor. The doctor, Cornelius, is suspicious and switches the poison for a harmless sleeping potion. The Queen passes the \"poison\" along to Pisanio, Posthumus and Imogen's loyal servant. Imogen is told it is a medicinal drug. Unable to be with Posthumus, Imogen secludes herself in her chambers, away from Cloten's aggressive advances.\nPosthumus must now live in Italy, where he meets Iachimo (or Giacomo), who wagers the proud Posthumus that he, Iachimo, can seduce Imogen, whom Posthumus has praised for her chastity, and will then bring Posthumus proof of Imogen's adultery. If Iachimo wins, he will get Posthumus's token ring. If Posthumus wins, not only must Iachimo pay him but also fight Posthumus in a duel with swords. Iachimo heads to Britain where he attempts to seduce the faithful Imogen, who rejects him. Iachimo then hides in a chest in Imogen's bedchamber and, when the princess falls asleep, steals Posthumus's bracelet from her. He also takes note of the room, as well as the mole on Imogen's partially nude body, to present as false evidence to Posthumus that he seduced his bride. Returning to Italy, Iachimo convinces Posthumus that he has successfully seduced Imogen. In his wrath, Posthumus sends two letters to Britain: one to Imogen, telling her to meet him at Milford Haven, on the Welsh coast; the other to the servant Pisanio, ordering him to murder Imogen at the Haven. However, Pisanio refuses and reveals Posthumus's plot to Imogen. He has Imogen disguise herself as a boy and they continue to Milford Haven to seek employment. He also gives her the Queen's \"poison\", believing it will alleviate her psychological distress. In the guise of a boy, Imogen assumes the name \"Fidele\", meaning \"faithful\".\n Back at Cymbeline's court, Cymbeline refuses to pay his British tribute to the Roman ambassador Caius Lucius. Lucius warns Cymbeline of the Roman Emperor's forthcoming wrath, which will be an invasion of Britain by Roman troops. Meanwhile, Cloten learns of the \"meeting\" between Imogen and Posthumus at Milford Haven. Dressing himself in Posthumus's clothes, he decides to go to Wales to kill Posthumus, and then rape, abduct, and marry Imogen. Imogen has now been travelling as Fidele through the Welsh mountains, her health in decline as she comes to a cave. It is the home of Belarius and his \"sons\" Polydore and Cadwal, whom he raised into great hunters. The two young men are the British princes Guiderius and Arviragus, who are unaware of their own origin. The men discover Fidele, and, instantly captivated by a strange affinity for \"him\", become fast friends. Outside the cave, Guiderius is met by Cloten, who insults him, leading to a sword fight during which Guiderius beheads Cloten. Meanwhile, Imogen's fragile state worsens and she takes the \"poison\" as a medicine; when the men re-enter, they find her \"dead.\" They mourn and, after placing Cloten's body beside hers, briefly depart to prepare for the double burial. Imogen awakes to find the headless body, and believes it to be Posthumus because the body is wearing Posthumus's clothes. Lucius' Roman soldiers have just arrived in Britain and, as the army moves through Wales, Lucius discovers the devastated Fidele, who pretends to be a loyal servant grieving his killed master; Lucius, moved by this faithfulness, enlists Fidele as a pageboy.\nThe treacherous Queen is now wasting away due to her son Cloten's disappearance. Meanwhile, the guilt-ridden Posthumus enlists in the Roman forces as they invade Britain. Belarius, Guiderius, Arviragus, and Posthumus all help rescue Cymbeline from the Roman onslaught; the king does not yet recognise these four, yet takes notice of them as they fight bravely and capture the Roman commanders, Lucius and Iachimo, thus winning the day. Posthumus, allowing himself to be captured, as well as Fidele, are imprisoned alongside the true Romans, who all await execution. In jail, Posthumus sleeps, while the ghosts of his dead family appear to complain to Jupiter of his grim fate. Jupiter himself appears in thunder and glory to assure the others that destiny will grant happiness to Posthumus and Britain.\nCornelius arrives at court to announce the Queen's sudden death, and that on her deathbed she unrepentantly confessed to villainous schemes against her husband and his throne. Both troubled and relieved by this news, Cymbeline prepares to execute his prisoners, but pauses when he sees Fidele, whom he finds both beautiful and familiar. Fidele has noticed Posthumus's ring on Iachimo's finger and demands to know how he obtained it. A remorseful Iachimo confesses about the wager he made, and how he tricked Posthumus into believing he had seduced Imogen. Posthumus then comes forward to confirm Iachimo's story, revealing his identity and acknowledging his wrongfulness in wanting Imogen killed. Ecstatic, Imogen throws herself at Posthumus, who, believing she is a boy, knocks her down. Pisanio then rushes to explain that Fidele is Imogen. Imogen still suspects that Pisanio conspired with the Queen to poison her. Pisanio claims innocence, and Cornelius reveals the potion was harmless. Insisting that his betrayal years ago was a set-up, Belarius makes his own happy confession, revealing Guiderius and Arviragus as Cymbeline's own two long-lost sons. With her brothers restored to the line of inheritance, Imogen is free to marry Posthumus. An elated Cymbeline pardons Belarius and the Roman prisoners, including Lucius and Iachimo. Lucius summons his soothsayer to decipher a prophecy of recent events, which ensures happiness for all. Blaming his manipulative Queen for his refusal to pay earlier, Cymbeline now agrees to pay the tribute to the Roman Emperor as a gesture of peace between Britain and Rome.\nSources.\nThe story of \"Cymbeline\" is grounded in the historical British figure of Cunobeline, mentioned by Suetonius in his \"Life of Caligula\" and Orosius in \"Historia adversus Paganos\". Cunobeline is also an important figure in Medieval Welsh literature, appearing in the Trioedd Ynys Prydein, \"Branwen ferch Ll\u0177r\", the \"Dream of Macsen Wledig\", and \"Lludd and Llefelys\" as \"Cynfelyn\" (Old Welsh) or \"Kymbelinus\" (medieval Latin). In the early 9th century \"Historia Brittonum\" Cunobeline is named as \"Bellinus son of Minocannus\", a figure which many Welsh kings would claim descent from in the Harleian genealogies.\nNumerous variations on this Bellinus figure appear in Geoffrey of Monmouth's 12th century \"Historia Regum Britanniae\". One such figure is \"Kymbelinus\", a mighty warrior raised in the courts of Augustus and friendly with the Roman court. This Kymbelinus has two sons named as Guiderius and Arvirargus, with Guiderius succeeded him but dying in the early stages of the Claudian invasion, leaving Arvirargus to carry on the fight. \nIt is likely that Shakespeare became familiar with Geoffrey's account via the 1587 edition of \"Holinshed's Chronicles\". Shakespeare based the setting of the play and the character Cymbeline on what he found in Holinshed's chronicles, but the plot and subplots of the play are derived from other sources. The subplot of Posthumus and Iachimo's wager derives from story II.9 of Giovanni Boccaccio's \"The Decameron\" and the anonymously authored \"Frederyke of Jennen\". These share similar characters and wager terms, and both feature Iachimo's equivalent hiding in a chest in order to gather proof in Imogen's room. Iachimo's description of Imogen's room as proof of her infidelity derives from \"The Decameron\", and Pisanio's reluctance to kill Imogen and his use of her bloody clothes to convince Posthumus of her death derive from \"Frederyke of Jennen.\" In both sources, the equivalent to Posthumus's bracelet is stolen jewellery that the wife later recognises while cross-dressed. Shakespeare also drew inspiration for \"Cymbeline\" from a play called \"The Rare Triumphs of Love and Fortune,\" first performed in 1582. There are many parallels between the characters of the two plays, including a king's daughter who falls for a man of unknown birth who grew up in the king's court. The subplot of Belarius and the lost princes was inspired by the story of Bomelio, an exiled nobleman in \"The Rare Triumphs\" who is later revealed to be the protagonist's father.\nDate and text.\nThe first recorded production of \"Cymbeline\", as noted by Simon Forman, was in April 1611. It was first published in the \"First Folio\" in 1623. When \"Cymbeline\" was actually written cannot be precisely dated.\nThe Yale edition suggests a collaborator had a hand in the authorship, and some scenes (e.g., Act III scene 7 and Act V scene 2) may strike the reader as particularly un-Shakespearean when compared with others. The play shares notable similarities in language, situation, and plot with Beaumont and Fletcher's tragicomedy \"Philaster, or Love Lies a-Bleeding\" (c.\u20091609\u201310). Both plays concern themselves with a princess who, after disobeying her father in order to marry a lowly lover, is wrongly accused of infidelity and thus ordered to be murdered, before escaping and having her faithfulness proven. Furthermore, both were written for the same theatre company and audience. Some scholars believe this supports a dating of approximately 1609, though it is not clear which play preceded the other.The editors of the Oxford and Norton Shakespeare believe the name of Imogen is a misprint for Innogen\u2014they draw several comparisons between \"Cymbeline\" and \"Much Ado About Nothing\", in early editions of which a ghost character named Innogen was supposed to be Leonato's wife (Posthumus being also known as \"Leonatus\", the Latin form of the Italian name in the other play). Stanley Wells and Michael Dobson point out that Holinshed's \"Chronicles\", which Shakespeare used as a source, mention an Innogen and that Forman's eyewitness account of the April 1611 performance refers to \"Innogen\" throughout. In spite of these arguments, most editions of the play have continued to use the name Imogen.\nMilford Haven is not known to have been used during the period (early 1st century AD) in which \"Cymbeline\" is set, and it is not known why Shakespeare used it in the play. Robert Nye noted that it was the closest seaport to Shakespeare's home town of Stratford-upon-Avon: \"But if you marched due west from Stratford, looking neither to left nor to right, with the idea of running away to sea in your young head, then Milford Haven is the port you'd reach,\" a walk of about , about six days' journey, that the young Shakespeare might well have taken, or at least dreamed of taking. Marisa R. Cull notes its possible symbolism as the landing site of Henry Tudor, when he invaded England via Milford on 7 August 1485 on his way to deposing Richard III and establishing the Tudor dynasty. It may also reflect English anxiety about the loyalty of the Welsh and the possibility of future invasions at Milford.\nCriticism and interpretation.\n\"Cymbeline\" was one of Shakespeare's more popular plays during the eighteenth century, though critics including Samuel Johnson took issue with its complex plot:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This play has many just sentiments, some natural dialogues, and some pleasing scenes, but they are obtained at the expense of much incongruity. To remark the folly of the fiction, the absurdity of the conduct, the confusion of the names and manners of different times, and the impossibility of the events in any system of life, were to waste criticism upon unresisting imbecility, upon faults too evident for detection, and too gross for aggravation.\nWilliam Hazlitt and John Keats, however, numbered it among their favourite plays.\nBy the early twentieth century, the play had lost favour. Lytton Strachey found it \"difficult to resist the conclusion that [Shakespeare] was getting bored himself. Bored with people, bored with real life, bored with drama, bored, in fact, with everything except poetry and poetical dreams.\"\nIn 1937, Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw wrote \"Cymbeline Refinished,\" that rewrites the final act of the play. Shaw commented on the play in 1896, in one fiery critique stating it was:\"stagey trash of the lowest melodramatic order, in parts abominably written, throughout intellectually vulgar, and, judged in point of thought by modem intellectual standards, vulgar, foolish, offensive, indecent and exasperating beyond all tolerance.\"Shaw, however, would go on to reform his opinion of the play after his rewriting of the ending, yet he remained firmly of the opinion that the final act was disastrous, writing in 1946 that it was \"one of the finest of Shakespeare's later plays\" but \"goes to pieces in the final act.\" Harley Granville-Barker, who found success as an actor in Shaw's plays had similar views, saying that the play shows that Shakespeare was becoming a \"wearied artist\".\nSome have argued that the play parodies its own content. Harold Bloom wrote that \"\"Cymbeline\", in my judgment, is partly a Shakespearean self-parody; many of his prior plays and characters are mocked by it.\"\nBritish identity.\nSimilarities between Cymbeline and historical accounts of the Roman Emperor Augustus have prompted critics to interpret the play as Shakespeare voicing support for the political notions of James I, who considered himself the \"British Augustus.\" His political manoeuvres to unite Scotland with England and Wales as an empire mirror Augustus' \"Pax Romana.\" The play reinforces the Jacobean idea that Britain is the successor to the civilised virtue of ancient Rome, portraying the parochialism and isolationism of Cloten and the Queen as villainous. Other critics have resisted the idea that \"Cymbeline\" endorses James I's ideas about national identity, pointing to several characters' conflicted constructions of their geographic identities. For example, although Guiderius and Arviragus are the sons of Cymbeline, a British king raised in Rome, they grew up in a Welsh cave. The brothers lament their isolation from society, a quality associated with barbarousness, but Belarius, their adoptive father, retorts that this has spared them from corrupting influences of the supposedly civilised British court.\nIachimo's invasion of Imogen's bedchamber may reflect concern that Britain was being maligned by Italian influence. According to Peter A. Parolin, \"Cymbeline's\" scenes ostensibly set in ancient Rome may be anachronistic portrayals of sixteenth-century Italy, which was characterised by contemporary British authors as a place where vice, debauchery, and treachery had supplanted the virtue of ancient Rome. Though \"Cymbeline\" concludes with a peace forged between Britain and Rome, Iachimo's corruption of Posthumus and metaphorical rape of Imogen may demonstrate fears that Great Britain's political union with other cultures might expose Britons to harmful foreign influences.\nGender and sexuality.\nScholars have emphasised that the play attributes great political significance to Imogen's virginity and chastity. There is some debate as to whether Imogen and Posthumus's marriage is legitimate. Imogen has historically been played and received as an ideal, chaste woman maintaining qualities applauded in a patriarchal structure; however, critics argue that Imogen's actions contradict these social definitions through her defiance of her father and her cross-dressing. Yet critics including Tracey Miller-Tomlinson have emphasised the ways in which the play upholds patriarchal ideology, including in the final scene, with its panoply of male victors. Whilst Imogen and Posthumus's marriage at first upholds heterosexual norms, their separation and final reunion leave open non-heterosexual possibilities, initially exposed by Imogen's cross-dressing as Fidele. Miller-Tomlinson points out the falseness of their social significance as a \"perfect example\" of\u00a0a public \"heterosexual marriage\", considering that their private relations turn out to be \"homosocial, homoerotic, and hermaphroditic.\"\nQueer theory has gained traction in scholarship on \"Cymbeline\", building upon the work of Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick and Judith Butler. Scholarship on this topic has emphasised the play's Ovidian allusions and exploration of non-normative gender/sexuality \u2013 achieved through separation from traditional society into what Valerie Traub terms \"green worlds.\" Amongst the most obvious and frequently cited examples of this non-normative dimension of the play is the prominence of homoeroticism, as seen in Guiderius and Arviragus's semi-sexual fascination with the disguised Imogen/Fidele. In addition to homoerotic and homosocial elements, the subjects of hermaphroditism and paternity/maternity also feature prominently in queer interpretations of \"Cymbeline\". Janet Adelman set the tone for the intersection of paternity and hermaphroditism in arguing that Cymbeline's lines, \"oh, what am I, / A mother to the birth of three? Ne'er mother / Rejoiced deliverance more\", amount to a \"parthenogenesis fantasy\". According to Adelman and Tracey Miller-Tomlinson, in taking sole credit for the creation of his children Cymbeline acts a hermaphrodite who transforms a maternal function into a patriarchal strategy by regaining control of his male heirs and daughter, Imogen. Imogen's own experience with gender fluidity and cross-dressing has largely been interpreted through a patriarchal lens. Unlike other Shakespearean agents of onstage gender fluidity \u2013 Portia, Rosalind, Viola and Julia \u2013 Imogen is not afforded empowerment upon her transformation into Fidele. Instead, Imogen's power is inherited from her father and based upon the prospect of reproduction.\nPerformance history.\nAfter the 1611 performance mentioned by Simon Forman, there is no record of production until 1634, when the play was revived at court for Charles I and Henrietta Maria. The Caroline production was noted as being \"well likte by the kinge.\" In 1728 John Rich staged the play with his company at Lincoln's Inn Fields, with emphasis placed on the spectacle of the production rather than the text of the play. Theophilus Cibber revived Shakespeare's text in 1744 with a performance at the Haymarket. There is evidence that Cibber put on another performance in 1746, and another in 1758.\nIn 1761, David Garrick edited a new version of the text. It is recognized as being close to the original Shakespeare, although there are several differences. Changes included the shortening of Imogen's burial scene and the entire fifth act, including the removal of Posthumus's dream. Garrick's text was first performed in November of that year, starring Garrick himself as Posthumus. Several scholars have indicated that Garrick's Posthumus was much liked. Valerie Wayne notes that Garrick's changes made the play more nationalistic, representing a trend in perception of \"Cymbeline\" during that period. Garrick's version of \"Cymbeline\" would prove popular; it was staged a number of times over the next few decades.\nIn the late eighteenth century, Cymbeline was performed in Jamaica.\nThe play entered the Romantic era with John Philip Kemble's company in 1801. Kemble's productions made use of lavish spectacle and scenery; one critic noted that during the bedroom scene, the bed was so large that Iachimo all but needed a ladder to view Imogen in her sleep. Kemble added a dance to Cloten's comic wooing of Imogen. In 1827, his brother Charles mounted an antiquarian production at Covent Garden; it featured costumes designed after the descriptions of the ancient British by such writers as Julius Caesar and Diodorus Siculus.\nWilliam Charles Macready mounted the play several times between 1837 and 1842. At the Theatre Royal, Marylebone, an epicene production was staged with Mary Warner, Fanny Vining, Anna Cora Mowatt, and Edward Loomis Davenport.\nIn 1859, \"Cymbeline\" was first performed in Sri Lanka. In the late nineteenth century, the play was produced several times in India.\nIn 1864, as part of the celebrations of Shakespeare's birth, Samuel Phelps performed the title role at Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. Helena Faucit returned to the stage for this performance.\nThe play was also one of Ellen Terry's last performances with Henry Irving at the Lyceum in 1896. Terry's performance was widely praised, though Irving was judged an indifferent Iachimo. Like Garrick, Irving removed the dream of Posthumus; he also curtailed Iachimo's remorse and attempted to render Cloten's character consistent. A review in the \"Athenaeum\" compared this trimmed version to pastoral comedies such as \"As You Like It\". The set design, overseen by Lawrence Alma-Tadema, was lavish and advertised as historically accurate, though the reviewer for the time complained of such anachronisms as gold crowns and printed books as props.\nSimilarly lavish but less successful was Margaret Mather's production in New York in 1897. The sets and publicity cost $40,000, but Mather was judged too emotional and undisciplined to succeed in a fairly cerebral role.\n20th century.\nBarry Jackson staged a modern dress production for the Birmingham Rep in 1923, two years before his influential modern dress \"Hamlet\". Walter Nugent Monck brought his Maddermarket Theatre production to Stratford in 1946, inaugurating the post-war tradition of the play.\nLondon saw two productions in the 1956 season. Michael Benthall directed the less successful production, at The Old Vic. The set design by Audrey Cruddas was notably minimal, with only a few essential props. She relied instead on a variety of lighting effects to reinforce mood; actors seemed to come out of darkness and return to darkness. Barbara Jefford was criticised as too cold and formal for Imogen; Leon Gluckman played Posthumus, Derek Godfrey Iachimo, and Derek Francis Cymbeline. Following Victorian practice, Benthall drastically shortened the last act.\nBy contrast, Peter Hall's production at the Shakespeare Memorial presented nearly the entire play, including the long-neglected dream scene (although a golden eagle designed for Jupiter turned out too heavy for the stage machinery and was not used). Hall presented the play as a distant fairy tale, with stylised performances. The production received favourable reviews, both for Hall's conception and, especially, for Peggy Ashcroft's Imogen. Richard Johnson played Posthumus, and Robert Harris Cymbeline. Iachimo was played by Geoffrey Keen, whose father Malcolm had played Iachimo with Ashcroft at the Old Vic in 1932.\nHall's approach attempted to unify the play's diversity by means of a fairy-tale topos. The next major Royal Shakespeare Company production, in 1962, went in the opposite direction. Working on a set draped with heavy white sheets, director William Gaskill employed Brechtian alienation effects, to mixed critical reviews. The acting, however, was widely praised. Vanessa Redgrave as Imogen was often compared favourably to Ashcroft; Eric Porter was a success as Iachimo, as was Clive Swift as Cloten. Patrick Allen was Posthumus, and Tom Fleming played the title role.\nA decade later, John Barton's 1974 production for the RSC (with assistance from Clifford Williams) featured Sebastian Shaw in the title role, Tim Pigott-Smith as Posthumus, Ian Richardson as Iachimo, and Susan Fleetwood as Imogen. Charles Keating was Cloten. As with contemporary productions of \"Pericles\", this one used a narrator (Cornelius) to signal changes in mood and treatment to the audience. Robert Speaight disliked the set design, which he called too minimal, but he approved the acting.\nIn 1980, David Jones revived the play for the RSC; the production was in general a disappointment, although Judi Dench as Imogen received reviews that rivalled Ashcroft's. Ben Kingsley played Iachimo; Roger Rees was Posthumus. In 1987, Bill Alexander directed the play in The Other Place (later transferring to the Pit in London's Barbican Centre) with Harriet Walter playing Imogen, David Bradley as Cymbeline and Nicholas Farrell as Posthumus.\nAt the Stratford Festival, the play was directed in 1970 by Jean Gascon and in 1987 by Robin Phillips. The latter production, which was marked by much-approved scenic complexity, featured Colm Feore as Iachimo, and Martha Burns as Imogen. The play was again at Stratford in 2004, directed by David Latham. A large medieval tapestry unified the fairly simple stage design and underscored Latham's fairy-tale inspired direction.\nIn 1994, Ajay Chowdhury directed an Anglo-Indian production of \"Cymbeline\" at the Rented Space Theatre Company. Set in India under British rule, the play features Iachimo, played by Rohan Kenworthy, as a British soldier and Imogen, played by Uzma Hameed, as an Indian princess.\n21st century.\nAt the new Globe Theatre in 2001, a cast of six (including Abigail Thaw, Mark Rylance, and Richard Hope) used extensive doubling for the play. The cast wore identical costumes even when in disguise, allowing for particular comic effects related to doubling (as when Cloten attempts to disguise himself as Posthumus.)\nThere have been some well-received theatrical productions including the Public Theater's 1998 production in New York City, directed by Andrei \u0218erban. \"Cymbeline\" was also performed at the Cambridge Arts Theatre in October 2007 in a production directed by Sir Trevor Nunn, and in November 2007 at the Chicago Shakespeare Theatre. The play was included in the 2013 repertory season of the Oregon Shakespeare Festival.\nIn 2004 and 2014, the Hudson Shakespeare Company of New Jersey produced two distinct versions of the play. The 2004 production, directed by Jon Ciccarelli, embraced the fairy tale aspect of the story and produced a colourful version with wicked step-mothers, feisty princesses and a campy Iachimo. The 2014 version, directed by Rachel Alt, went in a completely opposite direction and placed the action on ranch in the American Old West. The Queen was a southern belle married to a rancher, with Imogen as a high society girl in love with the cowhand Posthumous.\nIn a 2007 Cheek by Jowl production, Tom Hiddleston doubled as Posthumus and Cloten.\nIn 2011, the Shakespeare Theatre Company of Washington, DC, presented a version of the play that emphasised its fable and folklore elements, set as a tale within a tale, as told to a child.\nIn 2012, Antoni Cimolino directed a production at the Stratford Festival that steered into the fairy-tale elements of the text.\nAlso in 2012, the South Sudan Theatre Company staged \"Cymbeline\" in Juba Arabic for the Shakespeare's Globe \"Globe to Globe\" festival. It was translated by Derik Uya Alfred and directed by Joseph Abuk. Connections between the content of the play and South Sudan's own political struggle have been drawn by the production's producers, as well as some scholars. Overall, the production was well received by audiences and critics. Critic Matt Truman gave the production four out of five stars, saying \"The world's youngest nation seems delighted to be here and, played with this much heart, even Shakespeare's most rambling romance becomes irresistible.\"\nIn 2013, Samir Bhamra directed the play for Phizzical Productions with six actors playing multiple parts for a UK national tour. The cast included Sophie Khan Levy as Innojaan, Adam Youssefbeygi, Tony Hasnath, Liz Jadav and Robby Khela. The production was set in the souks of Dubai and the Bollywood film industry during the 1990s communal riots and received acclaim from reviewers and academics alike.\nAlso in 2013, a folk musical adaptation of \"Cymbeline\" was performed at the First Folio Theatre in Oak Brook, Illinois. The setting was the American South during the Civil War, with Cymbeline as a man of high status who avoids military service. The play was performed outdoors and was accompanied by traditional Appalachian folk songs.\nIn 2015, at Shakespeare's Globe in the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse, a production was directed by Sam Yates where the role of Innogen was played by Emily Barber and Jonjo O'Neill as Posthumus.\nIn 2016, Melly Still directed \"Cymbeline\" at the Royal Shakespeare Company. This version of the play was performed at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre before moving to the Barbican in late 2016. The performance featured Bethan Cullinane as Innogen and Gillian Bevan as Cymbeline.\nIn 2023, Gregory Doran directed \"Cymbeline\" at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre. It was his final production as artistic director, and received largely positive reviews. The cast included Peter De Jersey as Cymbeline and Amber James as Imogen.\nAlso in 2023, San Francisco's Free Shakespeare in the Park performed \"Cymbeline\", directed by Maryssa Wanlass, with a David Bowie/fantasy-themed focus on the play's queer interpretations.\nIn 2024, at the Stratford Festival, \"Cymbeline\", directed by Esther Jun, reversed the gender of several roles, with Cymbeline portrayed as Queen of Britain by Lucy Peacock and her husband as a Duke, played by Rick Roberts. Innogen was played by Allison Edwards-Crewe.\nAdaptations.\nThe play was adapted by Thomas d'Urfey as \"The Injured Princess, or, the Fatal Wager\"; this version was produced at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, presumably by the united King's Company and Duke's Company, in 1682. The play changes some names and details, and adds a subplot, typical of the Restoration, in which a virtuous waiting-woman escapes the traps laid by Cloten. D'Urfey also changes Pisanio's character so that he at once believes in Imogen's (Eugenia, in D'Urfey's play) guilt. For his part, D'Urfey's Posthumus is ready to accept that his wife might have been untrue, as she is young and beautiful. Some details of this alteration survived in productions at least until the middle of the century.\nWilliam Hawkins revised the play again in 1759. His was among the last of the heavy revisions designed to bring the play in line with classical unities. He cut the Queen, reduced the action to two places (the court and a forest in Wales). The dirge \"With fairest flowers...\" was set to music by Thomas Arne.\nNearer the end of the century, Henry Brooke wrote an adaptation which was apparently never staged. His version eliminates the brothers altogether as part of a notable enhancement of Posthumus's role in the play.\nGeorge Bernard Shaw, who criticized the play perhaps more harshly than he did any of Shakespeare's other works, took aim at what he saw as the defects of the final act in his 1937 \"Cymbeline Refinished\"; as early as 1896, he had complained about the absurdities of the play to Ellen Terry, then preparing to act Imogen. He called it \"stagey trash of the lowest melodramatic order\". He later changed his view, saying it was \"one of the finest of Shakespeare's later plays\", but he remained convinced that it \"goes to pieces in the final act\". Accordingly, in \"Cymbeline Refinished\" he rewrote the last act, cutting many of the numerous revelations and expositions, while also making Imogen a much more assertive figure in line with his feminist views.\nThere have been a number of radio adaptations of \"Cymbeline\" between the 1930s and the 2000s. The BBC broadcast productions of \"Cymbeline\" in the United Kingdom in 1934, 1951, 1957, 1986, 1996, and 2006. NBC broadcast a production of the play in the United States in 1938. In October 1951 the BBC aired a production of George Bernard Shaw's \"Cymbeline Refinished\", as well as Shaw's foreword to the play.\nScreen adaptations.\nLucius J. Henderson directed the first screen adaptation of \"Cymbeline\" in 1913. The film was produced by the Thanhouser Company and starred Florence La Badie as Imogen, James Cruze as Posthumus, William Garwood as Iachimo, William Russell as Cymbeline, and Jean Darnell as the Queen.\nIn 1937 the BBC broadcast several scenes of Andr\u00e9 van Gyseghem's production of the play, which opened 16 November the same year, on television. The scenes that comprised the broadcast were pulled exclusively from Acts I and II of the play, and included the 'trunk scene' from Act II Scene 2. In 1956 the BBC produced a similar television program, this time airing scenes from Michael Benthall's theatrical production, which opened 11 September 1956. Like the 1937 program, the 1956 broadcast ran for roughly half an hour and presented several scenes from \"Cymbeline,\" including the trunk scene.\nIn 1968 Jerzy Jarocki directed an adaptation of the play for Polish television, starring Wiktor Sadecki as Cymbeline and Ewa Lassek as Imogen.\nElijah Moshinsky directed the BBC Television Shakespeare adaptation in 1982, ignoring the ancient British period setting in favour of a more timeless and snow-laden atmosphere inspired by Rembrandt and his contemporary Dutch painters. Richard Johnson, Claire Bloom, Helen Mirren, and Robert Lindsay play Cymbeline, his Queen, Imogen, and Iachimo, respectively, with Michael Pennington as Posthumus.\nIn 2014, Ethan Hawke and director Michael Almereyda, who previously collaborated on the 2000 film \"Hamlet\", re-teamed for the film \"Cymbeline\", in which Hawke plays Iachimo. The film is set in the context of urban gang warfare. Ed Harris takes the title role. Penn Badgley plays the orphan Posthumus; Milla Jovovich plays the role of the Queen; Anton Yelchin is Cloten; and Dakota Johnson plays the role of Imogen.\nStage adaptions.\nPrior to operatic adaptations only incidental music was composed. The first operatic adaption seems to be composed by Edmond Missa in 1894, under the title \"Dinah\"; American composer Christopher Berg composed another one, of which scenes were performed in 2009.\nCultural references.\nIn Beethoven's one opera Fidelio, the loyal wife Leonore, disguising herself as a man, takes on the name Fidelio, as a probable reference to Imogen's cross-dressing as Fidele.\nThe 'Song' from Act II, Scene 3 \"(Hark, hark! the lark)\" was set to music by Franz Schubert in 1826.\nPerhaps the most famous verses in the play come from the funeral song of Act IV, Scene 2, which begins:\nFear no more the heat o' the sun,\nNor the furious winter's rages;\nThou thy worldly task hast done,\nHome art gone, and ta'en thy wages:\nGolden lads and girls all must,\nAs chimney-sweepers, come to dust.\nThe first two lines are quoted by Virginia Woolf in \"Mrs. Dalloway\" by the two main characters Clarissa and Septimus Smith. The lines, which turn Mrs. Dalloway's thoughts to the trauma of the First World War, are at once an elegiac dirge and a profoundly dignified declaration of endurance. The song provides a major organisational motif for the novel. The final couplet also appears in the Anton Myrer novel, \"The Last Convertible\".\nThe last two lines appear to have inspired T. S. Eliot in \"Lines to a Yorkshire Terrier\" (in \"Five-Finger Exercises\"). He writes:\nPollicle dogs and cats all must\nJellicle cats and dogs all must\nLike undertakers, come to dust.\nThe song was set to music by Roger Quilter as \"Fear No More the Heat o' the Sun,\" No. 1 of Five Shakespeare Songs, Op. 23 (1921). It was also set by Gerald Finzi as part of his song cycle on texts by Shakespeare \"Let Us Garlands Bring\" (1942). The text is sung by Cleo Laine to music by John Dankworth on her 1964 album \"Shakespeare and All That Jazz\".\nAt the end of Stephen Sondheim's \"The Frogs\", William Shakespeare is competing against George Bernard Shaw for the title of best playwright, deciding which of them is to be brought back from the dead in order to improve the world. Shakespeare sings the funeral song of Act IV, Scene 2, when asked about his view of death (the song is titled \"Fear No More\").\n\"Fear no more the heat of the sun\" is the line that Winnie and her husband are trying to remember in Samuel Beckett's \"Happy Days\" as they sit exposed to the elements.\nIn the Epilogue of the novel \"Appointment with Death\" by Agatha Christie, the first four lines of the verse are quoted by the character Ginevra Boynton as she reflects on the life of her deceased mother Mrs Boynton.\nIn \"The Scent of Water\" (1963) by Elizabeth Goudge, the central character, Mary Lindsay, feels struck by lightning when she realises she has fallen in love with Paul Randall, an author and Royal Air Force pilot, blinded in the last days of World War II, and married. \"Fear no more the lightning-flash\", Mary suddenly thinks, along with the rest of that stanza, ending \"All lovers young, all lovers must /Consign to thee, and come to dust\", knowing she must hide her love, and recognising that, already fifty, she is growing old (Chapter IX, Part 1, p 164).\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nEditions of \"Cymbeline\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39630", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39630", "title": "Shakespeare's late romances", "text": "Category of Shakespeare's plays\nThe late romances, often simply called the romances, are a grouping of William Shakespeare's last plays, comprising \"Pericles, Prince of Tyre\"; \"Cymbeline\"; \"The Winter's Tale\"; and \"The Tempest\". \"The Two Noble Kinsmen\", of which Shakespeare was co-author, is sometimes also included in the grouping. The term \"romances\" was first used for these late works in Edward Dowden's \"Shakspere\" (1877). Later writers have generally been content to adopt Dowden's term.\nShakespeare's plays cannot be precisely dated, but it is generally agreed that these comedies followed a series of tragedies including \"Othello\", \"King Lear\" and \"Macbeth\". Shakespeare wrote tragedies because their productions were financially successful, but he returned to comedy towards the end of his career, mixing it with tragic and mystical elements. Shakespeare's late romances were also influenced by the development of tragicomedy and the extreme elaboration of the courtly masque as staged by Ben Jonson and Inigo Jones. The subjects and style of these plays were also influenced by the preference of the monarch, by Shakespeare's ageing company and by their more upper class audiences.\nThe romances call for spectacular effects to be shown onstage, including storms at sea, opulent interior and exterior scenery, dream settings and the illusion of time passing. Scholars have argued that the late plays deal with faith and redemption, and are variations on themes of rewarding virtue over vice.\nPlays.\nShakespeare's late romances are:\nSources: F E Halliday (1964), A L Rowse (1978) and Stanley Wells (1986)\nThe Norton Shakespeare describes \"Henry VIII\" (ca. 1612\u201313) as being characteristic of the late romances, but still considers it one of the histories, as does Rowse.\nLabelling and structure.\nThe category of Shakespearean romance arises from a desire among critics for the late plays to be recognised as a more complex kind of comedy; the labels of romance and tragicomedy are preferred by the majority of modern critics and editors. In the First Folio of 1623, John Heminges and Henry Condell, its editors, listed \"The Tempest\" and \"The Winter's Tale\" as comedies, and \"Cymbeline\" as a tragedy. \"Pericles\" did not appear in it at all. In 1875, when Dowden argued that Shakespeare's late comedies should be called \"romances\", he did so because they resemble late medieval and early modern \"romances\", a genre in which stories were set across the immensity of space and time. The romances have grand plot points which are combined with humour, dramatic action and internal struggles. They also feature broader characters, larger spectacles and a different handling of the themes of appearance and reality. The late romances differed from early Shakespearean comedies by relying on grand themes, rather than specific moments. The romances are Shakespearean tragedies that end happily, instead of a moment of danger that moves rapidly to a solution. They also focus on the relationships between father and daughter.\nDefining characteristics.\nThe final plays share some common traits:\nTragicomic influence.\nShakespeare's romances were also influenced by two major developments in theatre in the early years of the seventeenth century. The first was the innovation of tragicomedy initiated by John Fletcher and developed in the early Beaumont and Fletcher collaborations. Tragicomedies made a pretence at \"grave stuff\" but invariably provided a happy ending with light entertainment. Shakespeare's romances are more sharply tragicomic than his comedies: threats of death and scenes of suffering are more acute. Encounters with the supernatural are also more direct and emphatic. The other influence was the extreme elaboration of the courtly masque being stage in the same period by Ben Jonson and Inigo Jones. Key scenes in the late romances are closely related to court masques: They embrace the visual magnificence but also the shallowness of such a display.\nHistory.\nThe popular drama during the Renaissance was subject to external influences, specifically what the ruler wanted to see. Elizabeth I enjoyed watching what the people liked, which were the tragedies. Elizabeth reigned until her death in 1603. James I succeeded her, and he preferred the romances.\nShakespeare's health was impaired, and he died about five years after \"The Tempest\", the last play he wrote by himself. The shift indicates that he was giving up composition. He retired to Stratford following completion of his final play. The scholar Catherine Alexander has suggested that the plays were not specifically autobiographical in respect of Shakespeare's advancing old age, but reflected the fact that the actors themselves were older. The King's Men occupied a second playhouse, the Blackfriars, which had been out of use for several years. The playhouse had been shut down because of objections by local residents, but was reopened during the second half of 1608. In the interim the actors had aged, and Shakespeare adjusted the age of his characters.\nThe King's Men were allowed to change their name from the Lord Chamberlain's Men in 1603, when James I came to the throne. They would put on as many as two new plays a week. Many plays had only a few performances, and there was no director: actors were expected to know fairly standard blocking patterns.\n Audiences at the Blackfriars were generally upper class, as the cost of admission was so high that the lower classes were unlikely to attend many performances. Because of the sophistication of the audience, the romances leaned more toward aesthetics and culture.\nPerformances.\nThe romances create challenges for directors, as they require spectacular effects to be shown onstage. For \"Pericles,\" in 1854, Samuel Phelps created the effect of a storm by using rowers manning oars to carry Pericles from one location to another while a panorama moved behind them to create the illusion of travel. \"Cymbeline\" often offers two different directions for staging: grand and simple. In the spring of 1896, Henry Irving staged the play at the Lyceum Theatre, London with elaborate Celtic sets for Cymbeline's palace gardens and interior rooms, a Roman banqueting hall for Posthumus's visit to Rome, a handsomely decorated bedchamber for Imogen, and a spectacular dream setting for the descent of Jupiter. Ben Greet at The Old Vic in 1918, on the other hand, chose a simple, Elizabethan approach. \"The Winter's Tale\" poses the challenges of time passing and a bear pursuing Antigonus off stage. In 1976, Trevor Nunn and John Barton cast John Nettles as both Time and the bear. At Stratford-upon-Avon in 1986, Terry Hands used a bearskin rug, which rose off the ground to chase Antigonus off.\n\"The Tempest\" opens with a scene inspired by the shipwreck of \"Sea Venture\" in 1609. This scene has allowed for different stagings, from William Charles Macready in 1842 at Covent Garden featuring a huge sea vessel, fully rigged and manned, to Robert Falls's production at the Goodman Theatre in 1987, where the scene was set on a cruiseship, with tourist passengers in deck chairs or playing shuffleboard until disaster struck.\nCriticism.\nBecause of the shift in style, as well as Shakespeare's physical state, there has been much debate about why the late plays were written as they were. Dowden created a biographical view that suggested that Shakespeare was suffering from depression when he wrote his tragedies, and had worked his way out of it to create the romances. SirEdmund Chambers suggested that he suffered a breakdown while writing \"Timon of Athens,\" and the romances reflect a kind of psychological convalescence. Clifford Leech viewed the romances as infected with a kind of fantastical puritanism that came from Shakespeare's personal revulsion from sex. D G James believed that Shakespeare ran out of poetic energy as he got older. Raphael Lyne comments that it is impossible to show that Shakespeare managed his career to this extent, and there is no pressing need to consider these works as anything other than coincidentally \"late\". There is a belief among some scholars that the late plays deal with faith and redemption, and are variations on themes of rewarding virtue over vice.\nG. Wilson Knight was among those critics to argue that the late romances embody, together with the high tragedies or even above them, Shakespeare's greatest achievement. Harold Bloom says of \"The Winter's Tale\" that in it Shakespeare returns to his full talent and genius with full force.\nFilm adaptations.\nA film version of \"Cymbeline\" was released in 2014, starring Milla Jovovich, Ethan Hawke, Penn Badgley, John Leguizamo and Ed Harris.\n\"The Tempest\" has been adapted most often. A silent film version was made in 1908. Later adaptations include, \"Yellow Sky\" (1948) \u2013 set in the wild west, with Gregory Peck and Anne Baxter; \"Forbidden Planet\" (1956) \u2013 a science fiction classic set in outer space; Derek Jarman's 1979 version relocated to a crumbling mansion off the Scottish coast; \"Tempest\" (1982) \u2013 set on a Greek isle, with John Cassavetes, Molly Ringwald, Gena Rowlands and Susan Sarandon; \"Prospero's Books\" (1991) starring John Gielgud \u2013 which is not so much an adaptation as a reading of the play, combining film, dance, opera, and animation; and a 2010 version with Prospero recast as Prospera, played by Helen Mirren.\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39632", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39632", "title": "Alpine skiing at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "Alpine skiing at the 2002 Winter Olympics consisted of ten events held 10\u201323 February in the United States near Salt Lake City, Utah. The downhill, super-G, and combined events were held at Snowbasin, the giant slaloms at Park City, and the slaloms at adjacent Deer Valley.\nMedal table.\nParticipating NOCs.\nFifty nations competed in the alpine skiing events at Salt Lake City.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCourse information.\nSnowbasin hosted the downhill, super-G, and combined events; the giant slaloms were at Park City and the slaloms at adjacent Deer Valley&lt;br&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39634", "revid": "12353686", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39634", "title": "Cross-country skiing at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "Olympic skiing event\nThe cross-country skiing events at the 2002 Winter Olympics were marred by drug problems. The winners of three races were disqualified after blood tests showed that three skiers had overly high red blood cell counts indicating the use of darbepoetin, a drug used to treat anemia. At the time, the drug was not specifically listed in the International Olympic Committee's (IOC) list of banned substances, but the Olympic rules generally prohibit doping of any kind, in accordance with its charter. After two years and several lawsuits in Olympic and Swiss courts, the skiers in question (Johann M\u00fchlegg of Spain, and Larissa Lazutina and Olga Danilova of Russia) were stripped of all their medals from the 2002 Games.\nSee the external links below for the official IOC press releases containing detailed information of the doping cases and their resolution, including initial, intermediate, and final amended results. This article gives the final medalists as decided on by the IOC in early 2004.\nMedal summary.\nParticipating NOCs.\nForty-four nations competed in the cross-country skiing events at Salt Lake City.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39635", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39635", "title": "Figure skating at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "All figure skating events in 2002 Winter Olympics were held at the Salt Lake Ice Center.\nMedals awarded Thursday, February 14, 2002\nResults.\nMen.\nYagudin received 5.9s and 6.0s for his free skating after World Champion Plushenko had made several errors in both the short program and the free skating.\nReferee:\nAssistant Referee:\nJudges:\nMedals awarded Thursday, February 21, 2002\nLadies.\n16-year-old Hughes, fourth after the short program, skated a clean free skating with seven triple jumps, including two triple-triple combinations. Kwan led after the short program but slipped to third after two jumping errors. Sasha Cohen finished fourth, after a fall on the back end of a triple lutz-triple toe combination. Slutskaya became only the second Russian to medal in the ladies' event at the Olympics.\nHughes and Slutskaya finished with tie scores, Hughes winning the gold medal on a tiebreaker for having won the free skating. The Russian officials were very disappointed with the result and filed a protest, which was not accepted by ISU after it examined all results and scores, thus confirming Hughes as the winner.\nDuring competition, the pairwise ranked choice voting system that the International Skating Union (ISU) had adopted after a debacle during the ladies' competition at the 1995 world championships caused a similar change in the scoring. Kwan, whose routine had triggered the 1995 incident, had been ahead of Hughes until Slutskaya skated. The judges' revised rankings put Hughes ahead of Kwan, an undesired effect of the independent irrelevant alternative. Two years later the ISU changed the voting procedures again to range voting. \nReferee:\nAssistant Referee:\nJudges:\nMedals awarded February 11, 2002; second award ceremony February 17.\nPairs.\nA controversial decision was taken which extended the Russian dominance of pair skating at the Olympics.\nIn the first week of the Games, a controversy in the pairs' figure skating competition culminated in the French judge's scores being thrown out and the Canadian team of Jamie Sal\u00e9 and David Pelletier being awarded a gold medal (together with the Russians who were controversially awarded gold previously and kept their medals despite the allegations of vote swapping and buying the votes of the French judge). Allegations of bribery were leveled against many ice-skating judges, leading to the arrest of known criminal Alimzhan Tokhtakhounov in Italy (at the request of the United States). He was released by the Italian officials.\nJudges from Russia, the People's Republic of China, Poland, Ukraine, and France placed the Russians first; judges from the United States, Canada, Germany, and Japan gave the nod to the Canadians. The International Skating Union announced a day after the competition that it would conduct an \"internal assessment\" into the judging decision. On February 15 the ISU and IOC, in a joint press conference, announced that Marie-Reine Le Gougne, the French judge implicated in collusion, was guilty of misconduct and was suspended effective immediately.\nFull results.\nThe following are the final amended results, not the original results.\nReferee:\nAssistant Referee:\nJudges:\nMedals awarded Monday, February 18, 2002\nIce dance.\nRussian skater Anissina emigrated to France after Averbukh, her former partner, left her to skate with Lobacheva. It was the first gold in Olympic figure skating for France since 1932.\nThe first compulsory dance was the Quickstep. The second was Blues.\nFull results.\nReferee:\nAssistant Referee:\nJudges (CD1):\nJudges (CD2):\nJudges (OD):\nJudges (FD):\nParticipating NOCs.\nThirty-one nations competed in the figure skating events at Salt Lake City.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39637", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39637", "title": "Freestyle skiing at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "Four freestyle skiing events were held at the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, at the venue in Deer Valley. There were both men's and women's competition in both \"aerials\" and \"moguls\" events. In moguls, the athletes ski down a slope littered with moguls (bumps), attempting to get down in as fast a time as possible while also attempting to get points for technique and their two aerial jumps during the course. The aerials events consisted of two jumps, which were judged by air, form and landing.\nParticipating NOCs.\nTwenty-one nations competed in the freestyle skiing events at Salt Lake City.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39639", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39639", "title": "Luge at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "The Luge competition at the 2002 Winter Olympic Games was held at Utah Olympic Park in Park City. Three events were staged, taking place from 10 to 14 February.\nMedal summary.\nParticipating NOCs.\nTwenty-five nations competed in the luge events at Salt Lake City.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39641", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39641", "title": "Nordic combined at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "Nordic combined at the 2002 Winter Olympics, consisted of three events held over ten days, from 9 February to 22 February. The ski jumping part took place in Park City, while the cross-country part took place in Soldier Hollow. This was the first Winter Olympics to have two individual Nordic Combined events: the 7.5\u00a0km individual normal hill (sprint) and the 15\u00a0km individual large hill (individual).\nParticipating NOCs.\nFourteen nations participated in Nordic Combined at the Salt Lake Games.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39642", "revid": "1293303418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39642", "title": "Short-track speed skating at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "Speed skating at the Olympics\n \"For the long track speed skating events, see Speed skating at the 2002 Winter Olympics\"\nShort track speed skating at the 2002 Winter Olympics was held from 13 to 23 February. Eight events were contested at Salt Lake Ice Center (normally called Delta Center). Two new events were added for these games, with the men's and women's 1500 metres making debuts.\nMedal summary.\nMedal table.\nChina led the overall table with seven medals, while Evgenia Radanova's two medals for Bulgaria were their first in the sport.\nRecords.\nTwo world records and fifteen Olympic records were set in Salt Lake City.\nParticipating NOCs.\nTwenty-six nations competed in the short track events at Salt Lake City. Belarus, the Czech Republic, Hong Kong, Israel, Romania and Slovakia made their short track debuts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39643", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39643", "title": "Ski jumping at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "Ski jumping at the 2002 Winter Olympics, consisted of three events held from 10 February to 13 February, taking place at Park City.\nMedal summary.\nMedal table.\nSwitzerland topped the medal table, with two gold medals from Simon Amman. The bronze medal won by Slovenia in the team event was the country's first in the sport.\nParticipating NOCs.\nTwenty-two nations participated in ski jumping at the Salt Lake Games. Estonia and Kyrgyzstan made their Olympic ski jumping debuts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39644", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39644", "title": "Snowboarding at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "The 2002 Winter Olympic Games Snowboarding competition consisted of men's and women's halfpipe and parallel giant slalom events. The snowboarding competition took place at Park City, over a five-day period.\nParticipating NOCs.\nNineteen nations competed in the snowboarding events at Salt Lake City.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39645", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39645", "title": "Speed skating at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "Speed skating at the 2002 Winter Olympics was held over fourteen days, from 9 to 23 February. Ten events were contested at the Utah Olympic Oval.\nRecords.\nSalt Lake City's high altitude was a major contributing factor to the speed of the Utah Olympic Oval's ice, as new Olympic records were set in all ten events, and new World records in eight.\nParticipating NOCs.\nTwenty-three nations competed in the speed skating events at Salt Lake City.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39646", "revid": "1266869297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39646", "title": "Bobsleigh at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "Three bobsleigh events were competed at the 2002 Winter Olympics, at Utah Olympic Park. The competition took place between February 16 and February 23, 2002.\nFor the first time since 1932, Olympic bobsleigh added a new event, with the first ever women's competition, won by Jill Bakken and Vonetta Flowers of the United States.\nThe competitions comprised four heats. Teams raced in the first and third heats in the order of the draw. The second heat was raced in order of ranking after the first heat, and the fourth heat is raced in order of the ranking after the first three heats. Total time for the four heats determined the final rank.\nParticipating NOCs.\nThirty-four nations competed in the bobsleigh events at Salt Lake City.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39648", "revid": "1316507625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39648", "title": "New England Digital", "text": "New England Digital Corporation (1976\u20131993) was founded in Norwich, Vermont, and relocated to White River Junction, Vermont. It was best known for its signature product, the Synclavier Synthesizer System, which evolved into the Synclavier Digital Audio System or \"Tapeless Studio.\" The company sold an FM digital synthesizer/16-bit polyphonic synthesizer and magnetic disk-based non-linear 16-bit digital recording product, referred to as the \"Post-Pro.\" \nThe Synclavier was developed as the \"Dartmouth Digital Synthesizer\" by Dartmouth College Professors Jon Appleton and Frederick J. Hooven, in association with NED co-founders Sydney A. Alonso and Cameron W. Jones. The Synclavier would become the pioneering prototype hardware and software system for all digital non-linear synthesis, polyphonic sampling, magnetic (hard-disk) recording and sequencing systems technology that is commonplace in all music and sound effects/design today.\nThe instrument's development picked up speed in late 1978/early 1979, when master synthesist, sound designer, and musical arranger, Denny Jaeger, began working with NED to help create system upgrades, advanced capabilities, and unique sounds that were tailored to fit the needs of the product for the commercial music industry. The second generation's user interface panel and overall music design features of the original Synclavier (that would become Synclavier II) were substantially driven and designed by Denny Jaeger. His relentless attention to detail and unparalleled understanding of synthesis, audio recording, and technology provided tremendous product/market insight to the original founding hardware and software engineering team of Alonso and Jones. \nIn November 1979, immediately following the arrival of Denny Jaeger, Alonso hired Brad Naples as the company's Business Manager. Working in tandem, Jaeger and Naples were the main drivers of the marketing and sales/business development efforts of the company. However, all four individuals\u2014Alonso, Jones, Jaeger, and Naples\u2014worked as a collaborative team, which was quite unique and unparalleled at the time. However, Naples became the main individual to harness the collaborative nature of the 4, and importantly, drove and managed the company that grew from 8 to 215 employees with direct officers in New York, Los Angeles, Chicago and London. NED unveiled the newly improved Synclavier II at the AES show in May 1980, where it became an instant hit.\nIn 1981 New England Digital pioneered the recording of digital audio to hard disk with the introduction of their Sample-To-Disk option. Their software module known as SFM (Signal File Manager) was popular among the academic world for research and analysis of audio. The SFM also found use in the US Military for the analysis of submarine sounds.\nThe company continued to refine the Synclavier II, with Jaeger leading more musician-friendly, technological improvements, and Naples evolving to become the company's President/CEO (1983\u20131993) to assist Alonso and Jones, who were substantially expanding the hardware and software team. Musicians such as New York City-based multi-instrumentalist Kashif were involved in the creative development of Synclavier.\nIt became one of the most advanced electronic synthesis and recording tools of the day. Early adopters included:\nThe system was nearly as famous for where it was \"not\" used, as it was for the list of premier studios in which it was: the extremely sophisticated synthesizer enjoyed the distinction of being banned from many famous concert halls, out of fear that it would make the musicians themselves obsolete. A notable exception being the massive, 55 minute Dialogue for Synclavier and Orchestra by American Composer Frank Proto, commissioned and performed by the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra in 1986. Bringing together the full forces of a contemporary orchestra with a fully decked out Synclavier in a live performance, it displayed what can be achieved, combining both seemingly incompatible disciplines, by a composer with intimate knowledge of not only the available orchestral and electronic forces, but with the compositional skills to take advantage of both, without resorting to gimmicky devices frequently found in attempts to wed the two. \nThe mature Synclavier was a modular, component-based system that included facilities for FM-based synthesis, digital sampling, hard-disk recording, and sophisticated computer-based sound editing. By the late 1980s, complete Synclavier systems were selling for upwards of $200,000, to famous musicians such as Sting, Michael Jackson and Stevie Wonder, and to major studios the world over. The Synclavier was also employed by experimental musicians, such as John McLaughlin, Kraftwerk, Laurie Anderson, Frank Zappa, Kashif and Peter Buffett who used it extensively in their music. It is still used to this day in major movies for sound design, along with TV, Commercials and Music composition and production.\nNED/Synclavier became a victim of the early 1990s economic downturn, it's high prices as well as due in part to the fact that the technology development team which was well-funded from 1988 and 1989 to create a modest product based-upon a MacIntosh platform and the rapidly increasing capabilities of personal computers, MIDI-enabled synthesizers and low-cost digital samplers. In the span of two years, the company saw enormous sales evaporate, and in 1992 they closed their doors forever. Parts of the company were purchased by Fostex, which used the technical knowledge base of staff to build several hard-disk recording systems in the 1990s (like Fostex Foundation 2000 and 2000re), and AirWorks Media, a Canadian company who used portions of code in their TuneBuilder product line. Simultaneously, a group of ex-employees and product owners collaborated to form The Synclavier Company, primarily as a maintenance organization for existing customers, but with an eye to adapting Synclavier software for stand-alone personal computer use, while in Europe the previously profitable, but now motherless, NED Europe is run by ex-head of European operations, Steve Hills. , it was still trading in London, England, as Synclavier Europe.\nIn 1998, under the company Demas, NED co-founder Cameron W. Jones (original and current owner of the Synclavier trademark and software) collaborated with ex-employee Brian S. George (owner of Demas, the company that purchased all of NED's hardware and technical assets) and original co-founding partner Sydney Alonso to develop an emulator designed to run Synclavier software for Apple Computer's Macintosh computer systems and hardware designed to share the core processing with the later generation of Apple G3 computers giving enhanced features and greater speed to the system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39651", "revid": "212049893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39651", "title": "System Science", "text": ""}
{"id": "39652", "revid": "50644952", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39652", "title": "OCaml", "text": "Programming language\nOCaml ( , formerly Objective Caml) is a general-purpose, high-level, multi-paradigm programming language which extends the Caml dialect of ML with object-oriented features. OCaml was created in 1996 by Xavier Leroy, J\u00e9r\u00f4me Vouillon, Damien Doligez, Didier R\u00e9my, Asc\u00e1nder Su\u00e1rez, and others.\nThe OCaml toolchain includes an interactive top-level interpreter, a bytecode compiler, an optimizing native code compiler, a reversible debugger, and a package manager (https://) together with a composable build system for OCaml (https://). OCaml was developed first in the context of automated theorem proving, and is used in static analysis and formal methods software. Beyond these areas, it has found use in systems programming, web development, and specific financial utilities, among other application domains.\nThe acronym \"CAML\" originally stood for \"Categorical Abstract Machine Language\", but OCaml omits this abstract machine. OCaml is a free and open-source software project managed and principally maintained by the French Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation (Inria). In the early 2000s, elements from OCaml were adopted by many languages, notably F# and Scala.\nPhilosophy.\nML-derived languages are best known for their static type systems and type-inferring compilers. OCaml unifies functional, imperative, and object-oriented programming under an ML-like type system. Thus, programmers need not be highly familiar with the pure functional language paradigm to use OCaml.\nBy requiring the programmer to work within the constraints of its static type system, OCaml eliminates many of the type-related runtime problems associated with dynamically typed languages. Also, OCaml's type-inferring compiler greatly reduces the need for the manual type annotations that are required in most statically typed languages. For example, the data types of variables and the signatures of functions usually need not be declared explicitly, as they do in languages like Java and C#, because they can be inferred from the operators and other functions that are applied to the variables and other values in the code. Effective use of OCaml's type system can require some sophistication on the part of a programmer, but this discipline is rewarded with reliable, high-performance software. \nOCaml is perhaps most distinguished from other languages with origins in academia by its emphasis on performance. Its static type system prevents runtime type mismatches and thus obviates runtime type and safety checks that burden the performance of dynamically typed languages, while still guaranteeing runtime safety, except when array bounds checking is turned off or when some type-unsafe features like serialization are used. These are rare enough that avoiding them is quite possible in practice.\nAside from type-checking overhead, functional programming languages are, in general, challenging to compile to efficient machine language code, due to issues such as the funarg problem. Along with standard loop, register, and instruction optimizations, OCaml's optimizing compiler employs static program analysis methods to optimize value boxing and closure allocation, helping to maximize the performance of the resulting code even if it makes extensive use of functional programming constructs.\nXavier Leroy has stated that \"OCaml delivers at least 50% of the performance of a decent C compiler\", although a direct comparison is impossible. Some functions in the OCaml standard library are implemented with faster algorithms than equivalent functions in the standard libraries of other languages. For example, the implementation of set union in the OCaml standard library in theory is asymptotically faster than the equivalent function in the standard libraries of imperative languages (e.g., C++, Java) because the OCaml implementation can exploit the immutability of sets to reuse parts of input sets in the output (see persistent data structure).\nHistory.\nDevelopment of ML (Meta Language).\nBetween the 1970s and 1980s, Robin Milner, a British computer scientist and Turing Award winner, worked at the University of Edinburgh's Laboratory for Foundations of Computer Science. Milner and others were working on theorem provers, which were historically developed in languages such as Lisp. Milner repeatedly ran into the issue that the theorem provers would attempt to claim a proof was valid by putting non-proofs together. As a result, he went on to develop the meta language for his Logic for Computable Functions, a language that would only allow the writer to construct valid proofs with its polymorphic type system. ML was turned into a compiler to simplify using LCF on different machines, and, by the 1980s, was turned into a complete system of its own. ML would eventually serve as a basis for the creation of OCaml.\nIn the early 1980s, there were some developments that prompted INRIA's Formel team to become interested in the ML language. Luca Cardelli, a research professor at University of Oxford, used his \"functional abstract machine\" to develop a faster implementation of ML, and Robin Milner proposed a new definition of ML to avoid divergence between various implementations. Simultaneously, Pierre-Louis Curien, a senior researcher at Paris Diderot University, developed a calculus of categorical combinators and linked it to lambda calculus, which led to the definition of the \"categorical abstract machine\" (CAM). Guy Cousineau, a researcher at Paris Diderot University, recognized that this could be applied as a compiling method for ML.\nFirst implementation.\nCaml was designed and developed first by INRIA's Formel team headed by G\u00e9rard Huet. The first implementation of Caml was created in 1987 and was further developed until 1992. Though it was spearheaded by Asc\u00e1nder Su\u00e1rez, Pierre Weis and Michel Mauny carried on with development after he left in 1988.\nGuy Cousineau is quoted recalling that his experience with programming language implementation was initially very limited, and that there were multiple inadequacies for which he is responsible. Despite this, he believes that \"Ascander, Pierre and Michel did quite a nice piece of work.\u201d\nCaml Light.\nBetween 1990 and 1991, Xavier Leroy designed a new implementation of Caml based on a bytecode interpreter written in C. In addition to this, Damien Doligez wrote a memory management system, also known as a sequential garbage collector, for this implementation. This new implementation, known as Caml Light, replaced the old Caml implementation and ran on small desktop machines. In the following years, libraries such as Michel Mauny's syntax manipulation tools appeared and helped promote the use of Caml in educational and research teams.\nCaml Special Light.\nIn 1995, Xavier Leroy released Caml Special Light, which was an improved version of Caml. An optimizing native-code compiler was added to the bytecode compiler, which greatly increased performance to comparable levels with mainstream languages such as C++. Also, Leroy designed a high-level module system inspired by the module system of Standard ML which provided powerful facilities for abstraction and parameterization and made larger-scale programs easier to build.\nObjective Caml.\nDidier R\u00e9my and J\u00e9r\u00f4me Vouillon designed an expressive type system for objects and classes, which was integrated within Caml Special Light. This led to the emergence of the Objective Caml language, first released in 1996 and subsequently renamed to OCaml in 2011. This object system notably supported many prevalent object-oriented idioms in a statically type-safe way, while those same idioms caused unsoundness or required runtime checks in languages such as C++ or Java. In 2000, Jacques Garrigue extended Objective Caml with multiple new features such as polymorphic methods, variants, and labeled and optional arguments.\nOngoing development.\nLanguage improvements have been incrementally added for the last two decades to support the growing commercial and academic codebases in OCaml. The OCaml 4.0 release in 2012 added Generalized Algebraic Data Types (GADTs) and first-class modules to increase the flexibility of the language. The OCaml 5.0.0 release in 2022 is a complete rewrite of the language runtime, removing the global GC lock and adding effect handlers via delimited continuations. These changes enable support for shared-memory parallelism and color-blind concurrency, respectively.\nOCaml's development continued within the Cristal team at INRIA until 2005, when it was succeeded by the Gallium team. Subsequently, Gallium was succeeded by the Cambium team in 2019. As of 2023, there are 23 core developers of the compiler distribution from a variety of organizations and 41 developers for the broader OCaml tooling and packaging ecosystem. In 2023, the OCaml compiler was recognised with ACM SIGPLAN's Programming Languages Software Award.\nFeatures.\nOCaml features a static type system, type inference, parametric polymorphism, tail recursion, pattern matching, first class lexical closures, functors (parametric modules), exception handling, effect handling, and incremental generational automatic garbage collection.\nOCaml is notable for extending ML-style type inference to an object system in a general-purpose language. This permits structural subtyping, where object types are compatible if their method signatures are compatible, regardless of their declared inheritance (an unusual feature in statically typed languages).\nA foreign function interface for linking to C primitives is provided, including language support for efficient numerical arrays in formats compatible with both C and Fortran. OCaml also supports creating libraries of OCaml functions that can be linked to a \"main\" program in C, so that an OCaml library can be distributed to C programmers who have no knowledge or installation of OCaml.\nAlthough OCaml does not have a macro system as an indivisible part of the language (metaprogramming), i.e. built-in support for preprocessing, the https://. These can be of two types: one that works at the source code level (as in C), and one that works on the Abstract Syntax Tree level. The latter, which is called PPX, acronym for Pre-Processor eXtension, is the recommended one.\nThe OCaml distribution contains:\nThe native code compiler is available for many platforms, including Unix, Microsoft Windows, and Apple macOS. Portability is achieved through native code generation support for major architectures: \nThe bytecode compiler supports operation on any 32- or 64-bit architecture when native code generation is not available, requiring only a C compiler.\nOCaml bytecode and native code programs can be written in a multithreaded style, with preemptive context switching. OCaml threads in the same domain execute by time sharing only. However, an OCaml program can contain several domains.\nCode examples.\nSnippets of OCaml code are most easily studied by entering them into the \"top-level REPL\". This is an interactive OCaml session that prints the inferred types of resulting or defined expressions. The OCaml top-level is started by simply executing the OCaml program:\n$ ocaml\nOCaml version 5.4.0\nEnter #help;; for help.\nCode can then be entered at the \"#\" prompt. For example, to calculate 1+2*3:\n- : int = 7\nOCaml infers the type of the expression to be \"int\" (a machine-precision integer) and gives the result \"7\".\nHello World.\nThe following program \"hello.ml\":\nprint_endline \"Hello World!\"\ncan be run directly:\n $ ocaml hello.ml\ncompiled into a bytecode executable:\n $ ocamlc hello.ml -o hello\nor compiled into an optimized native-code executable:\n $ ocamlopt hello.ml -o hello\nand executed:\n$ ./hello\nHello World!\nThe first argument to ocamlc, \"hello.ml\", specifies the source file to compile and the \"-o hello\" flag specifies the output file.\nOption.\nThe codice_1 type constructor in OCaml, similar to the codice_2 type in Haskell, augments a given data type to either return codice_3 value of the given data type, or to return codice_4. This is used to express that a value might or might not be present.\n- : int option = Some 42\n- : 'a option = None\nThis is an example of a function that either extracts an int from an option, if there is one inside, and converts it into a string, or if not, returns an empty string:\nlet extract o =\n match o with\n | Some i -&gt; string_of_int i\n | None -&gt; \"\";;\n- : string = \"42\"\n- : string = \"\"\nSumming a list of integers.\nLists are one of the fundamental datatypes in OCaml. The following code example defines a recursive function \"sum\" that accepts one argument, \"integers\", which is supposed to be a list of integers. Note the keyword codice_5 which denotes that the function is recursive. The function recursively iterates over the given list of integers and provides a sum of the elements. The \"match\" statement has similarities to C's switch element, though it is far more general.\nlet rec sum integers = (* Keyword rec means 'recursive'. *)\n match integers with\n | [] -&gt; 0 (* Yield 0 if integers is the empty \n list []. *)\n | first :: rest -&gt; first + sum rest;; (* Recursive call if integers is a non-\n empty list; first is the first \n element of the list, and rest is a \n list of the rest of the elements, \n possibly []. *)\n # sum [1;2;3;4;5];;\n - : int = 15\nAnother way is to use standard fold function that works with lists.\nlet sum integers =\n List.fold_left (fun accumulator x -&gt; accumulator + x) 0 integers;;\n # sum [1;2;3;4;5];;\n - : int = 15\nSince the anonymous function is simply the application of the + operator, this can be shortened to:\nlet sum integers =\n List.fold_left (+) 0 integers\nFurthermore, one can omit the list argument by making use of a partial application:\nlet sum =\n List.fold_left (+) 0\nQuicksort.\nOCaml lends itself to concisely expressing recursive algorithms. The following code example implements an algorithm similar to quicksort that sorts a list in increasing order.\n let rec qsort = function\n | pivot :: rest -&gt;\n let is_less x = x &lt; pivot in\n let left, right = List.partition is_less rest in\n qsort left @ [pivot] @ qsort right\nOr using partial application of the &gt;= operator.\n let rec qsort = function\n | pivot :: rest -&gt;\n let is_less = (&gt;=) pivot in\n let left, right = List.partition is_less rest in\n qsort left @ [pivot] @ qsort right\nBirthday problem.\nThe following program calculates the smallest number of people in a room for whom the probability of completely unique birthdays is less than 50% (the birthday problem, where for 1 person the probability is 365/365 (or 100%), for 2 it is 364/365, for 3 it is 364/365 \u00d7 363/365, etc.) (answer = 23).\nlet year_size = 365.\nlet rec birthday_paradox prob people =\n let prob = (year_size -. float people) /. year_size *. prob in\n if prob &lt; 0.5 then\n Printf.printf \"answer = %d\\n\" (people+1)\n else\n birthday_paradox prob (people+1)\nbirthday_paradox 1.0 1\nChurch numerals.\nThe following code defines a Church encoding of natural numbers, with successor (succ) and addition (add). A Church numeral is a higher-order function that accepts a function and a value and applies to exactly times. To convert a Church numeral from a functional value to a string, we pass it a function that prepends the string to its input and the constant string . The given example outputs the Church numeral for five as \u201cSSSSS0\u201d.\nlet zero f x = x\nlet succ n f x = f (n f x)\nlet one = succ zero\nlet two = succ (succ zero)\nlet add n1 n2 f x = n1 f (n2 f x)\nlet to_string n = n (fun k -&gt; \"S\" ^ k) \"0\"\nlet church_5 = to_string (add (succ two) two)\nprint_endline church_5;\nArbitrary-precision factorial function (libraries).\nA variety of libraries are directly accessible from OCaml. For example, OCaml has a built-in library for arbitrary-precision arithmetic. As the factorial function grows very rapidly, it quickly overflows machine-precision numbers (typically 32- or 64-bits). Thus, factorial is a suitable candidate for arbitrary-precision arithmetic.\nIn OCaml, the Num module (now superseded by the ZArith module) provides arbitrary-precision arithmetic and can be loaded into a running top-level using:\nThe factorial function may then be written using the arbitrary-precision numeric operators \n/, */ and -/ :\n if n =/ Int 0 then Int 1 else n */ fact(n -/ Int 1);;\nval fact : Num.num -&gt; Num.num = &lt;fun&gt;\nThis function can compute much larger factorials, such as 120!:\n- : string =\n\"6689502913449127057588118054090372586752746333138029810295671352301633\n55724496298936687416527198498130815763789321409055253440858940812185989\n8481114389650005964960521256960000000000000000000000000000\"\nTriangle (graphics).\nThe following program renders a rotating triangle in 2D using OpenGL:\nlet () =\n ignore (Glut.init Sys.argv);\n Glut.initDisplayMode ~double_buffer:true ();\n ignore (Glut.createWindow ~title:\"OpenGL Demo\");\n let angle t = 10. *. t *. t in\n let render () =\n GlClear.clear [ `color ];\n GlMat.load_identity ();\n GlMat.rotate ~angle: (angle (Sys.time ())) ~z:1. ();\n GlDraw.begins `triangles;\n List.iter GlDraw.vertex2 [-1., -1.; 0., 1.; 1., -1.];\n GlDraw.ends ();\n Glut.swapBuffers () in\n GlMat.mode `modelview;\n Glut.displayFunc ~cb:render;\n Glut.idleFunc ~cb:(Some Glut.postRedisplay);\n Glut.mainLoop ()\nThe LablGL bindings to OpenGL are required. The program may then be compiled to bytecode with:\n $ ocamlc -I +lablGL lablglut.cma lablgl.cma simple.ml -o simple\nor to nativecode with:\n $ ocamlopt -I +lablGL lablglut.cmxa lablgl.cmxa simple.ml -o simple\nor, more simply, using the ocamlfind build command\n $ ocamlfind opt simple.ml -package lablgl.glut -linkpkg -o simple\nand run:\n $ ./simple\nFar more sophisticated, high-performance 2D and 3D graphical programs can be developed in OCaml. Thanks to the use of OpenGL and OCaml, the resulting programs can be cross-platform, compiling without any changes on many major platforms.\nFibonacci sequence.\nThe following code calculates the Fibonacci sequence of a number \"n\" inputted. It uses tail recursion and pattern matching.\nlet fib n =\n let rec fib_aux m a b =\n match m with\n | 0 -&gt; a\n | _ -&gt; fib_aux (m - 1) b (a + b)\n in fib_aux n 0 1\nHigher-order functions.\nFunctions may take functions as input and return functions as result. For example, applying \"twice\" to a function \"f\" yields a function that applies \"f\" two times to its argument.\nlet twice (f : 'a -&gt; 'a) = fun (x : 'a) -&gt; f (f x);;\nlet inc (x : int) : int = x + 1;;\nlet add2 = twice inc;;\nlet inc_str (x : string) : string = x ^ \" \" ^ x;;\nlet add_str = twice(inc_str);;\n # add2 98;;\n - : int = 100\n # add_str \"Test\";;\n - : string = \"Test Test Test Test\"\nThe function \"twice\" uses a type variable\" 'a\" to indicate that it can be applied to any function \"f\" mapping from a type\" 'a\" to itself, rather than only to \"int-&gt;int\" functions. In particular, \"twice\" can even be applied to itself.\n # let fourtimes f = (twice twice) f;;\n val fourtimes : ('a -&gt; 'a) -&gt; 'a -&gt; 'a = &lt;fun&gt;\n # let add4 = fourtimes inc;;\n val add4 : int -&gt; int = &lt;fun&gt;\n # add4 98;;\n - : int = 102\nDerived languages.\nMetaOCaml.\nMetaOCaml is a multi-stage programming extension of OCaml enabling incremental compiling of new machine code during runtime. Under some circumstances, significant speedups are possible using multistage programming, because more detailed information about the data to process is available at runtime than at the regular compile time, so the incremental compiler can optimize away many cases of condition checking, etc.\nAs an example: if at compile time it is known that some power function is needed often, but the value of is known only at runtime, a two-stage power function can be used in MetaOCaml:\nlet rec power n x =\n if n = 0\n then .&lt;1&gt;.\n else\n if even n\n then sqr (power (n/2) x)\n else .&lt;.~x *. .~(power (n - 1) x)&gt;.\nAs soon as is known at runtime, a specialized and very fast power function can be created:\n.&lt;fun x -&gt; .~(power 5 .&lt;x&gt;.)&gt;.\nThe result is:\nfun x_1 -&gt; (x_1 *\n let y_3 = \n let y_2 = (x_1 * 1)\n in (y_2 * y_2)\n in (y_3 * y_3))\nThe new function is automatically compiled.\nUsers.\nAt least several dozen companies use OCaml to some degree. Notable examples include:\nIn the context of academic teaching and research, OCaml has a remarkable presence in computer science teaching programmes, both in universities and colleges. A list of educational resources and these teaching programmes can be found https://.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39653", "revid": "12793781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39653", "title": "Dissociative identity disorder", "text": "Mental illness with multiple personality states\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nDissociative identity disorder (DID), previously known as multiple personality disorder (MPD), is characterized by the presence of at least two personality states or \"alters\". The diagnosis is controversial and remains disputed. Proponents of DID support the \"trauma model\", viewing the disorder as an organic response to severe childhood trauma. Critics of the trauma model support the \"sociogenic\" (fantasy) \"model\" of DID as a societal construct and learned behavior used to express distress; developed through iatrogenesis in therapy, cultural beliefs, and exposure to the behavior in media or online.\nPublic perceptions of the disorder were popularized by alleged true stories in the 20th century; \"Sybil\" influenced many elements of the diagnosis, but was later found to be fraudulent. After multiple personality disorder (MPD) was recognized as a diagnosis in DSM-III in 1975, an epidemic of the disorder spread across North America, closely tied to the satanic panic. Therapists began using hypnosis on patients, believing they were discovering alters and recovering forgotten memories of satanic ritual abuse. Psychologists familiar with the malleability of memory argued they were constructing false memories. Diagnoses reached 50,000 by the 1990s, but the FBI failed to validate allegations made against caregivers. Skepticism increased when MPD patients recovered from the behavior, retracted their false memories, and brought successful lawsuits against therapists. A sharp decline in cases followed, and the disorder was reclassified as \"dissociative identity disorder\" (DID) in DSM-IV. In the 2020s, an uptick in DID cases followed the spread of viral videos about the disorder on TikTok and YouTube. \nAccording to the DSM, the disorder is accompanied by memory gaps more severe than could be explained by ordinary forgetfulness, including gaps in consciousness, basic bodily functions, and perception. Research has challenged this premise; McNally found that although patients reported amnesia between alters, objective tests found their memory function was intact. Some clinicians view it as a form of hysteria. After a sharp decline in publications in the early 2000s from the peak in the 90s, Pope et al. (2006) described the disorder as an academic fad. Boysen et al. (2012) described research as steady, but lacking in convincing evidence.\nAccording to the DSM-5-TR, early childhood trauma, typically starting before 5\u20136 years of age, places someone at risk of developing dissociative identity disorder.(p334) Across diverse geographic regions, 90% of people diagnosed with dissociative identity disorder report experiencing multiple forms of childhood abuse, such as rape, violence, neglect, or severe bullying.(p334) Other traumatic childhood experiences that have been reported include painful medical and surgical procedures,(p334) war,(p334) terrorism,(p334) attachment disturbance,(p334) natural disaster, cult and occult abuse, loss of a loved one or loved ones, human trafficking,(p334) and dysfunctional family dynamics.(p334)\nTreatment generally involves supportive care and psychotherapy. Medications can be used for comorbid disorders or targeted symptom relief. Lifetime prevalence, according to two epidemiological studies in the US and Turkey, is between 1.1\u20131.5% of the general population and 3.9% of those admitted to psychiatric hospitals in Europe and North America,(p334) though these figures have been argued to be both overestimates and underestimates. Comorbidity with other psychiatric conditions is high. DID is diagnosed 6\u20139 times more often in women than in men.\nThe number of recorded cases increased significantly in the latter half of the 20th century, along with the number of identities reported by those affected, but it is unclear whether increased rates of diagnosis are due to better recognition or to sociocultural factors such as mass media portrayals. The typical presenting symptoms in different regions of the world may also vary depending on culture, such as alter identities taking the form of possessing spirits, deities, ghosts, or mythical creatures in cultures where possession states are normative.(p335)\nDefinitions.\nDissociation, the term that underlies dissociative disorder, has been defined as a \"compartmentalization of psychological functions such as identity and memory that are usually integrated\", with a resulting symptomatic criteria characterized by \"unbidden intrusions into awareness and behavior, with accompanying losses of continuity in subjective experience\" and/or \"inability to access information or control mental functions\". Critics have argued that the term lacks a precise, empirical, and generally agreed upon definition, proposing to define it instead as an impairment in \"meta-consciousness\".\nMany diverse experiences have been termed dissociative, ranging from normal failures in attention to the breakdowns in memory processes characterized by the dissociative disorders. It is therefore unknown whether there is a commonality among all dissociative experiences, or whether the range of mild to severe symptoms is a result of different etiologies and biological structures. Other terms used in the literature, including personality, personality state, identity, ego state, and amnesia, also lack agreed upon definitions. Multiple competing models exist that incorporate some non-dissociative symptoms while excluding dissociative ones.\nDue to the lack of consensus about terminology in the study of DID, several terms have been proposed. One is \"ego state\" (behaviors and experiences possessing permeable boundaries with other such states but united by a common sense of self). Another is \"alters\" (each of which may have a separate autobiographical memory, independent initiative, and a sense of ownership over individual behavior).\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe full presentation of dissociative identity disorder can occur at any age, but symptoms typically begin by ages 5\u201310. DID generally develops in childhood. According to the fifth edition [text revision] of the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (\"DSM-5-TR\"), symptoms of DID include \"the presence of two or more distinct personality states\" accompanied by the inability to recall personal information (an inability beyond what is expected from normal forgetting). Other DSM-5 symptoms include a loss of identity as related to individual distinct personality states, loss of subjective experience of the passage of time, and degradation of a sense of self and consciousness. In each individual, the clinical presentation varies, and the level of functioning can change from severe impairment to minimal impairment. The symptoms of dissociative amnesia are subsumed under a DID diagnosis; dissociative amnesia should not be diagnosed separately if DID criteria are met. Individuals with DID may experience distress from both the symptoms of DID (hearing voices, intrusive thoughts/emotions/impulses) and the consequences of the accompanying symptoms (inability to remember specific information or periods of time). The large majority of patients with DID report repeated childhood sexual and/or physical abuse, usually by caregivers, as well as organized abuse. Amnesia may be asymmetrical between identities; one identity may or may not be aware of what is known by another. Individuals with DID may be reluctant to discuss symptoms due to associations with abuse, shame, and fear.\nAround half of the people with DID have fewer than 10 identities, and most have fewer than 100; a person with as many as 4,500 identities was reported by Richard Kluft in 1988.(p503) The average number of identities has increased over time, from two or three to an average of approximately 16. However, it is unclear whether this is due to an actual increase in identities or simply that the psychiatric community has become more accepting of a high number of compartmentalized memory components.\nComorbid disorders.\nThe person's psychiatric history frequently contains multiple previous diagnoses of various disorders and treatment failures. The most common presenting complaint of DID is depression (90%) that is often treatment-resistant, with headaches and non-epileptic seizures being common neurologic symptoms. Comorbid disorders include post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), substance use disorders, eating disorders, anxiety disorders, personality disorders, and autism spectrum disorder. 30-70% of those diagnosed with DID have history of borderline personality disorder. Presentations of dissociation in people with schizophrenia differ from those with DID as not being rooted in trauma, and this distinction can be effectively tested; the conditions share a high rate of auditory hallucinations in the form of voices. Disturbed and altered sleep has also been suggested as having a role in dissociative disorders in general and specifically in DID. Alterations to environments are also said to affect DID patients. Individuals diagnosed with DID demonstrate the highest hypnotizability of any clinical population.\nCauses.\nGeneral.\nThere are two competing theories on what causes dissociative identity disorder to develop. The trauma-related model suggests that complex trauma or severe adversity in childhood, also known as developmental trauma, increases the risk of someone developing dissociative identity disorder. The non-trauma related model, also referred to as the sociogenic or fantasy model, suggests that dissociative identity disorder is developed through high fantasy-proneness or suggestibility, roleplaying, or sociocultural influences.\nThe DSM-5-TR states that \"early life trauma (e.g., neglect and physical, sexual, and emotional abuse, usually before ages 5-6 years) represents a major risk factor for dissociative identity disorder.\"(p333) Other risk factors reported include painful medical procedures, experiences of war, witnessing terrorism, or being trafficked in childhood.(p333) Dissociative disorders frequently occur after trauma, and the DSM-5-TR places them after the chapter on trauma- and stressor-related disorders to reflect this close relationship between complex trauma and dissociation.(p329)\nTraumagenic model.\nDissociative identity disorder is often conceptualized as \"the most severe form of a childhood-onset post-traumatic stress disorder.\" According to many researchers, the etiology of dissociative identity is multifactorial, involving a complex interaction between developmental trauma, sociocultural influences, and biological factors.\nPeople diagnosed with dissociative identity disorder often report that they have experienced physical or sexual abuse during childhood (although the accuracy of these reports has been disputed); others report overwhelming stress, serious medical illness, or other traumatic events during childhood. They also report more historical psychological trauma than those diagnosed with any other mental illness.\nSevere sexual, physical, or psychological trauma in childhood has been proposed as an explanation for its development; awareness, memories, and emotions of harmful actions or events caused by the trauma are sequestered away from consciousness, and alternate parts form with differing memories, emotions, beliefs, temperament, and behavior. Dissociative identity disorder is also attributed to extremes of stress and disturbances of attachment to caregivers in early life. What may result in complex post-traumatic stress disorder (C-PTSD) in adults may become dissociative identity disorder when occurring in children, possibly due to their greater use of imagination as a form of coping as well as lack of developmental integration in childhood.\nPossibly due to developmental changes and a more coherent sense of self past age 6\u20139 years, the experience of extreme trauma may result in different, though also complex, dissociative symptoms, identity disturbances and trauma-related disorders. Relationships between childhood abuse, disorganized attachment, and lack of social support are thought to be common risk factors leading to dissociative identity disorder. Although the role of a child's biological capacity to dissociate remains unclear, some evidence indicates a neurobiological impact of developmental stress. Moreover, in a review study done Vedat, it was proposed that personalities of children are universally born unintegrated, and the various aspects of a child's undeveloped personality gradually integrate as the child's brain grows and develops.\nDelinking early trauma from the etiology of dissociation has been explicitly rejected by those supporting the early trauma model. A 2012 review article argues the hypothesis that current or recent trauma may affect an individual's assessment of the more distant past, changing the experience of the past and resulting in dissociative states. Giesbrecht et al. have suggested there is no empirical evidence linking early trauma to dissociation, and instead suggest that problems with neuropsychological functioning, such as increased distractibility in response to certain emotions and contexts, account for dissociative features. A middle position hypothesizes that trauma, in some situations, alters neuronal mechanisms related to memory. Evidence is increasing that dissociative disorders are related both to a trauma history and to \"specific neural mechanisms\". It has also been suggested that there may be a genuine but more modest link between trauma and dissociative identity disorder, with early trauma causing increased fantasy-proneness, which may in turn render individuals more vulnerable to socio-cognitive influences surrounding the development of dissociative identity disorder.\nJoel Paris states that the trauma model of dissociative identity disorder increased the appeal of the diagnosis among health care providers, patients and the public as it validated the idea that child abuse had lifelong, serious effects. Paris asserts that there is very little experimental evidence supporting the trauma-dissociation hypothesis, and no research showing that dissociation consistently links to long-term memory disruption.\nSociogenic model.\nSymptoms of dissociative identity disorder may be created by therapists using techniques to \"recover\" memories (such as the use of hypnosis to \"access\" alter identities, facilitate age regression or retrieve memories) on suggestible individuals. Referred to as the non-trauma-related model, or the sociocognitive model or fantasy model, it proposes that dissociative identity disorder is due to a person consciously or unconsciously behaving in certain ways promoted by cultural stereotypes, with unwitting therapists providing cues through improper therapeutic techniques. This model posits that behavior is enhanced by media portrayals of dissociative identity disorder. One example of the disorder in media portrayals, that supports this theory, is in purportedly true books and films in the 20th century; \"Sybil\" became the basis for many elements of the diagnosis, but it was later found to be fictionalized.\nProponents of the non-trauma-related model note that the dissociative symptoms are rarely present before intensive therapy by specialists in the treatment of dissociative identity disorder who, through the process of eliciting, conversing with, and identifying alters, shape or possibly create the diagnosis. While proponents note that dissociative identity disorder is accompanied by genuine suffering and the distressing symptoms, and can be diagnosed reliably using the DSM criteria, they are skeptical of the trauma-related etiology suggested by proponents of the trauma-related model. Proponents of non-trauma-related dissociative identity disorder are concerned about the possibility of hypnotizability, suggestibility, frequent fantasization and mental absorption predisposing individuals to dissociation. They note that a small subset of doctors are responsible for diagnosing the majority of individuals with dissociative identity disorder.\nPsychologist Nicholas Spanos and others have suggested that, besides cases caused by therapy, dissociative identity disorder might result from role-playing. However, others disagree, arguing that there is no strong incentive for people to fabricate or maintain separate identities. They also cite reported histories of abuse as evidence. Other arguments that therapy can cause dissociative identity disorder include the lack of children diagnosed with DID, the sudden spike in rates of diagnosis after 1980 (although dissociative identity disorder was not a diagnosis until DSM-IV, published in 1994), the absence of evidence of increased rates of child abuse, the appearance of the disorder almost exclusively in individuals undergoing psychotherapy, particularly involving hypnosis, the presences of bizarre alternate identities (such as those claiming to be animals or mythological creatures) and an increase in the number of alternate identities over time (as well as an initial increase in their number as psychotherapy begins in DID-oriented therapy). These various cultural and therapeutic causes occur within a context of pre-existing psychopathology, notably borderline personality disorder, which is commonly comorbid with dissociative identity disorder. In addition, presentations can vary across cultures, such as Indian patients who only switch alters after a period of sleep, which is commonly how dissociative identity disorder is presented by the media within that country.\nProponents of non-trauma-related dissociative identity disorder state that the disorder is strongly linked to (possibly suggestive) psychotherapy, often involving recovered memories (memories that the person previously had amnesia for) or false memories, and that such therapy could cause additional identities. Such memories could be used to make an allegation of child sexual abuse. There is little agreement between those who see therapy as a cause and trauma as a cause. Supporters of therapy as a cause of dissociative identity disorder suggest that a small number of clinicians diagnosing a disproportionate number of cases would provide evidence for their position though it has also been claimed that higher rates of diagnosis in specific countries like the United States may be due to greater awareness of DID. Lower rates in other countries may be due to artificially low recognition of the diagnosis. It is argued that \"the mechanisms described in the DSM\u20135 as 'dissociative amnesia' do not correspond to current knowledge of how memory works, either in an ordinary way or in intense stress circumstances\", and that while traumatic memories may be forgotten and later remembered that this is due to regular processes of forgetting and remembering memories, and is not a distinct process. However, false memory syndrome \"per se\" is not regarded by mental health experts as a valid diagnosis, and has been described as \"a non-psychological term originated by a private foundation whose stated purpose is to support accused parents,\" and critics argue that the concept has no empirical support, and further describe the False Memory Syndrome Foundation as an advocacy group that has distorted and misrepresented memory research.\nA review of recent research into DID found not one empirical study into the sociocognitive model in the 2011-2021 period, identifying the model as \"a source of unresolved criticism of the trauma model\", not an empirical hypothesis in its own right. Some major skeptics of trauma-related DID have in recent years abandoned single-cause models of the disorder, arguing for an end to the controversy as no such model can provide a \"complete or fully satisfactory account\" of DID. As part of their \"trans-theoretical\" model Lynn et al. suggested that trauma may be more important than sociocognitive factors in clinical cases.\nChildren.\nThe rarity of DID diagnoses in children is cited as a reason to doubt the validity of the disorder, and proponents of both etiologies believe that the discovery of dissociative identity disorder in a child who had never undergone treatment would critically undermine the non-trauma related model. Conversely, if children are found to develop dissociative identity disorder only after undergoing treatment it would challenge the trauma-related model. As of 2011[ [update]], approximately 250 cases of dissociative identity disorder in children have been identified, though the data does not offer unequivocal support for either theory. While children have been diagnosed with dissociative identity disorder before therapy, several were presented to clinicians by parents who were themselves diagnosed with dissociative identity disorder; others were influenced by the appearance of dissociative identity disorder in popular culture or due to a diagnosis of psychosis due to hearing voices \u2013 a symptom also found in dissociative identity disorder. No studies have looked for children with dissociative identity disorder in the general population, and the single study that attempted to look for children with dissociative identity disorder not already in therapy did so by examining siblings of those already in therapy for dissociative identity disorder. An analysis of the diagnosis of children reported in scientific publications, 44 case studies of single patients were found to be evenly distributed (i.e., each case study was reported by a different author), but in articles regarding groups of patients, four researchers were responsible for the majority of the reports.\nThe initial theoretical description of dissociative identity disorder was that dissociative symptoms were a means of coping with extreme stress (particularly childhood sexual and physical abuse), but this belief has been challenged by the data of multiple research studies. Proponents of the trauma-related model claim the high correlation of child sexual and physical abuse reported by adults with dissociative identity disorder corroborates the link between trauma and dissociative identity disorder. However, the link between dissociative identity disorder and maltreatment has been questioned for several reasons. The studies reporting the links often rely on self-report rather than independent corroborations, and these results may be worsened by selection and referral bias. Most studies of trauma and dissociation are cross-sectional rather than longitudinal, which means researchers can not attribute causation, and studies avoiding recall bias have failed to corroborate such a causal link. In addition, studies rarely control for the many disorders comorbid with dissociative identity disorder, or family maladjustment (which is itself highly correlated with dissociative identity disorder). The popular association of dissociative identity disorder with childhood abuse is relatively recent, occurring only after the publication of \"Sybil\" in 1973. Most previous examples of \"multiples\" such as Chris Costner Sizemore, whose life was depicted in the book and film \"The Three Faces of Eve\", reported no memory of childhood trauma.\nPathophysiology.\nDespite research on DID including structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, single-photon emission computed tomography, event-related potentials, and electroencephalography, no convergent neuroimaging findings have been identified regarding DID, with the exception of smaller hippocampal volume in DID patients. In addition, many of the studies that do exist were performed from an explicitly trauma-based position. There is no research to date regarding the neuroimaging and introduction of false memories in DID patients. or support for amnesia between alters. DID patients also appear to show deficiencies in tests of conscious control of attention and memorization (which also showed signs of compartmentalization for implicit memory between alters but no such compartmentalization for verbal memory) and increased and persistent vigilance and startle responses to sound. DID patients may also demonstrate altered neuroanatomy.\nDiagnosis.\nGeneral.\nThe fifth, revised edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5-TR) diagnoses DID according to the diagnostic criteria found under code 300.14 (dissociative disorders). DID is often initially misdiagnosed because clinicians receive little training about dissociative disorders or DID, and often use standard diagnostic interviews that do not include questions about trauma, dissociation, or post-traumatic symptoms.(p118) This contributes to difficulties diagnosing the disorder, and to clinician bias.\nDID is rarely diagnosed in children. The criteria require that an individual be recurrently controlled by two or more discrete identities or personality states, accompanied by memory lapses for important information that is not caused by alcohol, drugs or medications and other medical conditions such as complex partial seizures. In children, the symptoms must not be better explained by \"imaginary playmates or other fantasy play\". Diagnosis is normally performed by a clinically trained mental health professional such as a psychiatrist or psychologist through clinical evaluation, interviews with family and friends, and consideration of other ancillary material. Specially designed interviews (such as the SCID-D) and personality assessment tools may be used in the evaluation as well. Since most of the symptoms depend on self-report and are not concrete and observable, there is a degree of subjectivity in making the diagnosis. People are often disinclined to seek treatment, especially since their symptoms may not be taken seriously; thus dissociative disorders have been referred to as \"diseases of hiddenness\".\nThe diagnosis has been criticized by supporters of \"therapy as a cause\" or the sociocognitive hypothesis as they believe it is a culture-bound and often health care-induced condition. The social cues involved in diagnosis may be instrumental in shaping patient behavior or attribution, such that symptoms within one context may be linked to DID, while in another time or place the diagnosis could have been something other than DID. Other researchers disagree and argue that the existence of the condition and its inclusion in the DSM is supported by multiple lines of reliable evidence, with diagnostic criteria allowing it to be clearly discriminated from conditions it is often mistaken for (schizophrenia, borderline personality disorder, and seizure disorder). That a large proportion of cases are diagnosed by specific health care providers, and that symptoms have been created in nonclinical research subjects given appropriate cueing has been suggested as evidence that a small number of clinicians who specialize in DID are responsible for the creation of alters through therapy.\nDifferential diagnoses.\nPatients with DID are diagnosed with 5-7 comorbid disorders on average, higher than other mental conditions. Misdiagnoses (e.g., schizophrenia, bipolar disorder) are very common among patients with DID.\nDue to overlapping symptoms, the differential diagnosis includes schizophrenia, normal and rapid-cycling bipolar disorder, epilepsy, borderline personality disorder, and autism spectrum disorder. Delusions or auditory hallucinations can be mistaken for speech by other personalities. Persistence and consistency of identities and behavior, amnesia, measures of dissociation or hypnotizability and reports from family members or other associates indicating a history of such changes can help distinguish DID from other conditions. A diagnosis of DID takes precedence over any other dissociative disorders. Distinguishing DID from malingering is a concern when financial or legal gains are an issue, and factitious disorder may also be considered if the person has a history of help or attention-seeking. Individuals who state that their symptoms are due to external spirits or entities entering their bodies are generally diagnosed with dissociative disorder not otherwise specified rather than DID due to the lack of identities or personality states. Most individuals who enter an emergency department and are unaware of their names are generally in a psychotic state. Although auditory hallucinations are common in DID, complex visual hallucinations may also occur. Those with DID generally have adequate reality testing. People with DID may have more positive and fewer negative Schneiderian symptoms of schizophrenia. The DID persona perceives any voices heard as coming from inside their heads whereas the schizophrenia persona perceives voices as external. In addition, individuals with psychosis are much less susceptible to hypnosis than those with DID. Difficulties in differential diagnosis are increased in children.\nDID must be distinguished from, or determined if comorbid with, a variety of disorders including mood disorders, psychosis, anxiety disorders, PTSD, personality disorders, cognitive disorders, neurological disorders, epilepsy, somatoform disorder, factitious disorder, malingering, other dissociative disorders, and trance states. An additional aspect of the controversy of diagnosis is that there are many forms of dissociation and memory lapses, which can be common in both stressful and nonstressful situations and can be attributed to much less controversial diagnoses.\nA relationship between DID and borderline personality disorder has been posited, with various clinicians noting overlap between symptoms and behaviors and it has been suggested that some cases of DID may arise \"from a substrate of borderline traits\". Reviews of DID patients and their medical records concluded that 30-70% of those diagnosed with DID have comorbid borderline personality disorder.\nThe DSM-5 elaborates on cultural background as an influence for some presentations of DID.(p295)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many features of dissociative identity disorder can be influenced by the individual's cultural background. Individuals with this disorder may present with prominent medically unexplained neurological symptoms, such as non-epileptic seizures, paralyses, or sensory loss, in cultural settings where such symptoms are common. Similarly, in settings where normative possession is common (e.g., rural areas in the developing world, among certain religious groups in the United States and Europe), the fragmented identities may take the form of possessing spirits, deities, demons, animals, or mythical figures. Acculturation or prolonged intercultural contact may shape the characteristics of other identities (e.g., identities in India may speak English exclusively and wear Western clothes). Possession-form dissociative identity disorder can be distinguished from culturally accepted possession states in that the former is involuntary, distressing, uncontrollable, and often recurrent or persistent; involves conflict between the individual and their surrounding family, social, or work milieu; and is manifested at times and in places that violate the norms of the culture or religion.\nValidity disputed.\nDID is among the most controversial of the dissociative disorders and among the most controversial disorders found in the DSM-5-TR. The primary dispute is between those who believe DID is caused by traumatic stresses that split the mind into multiple identities, each with a separate set of memories, and those who believe that the symptoms of DID are produced artificially by certain psychotherapeutic practices or by patients playing a role they believe appropriate for a person with DID. The debate between the two positions is characterized by intense disagreement. Research has been characterized by poor methodology. Psychiatrist Joel Paris asserts that the idea that a personality is capable of splitting into independent alters is an unproven assertion at odds with research in cognitive psychology, while David Gleaves argues that recognition of DID was in fact prompted by developments in that field, including theories of parallel-distributed processing.\nAccording to proponents of the trauma model, the ordinary \"host\" personality experiences memory gaps for their alter personalities. Research has challenged this idea: Richard McNally (2012) found that although patients reported amnesia between alters, objective tests found their memory function was intact.\nSome people, such as Russell A. Powell and Travis L. Gee, believe that DID is caused by health care, i.e. symptoms of DID are created by therapists themselves via hypnosis. This implies that those with DID are especially susceptible to manipulation by hypnosis and suggestion. The iatrogenic model also sometimes states that treatment for DID is harmful. According to Brand, Loewenstein, and Spiegel, \"claims that DID treatment is harmful are based on anecdotal cases, opinion pieces, reports of damage that are not substantiated in the scientific literature, misrepresentations of the data, and misunderstandings about DID treatment and the phenomenology of DID\". Their claim is evidenced by the fact that only 5%\u201310% of people receiving treatment initially worsen in their symptoms.\nPsychiatrists August Piper and Harold Merskey have challenged the trauma hypothesis, arguing that correlation does not imply causation\u2014the fact that people with DID report childhood trauma does not mean trauma causes DID\u2014and point to the rarity of the diagnosis before 1980 as well as a failure to find DID as an outcome in longitudinal studies of traumatized children. They assert that DID cannot be accurately diagnosed because of vague and unclear diagnostic criteria in the DSM and undefined concepts such as \"personality state\" and \"identities\", and question the lack of evidence of childhood abuse (beyond self-reports) in some people with DID, the lack of a defined threshold of abuse sufficient to induce DID, and the extremely small number of cases of children diagnosed with DID despite an average age of three years at the appearance of the first alter. Psychiatrist Colin Ross disagrees with Piper and Merskey's conclusion that DID cannot be accurately diagnosed, pointing to internal consistency between different structured dissociative disorder interviews (including the Dissociative Experiences Scale, Dissociative Disorders Interview Schedule, and Structured Clinical Interview for Dissociative Disorders) in the internal validity range of widely accepted mental illnesses such as schizophrenia and major depressive disorder. In his opinion, Piper and Merskey set their standard of proof higher than it is for other diagnoses. He also asserts that Piper and Merskey have cherry-picked data and not incorporated all relevant scientific literature, such as independent corroborating evidence of trauma.\nTreatment.\nTreatment under the sociogenic model.\nProponents of the sociogenic model dispute that dissociative identity disorder is an organic response to trauma, but believe it is a socially constructed behavior and psychic contagion. Paul R. McHugh says that the disorder is \"sustained in large part by the attention that doctors tend to pay to it. This means that it is not a mental condition that derives from nature, such as panic anxiety or major depression. It exists in the world as an artificial product of human devising\". McHugh believed that proponents of dissociative identity disorder inadvertently worsen the patient's condition by validating the behavior and providing attention.\nAccording to McHugh, at Johns Hopkins Hospital doctors should ignore the displays from \"alters\", and instead focus on treatment for other psychiatric problems patients present with. This method of treatment is reportedly successful:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What surprises many people is that multiple personalities tend to fall away quickly when ignored. Usually on our anorexia nervosa floor, patients who entered with MPD [multiple personality disorder] cease discussing their alters within a few days and often report that after a week or two of recovering their body weight and attending group therapy tied to their eating disorder, the ideas and preoccupations with their \"alters\" gradually vanished from their thinking.\nAccording to a 2014 review, such views are based on anecdotal or non-peer-reviewed findings. In controlled studies, non-specialised treatment that did not address dissociative self-states did not substantially improve DID symptoms, though there may be improvement in patients' other conditions.\nTreatments under the trauma model.\nThe International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation, proponents of the trauma model, have published guidelines for \"phase-oriented\" treatment in adults as well as children and adolescents that are widely used successfully in the field of DID treatment. The guidelines state that \"a desirable treatment outcome is a workable form of integration or harmony among alternate identities\". Some experts in treating people with DID use the techniques recommended in the 2011 treatment guidelines. The empirical research includes the longitudinal TOP DD treatment study, which found that patients showed \"statistically significant reductions in dissociation, PTSD, distress, depression, hospitalisations, suicide attempts, self-harm, dangerous behaviours, drug use, and physical pain\" and improved overall functioning. Treatment effects have been studied for over thirty years, with some studies having a follow-up of ten years. Adult and child treatment guidelines exist that suggest a three-phased approach.\nCommon treatment methods include an eclectic mix of psychotherapy techniques, including cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), insight-oriented therapy, dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT), hypnotherapy, and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR).\nHypnosis should be carefully considered when choosing both treatment and provider practitioners because of its dangers. For example, hypnosis can sometimes lead to false memories and false accusations of abuse by family, loved ones, friends, providers, and community members. Those who suffer from dissociative identity disorder have commonly been subject to actual abuse (sexual, physical, emotional, financial) by therapists, family, friends, loved ones, and community members.\nBrief treatment due to managed care may be difficult, as individuals diagnosed with DID may have unusual difficulties in trusting a therapist and take a prolonged period to form a comfortable therapeutic alliance. Regular contact (at least weekly) is recommended, and treatment generally lasts years, not weeks or months. Sleep hygiene has been suggested as a treatment option, but has not been tested. In general, there are very few clinical trials on the treatment of DID, none of which were randomized controlled trials.\nTherapy for DID is generally phase-oriented. Different alters may appear based on their greater ability to deal with specific situational stresses or threats. While some patients may initially present with a large number of alters, this number may reduce during treatment, though it is considered important for the therapist to become familiar with at least the more prominent personality states, as the \"host\" personality may not be the \"true\" identity of the patient. Specific alters may react negatively to therapy, fearing that the therapist's goal is to eliminate the alter (particularly those associated with illegal or violent activities). A more realistic and appropriate goal of treatment is to integrate adaptive responses to abuse, injury, or other threats into the overall personality structure.\nThe first phase of therapy focuses on symptoms and relieving the distressing aspects of the condition, ensuring the safety of the individual, improving the patient's capacity to form and maintain healthy relationships, and improving general daily life functioning. Comorbid disorders such as substance use disorder and eating disorders are addressed in this phase of treatment. The second phase focuses on stepwise exposure to traumatic memories and prevention of re-dissociation. The final phase focuses on reconnecting the identities of disparate alters into a single functioning identity with all its memories and experiences intact.\nPrognosis.\nLittle is known about prognosis of untreated DID. Symptoms commonly wax and wane over time. Patients with mainly dissociative and post-traumatic symptoms face a better prognosis than those with comorbid disorders or those still in contact with abusers, and the latter groups often face a lengthier and more difficult treatment course. Suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and self-harm are common in the DID population. Duration of treatment can vary depending on patient goals, which can range from merely improving inter-alter communication and cooperation, to reducing inter-alter amnesia, to integration and \"fusion\" of all alters, but this last goal generally takes years, with trained and experienced psychotherapists.\nEpidemiology.\nGeneral.\nAccording to the American Psychiatric Association, the 12-month prevalence of DID among adults in the US is 1.5%, with similar prevalence between women and men. Population prevalence estimates have been described to widely vary, with some estimates of DID in inpatient settings suggesting 1\u20139.6%.\" Reported rates in the community vary from 1% to 3% with higher rates among psychiatric patients. As of 2017, evidence suggested a prevalence of DID of 2\u20135% among psychiatric inpatients, 2\u20133% among outpatients, and 1% in the general population. Its true prevalence is a matter of controversy, with these figures being argued to be both heavy overestimates and heavy underestimates.\nAs of 2012, DID was diagnosed 5 to 9 times more commonly in women than men during young adulthood, although this may have been due to selection bias, as men meeting DID diagnostic criteria were suspected to end up in the criminal justice system rather than hospitals. DID diagnoses are extremely rare in children; much of the research on childhood DID occurred in the 1980s and 1990s and does not address ongoing controversies surrounding the diagnosis. DID occurs more commonly in young adults and declines in prevalence with age.\nThere is a poor awareness of DID in the clinical settings and the general public. Poor clinical education (or lack thereof) for DID and other dissociative disorders has been described in literature: \"most clinicians have been taught (or assume) that DID is a rare disorder with a florid, dramatic presentation.\" Symptoms in patients are often not easily visible, which complicates diagnosis. DID has a high correlation with, and has been described as a form of, complex post-traumatic stress disorder. There is a significant overlap of symptoms between borderline personality disorder and DID.\nHistorical prevalence.\nRates of diagnosed DID were increasing in the late 20th century, reaching a peak of diagnoses at approximately 40,000 cases by the end of the 20th century, up from less than 200 diagnoses before 1970. Initially, DID, along with the rest of the dissociative disorders were considered the rarest of psychological conditions, diagnosed in fewer than 100 by 1944, with only one further case reported in the next two decades. In the late 1970s and '80s, the number of diagnoses rose sharply. An estimate from the 1980s placed the incidence at 0.01%. Accompanying this rise was an increase in the number of alters, rising from only the primary and one alter personality in most cases, to an average of 13 in the mid-1980s (the increase in both number of cases and number of alters within each case are both factors in professional skepticism regarding the diagnosis). Others explain the increase as being due to the use of inappropriate therapeutic techniques in highly suggestible individuals, though this is itself controversial while proponents of DID claim the increase in incidence is due to increased recognition of and ability to recognize the disorder.\nA 1996 essay suggested three possible causes for the sudden increase of DID diagnoses, among which the author suspects the first being most likely:\nDissociative disorders were excluded from the .\nNorth America.\nDID continues to be considered a controversial diagnosis; it was once regarded as a phenomenon confined to North America, though studies have since been published from DID populations across 6 continents. Although research has appeared discussing the appearance of DID in other countries and cultures and the condition has been described in non-English speaking nations and non-Western cultures, these reports all occur in English-language journals authored by international researchers who cite Western scientific literature.\nSocial media.\nA paper published in 2022 in the journal Comprehensive Psychiatry described how prolonged social media use, especially on video-sharing platforms including TikTok, has exposed young people, largely adolescent females, a core user group of TikTok, to a growing number of content creators making videos about their self-diagnosed disorders. \"An increasing number of reports from the US, UK, Germany, Canada, and Australia have noted an increase in functional tic-like behaviors before and during the COVID-19 pandemic, coinciding with an increase in social media content related to[...]dissociative identity disorder.\" Authors noted that such cases of self-diagnosed DID (amongst other conditions) often differ from clinically defined symptoms of the disorder, creating the possibility of malingering, and potential negative impacts on those with clinically diagnosed DID seeking integrative therapy. The paper concluded that there \"is an urgent need for focused empirical research investigation into this concerning phenomenon that is related to the broader research and discourse examining social media influences on mental health\".\nHistory.\nEarly references.\nIn the 19th century, \"d\u00e9doublement,\" or \"double consciousness\", the historical precursor to DID, was frequently described as a state of sleepwalking, with scholars hypothesizing that the patients were switching between a normal consciousness and a \"somnambulistic state\".\nAn intense interest in spiritualism, parapsychology and hypnosis continued throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, running in parallel with John Locke's views that there was an association of ideas requiring the coexistence of feelings with awareness of the feelings. Hypnosis, which was pioneered in the late 18th century by Franz Mesmer and Armand-Marie Jacques de Chastenet, Marques de Puys\u00e9gur, challenged Locke's association of ideas. Hypnotists reported what they thought were second personalities emerging during hypnosis and wondered how two minds could coexist.\nIn the 19th century, there were several reported cases of multiple personalities, which Rieber estimated would be close to 100. Epilepsy was seen as a factor in some cases, and discussion of this connection continues into the present era.\nBy the late 19th century, there was a general acceptance that emotionally traumatic experiences could cause long-term disorders that might display a variety of symptoms. These conversion disorders were found to occur in even the most resilient individuals, but with profound effect in someone with emotional instability like Louis Vivet (1863\u2013?), who had a traumatic experience as a 17-year-old when he encountered a viper. Vivet was the subject of countless medical papers and became the most studied case of dissociation in the 19th century.\nBetween 1880 and 1920, various international medical conferences devoted time to sessions on dissociation. It was in this climate that Jean-Martin Charcot introduced his ideas of the impact of nervous shocks as a cause for a variety of neurological conditions. One of Charcot's students, Pierre Janet, took these ideas and went on to develop his own theories of dissociation. One of the first individuals diagnosed with multiple personalities to be scientifically studied was Clara Norton Fowler, under the pseudonym Christine Beauchamp; American neurologist Morton Prince studied Fowler between 1898 and 1904, describing her case study in his 1906 monograph, \"Dissociation of a Personality\".\n20th century.\nIn the early 20th century, interest in dissociation and multiple personalities waned for several reasons. After Charcot died in 1893, many of his so-called hysterical patients were exposed as frauds, and Janet's association with Charcot tarnished his theories of dissociation. Sigmund Freud recanted his earlier emphasis on dissociation and childhood trauma.\nIn 1908, Eugen Bleuler introduced the term \"schizophrenia\" to represent a revised disease concept for Emil Kraepelin's \"dementia praecox.\" Whereas Kraepelin's natural disease entity was anchored in the metaphor of progressive deterioration and mental weakness and defect, Bleuler offered a reinterpretation based on dissociation or \"splitting\" (\"Spaltung\") and widely broadened the inclusion criteria for the diagnosis. A review of the \"Index medicus\" from 1903 through 1978 showed a dramatic decline in the number of reports of multiple personality after the diagnosis of schizophrenia became popular, especially in the United States. The rise of the broad diagnostic category of dementia praecox has also been posited in the disappearance of \"hysteria\" (the usual diagnostic designation for cases of multiple personalities) by 1910. Several factors helped create a large climate of skepticism and disbelief; paralleling the increased suspicion of DID was the decline of interest in dissociation as a laboratory and clinical phenomenon.\nStarting in about 1927, there was a large increase in the number of reported cases of schizophrenia, which was matched by an equally large decrease in the number of multiple personality reports. With the rise of a uniquely American reframing of dementia praecox/schizophrenia as a functional disorder or \"reaction\" to psychobiological stressors \u2013 a theory first put forth by Adolf Meyer in 1906\u2014many trauma-induced conditions associated with dissociation, including \"shell shock\" or \"war neuroses\" during World War I, were subsumed under these diagnoses. It was argued in the 1980s that DID patients were often misdiagnosed with schizophrenia.\nThe public, however, was exposed to psychological ideas that took their interest. Mary Shelley's \"Frankenstein\", Robert Louis Stevenson's \"Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde\", and many short stories by Edgar Allan Poe had a formidable impact.\n\"The Three Faces of Eve\".\nIn 1957, with the publication of the bestselling book \"The Three Faces of Eve\" by psychiatrists Corbett H. Thigpen and Hervey M. Cleckley, based on a case study of their patient Chris Costner Sizemore, and the subsequent popular movie of the same name, the American public's interest in multiple personality was revived. More cases of dissociative identity disorder were diagnosed in the following years. The cause of the sudden increase of cases is indefinite, but it may be attributed to the increased awareness, which revealed previously undiagnosed cases or new cases may have been induced by the influence of the media on the behavior of individuals and the judgement of therapists. During the 1970s, an initially small number of clinicians campaigned to have it considered a legitimate diagnosis.\nBook and film \"Sybil\".\nIn 1974, the highly influential book \"Sybil\" was published, and later made into a miniseries in 1976 and again in 2007. Describing what Robert Rieber called \"the third most famous of multiple personality cases,\" it presented a detailed discussion of the problems of treatment of \"Sybil Isabel Dorsett\", a pseudonym for Shirley Ardell Mason.\nThough the book and subsequent films helped popularize the diagnosis and trigger an epidemic of the diagnosis, later analysis of the case suggested different interpretations, ranging from Mason's problems having been caused by the therapeutic methods and sodium pentathol injections used by her psychiatrist, C. B. Wilbur, or an inadvertent hoax due in part to the lucrative publishing rights, though this conclusion has itself been challenged.\nDavid Spiegel, a Stanford psychiatrist whose father treated Shirley Ardell Mason on occasion, says that his father described Mason as \"a brilliant hysteric. He felt that Wilbur tended to pressure her to exaggerate on the dissociation she already had.\" As media attention on DID increased, so too did the controversy surrounding the diagnosis.\nHistory in the DSM.\nThe DSM-II used the term \"hysterical neurosis, dissociative type\". It described the possible occurrence of alterations in the patient's state of consciousness or identity, and included the symptoms of \"amnesia, somnambulism, fugue, and multiple personality\". The DSM-III grouped the diagnosis with the other four major dissociative disorders using the term \"multiple personality disorder\". The DSM-IV made more changes to DID than any other dissociative disorder, and renamed it DID. The name was changed for two reasons: First, the change emphasizes the main problem is not a multitude of personalities, but rather a lack of a single, unified identity and an emphasis on \"the identities as centers of information processing\". Second, the term \"personality\" is used to refer to \"characteristic patterns of thoughts, feelings, moods, and behaviors of the whole individual\", while for a patient with DID, the switches between identities and behavior patterns is the personality. It is, for this reason, the DSM-IV-TR referred to \"distinct identities or personality states\" instead of personalities. The diagnostic criteria also changed to indicate that while the patient may name and personalize alters, they lack independent, objective existence. The changes also included the addition of amnesia as a symptom, which was not included in the DSM-III-R because despite being a core symptom of the condition, patients may experience \"amnesia for the amnesia\" and fail to report it. Amnesia was replaced when it became clear that the risk of false negative diagnoses was low because amnesia was central to DID.\nThe ICD-10 places the diagnosis in the category of \"dissociative disorders\", within the subcategory of \"other dissociative (conversion) disorders\", but continues to list the condition as multiple personality disorder.\nThe DSM-IV-TR criteria for DID have been criticized for failing to capture the clinical complexity of DID, lacking usefulness in diagnosing individuals with DID (for instance, by focusing on the two least frequent and most subtle symptoms of DID) producing a high rate of false negatives and an excessive number of DDNOS diagnoses, for excluding possession (seen as a cross-cultural form of DID), and for including only two \"core\" symptoms of DID (amnesia and self-alteration) while failing to discuss hallucinations, trance-like states, somatoform, depersonalization, and derealization symptoms. Arguments have been made for allowing diagnosis through the presence of some, but not all of the characteristics of DID rather than the current exclusive focus on the two least common and noticeable features. The DSM-IV-TR criteria have also been criticized for being tautological, using imprecise and undefined language and for the use of instruments that give a false sense of validity and empirical certainty to the diagnosis.\nThe DSM-5 updated the definition of DID in 2013, summarizing the changes as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Several changes to the criteria for dissociative identity disorder have been made in DSM-5. First, Criterion A has been expanded to include certain possession-form phenomena and functional neurological symptoms to account for more diverse presentations of the disorder. Second, Criterion A now specifically states that transitions in identity may be observable by others or self-reported. Third, according to Criterion B, individuals with dissociative identity disorder may have recurrent gaps in recall for everyday events, not just for traumatic experiences. Other text modifications clarify the nature and course of identity disruptions.\nBetween 1968 and 1980, the term that was used for dissociative identity disorder was \"Hysterical neurosis, dissociative type\". The APA wrote in the second edition of the DSM: \"In the dissociative type, alterations may occur in the patient's state of consciousness or in his identity, to produce such symptoms as amnesia, somnambulism, fugue, and multiple personality.\" The number of cases sharply increased in the late 1970s and throughout the 80s, and the first scholarly monographs on the topic appeared in 1986.\nRe-classifications.\nThe DSM-III intentionally omitted the terms \"hysteria\" and \"neurosis\", naming those as Dissociative Disorders, which included Multiple Personality Disorder, and also added Post-traumatic Stress Disorder in Anxiety Disorders section.\nIn the opinion of McGill University psychiatrist Joel Paris, this inadvertently legitimized them by forcing textbooks, which mimicked the structure of the DSM, to include a separate chapter on them, and increased the diagnosis of dissociative conditions. Once a rarely occurring spontaneous phenomenon (research in 1944 showed only 76 cases), the diagnosis became \"an artifact of bad (or na\u00efve) psychotherapy\" as patients capable of dissociating were accidentally encouraged to express their symptoms by \"overly fascinated\" therapists.\n\"Interpersonality amnesia\" was removed as a diagnostic feature from the DSM-III in 1987, which may have contributed to the increasing frequency of the diagnosis. There were 200 reported cases of DID as of 1980, and 20,000 from 1980 to 1990. Joan Acocella reports that 40,000 cases were diagnosed from 1985 to 1995. Scientific publications regarding DID peaked in the mid-1990s, rapidly declined, then has continued on a steady increasing trend since.\nIn 1994, the fourth edition of the DSM replaced the criteria again and changed the name of the condition from \"multiple personality disorder\" to the current \"dissociative identity disorder\" to emphasize the importance of changes to consciousness and identity rather than personality. The inclusion of interpersonality amnesia helped to distinguish DID from dissociative disorder not otherwise specified (DDNOS), but the condition retains an inherent subjectivity due to difficulty in defining terms such as personality, identity, ego-state, and even amnesia. The ICD-10 classified DID as a \"Dissociative [conversion] disorder\" and used the name \"multiple personality disorder\" with the classification number of F44.81. In the ICD-11, the World Health Organization have classified DID under the name \"dissociative identity disorder\" (code 6B64), and most cases formerly diagnosed as DDNOS are classified as \"partial dissociative identity disorder\" (code 6B65).\n21st century.\nA 2006 study compared scholarly research and publications on DID and dissociative amnesia to other mental health conditions, such as anorexia nervosa, alcohol use disorder, and schizophrenia from 1984 to 2003. The results were found to be unusually distributed, with a very low level of publications in the 1980s followed by a significant rise that peaked in the mid-1990s and subsequently rapidly declined in the decade following. Compared to 25 other diagnoses, the mid-1990s \"bubble\" of publications regarding DID was unique. In the opinion of the authors of the review, the publication results suggest a period of \"fashion\" that waned, and that the two diagnoses \"presently do not command widespread scientific acceptance.\" A 2024 review found \"steady\" continued research after 2011, with 160 academic studies located in the 2011-2021 period, an increase of 60% over the previous decade. Authors previously skeptical of DID have adopted a \"trans-theoretical\" approach where trauma and social factors are simply two of many potential factors, indicating that \"the heat of past DID controversies has diminished some with the rise of multidimensional models of psychopathology\".\nSociety and culture.\nLegal issues.\nPeople with dissociative identity disorder may be involved in legal cases as a witness, defendant, or the victim/injured party. Claims of DID have been used only rarely to argue criminal insanity in court. In the United States, dissociative identity disorder has previously been found to meet the Frye test as a generally accepted medical condition, and the newer Daubert standard. Within legal circles, DID has been described as one of the most disputed psychiatric diagnoses and forensic assessments are needed. For defendants whose defense states they have a diagnosis of DID, courts must distinguish between those who genuinely have DID and those who are malingering to avoid responsibility. Expert witnesses are typically used to assess defendants in such cases, although some of the standard assessments like the MMPI-2 were not developed for people with a trauma history and the validity scales may incorrectly suggest malingering. In DID, evidence about the altered states of consciousness, actions of alter identities and episodes of amnesia may be excluded from a court if they are not considered relevant, although different countries and regions have different laws. A diagnosis of DID may be used to claim a defense of not guilty by reason of insanity, but this very rarely succeeds, or of diminished capacity, which may reduce the length of a sentence. DID may also affect competency to stand trial. A not guilty by reason of insanity plea was first used successfully in an American court in 1978, in the \"State of Ohio v. Milligan\" case. However, a DID diagnosis is not automatically considered a justification for an insanity verdict, and since Milligan the few cases claiming insanity have largely been unsuccessful.\nBennett G. Braun was an American psychiatrist known for his promotion of the concept of multiple personality disorder (now called \"dissociative identity disorder\") and involvement in promoting the \"Satanic Panic\", a moral panic around a discredited conspiracy theory that led to thousands of people being wrongfully medically treated or investigated for nonexistent crimes.\nIn popular culture.\nThe public's long fascination with DID has led to a number of different books and films,(p169) with many representations described as increasing stigma by perpetuating the myth that people with mental illness are usually dangerous. Movies about DID have been also criticized for poor representation of both DID and its treatment, including \"greatly overrepresenting\" the role of hypnosis in therapy, showing a significantly smaller number of personalities than many people with DID have, and misrepresenting people with DID as having theatrical and blatant switches between very conspicuous and different alters. Some movies are parodies and ridicule DID, for instance, \"Me, Myself &amp; Irene\", which also incorrectly states that DID is schizophrenia. In some stories, DID is used as a plot device, e.g. in \"Fight Club\", and in whodunnit stories like \"Secret Window\".\n\"United States of Tara\" was reported to be the first US television series with DID as its focus, and a professional commentary on each episode was published by the International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation.\nA number of people with DID have publicly spoken about their experiences, including comedian and talk show host Roseanne Barr, who interviewed Truddi Chase, author of \"When Rabbit Howls\"; Chris Costner Sizemore, the subject of \"The Three Faces of Eve\", Cameron West, author of \"First Person Plural: My life as a multiple\", and NFL player Herschel Walker, author of \"Breaking Free: My life with dissociative identity disorder\".\nIn \"The Three Faces of Eve\" (1957) hypnosis is used to identify a childhood trauma which then allows her to fuse from three identities into just one. However, Sizemore's books \"I'm Eve\" and \"A Mind of My Own\" revealed that this did not last; she later attempted suicide, sought further treatment, and had twenty-two personalities rather than three. Sizemore re-entered therapy and by 1974 had achieved a lasting recovery. \"\" portrays many of the 92 personalities Chase described in her book \"When Rabbit Howls\", and is unusual in breaking away from the typical ending of integrating into one. \"Frankie &amp; Alice\" (2010), starring Halle Berry was based on a real person with DID. In popular culture dissociative identity disorder is often confused with schizophrenia, as was true of the 1958 episode \"The Case of the Deadly Double\" of the \"Perry Mason\" TV series, where a woman shown as having two very distinct personas is described as being schizophrenic On the other hand, some movies advertised as representing dissociative identity disorder may be more representative of psychosis or schizophrenia, for example \"Psycho\" (1960).\nIn his book \"The C.I.A. Doctors: Human Rights Violations by American Psychiatrists\", psychiatrist Colin A. Ross states that based on documents obtained through freedom of information legislation, a psychiatrist linked to Project MKULTRA reported being able to deliberately induce dissociative identity disorder using a variety of highly aversive and abusive techniques, creating a Manchurian Candidate for military purposes.\nIn the USA Network television production \"Mr. Robot\", the protagonist Elliot Alderson was created using anecdotal experiences of DID of the show's creator's friends. Sam Esmail said he consulted with a psychologist who \"concretized\" the character's mental health conditions, especially his plurality.\nIn M. Night Shyamalan's \"Unbreakable\" superhero film series (specifically, the films \"Split\" and \"Glass\"), Kevin Wendell Crumb is diagnosed with DID, and that some of the personalities have super-human powers. Experts and advocates say the films are a negative portrayal of DID, and the films promote the stigmatization of the disorder.\nIn the 1993 Indian psychological horror film \"Manichithrathazhu\", the central character Ganga exhibits symptoms depicted as Dissociative Identity Disorder (DID), where an alternate personality, Nagavalli, expresses suppressed emotions. While lauded for popularizing mental health discussions, the film's dramatic, ritualistic \"cure\" is considered an oversimplification of DID's complex treatment. Nevertheless, it remains a culturally significant portrayal.\nIn the 1997 Japanese role-playing game \"Final Fantasy VII\", the protagonist Cloud Strife is shown to have an identity disorder involving false memories as a result of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Sharon Packer has identified Cloud as having DID.\nIn Marvel Comics, the character of Moon Knight is shown to have DID. In the TV series \"Moon Knight\" based on the comic book character, protagonist Marc Spector is depicted with DID; the website for the National Alliance on Mental Illness appears in the series' end credits.\nOnline subculture.\nA community of self-identifying \"plurals\" exists on social media, including YouTube, Reddit, Discord, and TikTok with an associated experience called \"multiplicity.\" In some cases, members of the community have claimed to have DID diagnoses or sought them out, but several high-profile members of this community have been criticized for allegedly faking their condition for views, or for portraying the disorder lightheartedly. Psychologist Naomi Torres-Mackie, head of research at The Mental Health Coalition, has stated \"All of a sudden, all of my adolescent patients think that they have this, and they don't ... Folks start attaching clinical meaning and feeling like, 'I should be diagnosed with this. I need medication for this', when actually a lot of these experiences are normative and don't need to be pathologized or treated\". Lately, the plural community has been divided between those who argue that anyone without DID diagnosis is likely fabricating their experience with others rejecting the DID diagnosis entirely and instead arguing against pathologizing the plural identity at all. \nAdvocacy.\nSome advocates consider recognizing 'positive plurality' and also the use of plural pronouns such as \"we\" and \"our\". Advocates also challenge the necessity of integration. Timothy Baynes argues that forcing people to undergo it as a treatment is \"seriously immoral\".\nA DID Awareness Day takes place on March 5 annually, participants displaying a multicolored awareness ribbon, based on the idea of a \"\"crazy quilt\".\"\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39654", "revid": "891214687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39654", "title": "Dissociative Identity Disorder", "text": ""}
{"id": "39657", "revid": "34669967", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39657", "title": "Joseph Banks", "text": "English naturalist and botanist (1743\u20131820)\nSir Joseph Banks, 1st Baronet, (24 February\u00a0[O.S. 13 February]\u00a01743\u00a0\u2013 19 June 1820) was an English naturalist, botanist, and patron of the natural sciences.\nBanks made his name on the 1766 natural-history expedition to Newfoundland and Labrador. He took part in Captain James Cook's first great voyage (1768\u20131771), visiting Brazil, Tahiti, and after 6 months in New Zealand, Australia, returning to immediate fame. He held the position of president of the Royal Society for over 41 years. He advised King George III on the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, sending botanists around the world to collect plants, he made Kew the world's leading botanical garden. He is credited for bringing 30,000 plant specimens home with him; amongst them, he was the first European to document 1,400.\nBanks advocated British settlement in New South Wales and the colonisation of Australia, as well as the establishment of Botany Bay as a place for the reception of convicts, and advised the British government on all Australian matters. He is credited with introducing the eucalyptus, acacia, and the genus named after him, \"Banksia\", to the Western world. Around 80 species of plants bear his name. He was the leading founder of the African Association and a member of the Society of Dilettanti, which helped to establish the Royal Academy.\nEarly life.\nBanks was born in Argyll Street, Soho, London, the son of William Banks, a wealthy Lincolnshire country squire and member of the House of Commons, and his wife Sarah, daughter of William Bate. He was baptised at St James's Church, Piccadilly, on 20 February 1743, Old Style. He had a younger sister, Sarah Sophia Banks, born in 1744.\nEducation.\nBanks was educated at Harrow School from the age of nine and then at Eton College from 1756; the boys with whom he attended the school included his future shipmate Constantine Phipps.\nAs a boy, Banks enjoyed exploring the Lincolnshire countryside and developed a keen interest in nature, history, and botany. When he was 17, he was inoculated with smallpox, but he became ill and did not return to school. In late 1760, he was enrolled as a gentleman-commoner at the University of Oxford. At Oxford, he matriculated at Christ Church, where his studies were largely focussed on natural history rather than the classical curriculum. Determined to receive botanical instruction, he paid the Cambridge botanist Israel Lyons to deliver a series of lectures at Oxford in 1764.\nBanks left Oxford for Chelsea in December 1763. He continued to attend the university until 1764, but left that year without taking a degree. His father had died in 1761, so when Banks reached the age of 21, he inherited the large estate of Revesby Abbey, in Lincolnshire, becoming the local squire and magistrate, and dividing his time between Lincolnshire and London. From his mother's house in Chelsea, he kept up his interest in science by attending the Chelsea Physic Garden of the Worshipful Society of Apothecaries and the British Museum, where he met the Swedish naturalist Daniel Solander. He began to make friends among the scientific men of his day and to correspond with Carl Linnaeus, whom he came to know through Solander. As Banks's influence increased, he became an adviser to King George III and urged the monarch to support voyages of discovery to new lands, hoping to indulge his own interest in botany. He became a Freemason sometime before 1769.\nNewfoundland and Labrador.\nIn 1766, Banks was elected to the Royal Society, and in the same year, at 23, he went with Phipps aboard the frigate to Newfoundland and Labrador with a view to studying their natural history. He made his name by publishing the first Linnean descriptions of the plants and animals of Newfoundland and Labrador. Banks also documented 34 species of birds, including the great auk, which became extinct in 1844. On 7 May, he noted a large number of \"penguins\" swimming around the ship on the Grand Banks, and a specimen he collected in Chateau Bay, Labrador, was later identified as the great auk.\n\"Endeavour\" voyage.\nBanks was appointed to a joint Royal Navy/Royal Society scientific expedition to the South Pacific Ocean on HMS \"Endeavour\", 1768\u20131771. This was the first of James Cook's voyages of discovery in that region. Banks funded eight others to join him: the Swedish naturalist Daniel Solander, the Finnish naturalist Herman Sp\u00f6ring (who also served as Banks's personal secretary and as a draughtsman), artists Sydney Parkinson and Alexander Buchan, and four servants from his estate: James Roberts, Peter Briscoe, Thomas Richmond, and George Dorlton. In 1771, he was travelling with James Cook and docked in Simon's Town in what is now South Africa. There, he met the trader Christoffel Brand and a friendship started. He was the godfather of Brand's grandson Christoffel Brand.\nThe voyage went to Brazil, where Banks made the first scientific description of a now common garden plant, \"Bougainvillea\" (named after Cook's French counterpart, Louis Antoine de Bougainville), and to other parts of South America. The voyage then progressed to Tahiti (where the transit of Venus was observed, the overt purpose of the mission), then to New Zealand.\nFrom there, it proceeded to the east coast of Australia, where Cook mapped the coastline and made landfall at Botany Bay. The ship then landed at Round Hill (23\u201325 May 1770), which is now known as Seventeen Seventy and at Endeavour River (near modern Cooktown) in Queensland, where they spent almost seven weeks ashore while the ship was repaired after becoming holed on the Great Barrier Reef. While they were in Australia, Banks, Daniel Solander, and Finnish botanist Dr Herman Sp\u00f6ring Jr. made the first major collection of Australian flora, describing many species new to science. Almost 800 specimens were illustrated by the artist Sydney Parkinson and appear in Banks' \"Florilegium\", finally published in 35 volumes between 1980 and 1990. Notable also was that during the period when the \"Endeavour\" was being repaired, Banks observed a kangaroo, first recorded as \"kanguru\" on 12 July 1770 in an entry in his diary.\nReturn home and voyage to Iceland.\nBanks arrived back in England on 12 July 1771. He had intended to go with Cook on his second voyage, which began on 13 May 1772, but difficulties arose about Banks's scientific requirements on board Cook's new ship, HMS \"Resolution\". The Admiralty regarded Banks's demands as unacceptable and withdrew his permission to sail. Banks immediately arranged an alternative expedition, and in July 1772, Daniel Solander and he visited the Isle of Wight, the Hebrides, Iceland, and the Orkney Islands, aboard \"Sir Lawrence\". In Iceland, they ascended Mt. Hekla and visited the Great Geyser, and were the first scientific visitors to Staffa in the Inner Hebrides. They returned to London in November, with many botanical specimens, via Edinburgh, where Banks and Solander were interviewed by James Boswell. In 1773, he toured south Wales in the company of artist Paul Sandby. \nRoyal Botanic Gardens Kew.\nBanks settled in London and began work on his \"Florilegium\". He kept in touch with most of the scientists of his time, was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1773. Banks was appointed as an informal director to the Royal Botanic Gardens Kew by George III in 1773. Banks sent the first Kew plant hunters around the world, including Francis Masson, Allan Cunningham and James Bowie. Banks was elected to the Dilettante Society in 1774. He was afterwards secretary of this society from 1778 to 1797. On 30 November 1778, he was elected president of the Royal Society, a position he was to hold with great distinction for over 41 years.\nIn March 1779, Banks married Dorothea Hugessen, daughter of W. W. Hugessen, and settled in a large house at 32 Soho Square. It continued to be his London residence for the remainder of his life. There, he welcomed the scientists, students, and authors of his period, and many distinguished foreign visitors. His sister Sarah Sophia Banks lived in the house with Banks and his wife. He had as librarian and curator of his collections Solander, Jonas Carlsson Dryander, and Robert Brown in succession. Also in 1779, Banks took a lease on an estate called Spring Grove, the former residence of Elisha Biscoe (1705\u20131776), which he eventually bought outright from Biscoe's son, also Elisha, in 1808. Its 34 acres ran along the northern side of the London Road, Isleworth, and contained a natural spring, which was an important attraction to him. Banks spent much time and effort on this secondary home. He steadily created a renowned botanical masterpiece on the estate, achieved primarily with many of the great variety of foreign plants he had collected on his extensive travels around the world, particularly to Australia and the South Seas. The surrounding district became known as Spring Grove. The house was substantially extended and rebuilt by later owners and is now part of West Thames College.\nBanks was made a baronet in 1781, three years after being elected president of the Royal Society. During much of this time, he was an informal adviser to King George III and his position at the Royal Botanic Gardens Kew was formalised in 1797. Banks continued to dispatch explorers and botanists to many parts of the world, and through these efforts, Kew Gardens became arguably the pre-eminent botanical garden in the world, with many species being introduced to Europe through them and through Chelsea Physic Garden and their head gardener John Fairbairn. He directly fostered several famous voyages, including that of George Vancouver to the northeastern Pacific (Pacific Northwest), and William Bligh's voyages (one entailing the infamous mutiny on the \"Bounty\") to transplant breadfruit from the South Pacific to the Caribbean islands. Banks was also a major financial supporter of William Smith in his decade-long efforts to create a geological map of England, the first geological map of an entire country. He also chose Allan Cunningham for voyages to Brazil and the north and northwest coasts of Australia to collect specimens.\nColonisation of New South Wales.\nBanks's own time in Australia, however, led to his interest in the British colonisation of that continent. He was to be the greatest proponent of settlement in New South Wales. A genus of the Proteaceae was named in his honour as \"Banksia\". In 1779, Banks, giving evidence before a committee of the House of Commons, had stated that in his opinion the place most eligible for the reception of convicts \"was Botany Bay, on the coast of New Holland\", on the general grounds that, \"it was not to be doubted that a Tract of Land such as New Holland, which was larger than the whole of Europe, would furnish Matter of advantageous Return\".\nAlthough Banks remained uninvolved in these colonies in a hands on manner, he was, nonetheless, the general adviser to the government on all Australian matters for twenty years. He arranged that a large number of useful trees and plants should be sent out in the supply ship , which was unfortunately wrecked, as well as other ships; many of these were supplied by Hugh Ronalds from his nursery in Brentford. Every vessel that came from New South Wales brought to Banks plants or animals or geological and other specimens and, on at least one occasion, human remains. Governor Philip Gidley King sent Banks the severed head of an Aboriginal man named Pemulwuy that Banks had seemingly listed as among his \"desiderata.\"\nHe was continually called on for help in developing the agriculture and trade of the colony, and his influence was used in connection with the sending out of early free settlers, one of whom, a young gardener George Suttor, later wrote a memoir of Banks. The three earliest governors of the colony, Arthur Phillip, John Hunter, and Philip Gidley King, were in continual correspondence with him. Banks produced a significant body of papers, including one of the earliest Aboriginal Australian words lists compiled by a European. Bligh was also appointed governor of New South Wales on Banks's recommendation. Banks followed the explorations of Matthew Flinders, George Bass, and Lieutenant James Grant, and among his paid helpers were George Caley, Robert Brown, and Allan Cunningham.\nHowever, Banks backed William Bligh to be installed as the new governor of New South Wales and to crack down on the New South Wales Corps (or Rum Corps), which made a fortune on the trading of rum. This brought him in direct confrontation with post-Rum Rebellion \"de facto\" leaders such as John Macarthur and George Johnston. This backing led to the Rum Rebellion in Sydney, whereby the governor was overthrown by the two men. This became an embarrassment for Sir Joseph Banks, also, because years earlier, he campaigned that John Macarthur not be granted of land near Sydney in the cow pastures, which was later granted by Lord Camden. The next governor, Lachlan Macquarie, was asked to arrest Macarthur and Johnston, only to realise that they had left Sydney for London to defend themselves. He was humiliated that Macarthur and Johnston were acquitted from all charges in London and both later returned to Sydney.\nLater life.\nBanks met the young Alexander von Humboldt in 1790, when Banks was already the president of the Royal Society. Before Humboldt and his scientific travel companion and collaborator Aim\u00e9 Bonpland left for what became a five-year journal of exploration and discovery, Humboldt requested a British passport for Bonpland, should the two encounter British warships. On their travels, Humboldt arranged for specimens be sent to Banks, should they be seized by the British. Banks and Humboldt remained in touch until Banks's death, aiding Humboldt by mobilising his wide network of scientific contacts to forward information to the great German scientist. Both men believed in the internationalism of science.\nBanks was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1787 and a foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1788. Among other activities, Banks found time to serve as a trustee of the British Museum for 42 years. He was high sheriff of Lincolnshire in 1794.\nHe worked with Sir George Staunton in producing the official account of the British mission to the Chinese Imperial court. This diplomatic and trade mission was headed by George, Earl Macartney. Although the Macartney Embassy returned to London without obtaining any concession from China, the mission could have been termed a success because it brought back detailed observations. This multivolume work was taken chiefly from the papers of Lord Macartney and from the papers of Sir Erasmus Gower, who was commander of the expedition. Banks was responsible for selecting and arranging engraving of the illustrations in this official record.\nBanks was invested as a Knight of the Order of the Bath (KB) on 1 July 1795, which became Knight Grand Cross (GCB) when the order was restructured in 1815.\nBanks was a large landowner and activist encloser, drainer and \u2018improver\u2019 in Fens at Revesby.\nBanks's health began to fail early in the 19th century and he suffered from gout every winter. After 1805, he practically lost the use of his legs and had to be wheeled to his meetings in a chair, but his mind remained as vigorous as ever. He had been a member of the Society of Antiquaries nearly all his life, and he developed an interest in archaeology in his later years. In 1807, William Kerr named the Lady Banks climbing rose after Banks's wife. Banks was made an honorary founding member of the Wernerian Natural History Society of Edinburgh in 1808. In 1809, he became associated member of the Royal Institute of the Netherlands. In 1809, his friend Alexander Henry dedicated his travel book to him. In May 1820, he forwarded his resignation as president of the Royal Society, but withdrew it at the request of the council. In 1819, Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen, on his First Russian Antarctic Expedition, briefly stopped in England and met Joseph Banks. Banks had sailed with James Cook 50 years earlier and supplied the Russians with books and charts for their expedition. He died on 19 June 1820 in Spring Grove House, Isleworth, London, and was buried at St Leonard's Church, Heston. Lady Banks survived him, but they had no children.\nLegacy.\nBanks was a major supporter of the internationalist nature of science, being actively involved both in keeping open the lines of communication with continental scientists during the Napoleonic Wars, and in introducing the British people to the wonders of the wider world. He was honoured with many place names in the South Pacific: Banks Peninsula on the South Island, New Zealand; the Banks Islands in modern-day Vanuatu; the Banks Strait between Tasmania and the Furneaux Islands; Banks Island in the Northwest Territories, Canada; and the Sir Joseph Banks Group in South Australia.\nThe Canberra suburb of Banks, the electoral Division of Banks, and the Sydney suburbs of Bankstown, Banksia, and Banksmeadow are all named after him, as is the northern headland of Botany Bay, Cape Banks. A number of schools and colleges are also named after him, including the Sir Joseph Banks High School in the Sydney suburb of Revesby, and the Joseph Banks Secondary College opened in Perth, Western Australia in 2015.\nAn image of Banks was featured on the paper $5 Australian banknote from its introduction in 1967 before it was replaced by the later polymer currency.\nIn 1986, Banks was honoured by his portrait being depicted on a postage stamp issued by Australia Post.\nIn Lincoln, England, the Sir Joseph Banks Conservatory was constructed in 1989 at The Lawn, Lincoln; its tropical hot house had numerous plants related to Banks's voyages, with samples from across the world, including Australia. The conservatory was moved to Woodside Wildlife Park in 2016 and has been named 'Endeavour'. A plaque was installed in Lincoln Cathedral in his honour. In Boston, Lincolnshire, Banks was recorder for the town. His portrait, painted in 1814 by Thomas Phillips, was commissioned by the Corporation of Boston, as a tribute to one whose 'judicious and active exertions improved and enriched this borough and neighbourhood'. It cost them 100 guineas. The portrait is now hanging in the Council Chamber of the Guildhall Museum.\nThe Sir Joseph Banks Centre is located in Horncastle, Lincolnshire, housed in a Grade II listed building, which was recently restored by the Heritage Trust of Lincolnshire to celebrate Banks's life. Horncastle is located a few miles from Banks's Revesby estate and the naturalist was the town's lord of the manor. The centre is located on Bridge Street. It boasts research facilities, historic links to Australia, and a garden in which rare plants can be viewed and purchased.\nAt the 2011 Chelsea Flower Show, an exhibition garden celebrated the historic link between Banks and the botanical discoveries of flora and fauna on his journey through South America, Tahiti, New Zealand, and eventually Australia on Captain Cook's ship \"Endeavour\". The competition garden was the entry of Melbourne's Royal Botanic Gardens with an Australian theme. It was based on the metaphorical journey of water through the continent, related to the award-winning Australian Garden at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Cranbourne. The design won a gold medal.\nIn 1911, London County Council marked Banks's house at 32 Soho Square with a blue plaque. This was replaced in 1938 with a rectangular stone plaque commemorating Banks and botanists David Don and Robert Brown and meetings of the Linnean Society.\nBanks appears in the historical novel \"Mutiny on the Bounty\", by Charles Nordhoff and James Norman Hall. He appears briefly as a contact with British naval intelligence in the historical novel \"Post Captain\", from the Aubrey\u2013Maturin series by Patrick O'Brian. He is also featured in Elizabeth Gilbert's 2013 best-selling novel, \"The Signature of All Things\", and is a major character in Martin Davies' 2005 novel \"The Conjuror's Bird\".\nBanks's life and influence were explored in a documentary five-part television series \"The Lost World of Joseph Banks\" in 2016.\nBanks's account of the \"Endeavour's\" approach to Botany Bay might have been the basis for the invisible ships myth.\nHerbarium specimens collected by Banks and Solander are cared for in herbaria, including at the National Herbarium of Victoria (MEL), Royal Botanic Gardens Victoria.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Botanist/styles.css\"/&gt;The standard author abbreviation Banks is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.\nDispersal of Banks's papers.\nFollowing Banks's death in 1820 a \"treasure-trove of letters and papers\" was passed to Sir Edward Knatchbull, his wife's nephew. In 1828 the latter passed bound volumes of foreign correspondence to the British Library but retained the rest of the papers in the expectation that an official biography would be written. After the death of Knatchbull and his wife, the letters and papers were passed on to their son Edward Knatchbull Hugesson, 1st Baron Brabourne, who offered to sell them to the British Museum. However, in 1884 it declined to purchase them. Following that \"notorious\" decision the Agent General of New South Wales, Sir Saul Samuel, issued instructions for the purchase of a large portion of the papers, which now form part of the State Library of New South Wales's Brabourne Collection. The \"large quantities of papers\" which remained were then auctioned off at Sotheby's in London in March and April 1886. One of the successful bidders was E. A. Petherick. Many of those are now in the Petherick Collection at the National Library of Australia. During the twentieth century the National Library continued to purchase Banks's letters and papers when they came on the market.\nOnline archive.\nIn his \"Endeavour\" journal, Banks recorded 30 years of his life. Letters, invoices, maps, regalia, and watercolour drawings have now been digitised on the State Library of NSW website. This rich research and educational tool provides access to 8800 high-quality digital images.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nSecondary resources.\nFiction.\nNovels based on a mix of historical fact and conjecture about Banks's early life include:"}
{"id": "39658", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39658", "title": "John Galsworthy", "text": "English novelist and playwright (1867\u20131933)\nJohn Galsworthy (; 14 August 1867 \u2013 31 January 1933) was an English novelist and playwright. He is best known for his trilogy of novels collectively called \"The Forsyte Saga\", and two later trilogies, \"A Modern Comedy\" and \"End of the Chapter\". He was awarded the 1932 Nobel Prize in Literature.\nBorn to a prosperous upper-middle-class family, Galsworthy was destined for a career as a lawyer, but found it uncongenial and turned instead to writing. He was thirty before his first book was published in 1897, and did not achieve real success until 1906, when \"The Man of Property\", the first of his novels about the Forsyte family was published. In the same year his first play, \"The Silver Box\" was staged in London. As a dramatist, he became known for plays with a social message, reflecting, among other themes, the struggle of workers against exploitation, the use of solitary confinement in prisons, the repression of women, jingoism and the politics and morality of war.\nThe Forsyte family series of novels and short stories collectively known as \"The Forsyte Chronicles\" is similar in many ways to Galsworthy's family, and the patriarch, Old Jolyon, is modelled on Galsworthy's father. The main sequence runs from the late 19th century to the early 1930s, featuring three generations of the family. The books were popular when first published and their latter-day popularity was boosted considerably when BBC Television broadcast a 26-part adaptation for the author's centenary in 1967.\nAs well as writing plays and novels with social messages, Galsworthy campaigned continually for a wide range of causes about which he felt strongly, from animal welfare to prison reform, censorship and workers' rights. Although seen by many as a radical, he belonged to and supported no political party. His plays are seldom revived, but his novels have been frequently reissued.\nLife and career.\nEarly years.\nJohn Galsworthy was born on 14 August 1867 at his family's home, Parkfield (now called Galsworthy House) on Kingston Hill in Surrey. He was the second child and elder son of the four children of John Galsworthy (1817\u20131904) and his wife Blanche Bailey \"n\u00e9e\" Bartleet (1837\u20131915). John senior was a London solicitor, with a flourishing practice, as well as substantial wealth inherited from his father \u2013 also John \u2013 who was from a Devonshire farming family. The latter had prospered as a ship chandler in Plymouth before moving to London and investing profitably in property. In the class-conscious mid-Victorian era, Blanche Galsworthy saw herself as being from a higher social stratum than her husband's comparatively \"nouveau riche\" family, and this, together with a 20-year age gap between them, made for an uneasy relationship. The four children were considerably more \"en rapport\" with their father than with their mother. He became the model for Old Jolyon, the patriarch in \"The Forsyte Saga\"; looking back, Galsworthy said in 1919, \"I was so truly and deeply fond of him that I seemed not to have a fair share of love left to give to my mother\".\nGalsworthy was educated by a governess until he was nine. In 1876 he was sent to Saugeen, a small preparatory school in Bournemouth. He was happy there, and his happiness increased when his younger brother, Hubert, was sent to join him. In the summer term of 1881 Galsworthy left Saugeen to go to Harrow School. He became a member of the school football team, and captain of his house XI. A contemporary later described him as \"one of the best football players and runners there have ever been at Harrow\u00a0... a beautiful dribbler and full of pluck\". His biographer David Holloway comments that in describing a character in a 1930 short story, Galsworthy was in fact describing his schoolboy self:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;No one, at school, I am sure, detected in him signs of future greatness\u00a0... I think that if you had asked any of his contemporaries for their opinion of him, they would have said: \"A very nice fellow, without much push, the best-dressed boy in the school, with more than ordinary athletic and artistic gifts, but never likely to make a stir in the world\".\nAfter Harrow, Galsworthy went to New College, Oxford to read law, matriculating in October 1886. His biographer Catherine Dupr\u00e9 calls his time at Oxford \"a happy, almost frivolous, interlude in a life that was lived in general with the greatest solemnity\". An Oxford contemporary recalled him as living the typical life of the well-to-do, a not very intellectual undergraduate from a leading public school. He joined the Oxford University Dramatic Society, and acted in other amateur productions, in one of which he fell in love with a fellow performer, Sybil Carlisle (later a professional actress); his ardent feelings were not reciprocated, which caused him much angst. He concluded his time at Oxford with a second-class honours degree, awarded in 1889.\nBarrister and traveller.\nAs his father wished, Galsworthy entered the legal profession. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn and was called to the bar in the Easter term of 1890. Holloway comments that as the son of a leading solicitor, Galsworthy was in an excellent position for a young barrister. His father could put a good deal of work his way and recommend him to other solicitors. He was nonetheless unenthusiastic about practising as a barrister. At his father's instigation he went with his brother Hubert on a trip across Canada, ostensibly to examine some family holdings there, but, according to Holloway, chiefly as a version of the Grand Tour, to let the brothers see something of the world.\nAfter returning to England in September 1891 Galsworthy had a brief, unhappy love affair. His father arranged further foreign trips to distract him from his emotional troubles and to develop his legal education by studying aspects of maritime law at close quarters with a view to specialising in it once back at home. In November 1892 Galsworthy and a friend from Oxford, Ted Sanderson, began a long trip that took them to the South Seas (where they hoped but failed to meet Robert Louis Stevenson in Samoa), Australasia and South Africa.\nOn the voyage from Adelaide to Cape Town, beginning in April 1893, Galsworthy met the ship's first mate, Joseph Conrad, who had yet to begin his career as a writer. The two became lifelong friends. In 1904 Galsworthy went to Russia, where his father had financial interests, before returning to England, supposedly to resume his career as a barrister. He remained unenthusiastic about working as a lawyer: \"I read in various Chambers, practised almost not at all, and disliked my profession thoroughly\". An obituarist in 1933 commented that despite Galsworthy's distaste for the legal profession, his study of the law left a permanent mark on his fiction, in which there are numerous court scenes, mostly leading to an outcome that does more harm than good. At this stage of his life Galsworthy was under no pressure to earn a living, having an adequate allowance from his father, but although he disapproved of an idle existence, he had no clear idea of what he wished to do.\nIn 1895 Galsworthy began a love affair with the wife of his cousin Arthur Galsworthy. Ada Galsworthy had married Arthur in 1891, but they had little in common and quickly drifted apart; within a year they had agreed to live separately. Until the death of John Galsworthy senior in 1904, Ada and Galsworthy kept their relationship secret, because a scandal would have distressed the old man greatly. Ada encouraged Galsworthy to become a writer, as did his two sisters, Lilian (Lily) and Mabel, close friends of Ada.\nFirst books; marriage.\nGalsworthy published his first work of fiction in 1897, when he was aged 30. It was a volume of nine short stories, \"From the Four Winds\", printed at his own expense. The book received many favourable reviews, but sales were modest. Nevertheless, the young publisher Gerald Duckworth was willing to take a chance on Galsworthy's second book, a novel, \"Jocelyn\", which he published in 1898. The author later dismissed his first two books as prentice works \u2013 he called \"From the Four Winds\" \"that dreadful little book\" \u2013 and over the next few years he honed his skills. He later said that he was writing fiction for five years before he mastered even the basic techniques. He studied the works of Turgenev and Maupassant, learning from their literary craftsmanship.\nWhile his father remained alive Galsworthy wrote under a pseudonym, John Sinjon, in whose name his first four books were published. His 1901 collection of short stories, \"A Man of Devon\", included \"The Salvation of Swithin Forsyte\", the first episode in what he later developed into a three-generation family saga, known collectively as \"The Forsyte Chronicles\". Two years later he began writing \"The Man of Property\", the first novel in the sequence.\nIn 1904 Galsworthy's father died, and there was no longer any cause for secrecy about his son's relationship with Ada. After the funeral the couple went to stay at Wingstone, a farmhouse in the village of Manaton on the edge of Dartmoor, which he had come across when on a walking tour. It was the first of many visits they made there, and four years later Galsworthy took a long lease of part of the building, which was the couple's second home until 1923. Arthur Galsworthy sued for divorce in February 1905; the divorce was finalised on 13 September of that year and Ada married John Galsworthy ten days later. The marriage, which was childless, lasted until his death. Ada was a key figure in the life of her second husband, and his biographers have attributed to her an important influence on his development as a novelist and playwright.\nGrowing fame.\n\"The Island Pharisees\" (1904), addressing the effects of poverty and the constraints of convention \u2212 themes with which Galsworthy became much associated \u2212 received considerable praise, but it was a further two years until he had his first outstanding successes. His biographer V. H. Marrot calls 1906 Galsworthy's \"annus mirabilis\". In March his novel \"The Man of Property\" was published by William Heinemann, and in December Harley Granville-Barker directed \"The Silver Box\" at the Royal Court Theatre in London.\nThe novel was reviewed enthusiastically. \"The Times\" said, \"A novel of this character is new; it shows thought and determination, and an unflagging alertness, with its companion, ease, that make Mr Galsworthy's career a matter of some importance to English fiction\", \"The Daily Telegraph\" said that Galsworthy had already published some good work, but \"nothing quite so strong as this carefully-imagined and well-elaborated chapter in the history of smug respectability\", and the \"Evening Standard\" commented that the characters are \"undeniably arresting. They always stand out of the page, clear and impressive, as true flesh and blood.\" Other comments included \"most incisive and cunningly wrought\", \"written with a finish which is both rare and delightful\" and \"a very human story of undoubted literary value\". The first impression sold out within weeks and a reprint was quickly arranged by Heinemann, who remained Galsworthy's publisher for the rest of the author's career. There were there four more reprints over the next five years, including a cheap \"Sixpenny Edition\".\nAt this stage, Galsworthy had only tentative thoughts of expanding the novel into the family saga and social panorama of \"The Forsyte Chronicles\". It was another twelve years before he wrote any more about the Forsytes. His novels in the interim included \"Fraternity\" (1909), a critique of the artificial veneer of urban life, and \"The Dark Flower\" (1913), depicting the disruptive, but sometimes creative, effects of love. Alongside his work as a novelist and playwright, Galsworthy was a vigorous campaigner for causes in which he believed. In 1912 and 1913 he carried on an effective campaign in the cause of humane slaughtering of animals killed for food.\n\"The Silver Box\" was the first of 28 plays Galsworthy wrote for the professional stage. Despite the success of \"The Man of Property\" earlier in the year, it was as a dramatist that he was first widely known. In 1916 Sheila Kaye-Smith wrote, \"Galsworthy takes his place in modern literature chiefly by virtue of his plays. Criticism may to a certain extent damage him as a novelist, but the most searching critics cannot leave him anything less than a great playwright\". Although throughout his career Galsworthy supported no political party, \"The Silver Box\" was seen as putting him alongside Bernard Shaw and Granville-Barker as a playwright with a strong social message. The play hinged on unequal treatment before the law, depending on social class. It was well and widely reviewed, although it did only modestly at the box-office. Between 1906 and the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Galsworthy had nine plays produced and published five novels. With the help of J. M. Barrie and Gilbert Murray he set up a committee to press for reform of the British laws imposing censorship on theatrical productions. They enlisted the strong backing of William Archer and Granville-Barker; W. S. Gilbert, Arthur Pinero and others lent their support.\nNot all the early plays had overt political or polemical themes: \"Joy\" (1907) is a study of a young woman's attempts to cope with the inadequacies of her parents, and \"The Fugitive\" (1913) depicts a marriage collapsing from the incompatibility of the couple. But \"Strife\" (1909) depicts the struggle of workers in a Cornish tin mine against exploitation by the employers; \"Justice\" (1910) attacks the use of solitary confinement in prisons; the theme of \"The Eldest Son\" (1912) is the repression of women both in the family and society; \"The Mob\" (1914) focuses on jingoism and the politics and morality of war. None of these plays were box-office successes, but Galsworthy had the benefit of producers\u2014Granville-Barker and Charles Frohman in London and Annie Horniman in Manchester\u2014who were willing to present non-commercial plays in which they believed, as well as more profitable productions.\nFirst World War.\nWhen the First World War began in August 1914, Galsworthy had conflicting views. He was appalled that civilised countries should be at war with each other, but thought it right to defend Belgium against German invasion. His family was directly affected by the war: his sister Lily was married to a German, the painter Georg Sauter, who was interned as an enemy alien and later expelled. Galsworthy was too old to serve in the army and felt increasingly that he was not contributing enough to the war effort. He donated his substantial American royalties to war charities, but in addition he felt impelled to offer his services in a personal capacity. He trained as a masseur and went to France as a volunteer, giving therapy to injured soldiers at the H\u00f4pital B\u00e9n\u00e9vole in Martouret, near Valence. His wife went with him, helping with the hospital's laundry. They returned to England in 1917.\nRevisiting the theme of the Forsyte family in 1917, Galsworthy wrote a short story, \"Indian Summer of a Forsyte\" depicting the serene final days of Old Jolyon, the head of the family in \"The Man of Property\". It was published in the 1918 collection \"Five Tales\", which also contained \"A Stoic\", later to be successfully adapted for the stage as \"Old English\".\nGalsworthy resumed much of his pre-war lifestyle, combining literary output, socialising, and promoting the causes in which he believed. He supported prison reform, women's rights, a minimum wage and animal welfare, and opposed censorship, exploitation of workers, blood sports and aerial warfare. He had included essays on some of these topics in his 1916 collection \"A Sheaf\". Towards the end of 1917 he was offered a knighthood, which he declined, on the grounds that \"no artist of Letters ought to dally with titles\". Officials mistakenly left his name in the published 1918 New Year Honours list, and at his insistence a correction was issued.\nPostwar.\nIn 1919 the American Academy of Arts and Letters invited Galsworthy to give an address at the celebrations marking the centenary of James Russell Lowell. In his speech, at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel, Galsworthy praised Lowell for his contribution to making English the universal language\u2014\"that most superb instrument for the making of word-music, for the telling of the truth, and the expression of the imagination.\"\nAt the St Martin's Theatre, London, in 1920 Galsworthy had his first big box-office success with \"The Skin Game\", depicting the clash between old and new money, attempted blackmail, and the effect of unrestrained capitalism on the lives of ordinary people. Reviews were generally favourable, although \"The Evening Standard\" said that the author's dramatic genius lent undeserved credibility to an essentially unrealistic plot, and \"The Observer\" commented that instead of seeing the good in both sides of an argument as he usually did, Galsworthy here depicted the bad in both. Archer wrote that the play contained some of the most thrilling passages in modern drama, and showed Galsworthy to be a born dramatist. Another reviewer called it \"unrivalled among present productions\u00a0... the finest play London has seen for years.\" The success of the play quickly led to a Broadway production and a film version featuring the West End cast, headed by Edmund Gwenn.\nBy this time Galsworthy had returned to the Forsytes; he wrote a second novel about the family, \"In Chancery\", published in October 1920. Within a year he completed another Forsyte short story (or \"interlude\"), called \"Awakening\", and a third novel, \"To Let\", published in September 1921. A month later the International PEN Club (standing for \"Poets, Essayists, Novelists\") was founded in London, with Galsworthy as its president, a position he held for the rest of his life. In May 1922, the three Forsyte novels were issued in a single volume as \"The Forsyte Saga\", and sold prodigiously\u2014more than two million copies within months of publication, according to one account, although Galsworthy's major biographers do not give a figure.\nHaving concluded \"The Forsyte Saga\", Galsworthy turned to the next generation of the family. The first instalment of a second trilogy\u2014\"The White Monkey\"\u2014was published in October 1924, a few days after the premiere of Galsworthy's drama, \"Old English\". The starring role in the play, Sylvanus Heythorpe, was played in London by Norman McKinnel and in New York by George Arliss. The latter starred in a film adaptation in 1930. The day before the play opened in London, Lily Sauter died. The Galsworthys took her son Rudolf and his wife, Viola, with them for a prolonged winter holiday in Italy and North Africa.\nLater years.\nGalsworthy's lease of Wingstone ended in 1923, to his regret and his wife's relief (she found the Devon weather bad for her bronchitis). They were without a country home for three years until in September 1926 they discovered and bought Bury House in Bury, West Sussex, a village off the A29, four miles north of Arundel. The house has extensive views across farmland to the South Downs, where Galsworthy used to ride. At Bury the Galsworthys entertained his friends and colleagues, including Arnold Bennett and Hugh Walpole; the latter was much taken with the house: \"really lovely, with pearl-grey stone fronting lawns that run straight to the open fields\u00a0... Everything artistic\u00a0... Very like a special edition of one of John's own books\". Galsworthy and Ada divided their time between Bury and their London home in Hampstead; Rudolf and Viola Sauter moved from London and lived at Bury House the year round.\nBetween 1926 and 1928 Galsworthy worked on the second Forsyte trilogy. \"The Silver Spoon\" was published in 1926 and \"Swan Song\" in 1928. He interspersed the novels with two short \"interludes\": \"A Silent Wooing\" (1926) and \"Passers By\" (1927). They were published in a single volume as \"A Modern Comedy\" in 1929. Sales were disappointing\u2014fewer than those of \"The Forsyte Saga\" as a single volume seven years earlier.\nIn 1929 Galsworthy was offered the Order of Merit. Although it is a more prestigious honour than a knighthood, it confers no title, and Galsworthy accepted it, receiving the award along with the Poet Laureate, Robert Bridges. Over the following three years he received honorary degrees from five universities, including Oxford, where he delivered the 1931 Romanes Lecture taking as his subject \"Shakespeare and Spiritual Life\".\nGalsworthy found himself drawn back to the Forsyte family, and in 1930 he published \"On Forsyte 'Change\", a collection of short stories about them, dealing with events before and soon after those recorded in the \"Saga\". In his foreword he wrote, \"it is hard to part suddenly and finally from those with whom one has lived so long; and\u00a0... these footnotes do really, I think, help to fill in and round out the chronicles of the Forsyte family\". In 1931 he began what developed into a third and last trilogy, with \"Maid in Waiting\", followed by \"Flowering Wilderness\" (1932) and the posthumously published \"Over the River\" (1933). This final trilogy, published together as \"End of the Chapter\" in 1935, moves the focus towards the Charwell family, related by marriage to the Forsytes. It sold well, although not matching the commercial or critical success of the \"Saga\".\nGalsworthy's health declined as he was working on \"Over the River\", and, hitherto a fluent writer, he found progress slow and effortful. In late 1932 he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, only the second English author to receive the award since its inception in 1901. The citation for Galsworthy's award was \"for his distinguished art of narration which takes its highest form in \"The Forsyte Saga\"\". He was by then too ill to go to Stockholm for the presentation, and died at his London home on 31 January 1933, aged 65, from a combination of causes including cerebral thrombosis, arterial sclerosis and a possible brain tumour.\nAfter a private funeral and cremation, a memorial service was held at Westminster Abbey, attended by members of the Cabinet including the prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, European ambassadors, fellow authors including Sir James Barrie, Laurence Binyon, Walter de la Mare and Sir Arthur Pinero, and representatives of numerous charities that Galsworthy had supported. In accordance with his will, his ashes were scattered from an aeroplane over the South Downs.\nWorks.\nGalsworthy wrote 20 novels; 28 completed plays; five collections of short stories; three volumes of poetry; eleven volumes of essays and sketches; and occasional stories and pamphlets, newspaper articles, unpublished essays and sketches. He wrote in longhand, revised extensively, and his wife\u2014the only secretary he ever had\u2014typed his completed manuscripts.\nNovels.\nOf Galsworthy's 20 novels, nine are about the Forsytes, the last three tangentially so, and the other eleven are all one-off stories. In a 1982 study, Alec Fr\u00e9chet analyses a comment that Galsworthy made in looking back at his works in the mid-1920s, that the novels reflected the battle between the emotional and critical sides of his nature:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My early work was certainly more emotional than critical. But from 1901 came nine years when the critical was, in the main, holding sway. From 1910 to 1918 the emotional again struggled for the upper hand; and from that time on there seems to have been something of a \"dead heat\".\nFrom this, Fr\u00e9chet divides the novels into five periods: the first consisting of the two early ones, \"Jocelyn\" (1898) and \"Villa Rubein\" (1900). Between 1901 and 1909 there were four novels characterised as \"critical\"\u2014\"The Island Pharisees\" (1904), \"The Man of Property\" (1906), \"The Country House\" (1907) and \"Fraternity\" (1909). These books reflect the author's disparaging view of various aspects of British society, such as hypocrisy, selfishness and exploitation of the poor and women of all classes. His censure was seen in conservative circles as scandalous, and the author was regarded by some as a traitor to his own class. He further offended conservatives by his attacks on imperialism; in \"The Island Pharisees\" he wrote, \"Why should we, a small portion of the world's population, assume that our standards are the proper ones for every kind of race?\"\nThe next period, from 1910 to 1919, produced six novels categorised as \"lyrical\" or \"war-time\": \"The Patrician\" (1911), \"The Dark Flower\" (1913), \"The Freelands\" (1915), \"Beyond\" (1917), \"The Burning Spear\" (1919) and \"Saint's Progress\" (1919). After these Fr\u00e9chet lists the 1920\u20131928 Forsyte novels as a category of their own: \"In Chancery\" (1920), \"To Let\" (1921), \"The White Monkey\" (1924), \"The Silver Spoon\" (1926) and \"Swan Song\" (1928). The last group in Fr\u00e9chet's summary of Galsworthy's classifications consists of the final trilogy: \"Maid in Waiting\" (1931), \"Flowering Wilderness\" (1932) and \"Over the River\" (completed in 1932).\nFr\u00e9chet comments that the recurring themes of Galsworthy's novels are, in order of importance: beauty, love and suffering, divorce, honour, art and the law. \"Beauty comes first, because in every case it coincides with love: the beloved woman is always very beautiful; but not only women: the natural setting for the action is also unfailingly lovely. The beauty of a woman and the beauty of nature are of the same kind.\" Money and family are important features, but generally as the background to, rather than the crux of, the plot.\nPlays.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Galsworthy's plays \n\u2022 \"The Silver Box\", 1906 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"Joy\", 1907 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"Strife\", 1909 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"Justice\", 1910 &lt;br&gt; \u2022 \"The Little Dream\", 1911 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"The Pigeon\", 1912 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"The Eldest Son\", 1912 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"The Fugitive\", 1913 &lt;br&gt; \u2022 \"The Mob\", 1914 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"A Bit o' Love\", 1915 &lt;br&gt; \u2022 \"The Foundations\", 1916 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"The Skin Game\", 1920 &lt;br&gt; \u2022 \"Six Short Plays\", 1921 &lt;br&gt; \u2022 \"A Family Man\", 1921 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"Loyalties\", 1922 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"Windows\", 1922 &lt;br&gt; \u2022 \"The Forest \", 1924 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"Old English\", 1924 &lt;br&gt; \u2022 \"The Show\", 1925 &lt;br&gt; \u2022 \"Escape\", 1926 &lt;br&gt; \u2022 \"The Silver Spoon\", 1926 &lt;br&gt;\u2022 \"Exiled\", 1929 &lt;br&gt; \u2022 \"The Roof\", 1929.\nLike his contemporary Somerset Maugham, Galsworthy was known more in his early career for his plays than for his novels. Unlike Maugham, who abandoned the theatre thirty years before the end of his writing career, Galsworthy continued writing plays, from \"The Silver Box\" in 1906 to \"The Roof\" in 1929. As with Maugham, the plays are rarely revived, although the Forsyte Saga and some other novels have been regularly reissued.\nAs a playwright, Galsworthy presented social issues of the time in the manner of the modernist school of Henrik Ibsen. Encouraged by Granville-Barker, Galsworthy wrote about conflicts and inequities within British society. Shaw did the same, but the styles of the two dramatists differed noticeably. \"The Times\" commented that Galsworthy was a dramatist of power with more feeling than Shaw, if less wit, \"and as keen a sense of social anomalies, if less readiness to offer theories by which they might be remedied.\" Shaw favoured a forthright presentation of his themes; Galsworthy and Granville-Barker preferred a more subtle, naturalistic approach, which, Shaw said, \"makes me blush for the comparative blatancy of my own plays\". Galsworthy seldom took sides; he was known for seeing both sides of most arguments and rarely giving any characters a monopoly of virtue or wisdom. The literary critic and academic Michael Molino summarises Galsworthy's technique:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;a dramatic situation presents the central thesis of the play; the action is then propelled through realistic dialogue and detail, and the conclusion poses a question to consider rather than presenting a certain resolution to the play's problem.\nNot all Galsworthy's plays are of this kind. Two were his adaptations of earlier short stories: \"The First and the Last\" (1921) and \"Old English\" (1924), which dealt respectively with murder and suicide\u2014the latter by the unconventional method of overeating: the play culminates in the death of the central character, who, faced with imminent ruin and disgrace, defies his doctor's orders and deliberately eats a fatally rich and elaborate dinner, with many courses and as many wines. These were exceptions: normally Galsworthy conceived his plots and characters as suitable either for drama or for fiction, but not both.\nSome critics felt that Galsworthy was apt to show the underdog in a sympathetic light even when the character deserved little sympathy. \"Windows\" (1923), centring on a vicious young woman, led the reviewer in \"The Times\" to quote Samuel Johnson: \"Sir, do not accustom your mind to confound virtue and vice.\"\nOther writing.\nGalsworthy was an accomplished writer of short stories; the most popular collection is \"Five Tales\" (1918). Opinions vary about his poetry. In \"The Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\" (2004), Geoffrey Harvey considers that Galsworthy's poems rarely transcend the conventional. Gilbert Murray thought that the \"Collected Poems\", posthumously published, showed that Galsworthy could have been a considerable poet if he had not already found his milieu in prose.\nHarvey judges Galsworthy's essays and published lectures to be \"thoughtful but unremarkable\".\nHonours.\nIn addition to the Order of Merit and the Nobel Prize, Galsworthy received honorary degrees from the universities of Cambridge, Dublin, Manchester, Oxford, Princeton, Sheffield and St Andrews, and was an honorary fellow of New College, Oxford.\nReputation.\nGalsworthy was known for his generosity. He insisted on living on only half his income, and gave the other half away in such causes as providing affordable homes for villagers in Manaton and Bury. Walpole described him as \"gentle, honest and just\" and \"absolutely good-hearted\u00a0... a dear\", although somewhat over-serious: \"A dinner with Galsworthy, Lucas, and Granville-Barker was quite fun although J. G. never sees a joke\". P. G. Wodehouse confirmed this reputation for seriousness; he wrote that Galsworthy abominated desultory conversation, and when he and his wife were entertaining dinner guests he would announce, as they sat down, a topic that would be discussed during the meal, such as \"To what extent is genius influenced by the educational standards of parents?\"\nThe literary modernists of his day deplored Galsworthy's books, and those of his contemporaries H. G. Wells and Arnold Bennett. Virginia Woolf called them \"the Edwardians\" and accused them of presiding over an \"age when character disappeared or was mysteriously engulfed\". In her view, according to Molino, the three \"ignored the complex internal life of characters\" and portrayed \"an orderly existence populated with characters typical of their social station, but little else.\" Of the three it was Galsworthy whom Woolf most disliked. When his death was announced she wrote of her thankfulness that \"that stuffed shirt\" had died. In 1927 D. H. Lawrence, although, in Fr\u00e9chet's phrase, \"undaunted by his lack of knowledge of the subject\", published an attack on Galsworthy. \"The story is feeble, the characters have no blood and bones, the emotions are faked, faked, faked. It is one great fake.\"\nThe publisher Rupert Hart-Davis thought that Galsworthy's touch grew less sure with each succeeding generation of the Forsytes: in the \"Saga\" the author could draw on his contemporaries and immediate forebears as models: the Forsytes are an upper-middle-class family like Galsworthy's own, two generations removed from their yeomen roots in the West Country; Ada's first marriage provided a basis for Irene and Soames Forsyte. But in Hart-Davis's view, in the later novels Galsworthy had to rely on his creative imagination, \"which by itself wasn't powerful enough to mask his ignorance of his juniors: perhaps if he'd had children the later books would have rung truer.\"\nIn his 1979 study \"John Galsworthy: l'homme, le romancier, le critique social\", Fr\u00e9chet wrote that Galsworthy's reputation is not the same in Britain as it is elsewhere: \"for the English, Galsworthy represents the past, because they are so conscious of all that is anachronistic in the world he describes, and of how fast it is all changing.\" Fr\u00e9chet suggests that readers from other countries \"are much better at perceiving what remains true in Galsworthy's depiction of England, because they realise how slowly it has changed.\"\nMarking the centenary of Galsworthy's birth, the BBC made a television adaptation of the first two trilogies, screened in 1967 under the title \"The Forsyte Saga\". It was at the time the most expensive television production ever made, with 26 episodes of 50 minutes each. It attracted large audiences in Britain and forty other countries, and led to a surge in the sale of Galsworthy's novels, which sold better than at any stage in his lifetime; Penguin Books sold more than 100,000 copies of \"The Man of Property\" in Britain in 1967 and more than 120,000 the following year. New translations brought the author a new international public.\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39659", "revid": "6", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39659", "title": "Sir Joseph Banks", "text": ""}
{"id": "39660", "revid": "47851520", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39660", "title": "Pope Benedict XVI", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 2005 to 2013\nPope BenedictXVI (born Joseph Alois Ratzinger; 16 April 1927 \u2013 31 December 2022) was head of the Catholic Church and sovereign of the Vatican City from 2005 until his resignation in 2013. Following his resignation, he chose to be known as \"pope emeritus\", a title he held until his death on 31 December 2022.\nOrdained as a priest in 1951 in his native Bavaria, Ratzinger embarked on an academic career and established himself as a highly regarded theologian by the late 1950s. He was appointed a full professor in 1958 when aged 31. After a long career as a professor of theology at several German universities, he was appointed Archbishop of Munich and Freising and created a cardinal by Pope Paul\u00a0VI in 1977, an unusual promotion for someone with little pastoral experience. In 1981, he was appointed Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, one of the most important dicasteries of the Roman Curia. In 2002, he also became Dean of the College of Cardinals. Before becoming pope, he had been \"a major figure on the Vatican stage for a quarter of a century\"; he had had an influence \"second to none when it came to setting church priorities and directions\" as one of John Paul\u00a0II's closest confidants. Following the death of John Paul II on 2 April 2005, a conclave elected Ratzinger as his successor on 19 April; he chose Benedict XVI as his papal name in honour of Benedict XV and Benedict of Nursia.\nBenedict's writings were prolific and generally defended traditional Catholic doctrine, values, and liturgy. He was originally a liberal theologian but adopted conservative views after 1968. During his papacy, Benedict advocated a return to fundamental Christian values to counter the increased secularisation of many Western countries. He viewed relativism's denial of objective truth, and the denial of moral truths in particular, as the central problem of the 21st century. Benedict also revived several traditions and permitted greater use of the Tridentine Mass. He strengthened the relationship between the Catholic Church and art, promoted the use of Latin, and reintroduced traditional papal vestments, for which reason he was called \"the pope of aesthetics\". He also established personal ordinariates for former Anglicans and Methodists joining the Catholic Church. Benedict's handling of sexual abuse cases within the Catholic Church and opposition to usage of condoms in areas of high HIV transmission was criticized by public health officials, anti-AIDS activists, and victims' rights organizations.\nCiting health reasons due to his advanced age, Benedict resigned as pope on 28 February 2013. He became the first pope to resign from office since Gregory\u00a0XII in 1415, and the first without external pressure since Celestine\u00a0V in 1294. He subsequently moved into the newly renovated Mater Ecclesiae Monastery in Vatican City for his retirement. The 2013 conclave elected Francis as his successor on 13 March. In addition to his native German language, Benedict had some proficiency in French, Italian, English, and Spanish. He also knew Portuguese, Latin, Biblical Hebrew, and Biblical Greek. He was a member of several social science academies, such as the French Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences Morales et Politiques.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life: 1927\u20131951.\nJoseph Alois Ratzinger was born on 16 April, Holy Saturday, 1927 at Schulstra\u00dfe 11 at 8:30 in the morning in his parents' home in Marktl, Bavaria, Germany. He was baptised the same day. He was the third and youngest child of Joseph Ratzinger Sr., a police officer, and Maria Ratzinger (n\u00e9e\u00a0Peintner); his grand-uncle was the German priest-politician Georg Ratzinger. His mother's family was originally from South Tyrol (now in Italy). Benedict's elder brother, Georg, became a Catholic priest and was the former director of the Regensburger Domspatzen choir. His sister, Maria, who never married, managed her brother Joseph's household until she died in 1991.\nAged five, Ratzinger was in a group of children who welcomed the visiting Cardinal Archbishop of Munich, Michael von Faulhaber, with flowers. Struck by the cardinal's distinctive garb, he announced later that day that he wanted to be a cardinal. He attended the elementary school in Aschau am Inn, which was renamed in his honour in 2009. In 1939, aged 12, he enrolled in a minor seminary in Traunstein. This period lasted until the seminary was closed for military use in 1942, and the students were all sent home. Ratzinger returned to Traunstein.\nWartime and ordination.\nRatzinger's family, especially his father, bitterly resented the Nazis, and his father's opposition to Nazism resulted in demotions and harassment of the family. Following his 14th birthday in 1941, Ratzinger was conscripted into the Hitler Youth\u00a0\u2013 as membership was required by law for all 14-year-old German boys after March 1939\u00a0\u2013 but was an unenthusiastic member who refused to attend meetings, according to his brother. In 1941, one of Ratzinger's cousins, a 14-year-old boy with Down syndrome, was taken away by the Nazi regime and murdered during the \"Aktion T4\" campaign of Nazi eugenics. In 1943, while still in seminary, he was drafted into the German anti-aircraft corps as Luftwaffenhelfer. Ratzinger then trained in the German infantry. As the Allied front drew closer to his post in 1945, he deserted back to his family's home in Traunstein after his unit had ceased to exist, just as American troops established a headquarters in the Ratzinger household. As a German soldier, he was interned in US prisoner of war camps, first in Neu-Ulm, then at Fliegerhorst (\"military airfield\") Bad Aibling (shortly to be repurposed as Bad Aibling Station) where he was at the time of Victory in Europe Day, and released on 19 June 1945.\nRatzinger and his brother Georg entered Saint Michael Seminary in Traunstein in November 1945, later studying at the Ducal Georgianum () of the Ludwig Maximilian University in Munich. They were both ordained in Freising on 29 June 1951 by Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber of Munich\u00a0\u2013\u00a0the same man Ratzinger had met as a child. He recalled: \"At the moment the elderly Archbishop laid his hands on me, a little bird\u00a0\u2013\u00a0perhaps a lark\u00a0\u2013\u00a0flew up from the altar in the high cathedral and trilled a little joyful song\". He celebrated his first Mass later that summer in Traunstein, at St. Oswald's Church.\nRatzinger's 1953 dissertation, earning him a Doctor of Theology degree from the University of Munich, was on Augustine of Hippo: it was titled \"The People and the House of God in Augustine's Doctrine of the Church\". His habilitation (which qualified him for a professorship) was on Bonaventure. It was completed in 1957 and he became a professor at Freising College in 1958.\nEncounter with Romano Guardini.\nFrom 1946 to 1951, he pursued studies in philosophy and theology at the University of Munich and at the in Freising. During this time, Ratzinger was deeply influenced by the ideas of Italian-German philosopher Romano Guardini, who was teaching in Munich while Ratzinger was a student there. The intellectual affinity between these two thinkers, who would later become decisive figures for the twentieth-century Catholic Church, was preoccupied with rediscovering the essentials of Christianity: Guardini wrote \"The Essence of Christianity\" in 1938, while Ratzinger penned \"Introduction to Christianity\", three decades later in 1968. Guardini inspired many in the Catholic social-democratic tradition, particularly the Communion and Liberation movement in the New Evangelization encouraged under the papacy of the Polish Pope John Paul\u00a0II. Ratzinger wrote an introduction to a 1996 reissue of Guardini's 1954 work \"The Lord\".\nPre-papal career: 1951\u20132005.\nAcademic career: 1951\u20131977.\nRatzinger began as assistant pastor (curate) at the parish St. Martin, Moosach, in Munich in 1951. Ratzinger became a professor at the University of Bonn in 1959, with his inaugural lecture on \"The God of Faith and the God of Philosophy\". In 1963, he moved to the University of M\u00fcnster. During this period, he participated in the Second Vatican Council (1962\u20131965) and served as a \"peritus\" (theological consultant) to Cardinal Frings of Cologne. He was viewed during the time of the council as a reformer, cooperating with theologians like Hans K\u00fcng and Edward Schillebeeckx. Ratzinger became an admirer of Karl Rahner, a well-known academic theologian of the \"Nouvelle th\u00e9ologie\" and a proponent of Church reform.\nIn 1966, Ratzinger was appointed to a chair in dogmatic theology at the University of T\u00fcbingen, where he was a colleague of Hans K\u00fcng. In his 1968 book \"Introduction to Christianity\", he wrote that the pope has a duty to hear differing voices within the Church before making a decision, and he downplayed the centrality of the papacy. During this time, he distanced himself from the atmosphere of T\u00fcbingen and the Marxist leanings of the student movement of the 1960s that quickly radicalized, in the years 1967 and 1968, culminating in a series of disturbances and riots in April and May 1968. Ratzinger came increasingly to see these and associated developments (such as decreasing respect for authority among his students) as connected to a departure from traditional Catholic teachings. Despite his reformist bent, his views increasingly came to contrast with the liberal ideas gaining currency in theological circles. He was invited by Rev. Theodore Hesburgh to join the theology faculty at the University of Notre Dame, but declined on grounds that his English was not good enough.\nSome voices, among them K\u00fcng, deemed this period in Ratzinger's life a turn towards conservatism, while Ratzinger himself said in a 1993 interview, \"I see no break in my views as a theologian [over the years]\". Ratzinger continued to defend the work of the Second Vatican Council, including \"Nostra aetate\", the document on respect of other religions, ecumenism, and the declaration of the right to freedom of religion. Later, as the Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Ratzinger most clearly spelled out the Catholic Church's position on other religions in the 2000 document \"Dominus Iesus\" which also talks about the Catholic way to engage in \"ecumenical dialogue\". During his time at T\u00fcbingen University, Ratzinger published articles in the reformist theological journal \"Concilium\", though he increasingly chose less reformist themes than other contributors such as K\u00fcng and Schillebeeckx.\nIn 1969, Ratzinger returned to Bavaria, to the University of Regensburg and co-founded the theological journal \"Communio\", with Hans Urs von Balthasar, Henri de Lubac, Walter Kasper, and others, in 1972. \"Communio\", now published in seventeen languages, including German, English, and Spanish, has become a prominent journal of contemporary Catholic theological thought. Until he was elected pope, he remained one of the journal's most prolific contributors. In 1976, he suggested that the Augsburg Confession might be recognised as a Catholic statement of faith. Several of Benedict's former students became his confidantes, notably Christoph Sch\u00f6nborn, and a number of his former students sometimes meet for discussions. He served as vice-president of the University of Regensburg from 1976 to 1977. On 26 May 1976, he was appointed a Prelate of Honour of His Holiness.\nArchbishop of Munich and Freising: 1977\u20131982.\nOn 24 March 1977, Ratzinger was appointed Archbishop of Munich and Freising, and was ordained a bishop on 28 May. He took as his episcopal motto (Latin for 'cooperators of the truth'), from the Third Epistle of John, a choice on which he commented in his autobiographical work \"Milestones\".\nIn the consistory of 27 June 1977, he was named Cardinal Priest of Santa Maria Consolatrice al Tiburtino by Pope Paul\u00a0VI. By the time of the 2005 conclave, he was one of only fourteen remaining cardinals appointed by PaulVI, and one of only three of those under the age of 80. Of these, only he and William Wakefield Baum took part in the conclave.\nPrefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith: 1981\u20132005.\nOn 25 November 1981, Pope John PaulII, upon the retirement of Franjo \u0160eper, named Ratzinger as the Prefect of the Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, formerly known as the \"Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office\", the historical Roman Inquisition. Consequently, he resigned from his post in Munich in early 1982. He was promoted within the College of Cardinals to become Cardinal Bishop of Velletri-Segni in 1993 and was made the college's vice-dean in 1998 and dean in 2002. Just a year after its foundation in 1990, Ratzinger joined the European Academy of Sciences and Arts in Salzburg.\nRatzinger defended and reaffirmed Catholic doctrine, including teaching on topics such as birth control, homosexuality, and inter-religious dialogue. The theologian Leonardo Boff, for example, was suspended, while others such as Matthew Fox were censured. Other issues also prompted condemnations or revocations of rights to teach: for instance, some posthumous writings of Jesuit priest Anthony de Mello were the subject of a notification. Ratzinger and the congregation viewed many of them, particularly the later works, as having an element of religious indifferentism (in other words, that Christ was \"one master alongside others\"). In particular, \"Dominus Iesus\", published by the congregation in the jubilee year 2000, reaffirmed many recently \"unpopular\" ideas, including the Catholic Church's position that \"salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to men by which we must be saved.\" The document angered many Protestant churches by claiming that they are not churches, but \"ecclesial communities\".\nRatzinger's 2001 letter \"\" clarified the confidentiality of internal church investigations, as defined in the 1962 document \"Crimen sollicitationis\", into accusations made against priests of certain crimes, including sexual abuse. This became a subject of controversy during the sex abuse cases. For 20 years, Ratzinger had been the man in charge of enforcing the document.\nWhile bishops hold the secrecy pertained only internally, and did not preclude investigation by civil law enforcement, the letter was often seen as promoting a coverup. Later, as pope, he was accused in a lawsuit of conspiring to cover up the molestation of three boys in Texas, but sought and obtained diplomatic immunity from liability.\nOn 12 March 1983, Ratzinger, as prefect, notified the lay faithful and the clergy that Archbishop Pierre Martin Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Th\u1ee5c had incurred excommunication \"latae sententiae\" for illicit episcopal consecrations without the apostolic mandate. It is reported that in 1997, when he turned 70, Ratzinger asked Pope John PaulII for permission to leave the Congregation of the Doctrine of Faith and to become instead the head of the Vatican Secret Archives and of the Vatican Library, but John Paul refused his assent.\nRatzinger engaged in a dialogue with critical theorist J\u00fcrgen Habermas in 2004, published three years later by Ignatius Press.\nPapacy: 2005\u20132013.\nElection to the papacy.\nIn April 2005, before his election as pope, Ratzinger was identified as one of the 100 most influential people in the world by \"Time\". While Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Ratzinger repeatedly stated he would like to retire to his house in the Bavarian village of Pentling near Regensburg and dedicate himself to writing books.\nAt the papal conclave, \"it was, if not Ratzinger, who? And as they came to know him, the question became, why not Ratzinger?\" On 19 April 2005, he was elected on the second day after four ballots. Cardinal Cormac Murphy-O'Connor described the final vote, \"It's very solemn when you go up one by one to put your vote in the urn and you're looking up at the \"Last Judgement\" of Michelangelo. And I still remember vividly the then Cardinal Ratzinger sitting on the edge of his chair.\" Ratzinger had hoped to retire peacefully and said that \"At a certain point, I prayed to God 'please don't do this to me'...Evidently, this time He didn't listen to me.\"\nThe day following Ratzinger's election, the German newspaper Bild ran what would become one of its most iconic headlines in response to the announcement of the prior day, (\"We are (the) Pope\").\nAt the balcony, Benedict's first words to the crowd, given in Italian before he gave the traditional \"Urbi et Orbi\" blessing in Latin, were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOn 24 April, Benedict celebrated the Papal Inauguration Mass in St. Peter's Square, during which he was invested with the Pallium and the Ring of the Fisherman. On 7 May, he took possession of his cathedral church, the Archbasilica of St. John Lateran.\nChoice of name.\nBenedictXVI chose his papal name, which comes from the Latin word meaning \"the blessed\", in honour of both Benedict\u00a0XV and Benedict of Nursia. BenedictXV was pope during the First World War, during which time he passionately pursued peace between the warring nations. St. Benedict of Nursia was the founder of the Benedictine monasteries (most monasteries of the Middle Ages were of the Benedictine order) and the author of the \"Rule of Saint Benedict\", which is still the most influential writing regarding the monastic life of Western Christianity. The Pope explained his choice of name during his first general audience in St. Peter's Square, on 27 April 2005:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTone of papacy.\nDuring Benedict's inaugural Mass, the previous custom of every cardinal submitting to the pope was replaced by being greeted by twelve people, including cardinals, clergy, religious, a married couple and their child, and some who were newly confirmed people; the cardinals had formally sworn their obedience upon the election of the new pontiff. He began using an open-topped papal car, saying that he wanted to be closer to the people. Benedict continued the tradition of his predecessor John PaulII and baptised several infants in the Sistine Chapel at the beginning of each year, on the Feast of the Baptism of the Lord, in his pastoral role as Bishop of Rome.\nBeatifications.\nDuring his pontificate, BenedictXVI beatified 870 people. On 9 May 2005, BenedictXVI began the beatification process for his predecessor, Pope John PaulII. Normally, five years must pass after a person's death before the beatification process can begin. However, in an audience with Benedict, Camillo Ruini, vicar general of the Diocese of Rome and the official responsible for promoting the cause for canonization of any person who dies within that diocese, cited \"exceptional circumstances\" which suggested that the waiting period could be waived. (This had happened before, when Pope PaulVI waived the five-year rule and announced beatification processes for two of his own predecessors, Pope Pius\u00a0XII and Pope John\u00a0XXIII. BenedictXVI followed this precedent when he waived the five-year rule for John PaulII.) The decision was announced on 13 May 2005, the Feast of Our Lady of F\u00e1tima and the 24th anniversary of the attempt on John PaulII's life. John PaulII often credited Our Lady of F\u00e1tima for preserving him on that day. Cardinal Ruini inaugurated the diocesan phase of the cause for beatification in the Lateran Basilica on 28 June 2005.\nThe first beatification under the new pope was celebrated on 14 May 2005, by Jos\u00e9 Cardinal Saraiva Martins, Cardinal Prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints. The new Blesseds were Marianne Cope and Ascensi\u00f3n Nicol Go\u00f1i. Cardinal Clemens August Graf von Galen was beatified on 9 October 2005. Mariano de la Mata was beatified in November 2006 and Rosa Eluvathingal was beatified on 3 December of that year, and Basil Moreau was beatified in September 2007. In October 2008, the following beatifications took place: Celestine of the Mother of God, Giuseppina Nicoli, Hendrina Stenmanns, Maria Rosa Flesch, Marta Anna Wiecka, Michael Sopocko, Petrus Kibe Kasui and 187 Companions, Susana Paz-Castillo Ram\u00edrez, and Maria Isbael Salvat Romero.\nOn 19 September 2010, during his visit to the United Kingdom, Benedict personally proclaimed the beatification of John Henry Newman.\nUnlike his predecessor, Benedict delegated the beatification liturgical service to a cardinal. On 29 September 2005, the Congregation for the Causes of Saints issued a communiqu\u00e9 announcing that henceforth beatifications would be celebrated by a representative of the pope, usually the prefect of that Congregation.\nCanonizations.\nDuring his pontificate, BenedictXVI canonized 45 people. He celebrated his first canonizations on 23 October 2005 in St. Peter's Square with the Canonizations of Josef Bilczewski, Alberto Hurtado, Zygmunt Gorazdowski, Gaetano Catanoso, and Felice da Nicosia. The canonizations were part of a mass that marked the conclusion of the General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops and the Year of the Eucharist. Benedict canonized Bishop Rafael Gu\u00edzar y Valencia, Th\u00e9odore Gu\u00e9rin, Filippo Smaldone, and Rosa Venerini on 15 October 2006.\nDuring his visit to Brazil in 2007, Benedict presided over the canonization of Frei Galv\u00e3o on 11 May, while George Preca, founder of the Malta-based MUSEUM, Szymon of Lipnica, Charles of Mount Argus, and Marie-Eug\u00e9nie de J\u00e9sus were canonized in a ceremony held at the Vatican on 3 June 2007. Preca is the first Maltese saint since the country's conversion to Christianity in A.D. 60 when St. Paul converted the inhabitants. In October 2008, the following canonizations took place: Alphonsa of the Immaculate Conception of India, Gaetano Errico, Narcisa de Jesus Martillo Moran, and Maria Bernarda B\u00fctler. In April 2009, the Pope canonized Arcangelo Tadini, Bernardo Tolomei, Nuno \u00c1lvares Pereira, Geltrude Comensoli, and Caterina Volpicelli. In October of the same year he canonized Jeanne Jugan, Damien de Veuster, Zygmunt Szcz\u0119sny Feli\u0144ski, Francisco Coll Guitart, and Rafael Arn\u00e1iz Bar\u00f3n.\nOn 17 October 2010, Benedict canonized Andr\u00e9 Bessette, a French-Canadian; Stanis\u0142aw So\u0142tys, a 15th-century Polish priest; Italian nuns Giulia Salzano and Camilla Battista da Varano; Spanish nun Candida Maria de Jesus Cipitria y Barriola; and the first Australian saint, Mary MacKillop. On 23 October 2011, he canonized three saints: a Spanish nun Bonifacia Rodr\u00edguez y Castro, Italian archbishop Guido Maria Conforti, and Italian priest Luigi Guanella. In December 2011, the Pope formally recognized the validity of the miracles necessary to proceed with the canonizations of Kateri Tekakwitha, who would be the first Native American saint; Marianne Cope, a nun working with lepers in what is now the state of Hawaii; Giovanni Battista Piamarta, an Italian priest; Jacques Berthieu, a French Jesuit priest and African martyr; Carmen Salles y Barangueras, a Spanish nun and founder of the Sisters of the Immaculate Conception; Peter Calungsod, a lay catechist and martyr from the Philippines; and Anna Sch\u00e4ffer, whose desire to be a missionary was unfulfilled on account of her illness. They were canonized on 21 October 2012.\nDoctors of the Church.\nOn 7 October 2012, Benedict named Hildegard of Bingen and John of \u00c1vila as Doctors of the Church, the 34th and 35th individuals so recognized in the history of Christianity.\nCuria reform.\nBenedict made only modest changes to the structure of the Roman Curia. In March 2006, he placed both the Pontifical Council for Pastoral Care of Migrants and Itinerant Peoples and the Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace under a single president, Cardinal Renato Martino. When Martino retired in 2009, each council received its own president once again. Also in March 2006, the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue was briefly merged into the Pontifical Council for Culture under Cardinal Paul Poupard. Those Councils maintained their separate officials and staffs while their status and competencies continued unchanged, and in May 2007, Interreligious Dialogue was restored to its separate status again with its own president. In June 2010, Benedict created the Pontifical Council for the Promotion of the New Evangelization, appointing Archbishop Rino Fisichella its first president. On 16 January 2013, the Pope transferred responsibility for catechesis from the Congregation for the Clergy to the Pontifical Council for Promoting the New Evangelization.\nTeachings.\nAs pope, one of Benedict's main roles was to teach about the Catholic faith and the solutions to the problems of discerning and living the faith, a role that he could play well as a former head of the Church's Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Friendship with Jesus Christ\".\nAfter his first homily as pope, Benedict referred to both Jesus Christ and John PaulII. Citing John PaulII's well-known words, \"Do not be afraid! Open wide the doors for Christ!\", Benedict said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Are we not perhaps all afraid in some way? If we let Christ enter fully into our lives, if we open ourselves totally to Him, are we not afraid that He might take something away from us? ... And once again the Pope said: No! If we let Christ into our lives, we lose nothing, nothing, absolutely nothing of what makes life free, beautiful, and great. No! Only in this friendship do we experience beauty and liberation. ... When we give ourselves to Him, we receive a hundredfold in return. Yes, open, open wide the doors to Christ\u00a0\u2013 and you will find true life.\n\"Friendship with Jesus Christ\" was a frequent theme of Benedict's preaching. He stressed that on this intimate friendship, \"everything depends\". He also said: \"We are all called to open ourselves to this friendship with God ... speaking to Him as to a friend, the only One who can make the world both good and happy ... That is all we have to do is put ourselves at His disposal ... is an extremely important message. It is a message that helps to overcome what can be considered the great temptation of our time: the claim, that after the Big Bang, God withdrew from history.\" Thus, in his book \"Jesus of Nazareth\", his main purpose was \"to help foster [in the reader] the growth of a living relationship\" with Jesus Christ. He took up this theme in his first encyclical \"Deus caritas est\". In his explanation and summary of the encyclical, he stated: \"If friendship with God becomes for us something ever more important and decisive, then we will begin to love those whom God loves and who are in need of us. God wants us to be friends of His friends and we can be so, if we are interiorly close to them.\" Thus, he said that prayer is \"urgently needed ... It is time to reaffirm the importance of prayer in the face of the activism and the growing secularism of many Christians engaged in charitable work.\"\n\"Dictatorship of relativism\".\nContinuing what he said in the pre-conclave Mass about what he often referred to as the \"central problem of our faith today\", on 6 June 2005, Benedict also said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Today, a particularly insidious obstacle to the task of education is the massive presence in our society and culture of that relativism which, recognising nothing as definitive, leaves as the ultimate criterion only the self with its desires. And under the semblance of freedom it becomes a prison for each one, for it separates people from one another, locking each person into his or her own ego.\nBenedict said that \"a dictatorship of relativism\" was the core challenge facing the Church and humanity. At the root of this problem, he said, is Immanuel Kant's \"self-limitation of reason\". This, he said, is contradictory to the modern acclamation of science whose excellence is based on the power of reason to know the truth. He said that this self-amputation of reason leads to pathologies of religion such as terrorism and pathologies of science such as ecological disasters. Benedict traced the failed revolutions and violent ideologies of the 20th century to a conversion of partial points of view into absolute guides. He said \"Absolutizing what is not absolute but relative is called totalitarianism.\"\nChristianity as religion according to reason.\nIn the discussion with secularism and rationalism, one of Benedict's basic ideas can be found in his address on the \"Crisis of Culture\" in the West, a day before Pope John PaulII died, when he referred to Christianity as the \"religion of the \"Logos\"\" (the Greek for \"word\", \"reason\", \"meaning\", or \"intelligence\"). He said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; From the beginning, Christianity has understood itself as the religion of the \"Logos\", as the religion according to reason ... It has always defined men, all men without distinction, as creatures and images of God, proclaiming for them ... the same dignity. In this connection, the Enlightenment is of Christian origin and it is no accident that it was born precisely and exclusively in the realm of the Christian faith. ... It was and is the merit of the Enlightenment to have again proposed these original values of Christianity and of having given back to reason its own voice ... Today, this should be precisely [Christianity's] philosophical strength, in so far as the problem is whether the world comes from the irrational, and reason is not other than a 'sub-product,' on occasion even harmful of its development\u00a0\u2013 or whether the world comes from reason, and is, as a consequence, its criterion and goal ... In the so necessary dialogue between secularists and Catholics, we Christians must be very careful to remain faithful to this fundamental line: to live a faith that comes from the \"Logos\", from creative reason, and that, because of this, is also open to all that is truly rational.\nBenedict also emphasised that \"Only creative reason, which in the crucified God is manifested as love, can really show us the way.\"\nEncyclicals.\nBenedict wrote three encyclicals: \"Deus caritas est\" (Latin for \"God is Love\"), \"Spe salvi\" (\"Saved by Hope\"), and \"Caritas in veritate\" (\"Love in Truth\").\nIn his first encyclical, \"Deus caritas est\", he said that a human being, created in the image of God who is love, can practise love: to give himself to God and others (agape) by receiving and experiencing God's love in contemplation. This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Teresa of Calcutta and the Blessed Virgin Mary, and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them in Jesus Christ. The encyclical contains almost 16,000 words in 42 paragraphs. The first half is said to have been written by Benedict in German, his first language, in the summer of 2005; the second half is derived from uncompleted writings left by his predecessor, Pope John PaulII. The document was signed by Benedict on Christmas Day, 25 December 2005. The encyclical was promulgated a month later in Latin and was translated into English, French, German, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, and Spanish. It is the first encyclical to be published since the Vatican decided to assert copyright in the official writings of the pope.\nBenedict's second encyclical titled \"Spe Salvi\" (\"Saved by Hope\"), about the virtue of hope, was released on 30 November 2007.\nHis third encyclical titled \"Caritas in veritate\" (\"Love in Truth\" or \"Charity in Truth\"), was signed on 29 June 2009 (the Feast of Sts. Peter and Paul) and released on 7 July 2009. In it, the Pope continued the Church's teachings on social justice. He condemned the prevalent economic system \"where the pernicious effects of sin are evident\", and called on people to rediscover ethics in business and economic relations.\nAt the time of his resignation, Benedict had completed a draft of a fourth encyclical entitled \"Lumen fidei\" (\"The Light of Faith\"), intended to accompany his first two encyclicals to complete a trilogy on the three theological virtues of faith, hope, and love. Benedict's successor, Francis, completed and published \"Lumen Fidei\" in June 2013, four months after Benedict's retirement and Francis's succession. Although the encyclical is officially the work of Francis, paragraph 7 of the encyclical explicitly expresses Francis's debt to Benedict: \"These considerations on faith \u2013 in continuity with all that the Church's magisterium has pronounced on this theological virtue \u2013 are meant to supplement what BenedictXVI had written in his encyclical letters on charity and hope. He himself had almost completed a first draft of an encyclical on faith. For this I am deeply grateful to him, and as his brother in Christ I have taken up his fine work and added a few contributions of my own.\"\nPost-synodal apostolic exhortation.\n\"Sacramentum caritatis\" (The Sacrament of Charity), signed 22 February 2007, was released in Latin, Italian, English, French, German, Portuguese, Spanish, and Polish. It was made available in various languages on 13 March 2007 in Rome. The English edition of \"Libera Editrice Vaticana\" is 158 pages. This apostolic exhortation \"seeks to take up the richness and variety of the reflections and proposals which emerged from the Ordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops\" which was held in 2006.\n\"Motu proprio\" on Tridentine Mass.\nOn 7 July 2007, Benedict issued the \"motu proprio Summorum Pontificum\", declaring that upon \"the request of the faithful\", the celebration of Mass according to the Missal of 1962 (of the Tridentine Mass), was to be more easily permitted. Stable groups who previously had to petition their bishop to have a Tridentine Mass may now merely request permission from their local priest. While \"Summorum Pontificum\" directs that pastors should provide the Tridentine Mass upon the requests of the faithful, it also allows for any qualified priest to offer private celebrations of the Tridentine Mass, to which the faithful may be admitted if they wish. For regularly scheduled public celebrations of the Tridentine Mass, the permission of the priest in charge of the church is required.\nIn an accompanying letter, the Pope outlined his position concerning questions about the new guidelines. As there were fears that the move would entail a reversal of the Second Vatican Council, Benedict emphasised that the Tridentine Mass would not detract from the council and that the Mass of Paul VI would still be the norm and priests were not permitted to refuse to say the Mass in that form. He pointed out that the use of Tridentine Mass \"was never juridically abrogated and, consequently, in principle, was always permitted.\" The letter also decried \"deformations of the liturgy ... because in many places celebrations were not faithful to the prescriptions of the new Missal\" as the Second Vatican Council was wrongly seen \"as authorising or even requiring creativity\", mentioning his own experience.\nThe Pope considered that allowing the Tridentine Mass to those who request it was a means to prevent or heal schism, stating that, on occasions in history, \"not enough was done by the Church's leaders to maintain or regain reconciliation and unity\" and that this \"imposes an obligation on us today: to make every effort to enable for all those who truly desire unity to remain in that unity or to attain it anew.\" Cardinal Dar\u00edo Castrill\u00f3n Hoyos, the president of the Pontifical Commission established to facilitate full ecclesial communion of those associated with that Society, stated that the decree \"opened the door for their return\". Bishop Bernard Fellay, superior general of the SSPX, expressed \"deep gratitude to the Sovereign Pontiff for this great spiritual benefit\".\nIn July 2021, Pope Francis issued the apostolic letter titled \"Traditionis custodes\", which substantially reversed the decision of BenedictXVI in \"Summorum Pontificum\" and imposed new and broad restrictions on the use of the Traditional Latin Mass. The decision was controversial and widely criticized by conservative and traditionalist Catholics as lacking in charity and an attack on those attached to the liturgical patrimony of the Church.\nUnicity and salvific universality of the Catholic Church.\nNear the end of June 2007, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith issued a document approved by BenedictXVI \"because some contemporary theological interpretations of Vatican II's ecumenical intent had been 'erroneous or ambiguous' and had prompted confusion and doubt.\" The document has been seen as restating \"key sections of a 2000 text the pope wrote when he was prefect of the congregation, \"Dominus Iesus\".\"\nConsumerism.\nBenedict condemned excessive consumerism, especially among youth. He stated in December 2007 that \"[A]dolescents, youths and even children are easy victims of the corruption of love, deceived by unscrupulous adults who, lying to themselves and to them, draw them into the dead-end streets of consumerism.\" In June 2009, he blamed outsourcing for the greater availability of consumer goods which lead to the downsizing of social security systems.\nEcumenism.\nSpeaking at his weekly audience in St. Peter's Square on 7 June 2006, Benedict asserted that Jesus himself had entrusted the leadership of the Church to his apostle Peter. \"Peter's responsibility thus consists of guaranteeing the communion with Christ. Let us pray so that the primacy of Peter, entrusted to poor human beings, may always be exercised in this original sense desired by the Lord, so that it will be increasingly recognised in its true meaning by brothers who are still not in communion with us.\"\nAlso in 2006, Benedict met the Anglican Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams. In their Common Declaration, they highlighted the previous 40 years of dialogue between Catholics and Anglicans while also acknowledging \"serious obstacles to our ecumenical progress\".\nOn 4 November 2009, in response to a 2007 petition by the Traditional Anglican Church, Benedict issued the apostolic constitution \"Anglicanorum coetibus\", which authorized the creation of \"Personal Ordinariates for Anglicans entering into full communion.\" Between 2011 and 2012, three ordinariates were erected, currently totalling 9090 members, 194 priests, and 94 parishes.\nInterfaith dialogue.\nJudaism.\nWhen Benedict ascended to the papacy, his election was welcomed by the Anti-Defamation League who noted \"his great sensitivity to Jewish history and the Holocaust\". However, his election received a more reserved response from British Chief Rabbi Jonathan Sacks, who hoped that Benedict would \"continue along the path of Pope JohnXXIII and Pope John PaulII in working to enhance relations with the Jewish people and the State of Israel.\" Israeli foreign minister Silvan Shalom also offered tentative praise, though Shalom believed that \"this Pope, considering his historical experience, will be especially committed to an uncompromising fight against anti-Semitism.\"\nCritics have accused Benedict's papacy of insensitivity towards Judaism. The two most prominent instances were the expansion of the use of the Tridentine Mass and the lifting of the excommunication on four bishops from the Society of St. Pius X (SSPX). In the Good Friday service, the Tridentine Mass rubrics include a prayer that asks God to lift the veil so \"they [Jews] may be delivered from their darkness\". This prayer has historically been contentious in Judaic-Catholic relations and several groups saw the restoration of the Tridentine Mass as problematic. Among those whose excommunications were lifted was Bishop Richard Williamson, an outspoken historical revisionist sometimes interpreted as a Holocaust denier. The lifting of his excommunication led critics to charge that the Pope was condoning his historical revisionist views.\nIslam.\nBenedict's relations with Islam were strained at times. On 12 September 2006, he delivered a lecture which touched on Islam at the University of Regensburg in Germany. He had served there as a professor of theology before becoming Pope, and his lecture was entitled \"Faith, Reason and the University\u00a0\u2013 Memories and Reflections\". The lecture received much attention from political and religious authorities. Many Islamic politicians and religious leaders registered their protest against what they labelled an insulting mischaracterization of Islam, although his focus was aimed towards the rationality of religious violence, and its effect on the religion. Muslims were particularly offended by a passage that the Pope quoted in his speech: \"Show me just what Muhammad brought that was new and there you will find things only evil and inhuman, such as his command to spread by the sword the faith he preached.\"\nThe passage originally appeared in the \"Dialogue Held with a Certain Persian, the Worthy Mouterizes, in Anakara of Galatia\" written in 1391 as an expression of the views of the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Palaeologus, one of the last Christian rulers in Constantinople before its fall to the Muslim Ottoman Empire, on such issues as forced conversion, holy war, and the relationship between faith and reason. According to the German text of his lecture, the Pope's original comment was that the emperor \"addresses his interlocutor in an astoundingly harsh\u00a0\u2013 to us surprisingly harsh\u00a0\u2013 way\" (). Benedict apologized for any offence he had caused and made a point of visiting Turkey, a predominantly Muslim country, and praying in its Blue Mosque. Benedict planned on 5 March 2008, to meet with Muslim scholars and religious leaders autumn 2008 at a Catholic-Muslim seminar in Rome. That meeting, the \"First Meeting of the Catholic-Muslim Forum\", was held from 4\u20136 November 2008. On 9 May 2009, Benedict visited the King Hussein Mosque in Amman, Jordan where he was addressed by Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad.\nBuddhism.\nThe Dalai Lama congratulated BenedictXVI upon his election, and visited him in October 2006 in Vatican City. In 2007, the People's Republic of China was accused of using its political influence to stop a meeting between the Pope and the Dalai Lama.\nIndigenous American beliefs.\nWhile visiting Brazil in May 2007, \"the pope sparked controversy by saying that native populations had been 'silently longing' for the Christian faith brought to South America by colonizers.\" The Pope continued, stating that \"the proclamation of Jesus and of his Gospel did not at any point involve an alienation of the pre-Columbus cultures, nor was it the imposition of a foreign culture.\" Venezuelan president Hugo Ch\u00e1vez demanded an apology, and an indigenous organization in Ecuador issued a response which stated that \"representatives of the Catholic Church of those times, with honourable exceptions, were accomplices, deceivers and beneficiaries of one of the most horrific genocides of all humanity.\" Later, the Pope, speaking Italian, said at a weekly audience that it was \"not possible to forget the suffering and the injustices inflicted by colonizers against the indigenous population, whose fundamental human rights were often trampled\" but made no apology.\nHinduism.\nWhile visiting the United States on 17 April 2008, Benedict met with International Society for Krishna Consciousness representative Radhika Ramana Dasa, a noted Hindu scholar and disciple of Hanumatpreshaka Swami. On behalf of the Hindu American community, Radhika Ramana Dasa presented a gift of an Om symbol to Benedict.\nPastoral visits and security.\nAs pontiff, Benedict carried out numerous Apostolic activities, including journeys in Italy and across the world.\nBenedict travelled extensively during the first three years of his papacy. In addition to his travels within Italy, he made two visits to his homeland, Germany, one for World Youth Day and another to visit the towns of his childhood. He also visited Poland and Spain, where he was enthusiastically received. His visit to Turkey, an overwhelmingly Muslim nation, was initially overshadowed by the controversy about a lecture he had given at Regensburg. His visit was met by nationalist and Islamic protesters and was placed under unprecedented security measures. Benedict made a joint declaration with Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew\u00a0I in an attempt to begin to heal the rift between the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches.\nIn 2007, Benedict visited Brazil to address the Bishops' Conference there and canonize Friar Ant\u00f4nio Galv\u00e3o, an 18th-century Franciscan. In June 2007, Benedict made a personal pilgrimage and pastoral visit to Assisi, the birthplace of St. Francis. In September, Benedict undertook a three-day visit to Austria, during which he joined Vienna's chief rabbi, Paul Chaim Eisenberg, in a memorial to the 65,000 Viennese Jews who perished in Nazi death camps. During his stay in Austria, he also celebrated Mass at the Marian shrine Mariazell and visited Heiligenkreuz Abbey.\nIn April 2008, Benedict made his first visit to the United States since becoming pope. He arrived in Washington, D.C., where he was formally received at the White House and met privately with US president George W. Bush. While in Washington, the pope addressed representatives of US Catholic universities, met with leaders of other world religions, and celebrated Mass at the Washington Nationals' baseball stadium with 47,000 people. The Pope also met privately with victims of sexual abuse by priests. The Pope travelled to New York City where he addressed the United Nations General Assembly. Also while in New York, the Pope celebrated Mass at St. Patrick's Cathedral, met with disabled children and their families, and attended an event for Catholic youth, where he addressed some 25,000 young people in attendance. On the final day of the Pope's visit, he visited the World Trade Center site and later celebrated Mass at Yankee Stadium.\nIn July 2008, the Pope travelled to Australia to attend World Youth Day 2008 in Sydney. On 19 July, in St. Mary's Cathedral, he made an apology for child sex abuse perpetrated by the clergy in Australia. On 13 September 2008, at an outdoor Paris Mass attended by 250,000 people, Benedict condemned the modern materialism\u00a0\u2013 the world's love of power, possessions, and money as a modern-day plague, comparing it to paganism. In 2009, he visited Africa (Cameroon and Angola) for the first time as pope. During his visit, he suggested that altering sexual behaviour was the answer to Africa's AIDS crisis and urged Catholics to reach out and convert believers in sorcery. He visited the Middle East (Jordan, Israel, and Palestine) in May 2009.\nBenedict's main arena for pastoral activity was the Vatican itself, his Christmas and Easter homilies and Urbi et Orbi were delivered from St. Peter's Basilica. The Vatican is also the only regular place where Benedict travelled via motor without the protective bulletproof case common to most popemobiles. Despite the more secure setting, Benedict was victim to security risks several times inside Vatican City. On Wednesday, 6 June 2007, during his General Audience, a man leapt across a barrier, evaded guards, and nearly mounted the Pope's vehicle, although he was stopped and Benedict seemed to be unaware of the event. On Thursday, 24 December 2009, while Benedict was proceeding to the altar to celebrate Christmas Eve Mass at St. Peter's Basilica, a woman later identified as 25-year-old Susanna Maiolo, who holds Italian and Swiss citizenship, jumped the barrier and grabbed the Pope by his vestments and pulled him to the ground. The 82-year-old Benedict fell but was assisted to his feet and he continued to proceed toward the altar to celebrate Mass. Roger Etchegaray, the vice-dean of the College of Cardinals, fell as well and suffered a hip fracture. Italian police reported that Maiolo had in a prior action attempted to accost Benedict at the previous Christmas Eve Mass, but was prevented from doing so.\nIn his homily, Benedict forgave Susanna Maiolo and urged the world to \"wake up\" from selfishness and petty affairs, and find time for God and spiritual matters.\nBetween 17 and 18 April 2010, Benedict made an Apostolic Journey to the Republic of Malta. Following meetings with various dignitaries on his first day on the island, 50,000 people gathered in a drizzle for Papal Mass on the granaries in Floriana. The Pope also met with the Maltese youth at the Valletta Waterfront, where an estimated 10,000 young people turned up to greet him.\nSexual abuse in the Catholic Church.\nPrior to 2001, the primary responsibility for investigating allegations of sexual abuse and disciplining perpetrators rested with the individual dioceses. In 2001, Ratzinger convinced John PaulII to put the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith in charge of all sexual abuse investigations. According to John L. Allen Jr., Ratzinger in the following years \"acquired a familiarity with the contours of the problem that virtually no other figure in the Catholic Church can claim. Driven by that encounter with what he would later refer to as 'filth' in the Church, Ratzinger seems to have undergone something of a 'conversion experience' throughout 2003\u201304. From that point forward, he and his staff seemed driven by a convert's zeal to clean up the mess.\"\nCardinal Vincent Nichols wrote that in his role as head of the CDF \"[Ratzinger] led important changes made in church law: the inclusion in canon law of internet offences against children, the extension of child abuse offences to include the sexual abuse of all under 18, the case by case waiving of the statute of limitation and the establishment of a fast-track dismissal from the clerical state for offenders.\" According to Charles J. Scicluna, a former prosecutor handling sexual abuse cases, \"Cardinal Ratzinger displayed great wisdom and firmness in handling those cases, also demonstrating great courage in facing some of the most difficult and thorny cases, \"sine acceptione personarum\" [without respect of persons]\". According to Cardinal Christoph Sch\u00f6nborn, Ratzinger \"made entirely clear efforts not to cover things up but to tackle and investigate them. This was not always met with approval in the Vatican\". Ratzinger had pressed John PaulII to investigate Hans Hermann Gro\u00ebr, an Austrian cardinal and friend of John Paul accused of sexual abuse, which resulted in Gro\u00ebr's resignation.\nIn March 2010, Benedict sent a pastoral letter to the Catholic Church in Ireland addressing cases of sexual abuse by priests of minors, expressing sorrow and promising changes in the way in which accusations of abuse were addressed. Victims' groups claimed the letter failed to clarify if secular law enforcement had priority over canon law confidentiality regarding internal investigation of abuse allegations. The Pope then promised to introduce measures that would \"safeguard young people in the future\" and \"bring to justice\" priests who were responsible for abuse and the next month the Vatican issued guidelines on how existing church law should be implemented. The guidelines asserted that \"Civil law concerning reporting of crimes\u00a0... should always be followed.\"\nAs Archbishop of Munich and Freising.\nDespite being more proactive than his predecessor in addressing sexual abuse, Benedict was nonetheless cited as failing to do so on more than one occasion. In January 2022, a report written by German law firm Westpfahl Spilker Wastl and commissioned by the Catholic Church concluded that Cardinal Ratzinger failed to adequately take action against clerics in four cases of alleged abuse while he was Archbishop of Munich and Freising from 1977 to 1982. The pope emeritus denied the accusations. Benedict corrected his former statement that he had not been at a meeting of the ordinariate of the Archdiocese of Munich and Freising in January 1980, saying he mistakenly told German investigators he was not there. However, the error was \"not done out of bad faith\", but \"the result of an error in the editorial processing\" of his statement. According to Reuters, lawyer Martin Pusch said that \"in a total of four cases, we have come to the conclusion that the then Archbishop Cardinal Ratzinger can be accused of misconduct in cases of sexual abuse.\"\nIn February 2022, Benedict admitted that errors were made in the treating of sexual abuse cases when he was Archbishop of Munich. According to the letter released by the Vatican, he asked forgiveness for any \"grievous fault\" but denied personal wrongdoing. Benedict stated: \"I have had great responsibilities in the Catholic Church. All the greater is my pain for the abuses and the errors that occurred in those different places during the time of my mandate.\" Public prosecutor's office in Munich had begun investigations as a result of the 2022 report against both Benedict and Cardinal Friedrich Wetter. The investigation was \"discontinued\" in March 2023 after it \"did not reveal sufficient suspicion of criminal activity\". The case of the investigation \"was not acts of abuse committed by the Church personnel managers themselves, but possible acts of aiding and abetting by active action or omission\".\nLegion of Christ founder Marcial Maciel.\nOne of the cases Ratzinger pursued involved Marcial Maciel, a Mexican priest and founder of the Legionaries of Christ who had been accused repeatedly of sexual abuse. Biographer Andrea Tornielli suggested that Cardinal Ratzinger had wanted to take action against Maciel but that John PaulII and other high-ranking officials, including several cardinals and the Pope's influential secretary Stanis\u0142aw Dziwisz, prevented him from doing so.\nAccording to Jason Berry, Cardinal Angelo Sodano \"pressured\" Ratzinger, who was \"operating on the assumption that the charges were not justified\", to halt the proceedings against Maciel in 1999. When Maciel was honoured by the Pope in 2004, new accusers came forward and Cardinal Ratzinger \"took it on himself to authorize an investigation of Maciel\". After Ratzinger became pope, he began proceedings against Maciel and the Legion of Christ that forced Maciel out of active service in the Church. On 1 May 2010, the Vatican issued a statement denouncing \"the most serious and objectively immoral behaviour of Father Maciel, confirmed by incontrovertible witnesses, which amount to true crimes and show a life deprived of scruples and authentic religious feeling.\"\nTheodore McCarrick controversy.\nIn November 2020, the Vatican published a report blaming Popes John PaulII and BenedictXVI for allowing defrocked former cardinal Theodore McCarrick to rise in power despite the fact that they both knew of sex abuse allegations against him. Despite the fact that Benedict pressured McCarrick to resign as Archbishop of Washington D.C. in 2006, McCarrick remained very active in ministry throughout Benedict's papacy and even made a very public appearance when he presided over US senator Ted Kennedy's burial service at Arlington National Cemetery in 2009.\nPost-papacy.\nIn 2019, Benedict released a 6,000-word letter that attributed the Church's sexual abuse crisis to an erosion of morality driven by secularization and the sexual revolution of the 1960s. The letter was in sharp contrast to the viewpoint of his successor, Francis, who saw the issue as a byproduct of abuses of power within the Church's hierarchical structure. \"The New York Times\" later reported that \"given his frail health at the time, however, many church watchers questioned whether Benedict had indeed written the letter or had been manipulated to issue it as a way to undercut Francis.\"\nUpon Benedict's death, his efforts to combat sexual abuse in the Church were remembered with mixed reactions, in particular by victims' groups. Francesco Zanardi, founder of the Italian victims' group \"Rete l'Abuso\" stated that \"Ratzinger was less communicative than Francis but he moved\" in the right direction, and that he was the first pontiff to effectively do so. Anne Barrett Doyle, a co-director of BishopAccountability.org, an advocacy and research group, said that Benedict would be \"remembered chiefly for his failure to achieve what should have been his job one: to rectify the incalculable harm done to the hundreds of thousands of children sexually abused by Catholic priests.\" She stated that his tenure had \"left hundreds of culpable bishops in power and a culture of secrecy intact\", while the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests said in a statement that \"Benedict was more concerned about the church's deteriorating image and financial flow to the hierarchy versus grasping the concept of true apologies followed by true amends to victims of abuse\".\nOther issues.\nDuring the last year of Benedict's papacy, the Vatileaks occurred. These revealed allegations of corruption, internal conflict, and financial mismanagement.\nAttire.\nBenedict re-introduced several papal garments which had fallen into disuse. He resumed the use of the traditional red papal shoes, which had been used since Roman times by popes but which had fallen into disuse during the pontificate of John PaulII. Contrary to the initial speculation of the press that the shoes had been made by the Italian fashion house Prada, the Vatican announced that the shoes were provided by the Pope's personal shoemaker.\nThe journalist Charlotte Allen described Benedict as \"the pope of aesthetics\": \"He has reminded a world that looks increasingly ugly and debased that there is such a thing as the beautiful\u00a0\u2013 whether it's embodied in a sonata or an altarpiece or an embroidered cope or the cut of a cassock\u00a0\u2013 and that earthly beauty ultimately communicates a beauty that is beyond earthly things.\"\nHealth.\nBefore his election as pope, Ratzinger had hoped to retire\u00a0\u2013 on account of age-related health problems, a long-held desire to have free time to write, and the retirement age for bishops (75)\u00a0\u2013 and submitted his resignation as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith three times, but continued at his post in obedience to the wishes of John PaulII. In September 1991, Ratzinger suffered a haemorrhagic stroke, which slightly impaired his eyesight temporarily but from which he recovered completely. This was never officially made public\u00a0\u2013 the official news was that he had fallen and struck his head against a radiator\u00a0\u2013 but was an open secret known to the conclave that elected him pope.\nAfter his election in April 2005 there were several rumours about the Pope's health, but none of them were confirmed. Early in his pontificate Benedict predicted a short reign, which led to concerns about his health. In May 2005 the Vatican announced that he had suffered another mild stroke. French cardinal Philippe Barbarin said that since the first stroke Ratzinger had been suffering from an age-related heart condition, for which he was on medication. In late November 2006 Vatican insiders told the international press that the Pope had had a routine examination of the heart. A few days later an unconfirmed rumour emerged that Benedict had undergone an operation in preparation for an eventual bypass operation, but this rumour was only published by a small left-wing Italian newspaper and was never confirmed by any Vatican insider.\nOn 17 July 2009, Benedict was hospitalized after falling and breaking his right wrist while on vacation in the Alps; his injuries were reported to be minor.\nPeter Seewald, Benedict's biographer, stated in 2023 that Benedict had been suffering from persistent insomnia since the 2005 World Youth Day in Cologne. A March 2012 incident in Mexico forced the Pope to cut back on sleeping pills and necessitated that he only appear in public in the morning. According to Seewald, Benedict revealed shortly before his death that these restrictions had been untenable and were the \"central motive\" for the decision to resign prior to his next major foreign trip, World Youth Day in Rio de Janeiro in July 2013.\nFollowing the announcement of his resignation, the Vatican revealed that Benedict had been fitted with a pacemaker while he was still a cardinal, before his election as pope in 2005. The battery in the pacemaker had been replaced three months earlier, a routine procedure, but that did not influence his decision.\nResignation.\nOn 11 February 2013, the Vatican announced that Benedict would resign the papacy on 28 February 2013, as a result of his advanced age, becoming the first pope to resign since Gregory\u00a0XII in 1415. Aged 85 years and 318 days on the effective date of his retirement, he was the fourth-oldest person to hold the office of pope. The move was unexpected, as all popes in modern times had held office until death. Benedict was the first pope to resign without external pressure since Celestine\u00a0V in 1294.\nIn his declaration of 10 February 2013, Benedict resigned as \"Bishop of Rome, Successor of Saint Peter\". In a statement, he cited his deteriorating strength and the physical and mental demands of the papacy; addressing his cardinals in Latin, he gave a brief statement announcing his resignation. He also declared that he would continue to serve the Church \"through a life dedicated to prayer\".\nAccording to a statement from the Vatican, the timing of the resignation was not caused by any specific illness but was to \"avoid that exhausting rush of Easter engagements\". After two weeks of ceremonial farewells, the Pope left office at the appointed time and \"sede vacante\" was declared. Benedict was succeeded by Cardinal Jorge Mario Bergoglio, who took the papal name of Francis on 13 March 2013.\nOn the eve of the first anniversary of Benedict's resignation he wrote to \"La Stampa\" to deny speculation he had been forced to step down. \"There isn't the slightest doubt about the validity of my resignation from the Petrine ministry,\" he wrote in a letter to the newspaper. \"The only condition for the validity is the full freedom of the decision. Speculation about its invalidity is simply absurd,\" he wrote. In an interview on 28 February 2021, Benedict again repeated the legitimacy of his resignation.\nPope emeritus: 2013\u20132022.\nOn the morning of 28 February 2013, Benedict met with the full College of Cardinals and in the early afternoon flew by helicopter to the papal summer residence of Castel Gandolfo. He stayed there until refurbishment was completed on his retirement home, the Mater Ecclesiae Monastery in the Vatican Gardens near St. Peter's, former home of twelve nuns, where he moved on 2 May 2013.\nAfter his resignation, Benedict retained his papal name rather than reverting to his birth name. He continued to wear the white cassock but without the pellegrina or the fascia. He ceased wearing red papal shoes. Benedict returned his official Fisherman's Ring, which was rendered unusable by two large cuts across its face.\nAccording to a Vatican spokesman, Benedict spent his first day as Pope emeritus with Archbishop Georg G\u00e4nswein, Prefect of the Papal Household. In the monastery, the pope emeritus did not live a cloistered life, but studied and wrote. He joined Pope Francis several months later at the unveiling of a new statue of Saint Michael the Archangel. The inscription on the statue, according to Cardinal Giovanni Lajolo, has the coat of arms of the two popes to symbolize the fact that the statue was commissioned by Benedict and consecrated by Francis.\nIn 2013 it was reported that Benedict had multiple health problems including high blood pressure and had fallen out of bed more than once, but the Holy See denied any specific illnesses. The former pope made his first public appearance after his resignation at St. Peter's Basilica on 22 February 2014 to attend the first papal consistory of his successor Francis. Benedict entered the basilica through a discreet entrance and was seated in a row with several other cardinals. He doffed his zucchetto when Francis came down the nave of St. Peter's Basilica to greet him. He then made an appearance at the canonization mass of Popes JohnXXIII and John PaulII, greeting the cardinals and Francis.\nIn August 2014, Benedict celebrated Mass at the Vatican and met with his former doctoral students, an annual tradition he had kept since the 1970s. He attended the beatification of Pope Paul\u00a0VI in October 2014. Weeks before this, he joined Francis in Saint Peter's Square for an audience with grandparents to honour their importance in society.\nBenedict wrote the text of a speech, delivered by Archbishop Georg G\u00e4nswein, on the occasion of the dedication of the Aula Magna at the Pontifical Urbaniana University to the pope emeritus, \"a gesture of gratitude for what he has done for the Church as a conciliar expert, with his teaching as professor, as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and, finally, the Magisterium.\" The ceremony took place on Tuesday, 21 October 2014, during the opening of the academic year.\nBenedict attended the consistory for new cardinals in February 2015, greeting Francis at the beginning of the celebration. In the summer of 2015, Benedict spent two weeks at Castel Gandolfo, at the invitation of Pope Francis. While at Castel Gandolfo, Benedict participated in two public events. He received two honorary doctorates given to him by Cardinal Stanis\u0142aw Dziwisz, Pope John PaulII's longtime aide, from the Pontifical University of John Paul II and the Krak\u00f3w Academy of Music. In his reception address, Benedict paid homage to his predecessor, John PaulII.\nThe Joseph Ratzinger\u2013Benedict XVI Roman Library at the Pontifical Teutonic College was announced in April 2015 and was scheduled to open to scholars in November 2015. The library section dedicated to his life and thought is being catalogued. It includes books by or about him and his studies, many donated by Benedict himself.\nBenedict, in August 2015, submitted a handwritten card to act as a testimony to the cause of canonization of Pope John Paul\u00a0I.\nIn March 2016, Benedict gave an interview expressing his views on mercy and endorsing Francis's stress on mercy in his pastoral practice. Also that month, a Vatican spokesman stated that Benedict was \"slowly, serenely fading\" in his physical health, although his mental capacity remained \"perfectly lucid\".\nThe pope emeritus was honoured by the Roman Curia and Francis in 2016 at a special audience, honouring the 65th anniversary of his ordination to the priesthood. That November, he did not attend the consistory for new cardinals, rather meeting with them and Francis at his residence afterward. Following the death of Cardinal Paulo Evaristo Arns in December 2016, Benedict became the last living person appointed cardinal by Pope PaulVI.\nIn June 2017, Benedict received newly created cardinals in his chapel and spoke with each of them in their native language. In July 2017, he sent a message through his private secretary for the funeral of Cardinal Joachim Meisner, who had suddenly died while on vacation in Germany.\nIn November 2017, images emerged on the Facebook page of the Bishop of Passau, Stefan Oster, of Benedict with a black eye; the bishop and author Peter Seewald visited the former pope on 26 October since the pair were presenting Benedict with the new book \"Benedict XVI \u2013 The German Pope\" which the Passau diocese created. The former pope suffered the hematoma earlier after having slipped.\nBenedict was portrayed by Anthony Hopkins in the biographical film \"The Two Popes\", which came out in 2019. In late 2019, Benedict collaborated on a book expressing that the Catholic Church must maintain its discipline of clerical celibacy, in light of ongoing debate on the issue, though later requested his name to be removed from the book as co-author.\nIn June 2020, Benedict visited his dying brother Georg in Germany for the last time. Georg died on 1 July, aged 96.\nOn 3 August 2020, Benedict's aides disclosed that he had an inflammation of the trigeminal nerve. On 2 December of the same year, Maltese cardinal Mario Grech announced to \"Vatican News\" that Benedict had difficulty speaking and that he had told the new cardinals after the consistory that \"the Lord has taken away my speech in order to let me appreciate silence\".\nBenedict became the longest-lived pope whose age can be verified on 4 September 2020, at 93 years, 141 days, surpassing the age of Pope Leo\u00a0XIII. There are two popes who are claimed to have lived longer than Benedict: Pope St Agatho (574\u2013681), who died aged 107; and Pope Gregory IX (1145\u20131241), who died aged 96. However, although there is some contemporary documentation attesting to their ages, there is not sufficient evidence for them to be verified with complete certainty.\nIn January 2021, Benedict and Francis each received doses of a COVID-19 vaccine. On 29 June 2021, the pope emeritus celebrated his platinum jubilee (70th anniversary) as a priest.\nFollowing the consistory of 27 August 2022, Francis and the newly created cardinals paid a brief visit to Benedict at Mater Ecclesiae Monastery.\nDeath and funeral.\nWorsening health and death.\nOn 28 December 2022, Pope Francis said at the end of his audience that Benedict XVI was \"very sick\" and asked God to \"comfort him and support him in this testimony of love for the Church until the end\". The same day, Matteo Bruni, the director of the Holy See Press Office, stated that \"in the last few hours there has been an aggravation of Benedict's health due to advancing age\" and that he was under medical care. Bruni also stated that Francis visited Benedict at the Mater Ecclesiae Monastery after the audience.\nPope Benedict XVI died on 31 December 2022 at 9:34am Central European Time at the Mater Ecclesiae Monastery, aged 95, due to cardiogenic shock, resulting from respiratory failure that evolved from a parenchymal insufficiency. His long-time secretary, Georg G\u00e4nswein, reported that his last words were .\nFuneral.\nFrom 2 to 4 January 2023, Pope Benedict XVI's body lay in state in St. Peter's Basilica, during which around 195,000 people paid their respects. His funeral took place on 5 January 2023 in St. Peter's Square at 9:30am, presided over by Pope Francis and celebrated by Cardinal Giovanni Battista Re. This ended the Catholic Church's 10-year involvement with the then-current pope and pope-emeritus, and was the first time since 1802 that a pope had attended a funeral for his predecessor. The funeral was attended by an estimated 50,000 people. Some attendees held signs reading or shouted \"Santo subito\", calling for his quick elevation to sainthood, a cry heard previously at the funeral of John Paul\u00a0II. Benedict was interred in the crypt beneath St. Peter's Basilica, in the same tomb originally occupied by John PaulII and JohnXXIII. The tomb was opened to the public on 8 January 2023.\nTitles and styles.\nAs Pope, Benedict's rarely used full title was:His Holiness BenedictXVI, Bishop of Rome, Vicar of Jesus Christ, Successor of the Prince of the Apostles, Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church, Primate of Italy, Archbishop and Metropolitan of the Roman Province, Sovereign of the Vatican City State, Servant of the servants of God.The best-known title, that of \"Pope\", did not appear in the official list of titles, but is commonly used in the titles of documents and appears, in abbreviated form, in their signatures as \"PP.\" standing for \"Papa\" (\"Pope\").\nBefore 1 March 2006, the list of titles also used to contain that of a \"Patriarch of the West\", which traditionally appeared in that list of titles before \"Primate of Italy\". The title of \"Patriarch of the West\" was removed in the 2006 edition of \"Annuario Pontificio\". According to Achille Silvestrini, Benedict chose to remove the title at a time as a \"sign of ecumenical sensitivity\" on the issue of papal primacy.\nAfter his resignation, the official style of the former pope in English was \"His Holiness BenedictXVI, Supreme Pontiff emeritus\" or \"Pope emeritus\". Less formally he was referred to as emeritus pope or Roman pontifex emeritus. Moreover, according to the 1983 \"Code of Canon Law\", he was also \"bishop emeritus of Rome\", retaining the sacred character received at his ordination as a bishop and receiving the title of emeritus of his diocese; although he did not use this style. The pope emeritus had personally preferred to be simply known as \"Father Benedict\".\nPositions on morality and politics.\nContraception and HIV/AIDS.\nIn 2005, the Pope listed several ways to combat the spread of HIV, including chastity, fidelity in marriage, and anti-poverty efforts; he also rejected the use of condoms. The alleged Vatican investigation of whether there are any cases when married persons may use condoms to protect against the spread of infections surprised many Catholics in the wake of John PaulII's consistent refusal to consider condom use in response to AIDS. However, the Vatican has since stated that no such change in the Church's teaching can occur. \"TIME\" also reported in its edition of 30 April 2006 that the Vatican's position remains what it always has been with Vatican officials \"flatly dismiss[ing] reports that the Vatican is about to release a document that will condone any condom use.\"\nIn March 2009, the Pope stated:\nI would say that this problem of AIDS cannot be overcome merely with money, necessary though it is. If there is no human dimension, if Africans do not help, the problem cannot be overcome by the distribution of prophylactics: on the contrary, they increase it. The solution must have two elements: firstly, bringing out the human dimension of sexuality, that is to say a spiritual and human renewal that would bring with it a new way of behaving towards others, and secondly, true friendship offered above all to those who are suffering, a willingness to make sacrifices and to practise self-denial, to be alongside the suffering.\nIn November 2010, in a book-length interview, Benedict, using the example of male prostitutes, stated that the use of condoms, with the intention of reducing the risk of HIV infection, may be an indication that the prostitute is intending to reduce the evil connected with his immoral activity. In the same interview, the Pope also reiterated the traditional teaching of the Church that condoms are not seen as a \"real or moral solution\" to the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Further, in December 2010, the Congregation of the Doctrine of the Faith explained that Benedict's statement did not constitute a legitimization of either contraception or prostitution, which remains gravely immoral.\nHomosexuality.\nDuring his time as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith (CDF), Cardinal Ratzinger addressed the issue of homosexuality. In 1986 the CDF sent a letter to all bishops entitled: \"On the Pastoral Care of Homosexual Persons\". The letter condemned a liberal interpretation of the earlier CDF document \"Declaration on Certain Questions Concerning Sexual Ethics\", which had led to a \"benign\" attitude \"to the homosexual condition itself\". \"On the Pastoral Care of Homosexual Persons\" clarified that the Church's position on homosexuality was that \"although the particular inclination of the homosexual person is not a sin, it is a more or less strong tendency ordered toward an intrinsic moral evil; and thus the inclination itself must be seen as an objective disorder.\" However, the document also condemned homophobic attacks and violence, stating that \"It is deplorable that homosexual persons have been and are the object of violent malice in speech or in action. Such treatment deserves condemnation from the Church's pastors wherever it occurs.\"\nIn 1992, Ratzinger again approved CDF documents declaring that homosexual \"inclination itself must be seen as an objective disorder\" and extended this principle to civil law. \"Sexual orientation\", the document said, was not equivalent to race or ethnicity, and it declared that it was \"not unjust discrimination to take sexual orientation into account.\"\nOn 22 December 2008, Benedict gave an end-of-year message to the Roman Curia in which he talked about gender and the important distinction between men and women. He said that the Church viewed the distinction as central to human nature, and \"asks that this order of creation be respected\". In his words, the Church must \"protect man from self-destruction\". He said \"something like a human ecology\" was needed, and added: \"Rain forests deserve indeed to be protected, but no less so does man.\" He attacked \"gender theories\", which he described as \"man's attempt at self-emancipation from creation and the Creator.\"\nLGBT groups, such as the Italian Arcigay and German LSVD, announced that they found Benedict's comments homophobic. Aurelio Mancuso, head of Arcigay, said \"A divine programme for men and women is out of line with nature, where the roles are not so clear.\" Canadian author Daniel Gawthrop, in a critical biography, \"The Trial of Pope Benedict\", said that the Pope blamed homosexuality \"for a problem the church had willingly enabled for hundreds of years\".\nVatican spokesman Federico Lombardi claimed the Pope had not wished specifically to attack people with homosexual inclinations, and had not mentioned gays or lesbians in his text. Lombardi insisted that there had been an overreaction to the pope's remarks, saying: \"He was speaking more generally about gender theories which overlook the fundamental difference in creation between men and women and focus instead on cultural conditioning.\" Nevertheless, the remarks were interpreted as a call to save mankind from homosexuals and transsexuals.\nSame-sex marriage.\nIn an address to a conference of the Diocese of Rome held at the basilica of St. John Lateran 6 June 2005, Benedict remarked on the issues of same-sex marriage and abortion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The various forms of the dissolution of matrimony today, like free unions, trial marriages and going up to pseudo-matrimonies by people of the same sex, are rather expressions of an anarchic freedom that wrongly passes for true freedom of man ... from here it becomes all the more clear how contrary it is to human love, to the profound vocation of man and woman, to systematically close their union to the gift of life, and even worse to suppress or tamper with the life that is born.\nDuring a 2012 Christmas speech, Benedict made remarks about the present-day interpretation of the notion of gender. He stated that a new philosophy of sexuality, which he rejects, suggests that \"sex is no longer a given element of nature, that man has to accept and personally make sense of: it is a social role that we choose for ourselves\", and \"The words of the creation account: 'male and female he created them' (Gen 1:27) no longer apply\". Although he did not mention the topic, his words were interpreted by news media as denunciations of same-sex marriage, with some outlets adding that Benedict would have called it a threat to world peace similar to abortion and euthanasia. In March 2012, he stated that heterosexual marriages should be defended from \"every possible misrepresentation of their true nature\".\nInternational relations.\nMigrants and refugees.\nIn a message released 14 November 2006, during a Vatican press conference for the 2007 annual observance of World Day for Migrants and Refugees, the Pope urged the ratification of international conventions and policies that defend all migrants, including refugees, exiles, evacuees and internally displaced persons. \"The church encourages the ratification of the international legal instruments that aim to defend the rights of migrants, refugees and their families,\" the Pope said. \"Much is already being done for the integration of the families of immigrants, although much still remains to be done.\"\nBenedict also promoted various UN events, such as World Refugee Day, on which he offered up special prayers for refugees and called for the international community to do more to secure refugees' human rights. He also called on Catholic communities and organizations to offer them concrete help.\nIn 2015, it was reported that Benedict was \"praying for migrants and refugees\" from Syria.\nChina.\nIn 2007, Benedict sent a letter at Easter to Catholics in China that could have wide-ranging implications for the Church's relationship with China's leadership. The letter provides long-requested guidance to Chinese bishops on how to respond to illicitly ordained bishops, as well as how to strengthen ties with the Patriotic Association and the Communist government. Benedict wrote that despite the two Catholic communities in China (i.e. the \"Patriotic\" Church and the \"Underground\" Church) there is no schism between them. Benedict stated that sacraments performed by the priests not in unity with the Vatican were valid but also illicit. He stated that the Catholic Church accepts the legitimacy of the civil authorities in secular matters and that the Pope has authority in ecclesial matters, and therefore the involvement of the Catholic Patriotic Association in the appointment of bishops (and its bishops conference) violated Catholic doctrine. The letter also removed the permission granted by the Vatican in 1978 to the Underground church to appoint bishops without Vatican approval.185\nKorea.\nOn 13 November 2006, Benedict said that the dispute over the North Korea nuclear weapons program should be resolved through negotiations, in his first public comment on the security issue, a news report said. \"The Holy See encourages bilateral or multilateral negotiations, convinced that the solution must be sought through peaceful means and in respect for agreements taken by all sides to obtain the denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula.\" Benedict was talking to the new Japanese ambassador to the Vatican.\nTurkey.\nIn a 2004 \"Le Figaro\" interview, Ratzinger said that Turkey, which is demographically Muslim but governmentally secular by virtue of its state constitution, should seek its future in an association of Muslim nations rather than the European Union, which Ratzinger stated has Christian roots. He said Turkey had always been \"in permanent contrast to Europe and that linking it to Europe would be a mistake\".\nLater visiting the country to \"reiterate the solidarity between the cultures,\" it was reported that Benedict made a counter-statement backing Turkey's bid to join the EU. Turkish prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan said that the Pope told him in their meeting that while the Vatican seeks to stay out of politics, it desires Turkey's membership in the EU. However, the Common Declaration of Pope BenedictXVI and Patriarch Bartholomew\u00a0I of Constantinople implied that support for Turkey's membership in the European Union would be contingent on the establishment of religious freedom in Turkey: \"In every step towards unification, minorities must be protected, with their cultural traditions and the distinguishing features of their religion.\"\nIsrael.\nIn May 2009, Benedict visited Israel. This was the third Papal visit to Israel, the previous ones being made by PaulVI in 1964 and John PaulII in 2000.\nIn his farewell speech before leaving to Rome on 15 May 2009, his balance was expressed as follows:\nLet it be universally recognized that the State of Israel has the right to exist, and to enjoy peace and security within internationally agreed borders. Let it be likewise acknowledged that the Palestinian people have a right to a sovereign independent homeland, to live with dignity and to travel freely.\nVietnam.\nVietnamese prime minister Nguy\u1ec5n T\u1ea5n D\u0169ng met with Benedict at the Vatican on 25 January 2007 in a \"new and important step towards establishing diplomatic ties\". The Pope met with Vietnamese president Nguy\u1ec5n Minh Tri\u1ebft on 11 December 2009. Vatican officials called the meeting \"a significant stage in the progress of bilateral relations with Vietnam.\"\nGlobal economy.\nIn July 2009, Benedict published his third encyclical, \"Caritas in veritate\" (\"Charity in truth\"), setting out the philosophical and moral foundations for human development, individually and collectively, in striving for the common good. This was the last encyclical of BenedictXVI's papacy.\n\"Caritas in veritate\" makes a case for the charitable distribution of wealth in considerable detail and discusses the environment, migration, terrorism, sexual tourism, bioethics, energy and population. \"The Financial Times\" reported that Benedict's advocacy for a fairer redistribution of wealth helped set the agenda for the 2009 July G8 summit.\nAlso included in \"Charity in Truth\" is advocacy for tax choice:\nOne possible approach to development aid would be to apply effectively what is known as fiscal subsidiarity, allowing citizens to decide how to allocate a portion of the taxes they pay to the State. Provided it does not degenerate into the promotion of special interests, this can help to stimulate forms of welfare solidarity from below, with obvious benefits in the area of solidarity for development as well.\nNuclear energy.\nBenedict supported the peaceful use of nuclear energy as a tool for development and the fight against poverty. In his message for the 50th anniversary of the founding of the International Atomic Energy Agency, he confirmed: \"The Holy See, fully approving of the IAEA's goal, has been a member from the organisation's foundation and continues to support its activity.\"\nMariology.\nIn 1996 and later in 2002 Ratzinger declared the introduction of a new dogma declaring the Virgin Mary as \"Co-Redemptrix\" or \"Mediatrix of all graces\" as inacceptable. He pointed out that \"the precise meaning of these titles is not clear, and the doctrine contained in them is not mature. A defined doctrine of divine faith belongs to the Depositum Fidei \u2014 that is, to the divine revelation conveyed in Scripture and the apostolic tradition. However, it is not clear how the doctrine expressed in these titles is present in Scripture and the apostolic tradition.\".\nPersonal life.\nInterest in classical music.\nBenedict was known to be deeply interested in classical music, and was an accomplished pianist. His favourite composer was Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, of whose music he said: \"His music is by no means just entertainment; it contains the whole tragedy of human existence.\" Benedict also stated that Mozart's music affected him greatly as a young man and \"deeply penetrated his soul\". Benedict's favourite works of music were Mozart's Clarinet Concerto and Clarinet Quintet. Benedict also enjoyed Bach, particularly \"Mass in B Minor\" and \"St Matthew Passion.\" He recorded an album of contemporary classical music in which he sings and recites prayers to the Blessed Virgin Mary. The album was set for release on 30\u00a0November 2009.\nCats.\nBenedict was also known to be fond of cats. As Cardinal Ratzinger, he was known (according to former neighbours) to look after stray cats in his neighbourhood, Borgo. A book called \"Joseph and Chico: A Cat Recounts the Life of Pope Benedict XVI\" was published in 2007 which told the story of the Pope's life from the feline Chico's perspective. This story was inspired by an orange tabby Pentling cat, which belonged to the family next door. During his trip to Australia for World Youth Day in 2008, the media reported that festival organizers lent the Pope a grey cat called Bella to keep him company during his stay.\nSocial network use.\nIn December 2012, the Vatican announced that BenedictXVI had joined social networking website Twitter, under the handle @Pontifex. His first tweet was made on 12 December and was \"Dear friends, I am pleased to get in touch with you through Twitter. Thank you for your generous response. I bless all of you from my heart.\" On 28 February 2013, the day he retired, the tweets were archived, and @Pontifex read \"Sede Vacante\". The @Pontifex account would subsequently be handed over to Benedict's successors, Francis and Leo XIV.\nDistinctions.\nA variety of awards and honours were given to Benedict including the following:\nWritings.\nBenedictXVI wrote 66 books, three encyclicals, and four apostolic exhortations.\nLegacy.\nAt his death, prior criticism of BenedictXVI received renewed attention, particularly that from public health officials, anti-AIDS activists, and victim's rights organizations over his handling of sexual abuse cases within the Catholic Church and position on the use of condoms in areas of high HIV transmission.\nBoth Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby and Patriarch Kirill of Moscow expressed their condolences at Benedict's death. Welby referred to the former pope as \"one of the greatest theologians of his age\", while Kirill praised conciliatory efforts undertaken between the Catholic and Russian Orthodox churches during Benedict's pontificate. The Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople expressed \u201crespect, love and gratitude\u201d for his work in Catholic-Orthodox relations.\nSome Catholics have called for Benedict's recognition as a Doctor of the Church, with Cardinal Gerhard M\u00fcller describing him as a \"true doctor of the Church for today.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nLiterature about Benedict.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39661", "revid": "50783279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39661", "title": "John Bunyan", "text": "English writer and preacher (1628\u20131688)\nJohn Bunyan (; 1628 \u2013 31 August 1688) was an English writer and nonconformist preacher. He is best remembered as the author of the Christian allegory \"The Pilgrim's Progress\", which also became an influential literary model. In addition to \"The Pilgrim's Progress\", Bunyan wrote nearly sixty titles, many of them expanded sermons.\nBunyan came from the village of Elstow, near Bedford. He had some schooling and, at the age of sixteen, joined the Parliamentary Army at Newport Pagnell during the first stage of the English Civil War. After three years in the army, he returned to Elstow and took up the trade of tinker, which he had learned from his father. He became interested in religion after his marriage, attending first the parish church and then joining the Bedford Meeting, a nonconformist group in St John's church in Bedford, and later became a preacher. After the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, when the freedom of nonconformists was curtailed, Bunyan was arrested and spent the next twelve years in prison because he refused to give up preaching. During this time, he wrote a spiritual autobiography, \"Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners\", and began work on his most famous book, \"The Pilgrim's Progress.\"\nBunyan's later years, following release from a further six-month imprisonment, were spent in relative comfort and he continued to be a popular author and preacher, and was the pastor of the Bedford Meeting. He died aged 59 after falling ill on a journey to London and is buried in Bunhill Fields. \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" became one of the most published books in the English language; 1,300 editions having been printed by 1938, 250 years after the author's death.\nBunyan is remembered in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival on 30 August. Some other churches of the Anglican Communion, such as the Anglican Church of Australia, honour him on the day of his death (31 August).\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nJohn Bunyan was born in 1628 to Thomas and Margaret Bunyan at Bunyan's End in the parish of Elstow, Bedfordshire. Bunyan's End is about halfway between the hamlet of Harrowden, (one mile south-east of Bedford) and Elstow High Street. Bunyan's exact date of birth is not known, but he was baptised on 30 November 1628, the baptismal entry in the parish register reading \"John the sonne of Thomas Bunnion Jun., the 30 November\". The name Bunyan was spelt in many ways (there are 34 variants in Bedfordshire Record Office) and probably had its origins in the Norman-French name Buignon. There had been Bunyans in Bedfordshire since at least 1199.\nBunyan's father was a brazier or tinker who travelled around the area mending pots and pans, and his grandfather Thomas served as a member of the Elstow Manor court and was a chapman (or small trader). Thomas Bunyan had, until his later years, owned land and properties in Elstow, so Bunyan's origins were not quite as humble as one might assume from his autobiographical work \"Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners\" where he wrote that his father's house was \"of that rank that is meanest and most despised in the country\".\nAs a child, Bunyan learned his father's trade of tinker and was given some schooling but it is not known which school he attended. It may have been at Houghton Conquest or Bedford Grammar. In \"Grace Abounding,\" Bunyan recorded few details of his upbringing, but he did note how he picked up the habit of swearing (from his father), suffered from nightmares, and read the popular stories of the day in cheap chap-books. In the summer of 1644 Bunyan lost both his mother and his sister Margaret. That autumn, shortly before or after his sixteenth birthday, Bunyan enlisted in the Parliamentary army when an edict demanded 225 recruits from the town of Bedford. There are few details available about his military service, which took place during the first stage of the English Civil War. A muster roll for the garrison of Newport Pagnell shows him as private \"John Bunnian\". In \"Grace Abounding\", he recounted an incident from this time, as evidence of the grace of God:\nWhen I was a Souldier, I, with others, were drawn out to go to such a place to besiege it; But when I was just ready to go, one of the company desired to go in my room, to which, when I had consented, he took my place; and coming to the siege, as he stood Sentinel, he was shot into the head with a Musket bullet and died.\nBunyan's army service provided him with a knowledge of military language which he then used in his book \"The Holy War\", and also exposed him to the ideas of the various religious sects and radical groups he came across in Newport Pagnell. The garrison town also gave him opportunities to indulge in the sort of behaviour he would later confess to in \"Grace Abounding\": \"So that until I came to the state of Marriage, I was the very ringleader of all the Youth that kept me company, in all manner of vice and ungodliness\". Bunyan spent nearly three years in the army, leaving in 1647 to return to Elstow and his trade as a tinker. His father had remarried and had more children and Bunyan moved from Bunyan's End to a cottage in Elstow High Street.\nMarriage and conversion.\nWithin two years of leaving the army, Bunyan married. The name of his wife and the exact date of his marriage are not known, but Bunyan did recall that his wife, a pious young woman, brought with her into the marriage two books that she had inherited from her father: Arthur Dent's \"Plain Man's Pathway to Heaven\" and Lewis Bayly's \"Practice of Piety\". He also recalled that, apart from these two books, the newly-weds possessed little: \"not having so much household-stuff as a Dish or a Spoon betwixt us both\". The couple's first daughter, Mary, was born in 1650, and it soon became apparent that she was blind. They would have three more children, Elizabeth, Thomas and John.\nBy his own account, Bunyan had as a youth enjoyed bell-ringing, dancing and playing games including on Sunday, which was forbidden by the Puritans, who held a particularly high view of Sunday, called the Lord's Day. One Sunday, the Rev'd Christopher Hall, vicar of Elstow, preached a sermon against Sabbath breaking and Bunyan took this sermon to heart. That afternoon, as he was playing tip-cat (a game in which a small piece of wood is hit with a stick) on Elstow village green, he heard a voice from the heavens in his soul \"Wilt thou leave thy sins, and go to Heaven? Or have thy sins, and go to Hell?\" and thought he could feel Jesus Christ looking down from Heaven rebuking him. The next few years were a time of intense spiritual conflict for Bunyan as he struggled with his doubts and fears over religion and guilt over what he saw as his state of sin. He described how he developed a fear of bell-ringing: \"I would go to the steeple-house and look on, though I durst not ring . . . but quickly after I began to think how if one of the bells should fall?\" He was later unable even to approach the steeple door of the church \"for fear the steeple should fall upon my head.\"\nDuring this time Bunyan, whilst on his travels as a tinker, happened to be in Bedford when he passed a group of women on a doorstep, talking about spiritual matters. The women were some of the founding members of the Bedford Free Church (or Bedford Meeting) and Bunyan, who had been attending the parish church of Elstow, was so impressed by their talk that he joined their church. At that time the nonconformist group was meeting in St John's church in Bedford under the leadership of former Royalist army officer John Gifford. At the instigation of other members of the congregation Bunyan began to preach, both in the church and to groups of people in the surrounding countryside. In 1656, having by this time moved his family to St Cuthbert's Street in Bedford, he published his first book, \"Gospel Truths Opened\", which was inspired by a dispute with Ranters and Quakers.\nIn 1658 Bunyan's wife died, leaving him with four young children, one of them being blind. A year later he married an eighteen-year-old woman named Elizabeth.\nImprisonment.\nThe religious tolerance which had allowed Bunyan the freedom to preach became curtailed with the restoration of the monarchy in 1660. The members of the Bedford Meeting were no longer able to meet in St John's church, which they had been sharing with the Anglican congregation. That November, Bunyan was preaching at Lower Samsell, a farm near the village of Harlington, thirteen miles from Bedford, when he was warned that a warrant was out for his arrest. Deciding not to make an escape, he was arrested and brought before the local magistrate Sir Francis Wingate, at Harlington House. Bunyan was arrested under the Religion Act 1592, which made it an offence to attend a religious gathering other than at the parish church with more than five people outside their family. The offence was punishable by 3 months' imprisonment followed by banishment or execution if the person then failed to promise not to re-offend. The Act had been little used, and Bunyan's arrest was probably due in part to concerns that non-conformist religious meetings were being held as a cover for people plotting against the king (although this was not the case with Bunyan's meetings). The Act of Uniformity, which made it compulsory for preachers to be ordained by an Anglican bishop and for the revised Book of Common Prayer to be used in church services, was still two years away, and the Act of Conventicles, which made it illegal to hold religious meetings of five or more people outside the Church of England was not passed until 1664.\nThe trial of Bunyan took place in January 1661 at the quarter sessions in Bedford, before a group of magistrates under John Kelynge, who would later help to draw up the Act of Uniformity. Bunyan, who had been held in prison since his arrest, was indicted of having \"devilishly and perniciousy abstained from coming to church to hear divine service\" and having held \"several unlawful meetings and conventicles, to the great disturbance and distraction of the good subjects of this kingdom\". He was sentenced to three months' imprisonment with transportation to follow if at the end of this time he did not agree to attend the parish church and desist from preaching.\nAs Bunyan refused to agree to give up preaching, his period of imprisonment eventually extended to 12 years and brought great hardship to his family. Elizabeth, who made strenuous attempts to obtain his release, had been pregnant when her husband was arrested and she subsequently gave birth prematurely to a still-born child. Left to bring up four step-children, one of whom was blind, she had to rely on the charity of Bunyan's fellow members of the Bedford Meeting and other supporters and on what little her husband could earn in gaol by making shoelaces. But Bunyan remained resolute: \"O I saw in this condition I was a man who was pulling down his house upon the head of his Wife and Children; yet thought I, I must do it, I must do it\".\nBunyan spent his 12 years' imprisonment in Bedford County Gaol, which stood on the corner of the High Street and Silver Street. There were, however, occasions when he was allowed out of prison, depending on the gaolers and the mood of the authorities at the time, and he was able to attend the Bedford Meeting and even to preach. His daughter Sarah was born during his imprisonment (the other child of his second marriage, Joseph, was born after his release in 1672).\nIn prison, Bunyan had a copy of the Bible and of John Foxe's \"Book of Martyrs\", as well as writing materials. He also had at times the company of other preachers who had been imprisoned. It was in Bedford Gaol that he wrote \"Grace Abounding\" and started work on \"The Pilgrim's Progress\", as well as penning several tracts that may have brought him a little money. In 1671, while still in prison, he was chosen as pastor of the Bedford Meeting. By that time there was a mood of increasing religious toleration in the country and in March 1672 the king issued a declaration of indulgence which suspended penal laws against nonconformists. Thousands of nonconformists were released from prison, amongst them Bunyan and five of his fellow inmates of Bedford Gaol; Bunyan was freed in May 1672 and immediately obtained a licence to preach under the declaration of indulgence.\nLater life.\nFollowing his release from prison in 1672 Bunyan probably did not return to his former occupation of a tinker. Instead, he devoted his time to writing and preaching. He continued as pastor of the Bedford Meeting and traveled over Bedfordshire and adjoining counties on horseback to preach, becoming known affectionately as \"Bishop Bunyan\". His preaching also took him to London, where Lord Mayor Sir John Shorter became a friend and presented him with a silver-mounted walking stick. \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" was published in 1678 by Nathaniel Ponder and immediately became popular, though probably making more money for its publisher than for its author.\nTwo events marred Bunyan's life during the later 1670s. Firstly, he became embroiled in a scandal concerning a young woman called Agnes Beaumont. When going to preach in Gamlingay in 1674 he allowed Beaumont, a member of the Bedford Meeting, to ride pillion on his horse, much to the anger of her father, who then died suddenly. His daughter was initially suspected of poisoning him, though the coroner found he had died of natural causes. Secondly, in April 1675, the Bishop of Lincoln obtained a writ de excommunicato capiendo against Bunyan for having failed to attend the parish church and take communion. This led to his arrest in December 1676 and a further six months in prison.\nIn 1688, on his way to London to the house of his friend, grocer John Strudwick of Snow Hill, Bunyan made a detour to Reading, Berkshire, to try and resolve a quarrel between a father and son. Travelling on from there to London, he was caught in a storm and fell ill with a fever. He died in Strudwick's house on the morning of 31 August 1688 and was buried in a tomb belonging to Strudwick in Bunhill Fields \u2013 the nonconformist burial ground in City Road London.\nBunyan's estate at his death was worth \u00a342 19s 0d (about \u00a35,200 in 2021). His widow Elizabeth died in 1691.\nWorks.\nBetween 1656, when he published his first work, \"Some Gospel Truths Opened\" (a tract against the Ranters and Quakers\u2014who at the time were somewhat indistinguishable), and his death in 1688, Bunyan published 42 titles. A further two works, including his Last Sermon, were published the following year by George Larkin. In 1692 Southwark comb-maker Charles Doe, who was a friend of Bunyan's in his later years, brought out, with the collaboration of Bunyan's widow, a collection of the author's works, including 12 previously unpublished titles, mostly sermons. Six years later Doe published \"The Heavenly Footman\" and finally in 1765 \"Relation of My Imprisonment\" was published, giving a total of 58 published titles.\nBunyan's allegory \"The Pilgrim's Progress\", was completed during his second period of imprisonment but was not published until 1678. It was an immediate success, made Bunyan's name as an author and remains the book for which Bunyan is best remembered. The images Bunyan used in \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" are reflections of images from his own world: the strait gate being a version of the wicket gate at Elstow Abbey church; the Slough of Despond is a reflection of Squitch Fen, a wet and mossy area near his cottage in Harrowden; the Delectable Mountains are an image of the Chiltern Hills surrounding Bedfordshire. Even his characters, like the Evangelist as influenced by John Gifford, are reflections of real people.\nFurther allegorical works were to follow: \"The Life and Death of Mr. Badman\" (1680), \"The Holy War\" (1682), and \"Pilgrim's Progress Part II\" (1684). \"Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners\", a spiritual autobiography, was published in 1666, when he was still in prison.\nMemorials.\nThere is a small obelisk and an interpretation board marking his birthplace at Bunyan's End \u2013 in a field beside 'Bumpy Lane', which runs northwards from Old Harrowden Road.\nIn 1862 a recumbent statue was created to adorn Bunyan's grave; it was restored in 1922.\nIn 1874, a bronze statue of John Bunyan, sculpted by Sir Joseph Edgar Boehm, was erected in Bedford. This stands at the south-western corner of St Peter's Green, facing Bedford's High Street. The site was chosen by Boehm for its significance as a crossroads. Bunyan is depicted expounding the Bible, to an invisible congregation, with a broken fetter representing his imprisonment by his left foot. There are three scenes from \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" on the stone plinth: Christian at the wicket gate; his fight with Apollyon; and losing his burden at the foot of the cross of Jesus. The statue was unveiled by Lady Augusta Stanley, wife of the Dean of Westminster, on Wednesday 10 June 1874. In 1876 the Duke of Bedford gave bronze doors by Frederick Thrupp depicting scenes from \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" to the John Bunyan Meeting (the former Bedford Meeting which had been renamed in Bunyan's honour, and now houses the John Bunyan Museum).\nThere is another statue of him in Kingsway, London, and there are memorial windows in Westminster Abbey, Southwark Cathedral and various churches, including Elstow Abbey (the parish church of Elstow) and the Bunyan Meeting Free Church in Bedford.\nBunyan is remembered in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival on 30 August. Some other churches of the Anglican Communion, such as the Anglican Church of Australia, honour him on the day of his death (31 August).\nLegacy.\nBunyan is best remembered for \"The Pilgrim's Progress\", a book which gained immediate popularity. By 1692, four years after the author's death, publisher Charles Doe estimated that 100,000 copies had been printed in England, as well as editions \"in France, Holland, New England and Welch\". By 1938, 250 years after Bunyan's death, more than 1,300 editions of the book had been printed.\nDuring the 18th century Bunyan's unpolished style fell out of favour, but his popularity returned with Romanticism. Many critics deem a turning point in Bunyan scholarship to be when poet Robert Southey wrote a lengthy appreciative biography in 1830 to accompany an edition of \"The Pilgrim's Progress\". Bunyan's reputation was further enhanced by the evangelical revival and he became a favourite author of the Victorians. The tercentenary of Bunyan's birth, celebrated in 1928, elicited praise from his former adversary, the Church of England. Although popular interest in Bunyan waned during the second half of the twentieth century, academic interest in the writer increased and Oxford University Press brought out a new edition of his works, beginning in 1976. Authors who have been influenced by Bunyan include C. S. Lewis, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Herman Melville, Charles Dickens, Louisa May Alcott, George Bernard Shaw, William Thackeray, Charlotte Bront\u00eb, Mark Twain, John Steinbeck and Enid Blyton.\nBunyan's work, in particular \"The Pilgrim's Progress\", has reached a wider audience through stage, film, TV, and radio productions. An opera based on \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" by Ralph Vaughan Williams, which Williams referred to as a 'Morality', was first performed at the Royal Opera House in 1951 as part of the Festival of Britain and revived in 2012 by the English National Opera.\nJohn Bunyan had six children, five of whom are known to have married, of whom four had children. The Moot Hall Museum in Elstow has a record of Bunyan's descendants, down to the nineteenth century, although this record is incomplete.\nThe 81-mile John Bunyan Trail notes places in Bedfordshire associated with Bunyan.\nSelected bibliography.\nThe best collection of Bunyan's writing is \"The Works of John Bunyan\", edited by George Offor and published in London in three volumes between 1853 and 1855, containing 61 unique works. (A revised edition was published in 1862.) The misnamed \"Complete Works of John Bunyan\", edited by John Gulliver and published in one volume by Bradley, Garretson &amp; Co. in 1871, omits 28 works and lacks the biblical references and editorial footnotes present in Offor's collection.\nAmong Bunyan's many works were the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"The Works of John Bunyan\", edited by George Offor:\nBiographies of John Bunyan:\nIllustrations:\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39663", "revid": "38448155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39663", "title": "Kepler's Supernova", "text": "Supernova visible from Earth in the 17th century\nSN 1604, also known as Kepler's Supernova, Kepler's Nova or Kepler's Star, was a Type Ia supernova that occurred in the Milky Way, in the constellation Ophiuchus. Appearing in 1604, it is the most recent supernova in the Milky Way galaxy to have been unquestionably observed by the naked eye, occurring no farther than 6 kiloparsecs (20,000 light-years) from Earth. Before the adoption of the current naming system for supernovae, it was named for Johannes Kepler, the German astronomer who described it in \"De Stella Nova\".\nObservation.\nVisible to the naked eye, Kepler's Star was brighter at its peak than any other star in the night sky, with an apparent magnitude of \u22122.5. It was visible during the day for over three weeks. Records of its sighting exist in European, Chinese, Korean, and Arabic sources.\nIt was the second supernova to be observed in a generation (after SN 1572 seen by Tycho Brahe in Cassiopeia). No further supernovae have since been observed with certainty in the Milky Way, though many others outside the galaxy have been seen since S Andromedae in 1885. SN 1987A in the Large Magellanic Cloud was visible to the naked eye at night.\nEvidence exists for two Milky Way supernovae whose electromagnetic radiation would have reached Earth c. 1680 and 1870 \u2013 Cassiopeia A, and G1.9+0.3 respectively. There is no historical record of either having been detected in those years, likely because absorption by interstellar dust obscured their visible light.\nThe remnant of Kepler's supernova is considered to be one of the prototypical objects of its kind and is still an object of much study in astronomy.\nControversies.\nAstronomers of the time (including Kepler) were concerned with observing the conjunction of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, which they saw as an auspicious conjunction linked to the Star of Bethlehem. However, cloudy weather prevented Kepler from making observations. Wilhelm Fabry, Michael Maestlin, and Helisaeus Roeslin were able to make observations of the conjunction on 9 October, but did not record the supernova. The first recorded observation in Europe was by Lodovico delle Colombe in northern Italy on 9 October 1604. Kepler was only able to begin his observations on 17 October while working at the imperial court in Prague for Emperor Rudolf II. The supernova was subsequently named after him, even though he was not its first observer, as his observations tracked the object for an entire year. These observations were described in his book \"De Stella nova in pede Serpentarii\" (\"On the new star in Ophiuchus's foot\", Prague 1606).\nDelle Colombe\u2013Galileo controversy.\nIn 1606, Delle Colombe published \"Discourse of Lodovico delle Colombe\" in which he shows that the \"Star Newly Appeared in October 1604 is neither a Comet nor a New Star\" and where he defended an Aristotelian view of cosmology after Galileo Galilei had used the occasion of the supernova to challenge the Aristotelian system. The description of Galileo's claims is as follows:\nGalileo explained the meaning and relevance of parallax, reported that the nova displayed none, and concluded, as a certainty, that it lay beyond the moon. Here he might have stopped, having dispatched his single arrow. Instead he sketched a theory that ruined the Aristotelian cosmos: the nova very probably consisted of a large quantity of airy material that issued from the earth and shone by reflected sunlight, like Aristotelian comets. Unlike them, however, it could rise beyond the moon. It not only brought change to the heavens, but did so provocatively by importing corruptible earthy elements into the pure quintessence. That raised heaven-shattering possibilities. The interstellar space might be filled with something similar to our atmosphere, as in the physics of the Stoics, to which Tycho had referred in his lengthy account of the nova of 1572. And if the material of the firmament resembled that of bodies here below, a theory of motion built on experience with objects within our reach might apply also to the celestial regions. \"But I am not so bold as to think that things cannot take place differently from the way I have specified.\"\nKepler\u2013Roeslin controversy.\nIn Kepler's \"De Stella Nova\" (1606), he criticized Roeslin concerning this supernova. Kepler argued that in his astrological prognostications, Roeslin had picked out just the two comets, the Great Comet of 1556 and 1580. Roeslin responded in 1609 that this was indeed what he had done. When Kepler replied later that year, he simply observed that by including a broader range of data Roeslin could have made a better argument.\nSupernova remnant.\nThe supernova remnant of SN 1604, Kepler's Star, was discovered in 1941 at the Mount Wilson Observatory as a dim nebula with a brightness of 19 mag. Only filaments can be seen in visible light, but it is a strong radio and X-ray source. Its diameter is 4 arc min. Distance estimates place it between 3 and more than 7 kiloparsecs (10,000 to 23,000 lightyears), with the current consensus being a distance of , as of 2021.\nThe available evidence supports a type Ia supernova as the source of this remnant, which is the result of a carbon-oxygen white dwarf interacting with a companion star. The integrated X-ray spectrum resembles that of Tycho's supernova remnant, a type Ia supernova. The abundance of oxygen relative to iron in the remnant of SN 1604 is roughly solar, whereas a core-collapse scenario should produce a much higher abundance of oxygen. No surviving central source has been identified, which is consistent with a type Ia event. Finally, the historical records for the brightness of this event are consistent with type Ia supernovae.\nThere is evidence for interaction of the supernova ejecta with circumstellar matter from the progenitor star, which is unexpected for type Ia but has been observed in some cases. A bow shock located to the north of this system is believed to have been created by mass loss prior to the explosion. Observations of the remnant are consistent with the interaction of a supernova with a bipolar planetary nebula that belonged to one or both of the progenitor stars. The remnant is not spherically symmetric, which is likely due to the progenitor being a runaway star system. The bow shock is caused by the interaction of the advancing stellar wind with the interstellar medium. A remnant rich in nitrogen and silicon indicates that the system consisted of a white dwarf with an evolved companion that had likely already passed through the asymptotic giant branch stage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39665", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39665", "title": "Jon Appleton", "text": "American composer and teacher (1939\u20132022)\nJon Howard Appleton (January 4, 1939 \u2013 January 30, 2022) was an American composer, an educator and a pioneer in electro-acoustic music. His earliest compositions in the medium, e.g. \"Chef d'Oeuvre\" and \"Newark Airport Rock\" (1967) attracted attention because they established a new tradition some have called programmatic electronic music. In 1970, he won Guggenheim, Fulbright and American-Scandinavian Foundation fellowships. When he was twenty-eight years old, he joined the faculty of Dartmouth College where he established one of the first electronic music studios in the United States. He remained there intermittently for forty-two years. In the mid-1970s, he left Dartmouth to briefly become the head of Elektronmusikstudion (EMS) in Stockholm, Sweden. In the late 1970s, together with Sydney Alonso and Cameron Jones, he helped develop the first commercial digital synthesizer called the Synclavier. For a decade he toured around the United States and Europe performing the compositions he composed for this instrument. In the early 1990s, he helped found the Theremin Center for Electronic Music at the Moscow Conservatory of Music. He also taught at Keio University (Mita) in Tokyo, Japan, CCRMA at Stanford University and the University of California Santa Cruz. In his later years, he devoted most of his time to the composition of instrumental and choral music in a quasi-Romantic vein which has largely been performed only in France, Russia and Japan.\nEarly life.\nAppleton was born in Los Angeles, California, on January 4, 1939, to Jewish parents: Helen Jacobs Appleton (born in Philadelphia, 1908) and Charles Leonard Appleton (born Chaim Epelboim in Kishinev, Bessarabia, July 14, 1900). His mother was employed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and his father by Twentieth Century Fox film studios. His father left his family the year Appleton was born and he spent his first years in Mrs. Bell's (an orphanage) and with his brother (Michael Charles Appleton, born 1932) at Palomar Military Academy. When he was six years old his mother married Alexander \"Sasha\" Walden (born in Ufa, Russia, in 1897), a double-bass player in the Los Angeles Philharmonic orchestra. He was the greatest musical influence in Appleton's young life seeing that he studied piano, encouraging him to compose music and taking him to multiple concerts. Appleton's parents were true believers in the Soviet Union and active members of the multiple left-wing organizations including the Communist party. In the 1950s both his parents were blacklisted by the House Un-American Activities Committee and lost their jobs. As a child Appleton studied piano with Jacob Gimpel and Theodore Saidenberg but preferred composing his own music rather than playing the works assigned to him (e.g. Chopin, Scarlatti, Prokofiev). However, he developed a deep, lifelong affection for Russian music.\nCareer.\n1960s.\nFrom 1957 to 1961 Appleton was a student at Reed College in Portland, Oregon. These years shaped his future life: he composed for his fellow students who performed everything he composed, he decided to become a college professor and in 1959 he married his first wife, a fellow student, Georganna Towne. Following his graduation from Reed College, Appleton moved to San Francisco, California, where his first child was born (Jennifer Appleton). Simultaneously he studied composition with Andrew Imbrie at the University of California, Berkeley, collaborated with writer Willard S. Bain (1938\u20132000) writing musical comedies and was employed at the Macy's department store as an assistant buyer.\nIn 1962\u20131963 Appleton was the music teacher at the Verde Valley School in Sedona, Arizona, where he conducted the choir and orchestra, taught music theory, history and piano lessons.\nFrom 1963 to 1966 Appleton was a graduate student at the University of Oregon in Eugene, Oregon, where he studied with Homer Keller, Henri Lazarof, Felix Salzer and Robert Trotter. It was there that he assembled a primitive electronic music studio and composed his first works in this genre. His thesis was an orchestral work, \"After \"Nude Descending a Staircase\"\". Most of the instrumental and vocal music he composed at this time used serial technique that he loved to compose. During his years in Eugene he became a lifelong friend of the pianist Gabriel Chodos.\nIn 1966, on the basis of his early electronic music, he was invited by Vladimir Ussachevsky at Columbia University to study in the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center. He became an advocate for electronic music and became friends with fellow composers Charles Dodge, Emmanuel Ghent and Richard Taruskin.\nDuring 1966\u20131968 he was hired by Oakland University in Rochester, Michigan, to establish an electronic music studio. When the university officials reneged on their promise, he resigned and accepted a position at Dartmouth College. It was during this year that his son, Jon Jason Appleton was born (\"a.k.a.\" JJ Appleton; born April 19, 1967).\n1970s.\nAt Dartmouth College Appleton's work in electronic music was generously encouraged by the administration of President John G. Kemeny and by a generous donation from Gerald Bregman '54. The Bregman Electronic Music studio was one of the pioneering studios at American universities and became a center for many visiting composers. Two of these, Lars-Gunnar Bodin (1935, Stockholm, Sweden \u2013 2021) and Jean-Claude Risset (born 1938, LePuy, France) became important colleagues throughout Appleton's life. In 1970 Appleton also was influenced by the work of the \"father\" of computer music, Max V. Mathews and by French composers Fran\u00e7ois Bayle, Beatriz Ferreyra and Michel Redolfi.\nIt was at this time that he initiated the first competition for electronic music that was held for three years at Dartmouth College.\nIn 1969 Appleton's first recordings were published (Syntonic Menagerie and Human Music \u2013 the latter in collaboration with jazz musician Don Cherry \u2013 on the Flying Dutchman label, produced by Bob Thiele.\nIn 1973 Appleton began his collaboration with engineers Sydney Alonso and Cameron Jones, which led to the creation of the Dartmouth Digital Synthesizer and ultimately the Synclavier. However, it was not until the 1980s that Appleton composed his best works for this digital synthesizer and on which he gave concerts of his own music for the following decade.\nHis love of Sweden led Appleton to leave Dartmouth College in 1976\u20131977 and become the director of Elektronmusikstudion, Sweden's national center for electronic music. His difficulty with the Swedish bureaucracy led to his resignation and he returned to Norwich, Vermont, as a partner, for one year, in the newly formed firm New England Digital Corporation that had begun to manufacture the Synclavier. The following year he returned to the faculty of Dartmouth College.\nIt was also during this time in his life that Appleton developed a serious interest in the music of Polynesia and Micronesia. He led a group of Dartmouth students to the Kingdom of Tonga and later received a grant from the National Endowment for the Arts to train radio personnel on the Micronesian islands of Chuuk and Pohnpei to record and broadcast their own music.\n1980s.\nIt was during this period that Appleton began to compose his best computer music and live-electronic music. Many of his works for this genre were first premiered at the annual festival held by the http:// (France) and at Fylkingen in Stockholm, Sweden.\nDuring his time in Bourges, Appleton became a founding member of the International Confederation for Electro-Acoustic Music (http://). His stimulating interaction with composers from many nations led him to believe that a similar organization in the United States might help raise the profile of electro-acoustic music in his own country. In 1984, together with a small group of like-minded composers, Appleton helped establish the Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States (SEAMUS). He ultimately served for a time as president of the society.\nIn the summer of 1984 Appleton helped Moses Asch, founder of Folkways Records, release its first recordings of electro-acoustic music. According to Asch's wishes, these recordings have remained in print under the Smithsonian/Folkways auspices.\n1990s.\nThe decade of the 1990s saw Appleton spending increasing amount of time abroad: teaching at Keio University (Mita) in Tokyo, Japan, for three years and frequently visiting Moscow, Russia, where he was inspired by the enthusiasm of young composers. He encouraged the composer/engineer Andre Smirnov to establish the Theremin Center at the Moscow Conservatory of Music. Appleton was first introduced to Russian musicians and artists by the choral conductor/ethnologist Dmitri Pokrovsky (1944\u20131996) and this began his compositional return to instrumental and choral music, much of it composed for the pianist Julia Turkina and cellist Alexander Zagorinsky. In an essay entitled \"How I Became a Russian Composer\" (2009) Appleton explains his love of Russian music and culture that he believes his stepfather, Alexander Walden, instilled in him.\nAlso in this decade Appleton composed two full-length operas for a choir of 1500 children and professional orchestra. The works, \"HOPI: La naissance de Desert\" and \"Le Dernier Voyage de Jean-Gallup de la Perouse\", were conducted by Alain Joutard and commissioned by the Delegation Departmental \u00e0 la Musique et \u00e0 la Danse of the Conseil General des Alpes-Maritimes in Nice, France.\nPersonal life and death.\nAppleton died on January 30, 2022, at his home in Vermont, at the age of 83.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n Produced at The Bregman Electronic Music Studio, Dartmouth College. \n Centaur CRC 2052.\n Discogs https://.\n AllMusic https://.\n , https://, https://, https://, https://.\n Recorded and produced with support from The Bregman Electronic Music Studio at Dartmouth \n Centaur CRC 2133.\n Discogs https://.\n AllMusic https://.\n Centaur CRC 2190\n Discogs https://.\n AllMusic https://.\n , https://, https://, https://, https://.\nBibliography.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReviews and treatises.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39666", "revid": "41663213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39666", "title": "Supernova remnant", "text": "Remnants of an exploded star\nA supernova remnant (SNR) is the structure resulting from the explosion of a star in a supernova. The supernova remnant is bounded by an expanding shock wave, and consists of ejected material expanding from the explosion, and the interstellar material it sweeps up and shocks along the way.\nThere are two common routes to a supernova: either a massive star may run out of fuel, ceasing to generate fusion energy in its core, and collapsing inward under the force of its own gravity to form a neutron star or a black hole; or a white dwarf star may accrete material from a companion star until it reaches a critical mass and undergoes a carbon detonation.\nIn either case, the resulting supernova explosion expels much or all of the stellar material with velocities as much as 10% the speed of light (or approximately 30,000\u00a0km/s) and a strong shock wave forms ahead of the ejecta. That heats the upstream plasma up to temperatures well above millions of\u00a0K. The shock continuously slows down over time as it sweeps up the ambient medium, but it can expand over hundreds or thousands of years and over tens of parsecs before its speed falls below the local sound speed.\nOne of the best observed young supernova remnants was formed by SN 1987A, a supernova in the Large Magellanic Cloud that was observed in February 1987. Other well-known supernova remnants include the Crab Nebula; Tycho, the remnant of SN 1572, named after Tycho Brahe who recorded the brightness of its original explosion; and Kepler, the remnant of SN 1604, named after Johannes Kepler. The youngest known remnant in the Milky Way is G1.9+0.3, discovered in the Galactic Center.\nStages.\nAn SNR passes through the following stages as it expands:\nTypes of supernova remnant.\nThere are three types of supernova remnant:\nRemnants which could only be created by significantly higher ejection energies than a standard supernova are called \"hypernova remnants\", after the high-energy hypernova explosion that is assumed to have created them.\nOrigin of cosmic rays.\nSupernova remnants are considered the major source of galactic cosmic rays. \nThe connection between cosmic rays and supernovas was first suggested by Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky in 1934. \nVitaly Ginzburg and Sergei Syrovatskii in 1964 remarked that if the efficiency of cosmic ray acceleration \nin supernova remnants is about 10 percent, the cosmic ray losses of the Milky Way are compensated.\nThis hypothesis is supported by a specific mechanism called \"shock wave acceleration\" based on Enrico Fermi's ideas, which is still under development.\nIn 1949, Fermi proposed a model for the acceleration of cosmic rays through particle collisions with magnetic clouds in the interstellar medium. This process, known as the \"Second Order Fermi Mechanism\", increases particle energy during head-on collisions, resulting in a steady gain in energy. A later model to produce Fermi Acceleration was generated by a powerful shock front moving through space. Particles that repeatedly cross the front of the shock can gain significant increases in energy. This became known as the \"First Order Fermi Mechanism\".\nSupernova remnants can provide the energetic shock fronts required to generate ultra-high energy cosmic rays. Observation of the SN 1006 remnant in the X-ray has shown synchrotron emission consistent with it being a source of cosmic rays. However, for energies higher than about 1018 eV a different mechanism is required as supernova remnants cannot provide sufficient energy.\nIt is still unclear whether supernova remnants accelerate cosmic rays up to PeV energies. The future telescope CTA will help to answer this question.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39667", "revid": "519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39667", "title": "Euro-asian cuisine", "text": ""}
{"id": "39668", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39668", "title": "Synclavier", "text": "Early digital synthesizer\nThe Synclavier is an early digital synthesizer, polyphonic digital sampling system, and music workstation manufactured by New England Digital Corporation of Norwich, Vermont. It was produced in various forms from the late 1970s into the early 1990s. Used by many notable musicians, the Synclavier was inducted into the TECnology Hall of Fame, an honor given to \"products and innovations that have had an enduring impact on the development of audio technology,\" in 2004.\nHistory.\nThe original design and development of the Synclavier prototype occurred at Dartmouth College with the collaboration of Jon Appleton, Professor of Digital Electronics, Sydney A. Alonso, and Cameron Jones, a software programmer and student at Dartmouth's Thayer School of Engineering.\nSynclavier I.\nFirst released in 1977\u201378, it proved to be highly influential among both electronic music composers and music producers, including Mike Thorne, an early adopter from the commercial world, due to its versatility, its cutting-edge technology, and distinctive sounds.\nThe Synclavier architecture was based on additive synthesis, with the output of multiple digital sine wave oscillators blended to form complex timbres. The oscillators formed the fundamental frequency along with harmonics or partials. The loudness and envelope of each oscillator could be adjusted using front panel controls. New England Digital Corporation (NED) designed their own 16-bit central processor called Able, a kind of minicomputer. Such an advanced computer was required because digital additive synthesis is computationally expensive. The audible result of additive synthesis was somewhat thin, suitable for steady-state sounds such as vibrating strings: violin, harp, guitar, etc. It was not good at generating percussive sounds with fast transients. To fix this problem, NED also designed sample-based synthesis into the Synclavier, calling it \"timbre frame synthesis\", and allowed for an optional FM synthesis module. The sampler recorded an external sound and saved it as a sound file. Most of the standard Synclavier timbres were obtained by sampling acoustic instruments or human voices. Four layers of sound files or partial timbres could be blended to make a more complex sound, for instance by adding a percussion sample to three brass instrument samples to get a sharper attack. If the FM synthesis module was purchased, a separate harmonic envelope feature was engaged, and a more dynamic sound could be produced.\nOnly about 20 Synclavier I models were built. These were sold mostly to universities. The initial models had only a computer and synthesis modules; later models added a musical keyboard and control panel.\nSynclavier II.\nThe system evolved in its next generation of product, the Synclavier II, which was released in early 1980 with the strong influence of music producer Denny Jaeger of Oakland, California. It was originally Jaeger's suggestion that the FM synthesis concept be extended to allow four simultaneous channels or voices of synthesis to be triggered with one key depression to allow the final synthesized sound to have much more harmonic series activity. This change greatly improved the overall sound design of the system and was very noticeable. 16-bit user sampling (originally in mono only) was added as an option in 1982. This model was succeeded by the ABLE Model C computer-based PSMT in 1984 and then the Mac-based 3200, 6400 and 9600 models, all of which used the VPK keyboard.\nKeyboard controller.\nSynclavier II models used an on/off type keyboard (retroactively called the ORK) while later models, labeled simply \"Synclavier\", used a weighted velocity- and pressure-sensitive keyboard (called the VPK) that was licensed from Sequential Circuits and used in their Prophet-T8 synthesizer.\nDigital sampling.\nThe company evolved the system continuously through the early 1980s to integrate the first 16-bit digital sampling system to magnetic disk, and eventually a 16-bit polyphonic sampling system to memory, as well. The company's product was the only digital sampling system that allowed sample rates to go as high as 100\u00a0kHz.\nTapeless studio concept.\nUltimately, the system was referred to as the \"Synclavier Digital Recording Tapeless Studio\" system among many professionals. It was a pioneering system in revolutionizing movie and television sound effects and Foley effects methods of design and production starting at Glen Glenn Sound. Although pricing made it inaccessible for most musicians (a Synclavier could cost anywhere from $25,000 to $200,000), it found widespread use among producers and professional recording studios, competing at times in this market with high-end production systems such as the Fairlight CMI.\nTechnological achievements.\nWhen the company launched and evolved its technology, there were no off-the-shelf computing systems, integrated software, or sound cards. Consequently, all of the hardware from the company's main real-time CPU, all input and output cards, analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog cards and its memory cards were developed internally, as well as all of the software. The hardware and software of the company's real-time capability were used in other fields completely remote to music, such as the main Dartmouth College campus computing node computers for one of the USA's first campus-wide computing networks, and in medical data acquisition research projects.\nEnd of manufacture.\nNew England Digital ceased operations in 1993. According to Jones, \"The intellectual property was bought up by a bank\u2014then it was owned by a Canadian company called Airworks\u2014and I bought the intellectual property and the trademark back from a second bank which had foreclosed on it from Airworks.\"\nReincarnations.\nIn 2019, Jones released an iOS version of the Synclavier dubbed Synclavier Go! using much of the original code base. Jones has also worked with Arturia to bring the Synclavier V software version of the instrument to their V Collection plugin suite.\nIn 2022, Synclavier Digital released and started production on the Regen, a desktop FM synthesizer.\nModels and options.\nBlack panel models.\nOn 1970s\u2013late 1980s:\nIvory panel models.\nIn late 1980s\u20131993; operated via Macintosh II as terminal.\nNotable users.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Neil Rolnick, Joel Chadabe, and Jon Appleton himself are among those who have performed with it frequently.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39669", "revid": "3810835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39669", "title": "Dengue fever", "text": "Mosquito-borne disease\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nDengue fever is a mosquito-borne disease caused by dengue virus, prevalent in tropical and subtropical areas. Most cases of dengue fever are either asymptomatic or manifest mild symptoms. Symptoms typically begin 3 to 14 days after infection. They may include a high fever, headache, vomiting, muscle and joint pains, and a characteristic skin itching and skin rash. Recovery generally takes two to seven days. In a small proportion of cases, the disease develops into severe dengue (previously known as dengue hemorrhagic fever or dengue shock syndrome) with bleeding, low levels of blood platelets, blood plasma leakage, and dangerously low blood pressure.\nDengue is spread by several species of female mosquitoes of the \"Aedes\" genus, principally \"Aedes aegypti\". The virus has four confirmed serotypes; infection with one type usually gives lifelong immunity to that type, but only short-term immunity to the others. Subsequent infection with a different type increases the risk of severe complications, so-called antibody-dependent enhancement. The symptoms may resemble those of malaria, influenza, or Zika. Blood tests to confirm the diagnosis including detecting viral RNA, or specific antibodies.\nInfection can be prevented by mosquito elimination and the prevention of mosquito bites. Two types of dengue vaccine have been approved and are commercially available. Dengvaxia became available in 2016, but it is only recommended to prevent re-infection in individuals who have been previously infected. The second vaccine, Qdenga, became available in 2022 and is suitable for adults, adolescents and children from four years of age. Treatment is symptomatic, as there is no specific treatment for dengue fever. In mild cases, treatment focuses on treating pain. Severe cases of dengue require hospitalisation; treatment of acute dengue is supportive and includes giving fluid either by mouth or intravenously.\nThe earliest descriptions of a dengue outbreak date from 1779; its viral cause and spread were understood by the early 20th century. Already endemic in more than one hundred countries, dengue is spreading from tropical and subtropical regions to the Iberian Peninsula and the southern states of the US, partly attributed to climate change. It is classified as a neglected tropical disease. During 2023, more than 5\u00a0million infections were reported, with more than 5,000 dengue-related deaths. As most cases are asymptomatic or mild, the actual numbers of dengue cases and deaths are under-reported.\nSigns and symptoms.\nTypically, people infected with dengue virus are asymptomatic or have only mild symptoms such as an uncomplicated fever (80%). Others have more severe illness (5%), and in a small proportion it is life-threatening. The incubation period (time between exposure and onset of symptoms) ranges from 3 to 14 days, but most often it is 4 to 7 days.\nThe characteristic symptoms of mild dengue are sudden-onset fever, headache (typically located behind the eyes), muscle and joint pains, nausea, vomiting, swollen glands and a rash. If this progresses to severe dengue the symptoms are severe abdominal pain, persistent vomiting, rapid breathing, bleeding gums or nose, fatigue, restlessness, blood in vomit or stool, extreme thirst, pale and cold skin, and feelings of weakness.\nClinical course.\nThe course of infection is divided into three phases: febrile, critical, and recovery.\nThe febrile phase involves high fever (40\u201341\u00a0\u00b0C; 104\u2013105.8\u00a0\u00b0F), and is associated with generalized pain and a headache; this usually lasts two to seven days. There may also be nausea, vomiting, a rash, and pains in the muscle and joints.\nMost people recover within a week or so. In about 5% of cases, symptoms worsen and can become life-threatening. This is called severe dengue (formerly called \"dengue hemorrhagic fever\" or \"dengue shock syndrome\"). Severe dengue can lead to shock, internal bleeding, organ failure and even death. Warning signs include severe stomach pain, vomiting, difficulty breathing, and blood in the nose, gums, vomit or stools.\nDuring this period, there is leakage of plasma from the blood vessels, together with a reduction in platelets. This may result in fluid accumulation in the chest and abdominal cavity as well as depletion of fluid from the circulation and decreased blood supply to vital organs.\nThe recovery phase usually lasts two to three days. The improvement is often striking, and can be accompanied with severe itching and a slow heart rate.\nComplications.\nComplications following severe dengue include fatigue, somnolence, headache, concentration impairment and memory impairment. A pregnant woman who develops dengue is at higher risk of miscarriage, low birth weight, and premature birth.\nChildren and older individuals are at a risk of developing complications from dengue fever compared to other age groups; young children typically suffer from more intense symptoms. Concurrent infections with tropical diseases like the Zika virus can worsen symptoms and make recovery more challenging.\nCause.\nVirology.\nDengue virus (DENV) is an RNA virus of the family \"Flaviviridae\"; genus \"Flavivirus\". Other members of the same genus include yellow fever virus, West Nile virus, and Zika virus.\nDengue virus genome (genetic material) contains about 11,000 nucleotide bases, which code for the three structural protein molecules (C, prM and E) that form the virus particle and seven other protein molecules that are required for replication of the virus. There are four confirmed strains of the virus, called serotypes, referred to as DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3 and DENV-4. The distinctions between the serotypes are based on their antigenicity.\nTransmission.\nDengue virus is most frequently transmitted by the bite of mosquitos in the \"Aedes\" genus, particularly \"A.\u00a0aegypti\". They prefer to feed at dusk and dawn, but they may bite and thus spread infection at any time of day. Other \"Aedes\" species that may transmit the disease include \"A.\u00a0albopictus\", \"A.\u00a0polynesiensis\" and \"A.\u00a0scutellaris\". Humans are the primary host of the virus, but it also circulates in nonhuman primates, and can infect other mammals. An infection can be acquired via a single bite.\nFor 2 to 10 days after becoming newly infected, a person's bloodstream will contain a high level of virus particles (the viremic period). A female mosquito that takes a blood meal from the infected host then propagates the virus in the cells lining its gut. Over the next few days, the virus spreads to other tissues including the mosquito's salivary glands and is released into its saliva. Next time the mosquito feeds, the infectious saliva will be injected into the bloodstream of its victim, thus spreading the disease. The virus seems to have no detrimental effect on the mosquito, which remains infected for life.\nDengue can also be transmitted via infected blood products and through organ donation. Vertical transmission (from mother to child) during pregnancy or at birth has been reported.\nRisk factors.\nThe principal risk for infection with dengue is the bite of an infected mosquito. This is more probable in areas where the disease is endemic, especially where there is high population density, poor sanitation, and standing water where mosquitoes can breed. It can be mitigated by taking steps to avoid bites such as by wearing clothing that fully covers the skin, using mosquito netting while resting, and/or the application of insect repellent (DEET being the most effective).\nChronic diseases \u2013 such as asthma, sickle cell anemia, and diabetes mellitus \u2013 increase the risk of developing a severe form of the disease. Other risk factors for severe disease include female sex and high body mass index. Infection with one serotype is thought to produce lifelong immunity to that type, but only short-term protection against the other three. Subsequent re-infection with a different serotype increases the risk of severe complications due to a phenomenon known as antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE).\nThe exact mechanism of ADE is not fully understood. It appears that ADE occurs when the antibodies generated during an immune response recognize and bind to a pathogen, but they fail to neutralize it. Instead, the antibody-virus complex has an enhanced ability to bind to the Fc\u03b3 receptors of the target immune cells, enabling the virus to infect the cell and reproduce itself.\nMechanism of infection.\nWhen a dengue virus carrying mosquito bites a person, the virus enters the skin together with the mosquito's saliva. The virus infects nearby skin cells called keratinocytes, as well as specialized immune cells located in the skin, called Langerhans cells. The Langerhans cells migrate to the lymph nodes, where the infection spreads to white blood cells, and reproduces inside the cells while they move throughout the body.\nThe white blood cells respond by producing several signaling proteins, such as cytokines and interferons, which are responsible for many of the symptoms, such as the fever, the flu-like symptoms, and the severe pains. In severe infection, the virus production inside the body is greatly increased, and many more organs (such as the liver and the bone marrow) can be affected. Fluid from the bloodstream leaks through the wall of small blood vessels into body cavities due to increased capillary permeability. As a result, blood volume decreases, and the blood pressure becomes so low that it cannot supply sufficient blood to vital organs. The spread of the virus to the bone marrow leads to reduced numbers of platelets, which are necessary for effective blood clotting; this increases the risk of bleeding, the other major complication of dengue fever.\nDiagnosis.\nMild cases of dengue fever can easily be confused with several common diseases including Influenza, measles, chikungunya, and zika. Dengue, chikungunya and zika share the same mode of transmission (\"Aedes\" mosquitoes) and are often endemic in the same regions, so that it is possible to be infected simultaneously by more than one disease. For travellers, dengue fever diagnosis should be considered in anyone who develops a fever within two weeks of being in the tropics or subtropics.\nWarning symptoms of severe dengue include abdominal pain, persistent vomiting, odema, bleeding, lethargy, and liver enlargement. Once again, these symptoms can be confused with other diseases such as malaria, gastroenteritis, leptospirosis, and typhus.\nBlood tests can be used to confirm a diagnosis of dengue. During the first few days of infection, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) can be used to detect the NS1 antigen; however this antigen is produced by all flaviviruses. Four or five days into the infection, it is possible to reliably detect anti-dengue IgM antibodies, but this does not determine the serotype. Nucleic acid amplification tests provide the most reliable method of diagnosis.\nTypes.\nThe World Health Organization's International Classification of Diseases divides dengue fever into two classes: uncomplicated and severe. Severe dengue is defined as that associated with severe bleeding, severe organ dysfunction, or severe plasma leakage. Risk factors of getting severe dengue include prior exposure to the disease, young children, older adults and those with medical comorbidities.\nSevere dengue can develop suddenly, sometimes after a few days as the fever subsides. Leakage of plasma from the capillaries results in extreme low blood pressure and hypovolemic shock; Patients with severe plasma leakage may have fluid accumulation in the lungs or abdomen, insufficient protein in the blood, or thickening of the blood. Severe dengue is a medical emergency which can cause damage to organs, leading to multiple organ failure and death.\nPrevention.\nMosquito control.\nThe principal risk for infection with dengue is the bite of an infected mosquito. This is more probable in areas where the disease is endemic, especially where there is high population density, poor sanitation, and standing water where mosquitoes can breed. It can be mitigated by taking steps to avoid bites such as by wearing clothing that fully covers the skin, using mosquito netting while resting, and/or the application of insect repellent (DEET being the most effective); it is also advisable to treat clothing, nets and tents with 0.5% permethrin.\nProtection of the home can be achieved with door and window screens, by using air conditioning, and by regularly emptying and cleaning all receptacles both indoors and outdoors which may accumulate water (such as buckets, planters, pools or trashcans).\nThe primary method of controlling \"A. aegypti\" is by eliminating its habitats. This is done by eliminating open sources of water, or if this is not possible, by adding insecticides or biological control agents to these areas. Generalized spraying with organophosphate or pyrethroid insecticides, while sometimes done, is not thought to be effective. Reducing open collections of water through environmental modification is the preferred method of control, given the concerns of negative health effects from insecticides and greater logistical difficulties with control agents. Ideally, mosquito control would be a community activity, e.g. when all members of a community clear blocked gutters and street drains and keep their yards free of containers with standing water. If residences have direct water connections this eliminates the need for wells or street pumps and water-carrying containers.\nVaccine.\nAs of March 2024, there are two vaccines to protect against dengue infection; Dengvaxia and Qdenga.\nDengvaxia (formerly CYD-TDV) became available in 2015, and is approved for use in the US, EU and in some Asian and Latin American countries. It is an attenuated virus, is suitable for individuals aged 6\u201345 years and protects against all four serotypes of dengue. Due to safety concerns about antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE), it should only be given to individuals who have previously been infected with dengue, in order to protect them from reinfection. It is given subcutaneously as three doses at six month intervals.\nQdenga (formerly TAK-003) completed clinical trials in 2022 and was approved for use in the European Union in December 2022; it has been approved by a number of other countries including Indonesia and Brazil, and has been recommended by the SAGE committee of the World Health Organization. It is indicated for the prevention of dengue disease in individuals four years of age and older, and can be administered to people who have not been previously infected with dengue. It is a live attenuated vaccine containing the four serotypes of dengue virus, administered subcutaneously as two doses three months apart.\nTreatment.\nAs of July 2024, there is no specific antiviral treatment available for dengue fever.\nMost cases of dengue fever have mild symptoms, and recovery takes place in a few days. No treatment is required for these cases. Acetaminophen (Paracetamol, Tylenol) may be used to relieve mild fever or pain. Other common pain relievers, including aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve) should be avoided as they can increase the risk of bleeding complications.\nFor moderate illness, those who can drink, are passing urine, have no warning signs and are otherwise reasonably healthy can be monitored carefully at home. Supportive care with analgesics, fluid replacement, and bed rest are recommended.\nSevere dengue is a life-threatening emergency, requiring hospitalization and potentially intensive care. Warning signs include dehydration, decreasing platelets and increasing hematocrit. Treatment modes include intravenous fluids, and transfusion with platelets or plasma.\nPrognosis.\nMost people with dengue recover without any ongoing problems. The risk of death among those with severe dengue is 0.8\u20132.5%, and with adequate treatment this is less than 1%. However, those who develop significantly low blood pressure may have a fatality rate of up to 26%. The risk of death among children less than five years old is four times greater than among those over the age of 10. Elderly people are also at higher risk of a poor outcome.\nEpidemiology.\nAs of March 2023, dengue is endemic in more than 100 countries with cases reported in every continent with the exception of Antarctica. The Americas, Southeast Asia and the Western Pacific regions are the most seriously affected. It is difficult to estimate the full extent of the disease, as many cases are mild and not correctly diagnosed. WHO currently estimates that 3.9\u00a0billion people are at risk of dengue infection. In 2013, it was estimated that 390\u00a0million dengue infections occur every year, with 500,000 of these developing severe symptoms and 25,000 deaths.\nGenerally, areas where dengue is endemic have only one serotype of the virus in circulation. The disease is said to be hyperendemic in areas where more than one serotype is circulating; this increases the risk of severe disease on a second or subsequent infection.\nInfections are most commonly acquired in urban environments where the virus is primarily transmitted by the mosquito species \"Aedes aegypti\". This species has adapted to the urban environment, is generally found close to human habitation, prefers humans as its host, and takes advantage of small bodies of standing water (such as tanks and buckets) in which to breed. In rural settings the virus is transmitted to humans by \"A. aegypti\" and other related mosquitoes such as \"Aedes albopictus\". Both these species have expanding ranges. There are two subspecies of \"Aedes aegypti\", where \"Aedes aegypti formosus\" can be found in natural habitats such as forests and \"Aedes aegypti aegypti\" has adapted to urban domestic habitats.\nDengue has increased in incidence in recent decades, with WHO recording a ten fold increase between 2010 and 2019 (from 500,000 to 5 million recorded cases). This increase is tied closely to the increasing range of Aedes mosquitoes, which is attributed to a combination of urbanization, population growth, and an increasingly warm climate. In endemic areas, dengue infections peak when rainfall is optimal for mosquito breeding. In October 2023, the first confirmed symptomatic case of locally acquired dengue (i.e. not while travelling) in the US was identified in California.\nThe disease infects all races, sexes, and ages equally. In endemic areas, the infection is most commonly seen in children who then acquire a lifelong partial immunity.\nClimate change.\nRising temperatures and altered rainfall patterns are expanding the season and habitats of Aedes mosquitoes, the primary vectors of the disease. In India, a study has developed an early warning system that analyzes regional climate factors\u2014such as temperature, rainfall, and humidity\u2014to predict potential dengue outbreaks two months in advance, enhancing preparedness and response strategies. Future projections indicate that dengue transmission risk will continue to rise with the rise in temperatures.\nHistory.\nThe first historical record of a case of probable dengue fever is in a Chinese medical encyclopedia from the Jin dynasty (266\u2013420) which referred to a \"water poison\" associated with flying insects.\nThe principal mosquito vector of dengue, \"Aedes aegypti\", spread out of Africa in the 15th to 19th centuries due to the slave trade and consequent expansion of international trading. There have been descriptions of epidemics of dengue-like illness in the 17th century, and it is likely that epidemics in Jakarta, Cairo, and Philadelphia during the 18th century were caused by dengue.\nIt is assumed that dengue was constantly present in many tropical urban centres throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, even though significant outbreaks were infrequent. The marked spread of dengue during and after the Second World War has been attributed partly to disruption caused by the war, and partly to subsequent urbanisation in south-east Asia. As novel serotypes were introduced to regions already endemic with dengue, outbreaks of severe disease followed. The severe hemorrhagic form of the disease was first reported in the Philippines in 1953; by the 1970s, it had become recognised as a major cause of child mortality in Southeast Asia.\nIn Central and South America, the Aedes mosquito had been eradicated in the 1950s; however the eradication program was discontinued in the 1970s and the disease re-established itself in the region during the 1980s, becoming hyperendemic and causing significant epidemics.\nDengue has continued to increase in prevalence during the 21st century, as the mosquito vector continues to expand its range. This is attributed partly to continuing urbanisation, and partly to the impact of a warmer climate.\nEtymology.\nThe name came into English in the early 19th century from West Indian Spanish, which borrowed it from the Kiswahili term \"dinga\" / \"denga\", meaning \"cramp-like seizure\" \u2013 the full term of the condition being \"ki-dinga pepo\": \"a sort of cramp-like seizure (caused by) an evil spirit\". The borrowed term changed to \"dengue\" in Spanish due to this word existing in Spanish with the meaning \"fastidiousness\" and this folk etymology referring to the dislike of movement by affected patients. Slaves in the West Indies having contracted dengue were said to have the posture and gait of a dandy, and the disease was known as \"dandy fever\".\nThe term \"break-bone fever\" was applied by physician and United States Founding Father Benjamin Rush, in a 1789 report of the 1780 epidemic in Philadelphia, due to the associated muscle and joint pains. In the report title he uses the more formal term \"bilious remitting fever\". The term dengue fever came into general use only after 1828. Other historical terms include \"breakheart fever\" and \"la dengue\". Terms for severe disease include \"infectious thrombocytopenic purpura\" and \"Philippine\", \"Thai\", or \"Singapore hemorrhagic fever\".\nResearch.\nResearch directions include dengue pathogenesis (the process by which the disease develops in humans), as well as the biology, ecology and behaviour of the mosquito vector. Improved diagnostics would enable faster and more appropriate treatment. Attempts are ongoing to develop an antiviral medicine targeting the NS3 or NS5 proteins.\nIn addition to the two vaccines which are already available, several vaccine candidates are in development.\nAn area of active research is developing experimental models for Dengue, beyond experimental animal models. Organ Chips and Lab-on-Chips have been developed to model Dengue leak syndrome and mechanopathology.\nSociety and culture.\nBlood donation.\nOutbreaks of dengue fever increase the need for blood products while decreasing the number of potential blood donors due to potential infection with the virus. Someone who has a dengue infection is typically not allowed to donate blood for at least the next six months.\nPublic awareness.\nInternational Anti-Dengue Day is observed every year on 15 June in a number of countries. The idea was first agreed upon in 2010 with the first event held in Jakarta, Indonesia, in 2011. Further events were held in 2012 in Yangon, Myanmar, and in 2013 in Vietnam. Goals are to increase public awareness about dengue, mobilize resources for its prevention and control and, to demonstrate the Southeast Asian region's commitment in tackling the disease. Efforts are ongoing as of 2019 to make it a global event.\nThe Philippines has an awareness month in June since 1998.\nA National Dengue Day is held in India annually on 16 May.\nEconomic burden.\nPersistent symptoms negatively impact patients' quality of life, reduce productivity, and increase medical and economic costs beyond the acute phase. A study estimated that the global burden of dengue in 2013 amounted to US$8.9 billion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39670", "revid": "18805347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39670", "title": "Finger millet", "text": "Species of grass\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFinger millet (Eleusine coracana) is an annual herbaceous plant. It is a tetraploid and self-pollinating species probably evolved from its wild relative \"Eleusine africana\".\nFinger millet is native to the Ethiopian and Ugandan highlands. It has the ability to withstand cultivation at altitudes over above sea level and a high drought tolerance. The grain is suitable for decades-long storage. It is widely grown as a cereal crop in the arid and semiarid areas in Africa and Asia.\nTaxonomy.\nFinger millet is under the genus \"Eleusine\" Gaertn.\nCultivation.\nHistory.\nFinger millet originated in East Africa (Ethiopian and Ugandan highlands). It probably evolved from its wild relative \"Eleusine africana\". It was claimed to have been found in an Indian archaeological site dated to 1800\u00a0BCE (Late Bronze Age); however, this was subsequently demonstrated to be incorrectly identified cleaned grains of hulled millets. The earliest record of finger millet comes from an archaeological site in Africa which is thought to date to the 3rd millennium BCE, although it has not been precisely dated.\nBy 1996, cultivation of finger millet in Africa was declining rapidly because of the large amount of labor it required, with farmers preferring to grow nutritionally inferior but less labor-intensive crops such as maize, sorghum, and cassava.39\u201340 Such a decline was not seen in Asia, however.42\nGrowing regions.\nMain cultivation areas are parts of eastern and southern Africa\u00a0\u2013 particularly Uganda, Kenya, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malawi, and Tanzania\u00a0\u2013 and parts of India and Nepal. It is also grown in southern Sudan39 and \"as far south\" in Africa as Mozambique.56\nClimate requirements.\nFinger millet is a short-day plant with a growing optimum 12 hours' daylight for most varieties. Its main growing area ranges from 20\u00b0N to 20\u00b0S, but it is found to be grown at 30\u00b0N in the Himalaya region (India and Nepal). It is generally considered a drought-tolerant crop, but compared with other millets, such as pearl millet and sorghum, it prefers moderate rainfall ( annually). The majority of worldwide finger millet farmers grow it rainfed, although yields often can be significantly improved when irrigation is applied. In India, finger millet is a typical \"rabi\" (dry, winter season) crop. Heat tolerance of finger millet is high. For Ugandan finger millet varieties, for instance, the optimal average growth temperature ranges at about 27\u00a0\u00b0C, while the minimal temperatures should not be lower than 18\u00a0\u00b0C. Relative to other species (pearl millet and sorghum), finger millet has a higher tolerance to cool temperatures. It is grown from about above sea level (e.g. in the Himalaya region). Hence, it can be cultivated on higher elevations than most tropical crops. Finger millet can grow on various soils, including highly weathered tropical lateritic soils. It thrives in free-draining soils with steady moisture levels. Furthermore, it can tolerate soil salinity up to a certain extent. Its ability to bear waterlogging is limited, so good drainage of the soils and moderate water-holding capacity are optimal. Finger millet can tolerate moderately acidic soils (pH 5), but also moderately alkaline soils (pH 8.2).\nCropping systems.\nFinger millet monocrops grown under rainfed conditions are most common in drier areas of Eastern Africa. In addition, intercropping with legumes, such as cowpea or pigeon pea, are also quite common in East Africa. Tropical Central Africa supports scattered regions of finger millet intercropping mostly with legumes, but also with cassava, plantain, and vegetables.\nMost common finger millet intercropping systems in South India are with legumes (dolichos, pigeonpea, black gram, or castor bean), cereals (maize, foxtail millet, jowar, or little millet), or brassicas (\u201e\u201csuch as mustard).\nWeeds.\nWeeds are the major biotic stresses for finger millet cultivation. Its seeds are very small, which leads to a relatively slow development in early growing stages. This makes finger millet a weak competitor for light, water, and nutrients compared with weeds. In East and Southern Africa, the closely related species \"Eleusine indica\" (common name Indian goose grass) is a severe weed competitor of finger millet. Especially in early growing stages of the crop and the weed and when broadcast seeding instead of row seeding is applied (as often the case in East Africa), the two species are very difficult to distinguish. Besides \"Eleusine indica\", the species \"Xanthium strumarium,\" which is animal dispersed and the stolon-owning species \"Cyperus rotondus\" and \"Cynodon dactylon\" are important finger millet weeds. Measures to control weeds include cultural, physical, and chemical methods. Cultural methods could be sowing in rows instead of broadcast sowing to make distinction between finger millet seedlings and \"E. indica\" easier when hand weeding. ICRISAT promotes cover crops and crop rotations to disrupt the growing cycle of the weeds. Physical weed control in financial resource-limited communities growing finger millet are mainly hand weeding or weeding with a hand hoe.\nDiseases and pests.\nFinger millet is generally seen as not very prone to diseases and pests. Nonetheless, finger millet blast, caused by the fungal pathogen \"Magnaporthe grisea\" (anamorph \"Pyricularia grisea\"), can locally cause severe damages, especially when untreated. In Uganda, yield losses up to 80% were reported in bad years. The pathogen leads to drying out of leaves, neck rots, and ear rots. These symptoms can drastically impair photosynthesis, translocation of photosynthetic assimilates, and grain filling, so reduce yield and grain quality. Finger millet blast can also infest finger millet weeds such as the closely related \"E.\u00a0indica\", \"E.\u00a0africana\", \"Digitaria \"spp., \"Setaria\" spp., and \"Doctylocterium spp\". Finger millet blast can be controlled with cultural measures, chemical treatments, and the use of resistant varieties. Researchers in Kenya have screened wild relatives of finger millet and landraces for resistance to blast. Cultural measures to control finger millet blast suggested by ICRISAT for Eastern Africa include crop rotations with nonhost crops such as legumes, deep ploughing under of finger millet straw on infected fields, washing of field tools after use to prevent dissemination of the pathogen to uninfected fields, weed control to reduce infections by weed hosts, and avoiding of high plant densities to impede the pathogen dispersal from plant to plant. Chemical measures can be direct spraying of systemic fungicides, such as the active ingredients pyroquilon or seed dressings with fungicides, such as trycyclozole.\n\"Striga,\" a parasitic weed which occurs naturally in parts of Africa, Asia, and Australia, can severely affect the crop and yield losses in finger millet and other cereals by 20 to 80%. \"Striga\" can be controlled with limited success by hand weeding, herbicide application, crop rotations, improved soil fertility, intercropping and biological control. The most economically feasible and environmentally friendly control measure would be to develop and use \"Striga\"-resistant cultivars. \"Striga\" resistant genes have not been identified yet in cultivated finger millet but could be found in crop wild relatives of finger millet. Another pathogen in finger millet cultivation is the fungus \"Helminthosporium nodulosum\", causing leaf blight. Finger millet pests are bird predators, such as quelea in East Africa.\nInsects.\nThe pink stem borer (\"Sesamia inferens\") and the finger millet shoot fly (\"Atherigona miliaceae\") are considered as the most relevant insect pests in finger millet cultivation. Measures to control \"Sesamia inferens\" are uprooting of infected plants, destroying of stubbles, having a crop rotation, chemical control with insecticides, biological measures such as pheromone traps, or biological pest control with the use of antagonistic organisms (e.g. \"Sturmiopsis inferens\").\nOther insect pests include:\nPropagation and sowing.\nPropagation in finger millet farming is done mainly by seeds. In rainfed cropping, four sowing methods are used:\nHarvest.\nCrop does not mature uniformly and hence the harvest is to be taken up in two stages. When the earhead on the main shoot and 50% of the earheads on the crop turn brown, the crop is ready for the first harvest. At the first harvest, all earheads that have turned brown should be cut. After this drying, threshing and cleaning the grains by winnowing. The second harvest is around seven days after the first. All earheads, including the green ones, should be cut. The grains should then be cured to obtain maturity by heaping the harvested earheads in shade for one day without drying, so that the humidity and temperature increase and the grains get cured. After this drying, threshing and cleaning as after the first harvesting.\nStorage.\nOnce harvested, the seeds keep extremely well and are seldom attacked by insects or moulds. Finger millet can be kept for up to 10 years when it is unthreshed. Some sources report a storage duration up to 50 years under good storage conditions. The long storage capacity makes finger millet an important crop in risk-avoidance strategies as a famine crop for farming communities.\nProcessing.\nMilling.\nAs a first step of processing finger millet can be milled to produce flour. However, finger millet is difficult to mill due to the small size of the seeds and because the bran is bound very tightly to the endosperm. Furthermore, the delicate seed can get crushed during the milling. The development of commercial mechanical milling systems for finger millet is challenging. Therefore, the main product of finger millet is whole grain flour. This has disadvantages, such as reduced storage time of the flour due to the high oil content. Furthermore, the industrial use of whole grain finger millet flour is limited. Moistening the millet seeds prior to grinding helps to remove the bran mechanically without causing damage to the rest of the seed. The mini millet mill can also be used to process other grains such as wheat and sorghum.\nMalting.\nAnother method to process the finger millet grain is germinating the seed. This process is also called malting and is very common in the production of brewed beverages such as beer. When finger millet is germinated, enzymes are activated, which transfer starches into other carbohydrates such as sugars. Finger millet has a good malting activity. The malted finger millet can be used as a substrate to produce for example gluten-free beer or easily digestible food for infants.\nUses.\nNutrition.\nFinger millet is 11% water, 7% protein, 54% carbohydrates, and 2% fat (table). In a 100 gram (3.5 oz) reference amount, finger millet supplies 305 calories, and is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of dietary fiber and several dietary minerals, especially iron at 87% DV (table).\nThe International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), a member of the CGIAR consortium, partners with farmers, governments, researchers and NGOs to help farmers grow nutritious crops, including finger millet. This helps their communities have more balanced diets and become more resilient to pests and drought. For example, the Harnessing Opportunities for Productivity Enhancement of Sorghum and Millets in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia (HOPE) project is increasing yields of finger millet in Tanzania by encouraging farmers to grow improved varieties.\nCulinary.\nFinger millet can be ground into a flour and cooked into cakes, puddings or porridge. The flour is made into a fermented drink (or beer) in Nepal and in many parts of Africa. The straw from finger millet is used as animal fodder.\nIn India.\nFinger millet is a staple grain in many parts of India, especially Karnataka, where it is known as ragi (from Kannada \u0cb0\u0cbe\u0c97\u0cbf \"r\u0101gi\"). It is malted and its grain is ground into flour.\nThere are numerous ways to prepare finger millet, including dosa, idli, and laddu. In southern India, on pediatrician's recommendation, finger millet is used in preparing baby food, because of millet's high nutritional content, especially iron and calcium. \"Satva\", \"pole\" (dosa), \"bhakri\", \"ambil\" (a sour porridge), and pappad are common dishes made using finger millet. In Karnataka, finger millet is generally consumed in the form of a porridge called \"ragi mudde\" in Kannada. It is the staple diet of many residents of South Karnataka. Mudde is prepared by cooking the ragi flour with water to achieve a dough-like consistency. This is then rolled into balls of desired size and consumed with sambar (huli), saaru (\u0cb8\u0cbe\u0cb0\u0cc1), or curries. Ragi is also used to make roti, idli, dosa and conjee. In the Malnad region of Karnataka, the whole ragi grain is soaked and the milk is extracted to make a dessert known as \"keelsa\". A type of flat bread is prepared using finger millet flour (called \"ragi rotti\" in Kannada) in Northern districts of Karnataka.\nIn Tamil Nadu, ragi is called \"kezhvaragu\" (\u0b95\u0bc7\u0bb4\u0bcd\u0bb5\u0bb0\u0b95\u0bc1) and also has other names like keppai, ragi, and ariyam. Ragi is dried, powdered, and boiled to form a thick mass that is allowed to cool. This is the famed \"kali\" or \"keppai kali\". This is made into large balls to quantify the intake. It is taken with sambar or kuzhambu. For children, ragi is also fed with milk and sugar (malt). It is also made in the form of pancakes with chopped onions and tomatoes. \"Kezhvaragu\" is used to make puttu with jaggery or sugar. Ragi is called \"koozh\" \u2013 a staple diet in farming communities, eaten along with raw onions and green chillies. In Andhra Pradesh, \"ragi sankati\" or \"ragi muddha\" \u2013 ragi balls \u2013 are eaten in the morning with chilli, onions, and sambar. In Kerala, puttu, a traditional breakfast dish, can be made with ragi flour and grated coconut, which is then steamed in a cylindrical steamer. In the tribal and western hilly regions of Odisha, ragi or \"mandiaa\" is a staple food. In the Garhwal and Kumaon regions of Uttarakhand, \"koda\" or \"maduwa\" is made into thick rotis (served with ghee), and also made into \"badi\", which is similar to halwa but without sugar. In the Kumaon region, ragi is traditionally fed to women after child birth. In some parts of Kumaon region the ragi flour is used to make various snacks like \"namkeen sev\", \"mathri\" and \"chips\".\nRagi flour.\nTo make the flour, ragi is graded and washed. It is allowed to dry naturally in sunlight for 5 to 8 hours. It is then powdered. Ragi porridge, ragi halwa, ragi ela ada, and ragi kozhukatta can be made with ragi flour. All-purpose flour can be replaced with ragi flour during baking. Ragi cake and ragi biscuits can be prepared. The flour is consumed with milk, boiled water, or yogurt. The flour is made into flatbreads, including thin, leavened dosa and thicker, unleavened roti.\nIn South and Far East Asia.\nIn Nepal, a thick dough (\"\u1e0dh\u0129\u1e0do\") made of millet flour (\"k\u014dd\u014d\") is cooked and eaten by hand. The dough, on other hand, can be made into thick bread (\"rotee\") spread over flat utensil and heating it. Fermented millet is used to make a beer chhaang and the mash is distilled to make a liquor (\"rak\u015bi\"\u0936\u0940). Whole grain millet is fermented to make tongba. Its use in holy Hindu practices is barred especially by upper castes. In Nepal, the National Plant Genetic Resource Centre at Khumaltar maintains 877 accessions (samples) of Nepalese finger millet (kodo).\nIn Sri Lanka, finger millet is called \"kurakkan\" and is made into \"kurakkan roti\" \u2013 an earthy brown thick roti with coconut and \"thallapa\" \u2013 a thick dough made of ragi by boiling it with water and some salt until like a dough ball. It is then eaten with a spicy meat curry and is usually swallowed in small balls, rather than chewing. It is also eaten as a porridge (kurrakan kenda) and as a sweet called 'Halape'. In northwest Vietnam, finger millet is used as a medicine for women at childbirth. A minority use finger millet flour to make alcohol.\nAs beverage.\nRagi malt porridge is made from finger millet which is soaked and shadow dried, then roasted and ground. This preparation is boiled in water and used as a substitute for milk powder-based beverages.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39671", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39671", "title": "Dengue hemorrhagic fever", "text": ""}
{"id": "39672", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39672", "title": "Gas sculpture", "text": "Gas sculpture is a concept introduced by Joan Mir\u00f3 to make sculptures out of gaseous materials. The idea of a gas sculpture also appeared in the book \"Gog\", by Giovanni Papini (1881\u20131956).\nAn example of pure water fog sculpture is in the sculpture garden at the National Gallery of Australia in Canberra. A large bank of very small nozzles is arrayed on the edge of a small rush-filled pond, and when the power is switched on a fine mist of fog billows out. The \"sculpture\" has a continuously changing shape as it is affected by the water, the rushes, and the air currents in the area.\nTechnology.\nCold water fog nozzle technologies were developed by industry in the late 1960s for factory air particulate control and agricultural orchard freeze prevention. These high pressure systems force filtered water at through custom nozzles to atomize the water into billions of ultra-fine droplets below in size. In industrial applications this also provides cooling due to rapid evaporation.\nArtists use this cold water fog technology to make experimental artworks that allow the viewer to safely interact and become fully immersed in the fog.\nHigh temperature steam fog from underground steam utility lines used for commercial heat transfer, and small boiler sources, are also used by artists for atmospheric visual displays, and as a dynamic projection surfaces.\nIn the commercial entertainment industry these various water fog systems are used for special effects in movies, and for theme park atmospherics.\nSome kinetic sculptures contain other gaseous elements, such as the sculptures of Jean-Paul Riopelle's \"La Joute\", which includes natural gas fire jets, a water fountain, and bronze sculptural elements.\nContemporary fog sculptures.\nA large scale use of cold water fog is the Blur Building (2002), an exhibition pavilion built for Swiss Expo.02 on Lake Neuchatel by architects Diller Scofidio + Renfro. This is an architecture described as \"an inhabitable cloud whirling above a lake\", built with an atmosphere of fog surrounding a lightweight tensegrity structure .\nThe primary visible building material is water. Water pumped from the lake is filtered and atomized to a fine mist through an array of 31,400 high-pressure nozzles. The nozzle pressures are regulated by a computer processor and a smart weather system that reads temperature, humidity, wind speed and direction. The fog created is thus in constant change, an interplay of natural and man-made forces.\nTwo bridges connect the building with the shore, four hundred visitors at a time can enter the building and be within the fog mass. Inside the fog, one's normal spatial references are lost when immersed within an optical \u201cwhiteout\u201d, and the \u201cwhite noise\u201d of hissing nozzles.\nArtistic use of steam fog was pioneered in the collaborative \"Center Beam\" artwork by the Center for Advanced Visual Studies at MIT. First shown in 1977 at documenta 6 in Kassel, Germany, it included steam works by Joan Brigham, Otto Piene, and Paul Earls. For \"Center Beam\", a low pressure hot water steam fog became a medium to project lasers, holograms, films and text onto.\nThe Children's Museum of Pittsburgh is planning a new park with a fog sculpture created by Ned Kahn. Set for completion in 2012, the sculpture will be a grid of stainless steel poles outfitted with fog nozzles. Kahn said of the sculpture, \"When the fog is on, it will appear like a 20-foot-diameter sphere [] of fog spinning inside the poles.\"\nIn 1998 polish artist Zuzanna Janin did the installation \u201cWhat a Hell, What a Heaven\u201d in Foksal Gallery in Warsaw, Poland, also in 1999 \"Memory\" in Center for CONTEMPORARY ART Zamek Ujazdowski in Warsaw, Poland. In 2002 she have done work \u201cSynagogue /Memory\u201d in Center of Contemporary Art (old synagogue building) in Trnava, Slovakia. The work was done from artificial fog used in disco or concerts. \nOther contemporary sculptures in which fog is used as a medium of expression are: \"Harbor Fog\", a viewer responsive artwork in the parkland above Boston's Big Dig highway; \"Cloud RIngs\" (2006) by Ned Kahn at the 21c Museum Hotel in Louisville, Kentucky; and the interactive landscape of Dilworth Plaza at Philadelphia City Hall (completion date 2013).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39673", "revid": "17859785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39673", "title": "Berengar of Tours", "text": "French theologian involved in transubstantiation controversy (999\u20131088)\nBerengar of Tours (died 6 January 1088), in Latin Berengarius Turonensis, was an 11th-century French Christian theologian and archdeacon of Angers, a scholar whose leadership of the cathedral school at Chartres set an example of intellectual inquiry through the revived tools of dialectic that was soon followed at cathedral schools of Laon and Paris. Berengar of Tours was distinguished from mainline Catholic theology by two views: his assertion of the supremacy of Scripture and his denial of transubstantiation.\nBiography.\nBerengar of Tours was born perhaps at Tours, probably in the early years of the 11th century. His education began in the school of Bishop Fulbert of Chartres, who represented the traditional theology of the early Middle Ages, but did not succeed in imparting it to his pupil. Berengar was less attracted by pure theology than by secular learning, and brought away a knowledge of Latin literature, dialectic, and general knowledge and freedom of thought. Later he paid more attention to the Bible and early Christian writers, especially Gregory of Tours and Augustine of Hippo; and thus he came to formal theology.\nAfter the death of Fulbert in 1028, Berengar returned to Tours, where he became a canon of the cathedral. In about 1040 he became head of its school, improving its efficiency and attracting students from far and near. He acquired his fame as much from his blameless and ascetic life as from the success of his teaching. His reputation was such that a number of monks requested him to write a book to kindle their zeal; and his letter to Joscelin, later archbishop of Bordeaux, who had asked him to decide a dispute between Bishop Isembert of Poitiers and his chapter, is evidence of the authority attributed to his judgment. He became archdeacon of Angers, but remained in Tours to direct the school. He enjoyed the confidence of not a few bishops and of the powerful Count Geoffrey of Anjou.\nAmid this chorus of praise, a discordant voice began to be heard; it was asserted that Berengar held heretical views on the Eucharist. The first controversies on the nature of the Eucharistic Presence date from the earlier Middle Ages. In the ninth century Paschasius Radbertus claimed that Christ's Eucharistic body was identical with his body in heaven, but he won practically no support. His doctrine was sharply attacked by Ratramnus and Rabanus Maurus, who opposed his emphatic realism, which was sometimes marred by unfortunate comparisons and illustrations, and proposed a more spiritual conception of the Divine Presence. As for Berengar, by one account, \"Considerably greater stir was provoked ... by the teaching of Berengar, who opposed the doctrine of the Real Presence.\" But in reality, there are diverse opinions among theologians and historians on this point, and it is not clear that Berengar actually denies the Real Presence, though he does deny transubstantiation. The first to take formal notice of this was his former fellow student Adelmann, who begged him to abandon his opposition to the Church's teaching.\nProbably in the early part of 1050, Berengar addressed a letter to Lanfranc, then prior of Bec Abbey in Normandy, in which he expressed his regret that Lanfranc adhered to the Eucharistic teaching of Paschasius and considered the treatise of Ratramnus on the subject (which Berengar supposed to have been written by Johannes Scotus Eriugena) to be heretical. He declared his own agreement with Eriugena, and believed himself to be supported by Saint Ambrose, Saint Jerome, Augustine, and other authorities. This letter was received by Lanfranc in Rome, where it was read before a council and Berengar's view was condemned. Berengar was summoned to appear at another council to be held at Vercelli in September. Berengar sought permission to go to the council from King Henry I of France, in his capacity as nominal abbot of St. Martin at Tours. Instead, for unclear reasons, the king imprisoned him. The council at Vercelli examined Berengar's doctrine and again condemned it and he was excommunicated.\nOn his release from prison, probably affected by the influence of Geoffrey of Anjou, the king still pursued him, and called a synod to meet in Paris in October 1051. Berengar, fearing its purpose, avoided appearing, and the king's threats after its session had no effect, since Berengar was sheltered by Geoffrey and by his former student, Eusebius, now Bishop of Angers. He also found numerous partisans among less prominent people.\nIn 1054, a Council was held at Tours presided over by Cardinal Hildebrand as papal legate. Berengar wrote a profession of faith wherein he confessed that after the consecration the bread and wine were truly the body and blood of Christ. The French bishops indicated that they wished a speedy settlement of the controversy and the synod declared itself satisfied by Berengar's written declaration. \nIn 1059, Berengar went to Rome, fortified by a letter of commendation from Count Geoffrey to Hildebrand. At a council held in the Lateran, he could get no hearing, and a formula representing what seemed to him the most carnal view of the sacrament was offered for his acceptance. Overwhelmed by the forces against him, he took this document in his hand and threw himself on the ground in the silence of apparent submission.\nBerengar returned to France full of remorse for this desertion of his faith and of bitterness against the pope and his opponents; his friends were growing fewer\u2014Geoffrey was dead and his successor hostile. Eusebius Bruno was gradually withdrawing from him. Rome, however, was disposed to give him a chance; Pope Alexander II wrote him an encouraging letter, at the same time warning him to give no further offence.\nHe was still firm in his convictions, and in about 1069 he published a treatise in which he gave vent to his resentment against Pope Nicholas II and his antagonists in the Roman council. Lanfranc answered it, and Berengar rejoined. Bishop Hugo of Langres also wrote a treatise, \"De corpore et sanguine Christi\", against Berengar. Even his namesake Berengar, Bishop of Venosa, was drawn into the quarrel and wrote against him at Rome in the years of his second summons there.\nBut the feeling against him in France was growing so hostile that it almost came to open violence at the Synod of Poitiers in 1076. Hildebrand, now Pope Gregory VII, tried yet to save him; he summoned him once more to Rome (1078), and undertook to silence his enemies by getting him to assent to a vague formula, something like the one which he had signed at Tours. But Berengar's enemies were not satisfied, and three months later at another synod they forced on him a formula which could mean nothing but what was later called transubstantiation, except by utterly indefensible sophistry. He was indiscreet enough to claim the sympathy of Gregory VII, who commanded him to acknowledge his errors and pursue them no further. Berengar confessed that he had erred, and was sent home.\nOnce back in France, he published his own account of the proceedings in Rome, retracting his recantation. The consequence was another trial before a synod at Bordeaux (1080), and another recantation.\nAfter this he kept silence, retiring to the island of Saint-Cosme near Tours to live in ascetic solitude. It was there that he died, in union with the Roman Catholic Church.\nSelection from his 1059 confession.\n\"...the bread and wine which are placed on the altar are after consecration not only a sacrament but also the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the senses not only sacramentally but in truth are taken and broken by the hands of the priests and crushed by the teeth of the faithful.\"\nText of his 1079 confession.\n\"I, Berengarius, believe in my heart and openly profess that the bread and wine that are placed on the altar are through the mystery of the sacred prayer and the words of our Redeemer substantially changed into the true and proper life-giving flesh and blood of Jesus Christ our Lord; and that after the consecration is the true body of Christ, which was born of the Virgin, as an offering for the salvation of the world hung on the cross, and sits at the right hand of the Father; and (is) the true blood of Christ which flowed from his side; not only through the sign and power of the sacrament but in his proper nature and true substance; as it is set down in this summary and as I read it and you understand it. Thus I believe, and I will not teach any more against this faith. So help me God and this holy Gospel of God.\"\nBerengar's theory of the Eucharist.\nBerengar's theory of the Eucharist had four points:\nThe views of Berengar on the Eucharist had very much in common with the views of John Calvin.\nSignificance.\nBerengar of Tours can be seen as a forerunner of Christian rationalism, as he criticized Church authority.\nBerengar's position was never diametrically opposed to that of his critics. But the controversy that he aroused forced people to reconsider the ninth-century discussion of the Eucharist, as Paschasius Radbertus had left it, and to clarify the doctrine of transubstantiation. Further, when both Berengar and his critics used the secular disciplines of logic and grammar to express a matter of Christian doctrine, the way was open to the scholasticism of the twelfth century.\nBerengar of Tours was a forerunner of the Reformers, especially of Zwingli and John Calvin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39674", "revid": "50100611", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39674", "title": "Planetary nebula", "text": "Type of emission nebula created by dying red giants\nA planetary nebula is a type of emission nebula consisting of an expanding, glowing shell of ionized gas ejected from red giant stars late in their lives.\nThe term \"planetary nebula\" is a misnomer because they are unrelated to planets. The term originates from the planet-like round shape of these nebulae observed by astronomers through early telescopes. The first usage may have occurred during the 1780s with the English astronomer William Herschel who described these nebulae as resembling planets; however, as early as January 1779, the French astronomer Antoine Darquier de Pellepoix described in his observations of the Ring Nebula, \"very dim but perfectly outlined; it is as large as Jupiter and resembles a fading planet\".\nThough the modern interpretation is different, the old term is still used.\nAll planetary nebulae form at the end of the life of a star of intermediate mass, about 1-8 solar masses. It is expected that the Sun will form a planetary nebula at the end of its life cycle. They are relatively short-lived phenomena, lasting perhaps a few tens of millennia, compared to considerably longer phases of stellar evolution. Once all of the red giant's atmosphere has been dissipated, energetic ultraviolet radiation from the exposed hot luminous core, called a planetary nebula nucleus (P.N.N.), ionizes the ejected material. Absorbed ultraviolet light then energizes the shell of nebulous gas around the central star, causing it to appear as a brightly colored planetary nebula.\nPlanetary nebulae probably play a crucial role in the chemical evolution of the Milky Way by expelling elements into the interstellar medium from stars where those elements were created. Planetary nebulae are observed in more distant galaxies, yielding useful information about their chemical abundances.\nStarting in the 1990s, Hubble Space Telescope images revealed that many planetary nebulae have extremely complex and varied morphologies. About one-fifth are roughly spherical, but the majority are not spherically symmetric. The mechanisms that produce such a wide variety of shapes and features are not yet well understood, but binary central stars, stellar winds and magnetic fields may play a role.\nObservations.\nDiscovery.\nThe first planetary nebula discovered (though not yet termed as such) was the Dumbbell Nebula in the constellation of Vulpecula. It was observed by Charles Messier on July 12, 1764 and listed as M27 in his catalogue of nebulous objects. To early observers with low-resolution telescopes, M27 and subsequently discovered planetary nebulae resembled the giant planets like Uranus. As early as January 1779, the French astronomer Antoine Darquier de Pellepoix described in his observations of the Ring Nebula, \"a very dull nebula, but perfectly outlined; as large as Jupiter and looks like a fading planet\". \nThe nature of these objects remained unclear. In 1782, William Herschel, discoverer of Uranus, found the Saturn Nebula (NGC 7009) and described it as \"A curious nebula, or what else to call it I do not know\". He later described these objects as seeming to be planets \"of the starry kind\". As noted by Darquier before him, Herschel found that the disk resembled a planet, but it was too faint to be one. In 1785, Herschel wrote to J\u00e9r\u00f4me Lalande:\nThese are celestial bodies of which as yet we have no clear idea and which are perhaps of a type quite different from those that we are familiar with in the heavens. I have already found four that have a visible diameter of between 15 and 30 seconds. These bodies appear to have a disk that is rather like a planet, that is to say, of equal brightness all over, round or somewhat oval, and about as well defined in outline as the disk of the planets, of a light strong enough to be visible with an ordinary telescope of only one foot, yet they have only the appearance of a star of about ninth magnitude.\nHe assigned these to Class IV of his catalogue of \"nebulae\", eventually listing 78 \"planetary nebulae\", most of which are in fact galaxies.\nHerschel used the term \"planetary nebulae\" for these objects. The origin of this term is not known. The label \"planetary nebula\" became ingrained in the terminology used by astronomers to categorize these types of nebulae, and is still in use by astronomers today.\nSpectra.\nThe nature of planetary nebulae remained unknown until the first spectroscopic observations were made in the mid-19th century. Using a prism to disperse their light, William Huggins was one of the earliest astronomers to study the optical spectra of astronomical objects.\nOn August 29, 1864, Huggins was the first to analyze the spectrum of a planetary nebula when he observed Cat's Eye Nebula. His observations of stars had shown that their spectra consisted of a continuum of radiation with many dark lines superimposed. He found that many nebulous objects, such as the Andromeda Nebula (as it was then known), had spectra that were quite similar. However, when Huggins looked at the Cat's Eye Nebula, he found a very different spectrum. Rather than a strong continuum with absorption lines superimposed, the Cat's Eye Nebula and other similar objects showed a number of emission lines. The brightest of these was at a wavelength of 500.7\u00a0nanometres, which did not correspond with a line of any known element.\nAt first, it was hypothesized that the line might be due to an unknown element, which was named nebulium. A similar idea had led to the discovery of helium through analysis of the Sun's spectrum in 1868. While helium was isolated on Earth soon after its discovery in the spectrum of the Sun, \"nebulium\" was not. In the early 20th century, Henry Norris Russell proposed that, rather than being a new element, the line at 500.7\u00a0nm was due to a familiar element in unfamiliar conditions.\nPhysicists showed in the 1920s that in gas at extremely low densities, electrons can occupy excited metastable energy levels in atoms and ions that would otherwise be de-excited by collisions that would occur at higher densities. Electron transitions from these levels in nitrogen and oxygen ions (O+, O2+ (a.k.a. O\u00a0iii), and N+) give rise to the 500.7\u00a0nm emission line and others. These spectral lines, which can only be seen in very low-density gases, are called \"forbidden lines\". Spectroscopic observations thus showed that nebulae were made of extremely rarefied gas.\nCentral stars.\nThe central stars of planetary nebulae are very hot. Only when a star has exhausted most of its nuclear fuel can it collapse to a small size. Planetary nebulae are understood as a final stage of stellar evolution. Spectroscopic observations show that all planetary nebulae are expanding. This led to the idea that planetary nebulae were caused by a star's outer layers being thrown into space at the end of its life.\nModern observations.\nTowards the end of the 20th century, technological improvements helped to further the study of planetary nebulae. Space telescopes allowed astronomers to study light wavelengths outside those that the Earth's atmosphere transmits. The first UV observations of PNe (IC 2149) were performed from space, with the Orion 2 Space Observatory (see Orion 1 and Orion 2 Space Observatories) on board the Soyuz 13 spacecraft in December 1973, two photon emission from nebulae was detected for the first time.\nInfrared and ultraviolet studies of planetary nebulae allowed much more accurate determinations of nebular temperatures, densities and elemental abundances. Charge-coupled device technology allowed much fainter spectral lines to be measured accurately than had previously been possible. The Hubble Space Telescope also showed that while many nebulae appear to have simple and regular structures when observed from the ground, the very high optical resolution achievable by telescopes above the Earth's atmosphere reveals extremely complex structures.\nUnder the Morgan-Keenan spectral classification scheme, planetary nebulae are classified as \"Type-P\", although this notation is seldom used in practice.\nOrigins.\nStars greater than 8\u00a0solar masses (M\u2299) will probably end their lives in dramatic supernovae explosions, while planetary nebulae seemingly only occur at the end of the lives of intermediate and low mass stars between 0.8\u00a0M\u2299 to 8.0\u00a0M\u2299. Progenitor stars that form planetary nebulae will spend most of their lifetimes converting their hydrogen into helium in the star's core by nuclear fusion at about 15\u00a0million K. This generates energy in the core, which creates outward pressure that balances the crushing inward pressures of gravity. This state of equilibrium is known as the main sequence, which can last for tens of millions to billions of years, depending on the mass.\nWhen the hydrogen in the core starts to run out, nuclear fusion generates less energy and gravity starts compressing the core, causing a rise in temperature to about 100\u00a0million\u00a0K. Such high core temperatures then make the star's cooler outer layers expand to create much larger red giant stars. This end phase causes a dramatic rise in stellar luminosity, where the released energy is distributed over a much larger surface area, which in fact causes the average surface temperature to be lower. In stellar evolution terms, stars undergoing such increases in luminosity are known as asymptotic giant branch stars (AGB). During this phase, the star can lose 50\u201370% of its total mass from its stellar wind.\nFor the more massive asymptotic giant branch stars that form planetary nebulae, whose progenitors exceed about 0.6M\u2299, their cores will continue to contract. When temperatures reach about 100\u00a0million K, the available helium nuclei fuse into carbon and oxygen, so that the star again resumes radiating energy, temporarily stopping the core's contraction. This new helium burning phase (fusion of helium nuclei) forms a growing inner core of inert carbon and oxygen. Above it is a thin helium-burning shell, surrounded in turn by a hydrogen-burning shell. However, this new phase lasts only 20,000 years or so, a very short period compared to the entire lifetime of the star.\nThe venting of atmosphere continues unabated into interstellar space, but when the outer surface of the exposed core reaches temperatures exceeding about 30,000\u00a0K, there are enough emitted ultraviolet photons to ionize the ejected atmosphere, causing the gas to shine as a planetary nebula.\nLifetime.\nAfter a star passes through the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) phase, the short planetary nebula phase of stellar evolution begins as gases blow away from the central star at speeds of a few kilometers per second. The central star is the remnant of its AGB progenitor, an electron-degenerate carbon-oxygen core that has lost most of its hydrogen envelope due to mass loss on the AGB. As the gases expand, the central star undergoes a two-stage evolution, first growing hotter as it continues to contract and hydrogen fusion reactions occur in the shell around the core and then slowly cooling when the hydrogen shell is exhausted through fusion and mass loss. In the second phase, it radiates away its energy and fusion reactions cease, as the central star is not heavy enough to generate the core temperatures required for carbon and oxygen to fuse. During the first phase, the central star maintains constant luminosity, while at the same time it grows ever hotter, eventually reaching temperatures around 100,000\u00a0K. In the second phase, it cools so much that it does not give off enough ultraviolet radiation to ionize the increasingly distant gas cloud. The star becomes a white dwarf, and the expanding gas cloud becomes invisible to us, ending the planetary nebula phase of evolution. For a typical planetary nebula, about 10,000\u00a0years pass between its formation and recombination of the resulting plasma.\nRole in galactic enrichment.\nPlanetary nebulae may play a very important role in galactic evolution. Newly born stars consist almost entirely of hydrogen and helium, but as stars evolve through the asymptotic giant branch phase, they create heavier elements via nuclear fusion which are eventually expelled by strong stellar winds. Planetary nebulae usually contain larger proportions of elements such as carbon, nitrogen and oxygen, and these are recycled into the interstellar medium via these powerful winds. In this way, planetary nebulae greatly enrich the Milky Way and their nebulae with these heavier elements \u2013 collectively known by astronomers as \"metals\" and specifically referred to by the metallicity parameter \"Z\".\nSubsequent generations of stars formed from such nebulae also tend to have higher metallicities. Although these metals are present in stars in relatively tiny amounts, they have marked effects on stellar evolution and fusion reactions. When stars formed earlier in the universe they theoretically contained smaller quantities of heavier elements. Known examples are the metal poor Population II stars. (See Stellar population.) Identification of stellar metallicity content is found by spectroscopy.\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical characteristics.\nA typical planetary nebula is roughly one light year across, and consists of extremely rarefied gas, with a density generally from 100 to 10,000 particles per cm3. (The Earth's atmosphere, by comparison, contains 2.5\u00d71019 particles per cm3.) Young planetary nebulae have the highest densities, sometimes as high as 106 particles per cm3. As nebulae age, their expansion causes their density to decrease. The masses of planetary nebulae range from 0.1 to 1\u00a0solar masses.\nRadiation from the central star heats the gases to temperatures of about 10,000\u00a0K. The gas temperature in central regions is usually much higher than at the periphery reaching 16,000\u201325,000\u00a0K. The volume in the vicinity of the central star is often filled with a very hot (coronal) gas having the temperature of about 1,000,000\u00a0K. This gas originates from the surface of the central star in the form of the fast stellar wind.\nNebulae may be described as \"matter bounded\" or \"radiation bounded\". In the former case, there is not enough matter in the nebula to absorb all the UV photons emitted by the star, and the visible nebula is fully ionized. In the latter case, there are not enough UV photons being emitted by the central star to ionize all the surrounding gas, and an ionization front propagates outward into the circumstellar envelope of neutral atoms.\nNumbers and distribution.\nAbout 3000 planetary nebulae are now known to exist in our galaxy, out of 200 billion stars. Their very short lifetime compared to total stellar lifetime accounts for their rarity. They are found mostly near the plane of the Milky Way, with the greatest concentration near the Galactic Center.\nMorphology.\nOnly about 20% of planetary nebulae are spherically symmetric (for example, see Abell 39). A wide variety of shapes exist with some very complex forms seen. Planetary nebulae are classified by different authors into: stellar, disk, ring, irregular, helical, bipolar, quadrupolar, and other types, although the majority of them belong to just three types: spherical, elliptical and bipolar. Bipolar nebulae are concentrated in the galactic plane, probably produced by relatively young massive progenitor stars; and bipolars in the galactic bulge appear to prefer orienting their orbital axes parallel to the galactic plane. On the other hand, spherical nebulae are probably produced by old stars similar to the Sun.\nThe huge variety of the shapes is partially the projection effect\u2014the same nebula when viewed under different angles will appear different. Nevertheless, the reason for the huge variety of physical shapes is not fully understood. Gravitational interactions with companion stars if the central stars are binary stars may be one cause. Another possibility is that planets disrupt the flow of material away from the star as the nebula forms. It has been determined that the more massive stars produce more irregularly shaped nebulae. In January 2005, astronomers announced the first detection of magnetic fields around the central stars of two planetary nebulae, predicted already in the 1960s, and hypothesized that the fields might be partly or wholly responsible for their remarkable shapes.\nMembership in clusters.\nPlanetary nebulae have been detected as members in four Galactic globular clusters: Messier 15, Messier 22, NGC 6441 and Palomar 6. Evidence also points to the potential discovery of planetary nebulae in globular clusters in the galaxy M31. However, there is currently only one case of a planetary nebula discovered in an open cluster that is agreed upon by independent researchers. That case pertains to the planetary nebula PHR 1315-6555 and the open cluster Andrews-Lindsay 1. Indeed, through cluster membership, PHR 1315-6555 possesses among the most precise distances established for a planetary nebula (i.e., a 4% distance solution). The cases of NGC 2818 and NGC 2348 in Messier 46, exhibit mismatched velocities between the planetary nebulae and the clusters, which indicates they are line-of-sight coincidences. A subsample of \"tentative\" cases that may potentially be cluster/PN pairs includes Abell 8 and Bica 6, and He 2-86 and NGC 4463.\nTheoretical models predict that planetary nebulae can form from main-sequence stars of between one and eight solar masses, which puts the progenitor star's age at greater than 40 million years. Although there are a few hundred known open clusters within that age range, a variety of reasons limit the chances of finding a planetary nebula within. For one reason, the planetary nebula phase for more massive stars is on the order of millennia, which is a blink of the eye in astronomical terms. Also, partly because of their small total mass, open clusters have relatively poor gravitational cohesion and tend to disperse after a relatively short time, typically from 100 to 600 million years.\nCurrent issues in planetary nebula studies.\nThe distances to planetary nebulae are generally poorly determined, but the \"Gaia\" mission is now measuring direct parallactic distances between their central stars and neighboring stars. It is also possible to determine distances to nearby planetary nebula by measuring their expansion rates. High resolution observations taken several years apart will show the expansion of the nebula perpendicular to the line of sight, while spectroscopic observations of the Doppler shift will reveal the velocity of expansion in the line of sight. Comparing the angular expansion with the derived velocity of expansion will reveal the distance to the nebula.\nThe issue of how such a diverse range of nebular shapes can be produced is a debatable topic. It is theorised that interactions between material moving away from the star at different speeds give rise to most observed shapes. However, some astronomers postulate that close binary central stars might be responsible for the more complex and extreme planetary nebulae. Several have been shown to exhibit strong magnetic fields, and their interactions with ionized gas could explain some planetary nebulae shapes.\nThere are two main methods of determining metal abundances in nebulae. These rely on recombination lines and collisionally excited lines. Large discrepancies are sometimes seen between the results derived from the two methods. This may be explained by the presence of small temperature fluctuations within planetary nebulae. The discrepancies may be too large to be caused by temperature effects, and some hypothesize the existence of cold knots containing very little hydrogen to explain the observations. However, such knots have yet to be observed.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39675", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39675", "title": "DeCSS", "text": "Free open-source program to decode DVDs with encryption\nDeCSS is one of the first free computer programs capable of decrypting commercially produced DVD-Video discs. Before the release of DeCSS, free and open source operating systems (such as BSD and Linux) could not play encrypted video DVDs.\nDeCSS's development was done without a license from the DVD Copy Control Association (CCA), the organization responsible for the Content Scramble System (CSS) used to protect commercial DVD discs. The release of DeCSS resulted in a Norwegian criminal trial and subsequent acquittal of one of the authors of DeCSS. DVD CCA launched numerous lawsuits in the United States in an effort to stop the distribution of the software.\nOrigins and history.\nDeCSS was devised by three people, two of whom remain anonymous. It was on the Internet mailing list LiViD in October 1999. The one known author of the trio is Norwegian programmer Jon Lech Johansen, whose home was raided in 2000 by Norwegian police. Still a teenager at the time, he was put on trial in a Norwegian court for violating Norwegian Criminal Code section 145, and faced a possible jail sentence of two years and large fines, but was acquitted of all charges in early 2003. On 5 March 2003, a Norwegian appeals court ruled that Johansen would have to be retried. The court said that arguments filed by the prosecutor and additional evidence merited another trial. On 22 December 2003, the appeals court agreed with the acquittal, and on 5 January 2004, Norway's \u00d8kokrim (Economic Crime Unit) decided not to pursue the case further.\nThe program was first released on 6 October 1999 when Johansen posted an announcement of DeCSS 1.1b, a closed source Windows-only application for DVD ripping, on the livid-dev mailing list. The source code was leaked before the end of the month. The first release of DeCSS was preceded by a few weeks by a program called DoD DVD Speed Ripper from a group called DrinkOrDie, which didn't include source code and which apparently did not work with all DVDs. DrinkOrDie reportedly disassembled the object code of the Xing DVD player to obtain a player key. The group that wrote DeCSS, including Johansen, came to call themselves Masters of Reverse Engineering and may have obtained information from DrinkOrDie.\nThe CSS decryption source code used in DeCSS was mailed to Derek Fawcus before DeCSS was released. When the DeCSS source code was leaked, Fawcus noticed that DeCSS included his css-auth code in violation of the GNU GPL. When Johansen was made aware of this, he contacted Fawcus to solve the issue and was granted a license to use the code in DeCSS under non-GPL terms.\nOn 22 January 2004, the DVD CCA dropped the case against Jon Johansen.\nJon Lech Johansen's involvement.\nThe DeCSS program was a collaborative project, in which Johansen wrote the graphical user interface. The transcripts from the Borgarting Court of Appeal, published in the Norwegian newspaper \"Verdens Gang\", contain the following description of the process which led to the release of DeCSS:\nThrough Internet Relay Chat (henceforth IRC), [Jon Lech Johansen] made contact with like-minded [people seeking to develop a DVD-player under the Linux operating system]. 11 September 1999, he had a conversation with \"mdx\" about how the encryption algorithm in CSS could be found, by using a poorly secured software-based DVD-player. In a conversation [between Jon Lech Johansen and \"mdx\"] 22 September, \"mdx\" informs that \"the nomad\" had found the code for CSS decryption, and that \"mdx\" now would send this [code] to Jon Lech Johansen. \"The nomad\" allegedly found this decryption algorithm through so-called reverse engineering of a Xing DVD-player, where the [decryption] keys were more or less openly accessible. Through this, information that made it possible [for \"mdx\"] to create the code CSS_scramble.cpp was retrieved. From chat logs dated 4 November 1999 and 25 November 1999, it appears that \"the nomad\" carried through the reverse engineering process on a Xing player, which he characterized as illegal. As the case is presented for the High Court, this was not known by Jon Lech Johansen before 4 November [1999].\nRegarding the authentication code, the High Court takes for its basis that \"the nomad\" obtained this code through the electronic mailing list LiVid (Linux Video) on the Internet, and that it was created by Derek Fawcus. It appears through a LiVid posting dated 6 October 1999 that Derek Fawcus on this date read through the DeCSS source code and compared it with his own. Further, it appears that \"the creators [of DeCSS] have taken [Derek Fawcus' code] almost verbatim - the only alteration was the removal of [Derek Fawcus'] copyright header and a paragraph containing commentaries, and a change of the function names.\" The name [of the code] was CSS_auth.cpp.\nThe High Court takes for its basis that the program Jon Lech Johansen later programmed, the graphical user interface, consisted of \"the nomad's\" decryption algorithm and Derek Fawcus' authentication package. The creation of a graphical user interface made the program accessible, also for users without special knowledge in programming. The program was published on the Internet for the first time 6 October 1999, after Jon Lech Johansen had tested it on the movie \"The Matrix.\" In this, he downloaded approximately 2.5%. 200 megabytes, of the movie to the hard drive on his computer. This file is the only film fragment Jon Lech Johansen has saved on his computer.\nTechnology and derived works.\nWhen the release of the DeCSS source code made the CSS algorithm available for public scrutiny, it was soon found to be susceptible to a brute-force attack quite different from DeCSS. The encryption is only 40-bit, and does not use all keys; a high-end home computer in 1999 running optimized code could brute-force it within 24 hours, and modern computers can brute-force it in a few seconds or less.\nProgrammers around the world created hundreds of programs equivalent to DeCSS, some merely to demonstrate the trivial ease with which the system could be bypassed, and others to add DVD support to open source movie players. The licensing restrictions on CSS make it impossible to create an open source implementation through official channels, and closed source drivers are unavailable for some operating systems, so some users need DeCSS or a similar tool to watch even legally obtained movies.\nLegal response.\nThe first legal threats against sites hosting DeCSS, and the beginning of the DeCSS mirroring campaign, began in early November 1999 (\"Universal v. Reimerdes\"). The preliminary injunction in \"DVD Copy Control Association, Inc. v. Bunner\" followed soon after, in January 2000. As a response to these threats a program also called DeCSS but with an unrelated function was developed. This program can be used to strip Cascading Style Sheets tags from HTML pages. In one case, a school removed a student's webpage that included a copy of this program, mistaking it for the original DeCSS program, and received a great deal of negative media attention. The CSS stripping program had been specifically created to bait the MPAA in this manner.\nIn protest against legislation that prohibits publication of copy protection circumvention code in countries that implement the WIPO Copyright Treaty (such as the United States' Digital Millennium Copyright Act), some have devised clever ways of distributing descriptions of the DeCSS algorithm, such as through steganography, through various Internet protocols, on T-shirts and in dramatic readings, as MIDI files, as a haiku poem (DeCSS haiku), and even as a so-called illegal prime number.\nFurther reading.\nLawrence Lessig, \"The Future of Ideas\", 2001, pp.\u00a0187\u2013190, freely available http:// ."}
{"id": "39679", "revid": "25353787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39679", "title": "Black's Law Dictionary", "text": "Popular American law dictionary\nBlack's Law Dictionary is the most frequently used legal dictionary in the United States. Henry Campbell Black (1860\u20131927) was the author of the first two editions of the dictionary.\nHistory.\nThe first edition was published in 1891 by West Publishing, with the full title \"A Dictionary of Law: containing definitions of the terms and phrases of American and English jurisprudence, ancient and modern, including the principal terms of international constitutional and commercial law, with a collection of legal maxims and numerous select titles from the civil law and other foreign systems\". A second edition was published in 1910 as \"A Law Dictionary\". Black died in 1927 and future editions were titled \"Black's Law Dictionary\".\nThe sixth and earlier editions of the book also provided case citations for each legal term, which lawyers regarded as the book\u2019s most useful feature, offering a valuable starting point with leading cases. The development of the Internet made legal research easier therefore many state- or circuit-specific case citations and outdated or overruled case citations were omitted from the seventh edition in 1999. The eighth edition introduced a unique system of perpetually updated case citations and cross-references to legal encyclopedias. The current edition is the twelfth, published in 2024.\nAs many legal terms are derived from a Latin root word, the dictionary provides a pronunciation guide for such terms. In addition, the applicable entries provide pronunciation transcriptions pursuant to those found among North American practitioners of law or medicine.\nAvailability.\nAn online version of the tenth edition can be accessed through the paid Westlaw legal information service, and is available as an application for iOS devices.\nThe second edition of \"Black's Law Dictionary\", published in 1910, is now in the public domain and is widely reproduced online. References to case law are out-of-date, and that edition of the dictionary omits legal terms that have since come into use and does not reflect contemporary changes in how legal terms are used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39681", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39681", "title": "Muckleshoot", "text": "Federally-recognized tribe in Washington state, US\nThe Muckleshoot Indian Tribe ( ; ), also known as the Muckleshoot Tribe, is a federally-recognized tribe located in Auburn, Washington. The tribe governs the Muckleshoot Reservation and is composed of descendants of the Duwamish, Stkamish, Smulkamish, Skopamish, Yilalkoamish, and Upper Puyallup peoples. The Muckleshoot Indian Tribe was formally established in 1936, after the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, but its origins lie in the creation of the Muckleshoot Reservation in 1874 and the treaties of Medicine Creek (1854) and Point Elliott (1855).\nName.\nThe name \"Muckleshoot\" is an anglicization of the Lushootseed word .\n originally referred only to a prairie, located between the White and Green rivers, and never as a word to refer to the peoples living in this area. Prior to the establishment of the Muckleshoot reservation, the Indigenous peoples of the Green-White river systems were variously called \"Green River Indians\", \"White River Indians\", or by their native village terms (such as Skopamish). The name \"Muckleshoot\" was first recorded in a survey conducted by George Gibbs from 1853-1856, where he recorded \"Mukl-shootl\", as being a \"prairie between the White and Green [rivers]. U.S. Military Station\".\nThe term evolved from referring to a prairie, to referring to a military outpost on the prairie. After the reservation was established at the fort, it took the name of the prairie, and later, was applied to the Indians living at the reservation. The earliest recorded use of \"Muckleshoot\" to refer to a people was in 1864, by John Montgomery, who described his wife as \"an Indian woman of the Muckleshute Band of the Klikitat Tribe.\" Montgomery, like other settlers at the time, evidently referred to peoples east of the Cascade mountains indiscriminately as \"Klikitats,\" and likely thought that the \"Muckleshutes\" of the Muckleshoot Reservation were a sub-group of the \"Klikitats\", due to close ties between the peoples of the Green and White rivers and the interior peoples. In 1868 and 1870, reports from the Commissioner of Indian Affairs described the \"Muckleshoots\" and the \"Muckleshoot Tribe\" living at the Muckleshoot reservation.\nHistory.\nThe Muckleshoot Indian Tribe is the successor of various groups which lived along the Duwamish River's watershed, and parts of the upper Puyallup River's watershed. These include the:\nThe Muckleshoot reservation.\nThe origins of the Muckleshoot Indian Tribe lie in the 1854 Treaty of Medicine Creek and the 1855 Treaty of Point Elliott. Although the Stkamish, Skopamish, and Smulkamish bands are mentioned in the preamble to the Treaty of Point Elliott, they did not sign the treaty directly. Along with the Sammamish, they were assumed by the territorial governor of Washington Territory, Isaac Stevens, to be under the control of the Duwamish and Seattle. It was Stevens' desire to alter the traditional political organization of the Indigenous peoples in the area by appointing single \"chiefs\" as leaders of entire groups, noting the \"difficulties in trying to control an indigenous population without strong chiefs and centralized authority.\" The decision of creating these political officices was not based on the indigenous social organization, and as such, Seattle was appointed as a \"head chief\" of a Duwamish Tribe that included all the peoples living along the Duwamish watershed, including the Green and White rivers' population. For this reason, the Muckleshoot Tribe has variously claimed that they have both a treaty and non-treaty status. Furthermore, the Muckleshoot Reservation exists on territory ceded by the Treaty of Point Elliott, but was dictated by the Treaty of Medicine Creek (and only the Medicine Creek treaty was ratified at the time), further contributing to the confusion.\nThe treaties were unpopular with many, and due to the continuing hostility, the Puget Sound War began shortly after, in 1855. The ancestral bands of the Muckleshoot joined the war against the American government. At the war's conclusion, during the Fox Island Council, governor Stevens agreed to the establishment of a new reservation for groups who had not received a reservation under the prior treaties. At Fox Island, Stevens agreed that a reservation would be created in all the lands between the White and Green rivers, including Muckleshoot Prairie.\nThe Muckleshoot Reservation was eventually established on January 20, 1857 by an executive order from U.S. president Franklin Pierce. However, the reservation did not include all the land previously promised at the Fox Island Council, including traditional fishing and village sites. The reservation would be later expanded in 1874 by president Ulysses S. Grant.\nEstablishment of the Muckleshoot Indian Tribe.\nIn 1934, the Indian Reorganization Act allowed Native Americans living on reservations to establish their own governments. The peoples of the Muckleshoot Reservation voted to establish the Muckleshoot Indian Tribe. In 1936, they established a constitution and bylaws. Around this time, in 1937, the Muckleshoot Tribe had 194 enrolled members.\nFights for treaty rights.\nThe Muckleshoot Tribe were denied their land claims in \"Duwamish Indians v. United States\", on the basis that there was no treaty with the \"Muckleshoot\". Later, however, in 1959, the Indian Claims Commission found that the ancestors of the Muckleshoot had possessed of land, valued at $86,377. On March 8, 1959, the Commission ordered that the Muckleshoot Tribe be paid that amount by the United States.\nA large Army quartermaster depot was established in the Green River Valley at the south end of Auburn to take advantage of railways. It served the ports along Puget Sound, supporting the US war effort in the Pacific. In the post-World War II era, Auburn began to be more industrialized. Together with rapid population growth in the region, which developed many suburbs, these changes put pressure on the Muckleshoot and their reservation holdings. Many private land owners tried to prevent them from fishing and hunting in traditional territories.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, the Muckleshoot engaged in a series of protests, intended at protecting their fragile ecosystem. Known as the Fish Wars, these protests attempted to preserve Muckleshoot fishing rights in nearby rivers that were not within the official reservation. County and state authorities had tried to regulate their fishing off-reservation. Similarly, the state tried to regulate other tribes in their fishing along the coastal waters.\nIn the Boldt Decision, the federal district court upheld the right of the Muckleshoot and other Treaty peoples to fish from the rivers of the region and hunt in these territories. It ruled that the Native Americans had rights to half the catch in their traditional areas. It designated the Muckleshoot as co-managers of the King County watershed, with control over fishing and hunting in their \"Usual and Accustomed\" historical fishing and hunting grounds.\nWhile this improved the tribe's economic standing, the Muckleshoot were soon forced to contend with a sharp decline in the salmon population, due to the adverse effects on the environment, especially river water quality, of urbanization and industrialization. Dams on rivers had decreased the fish populations that could get upstream to spawn, and water quality in the rivers had declined. While they continue to fight for the preservation of the ancient salmon runs, the Muckleshoot also found other venues to improve their economy.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe Muckleshoot Tribe is beholden to their constitution, which was approved on May 13, 1936 and was ratified later that year, on October 21, 1936. The primary governing body is the Muckleshoot Tribal Council, a nine-member elected body. The Tribal Council is subject to the General Council, which is composed of all citizens of the Muckleshoot Tribe.\nThe Muckleshoot Tribe is a member of an intertribal court system, which was formed in 1978.\nPolice.\nThe reservation falls under Public Law 280 jurisdiction, with police services supplied by both King County and Auburn. The Muckleshoot Indian Tribe contracts with the King County Sheriff's Office for police services. As an unincorporated jurisdiction, the Tribe already receives base-level police services from the King County Sheriff's Office. Deputies assigned to the Muckleshoot reservation include six patrol officers, one school resource officer, a storefront deputy, a Muckleshoot Housing Authority deputy and one police chief assigned full-time to the reservation. In 2023, the Muckleshoot Tribe received a grant to fund the country's first Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Persons cold case detective position.\nMuckleshoot Reservation.\nMost Muckleshoot citizens live on or near the Muckleshoot Reservation. The reservation is located between the White and Green rivers on Muckleshoot Prairie (), southeast of Auburn, Washington. The reservation is situated in parts of King and Pierce counties. Approximately 1,201 acres of the land on the reservation was in trust in 1975.\nOn November 6, 2013, the Muckleshoot Tribe bought of forest in Washington state to add to its landholdings.\nDemographics.\nAs of 2023, the Muckleshoot Tribe has 3,353 enrolled members, of which 1,522 (\u00b1337) are of Muckleshoot ancestry alone. As of 2023, the Muckleshoot Reservation has a population of around 3,959 (\u00b1569), of which 1,421 (\u00b1194) are White, 73 (\u00b150) are Black or African American, 1,103 (\u00b1290) are American Indian and Alaska Native, 171 (\u00b1114) are Asian, 96 (\u00b1102) are Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, 373 (\u00b1151) are Some Other Race, and 722 (\u00b1216) are Two or More Races.\nCulture.\nThe Muckleshoot speak the southern dialect of Lushootseed, called Whulshootseed. The specific variety of Southern Lushootseed spoken at Muckleshoot is called . Use of the language has declined, and English is now the majority language. However, the tribe has been engaging in revitalizing the language. Muckleshoot citizens Earnie Barr, Eva Jerry, Bertha McJoe, Bernice Tanewasha, and Ellen Williams were involved in creating a written form for Lushootseed.\nThe Muckleshoot Tribe holds Skopabsh Days each August, which is a three-day festival that features traditional arts, crafts, cooking, and clothing. Additionally, each July, the Muckleshoot Tribe hosts the Muckleshoot Sobriety Powwow.\nIn the First Salmon Ceremony, the entire community shares the flesh of a Spring Chinook. They return its remains to the river where it was caught. This is so the salmon can inform the other fish of how well it was received. The other ceremony for the first salmon is to roast it until it becomes ashes. The Muckleshoot toss the bones and ashes back into the water or stream where they took the salmon, believing that the fish would come alive again (be part of a round of new propagation).\nEconomy and services.\nMost Muckleshoot citizens are employed by industries in the nearby city of Auburn, as well as by the tribal government. Others engage in fishing, logging, or agriculture on the reservation. The tribe manages fisheries and hatcheries, as well as a community center, community housing, a library, a medical and dental clinic, an educational training program, and a youth group program. In total, the tribe employs 1,200, and is the second-largest employer in southern King County.\nEconomic developments.\nThe tribe won settlements from Puget Sound Power &amp; Light for the long-term effects of dam construction and the state government for imposing sales taxes on the reservation. It used proceeds from the settlements, as well as revenue from a bingo hall, to purchase more than of land on the reservation by 1995.\nIn 2006, the tribe made a $42 million agreement with the Seattle City Council for the conservation and protection of the Cedar River.\nThe Muckleshoot Tribe acquired the Salish Lodge at Snoqualmie Falls for $62.5\u00a0million in 2007. It sold the site to the Snoqualmie Tribe for $125\u00a0million in 2019.\nSince 2019, the tribe has signed sponsorship agreements with the Seattle Seahawks and Seattle Mariners that include naming rights and jersey sponsorships. The Seattle Kraken began wearing a sponsorship patch with the Muckleshoot Tribe's logo during the 2023\u201324 NHL season. It is believed to be the first sponsorship of a tribe\u2014rather than an Indian casino\u2014in major professional American sports. The tribe are also naming rights sponsors of the Muckleshoot Heritage Plaza at Lumen Field, the home stadium of the Seahawks and Seattle Sounders FC, through an agreement signed in 2019.\nMuckleshoot Casino.\nThe Muckleshoot Tribe opened the Muckleshoot Casino in April 1995, following changes to Native American gaming laws. The casino and bingo parlor, built with a tropical theme, included an off-track horse racing betting area. Since then, the facility has been expanded four times. The White River Amphitheatre was developed by the tribe on land adjacent to the casino and opened in June 2003. Revenue from these ventures funded the construction of a new tribal medical facility, tribal administrative offices, and a new Indian Shaker church in the early 2000s. Twenty percent of all revenue from tribal gaming is spent on education.\nThe Muckleshoot Casino was expanded in January 2024 with the opening of an 18-story hotel with 401 rooms. The casino itself was expanded to ; a parking garage at the site opened in 2021.\nTransportation.\nSince 2017, Muckleshoot Tribal Transit has offered free bus service on the reservation. The transit is funded by grants from the Federal Transit Administration and the Bureau of Indian Affairs.\nEducation.\nEducation for the tribe is conducted by Muckleshoot Child Care, Muckleshoot Tribal Schools, and the Muckleshoot Tribal College. Muckleshoot Tribal Schools started in 1984, and provides education which emphasizes Indigenous history, art, dance, and culture, as well as language. In 1997, MTS began offering all high-school grades. A modern, K-12 school opened in 2009, providing access to academic and cultural learning as well as 21st century technology. Students can earn an associates degree at Muckleshoot Tribal College."}
{"id": "39683", "revid": "43744280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39683", "title": "Banksia", "text": "Genus of flowering plants in the family Proteaceae\nBanksia is a genus of around 170 species of flowering plants in the family Proteaceae. These Australian wildflowers and popular garden plants are easily recognised by their characteristic flower spikes, and woody fruiting \"cones\" and heads. \"Banksias\" range in size from prostrate woody shrubs to trees up to 30 metres (100\u00a0ft) tall. They are found in a wide variety of landscapes: sclerophyll forest, (occasionally) rainforest, shrubland, and some more arid landscapes, though not in Australia's deserts.\nHeavy producers of nectar, banksias are a vital part of the food chain in the Australian bush. They are an important food source for nectarivorous animals, including birds, bats, rats, possums, stingless bees and a host of invertebrates. Further, they are of economic importance to Australia's nursery and cut flower industries. However, these plants are threatened by a number of processes including land clearing, frequent burning and disease, and a number of species are rare and endangered.\nDescription.\nBanksias grow as trees or woody shrubs. Trees of the largest species, \"B.\u00a0integrifolia\" (coast banksia) and \"B.\u00a0seminuda\" (river banksia), often grow over 15 metres tall, some even grow to standing 30 metres tall. \"Banksia\" species that grow as shrubs are usually erect, but there are several species that are prostrate, with branches that grow on or below the soil.\nThe leaves of \"Banksia\" vary greatly between species. Sizes vary from the narrow, 1\u2013&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 centimetre long needle-like leaves of \"B.\u00a0ericifolia\" (heath-leaved banksia), to the very large leaves of \"B.\u00a0grandis\" (bull banksia), which may be up to 45 centimetres long. The leaves of most species have serrated edges, but a few, such as \"B.\u00a0integrifolia\", do not. Leaves are usually arranged along the branches in irregular spirals, but in some species they are crowded together in whorls. Many species have differing juvenile and adult leaves (e.g., \"Banksia integrifolia\" has large serrated juvenile leaves).\nThe flowers are arranged in flower spikes or capitate flower heads. The character most commonly associated with \"Banksia\" is the flower spike, an elongated inflorescence consisting of a woody axis covered in tightly packed pairs of flowers attached at right angles. A single flower spike generally contains hundreds or even thousands of flowers; the most recorded is around 6000 on inflorescences of \"B.\u00a0grandis\". Not all \"Banksia\" have an elongate flower spike, however: the members of the small \"Isostylis\" complex have long been recognised as \"banksias\" in which the flower spike has been reduced to a head; and recently the large genus \"Dryandra\" has been found to have arisen from within the ranks of \"Banksia\", and sunk into it as \"B.\"\u00a0ser. \"Dryandra\". They similarly have capitate flower heads rather than spikes.\n\"Banksia\" flowers are usually a shade of yellow, but orange, red, pink and even violet flowers also occur. The colour of the flowers is determined by the colour of the perianth parts and often the style. The style is much longer than the perianth, and is initially trapped by the upper perianth parts. These are gradually released over a period of days, either from top to bottom or from bottom to top. When the styles and perianth parts are different colours, the visual effect is of a colour change sweeping along the spike. This can be most spectacular in \"B.\u00a0prionotes\" (acorn banksia) and related species, as the white inflorescence in bud becomes a brilliant orange. In most cases, the individual flowers are tall, thin saccate (sack-shaped) in shape.\nOccasionally, multiple flower spikes can form. This is most often seen in \"Banksia marginata\" and \"B. ericifolia\" \"(pictured right)\".\nAs the flower spikes or heads age, the flower parts dry up and may turn shades of orange, tan or dark brown colour, before fading to grey over a period of years. In some species, old flower parts are lost, revealing the axis; in others, the old flower parts may persist for many years, giving the fruiting structure a hairy appearance. Old flower spikes are commonly referred to as \"cones\", although they are not technically cones according to the botanical definition of the term: cones only occur in conifers and cycads.\nDespite the large number of flowers per inflorescence, only a few of them ever develop fruit, and in some species a flower spike will set no fruit at all. The fruit of \"Banksia\" is a woody follicle embedded in the axis of the inflorescence. In many species, the resulting structure is a massive woody structure commonly called a cone. Each follicle consists of two horizontal valves that tightly enclose the seeds. The follicle opens to release the seed by splitting along the suture. In some species, each valve splits too. In some species the follicles open as soon as the seed is mature, but in most species most follicles open only after stimulated to do so by bushfire. Each follicle usually contains one or two small seeds, each with a wedge-shaped papery wing that causes it to spin as it falls to the ground.\nTaxonomy.\nSpecimens of \"Banksia\" were first collected by Sir Joseph Banks and Daniel Solander, naturalists on the \"Endeavour\" during Lieutenant (later Captain) James Cook's first voyage to the Pacific Ocean. Cook landed on Australian soil for the first time on 29 April 1770, at a place that he later named Botany Bay in recognition of \"the great quantity of plants Mr Banks and Dr Solander found in this place\". Over the next seven weeks, Banks and Solander collected thousands of plant specimens, including the first specimens of a new genus that would later be named \"Banksia\" in Banks' honour. Four species were present in this first collection: \"B.\u00a0serrata\" (Saw Banksia), \"B.\u00a0integrifolia\" (Coast Banksia), \"B.\u00a0ericifolia\" (Heath-leaved Banksia) and \"B.\u00a0robur\" (Swamp Banksia). In June the ship was careened at Endeavour River, where specimens of \"B.\u00a0dentata\" (Tropical Banksia) were collected.\nThe genus \"Banksia\" was finally described and named by Carolus Linnaeus the Younger in his April 1782 publication \"Supplementum Plantarum\"; hence the full name for the genus is \"\"Banksia\" L.f.\". Linnaeus placed the genus in class Tetrandra, order Monogynia of his father's classification, and named it in honour of Banks. The name \"Banksia\" had in fact already been published in 1775 as \"Banksia\" J.R.Forst &amp; G.Forst, referring to some New Zealand species that the Forsters had collected during Cook's second voyage. However Linnaeus incorrectly attributed the Forsters' specimens to the genus \"Passerina\", and therefore considered the name \"Banksia\" available for use. By the time Joseph Gaertner corrected Banks' error in 1788, \"Banksia\" L.f. was widely known and accepted, so Gaertner renamed \"Banksia\" J.R.Forst, &amp; G.Forst to \"Pimelea\", a name previously chosen for the genus by Banks and Solander.\nThe first specimens of a \"Dryandra\" were collected by Archibald Menzies, surgeon and naturalist to the Vancouver Expedition. At the request of Joseph Banks, Menzies collected natural history specimens wherever possible during the voyage. During September and October 1791, while the expedition were anchored at King George Sound, he collected numerous plant specimens, including the first specimens of \"Dryandra\u00a0(\"now\" Banksia)\u00a0sessilis\" (Parrotbush) and \"D.\u00a0(\"now\" Banksia)\u00a0pellaeifolia\". Upon Menzies' return to England, he turned his specimens over to Banks; as with most other specimens in Banks' library, they remained undescribed for many years. Robert Brown gave a lecture, naming the new genus \"Dryandra\" in 1809, however Joseph Knight published the name \"Josephia\" before Brown published his paper with the description of \"Dryandra\". Brown ignored Knight's name, as did subsequent botanists.\nIn 1891, Otto Kuntze, strictly applying the principle of priority, argued that \"Pimelea\" should revert to the name \"Banksia\" J.R.Forst &amp; G.Forst. He proposed the new genus \"Sirmuellera\" to replaced \"Banksia\" L.f. and transferred its species to the new genus. This arrangement was largely ignored by Kuntze's contemporaries.\"Banksia\" L.f. was formally conserved and \"Sirmuellera\" rejected in 1940.\n\"Banksia\" belongs to the family Proteaceae, subfamily Grevilleoideae, and tribe Banksieae. There are around 170 species. The closest relatives of \"Banksia\" are two genera of rainforest trees in North Queensland (\"Musgravea\" and \"Austromuellera\").\nSubgeneric arrangement.\nAlex George arranged the genus into two subgenera\u2014subgenus \"Isostylis\" (containing \"B. ilicifolia\", \"B. oligantha\" and \"B. cuneata\") and subgenus \"Banksia\" (containing all other species except those he considered dryandras)\u2014in his 1981 monograph and 1999 treatment for the Flora of Australia series. He held that flower morphology was the key to relationships in the genus. Austin Mast and Kevin Thiele published the official merging of \"Dryandra\" within \"Banksia\" in 2007, recalibrating the genus into subgenus \"Banksia\" and subgenus \"Spathulatae\".\nDistribution and habitat.\nAll but one of the living \"Banksia\" species are endemic to Australia. The exception is \"B.\u00a0dentata\" (tropical banksia), which occurs throughout northern Australia, and on islands to the north including New Guinea and the Aru Islands. An extinct species, \"B.\u00a0novae-zelandiae\", was found in New Zealand. The other species occur in two distinct geographical regions: southwest Western Australia and eastern Australia. Southwest Western Australia is the main centre of biodiversity; over 90% of all \"Banksia\" species occur only there, from Exmouth in the north, south and east to beyond Esperance on the south coast. Eastern Australia has far fewer species, but these include some of best known and most widely distributed species, including \"B.\u00a0integrifolia\" (coast banksia) and \"B.\u00a0spinulosa\" (hairpin banksia). Here they occur from the Eyre Peninsula in South Australia right around the east coast up to Cape York in Queensland.\nThe vast majority of \"Banksia\" are found in sandy or gravelly soils, though some populations of \"B.\u00a0marginata\" (silver banksia) and \"B.\u00a0spinulosa\" do occur on soil that is heavier and more clay-like. \"B.\u00a0seminuda\" is exceptional for its preference for rich loams along watercourses.\nMost occur in heathlands or low woodlands; of the eastern species, \"B.\u00a0integrifolia\" and \"B.\u00a0marginata\" occur in forests; many south-western species such as \"B.\u00a0grandis\", \"B.\u00a0sphaerocarpa\", \"B.\u00a0sessilis\", \"B.\u00a0nobilis\" and \"B.\u00a0dallanneyi\" grow as understorey plants in jarrah (\"Eucalyptus marginata\"), wandoo (\"E. wandoo\") and karri (\"E. diversicolor\") forests, with \"B.\u00a0seminuda\" being one of the forest trees in suitable habitat.\nMost species do not grow well near the coast, notable exceptions being the southern Western Australian species \"B.\u00a0speciosa\", \"B.\u00a0praemorsa\" and \"B.\u00a0repens\". Only a few species, such as \"B.\u00a0rosserae\" and \"B.\u00a0elderiana\" (swordfish banksia), occur in arid areas. Most of the eastern Australian species survive in uplands, but only a few of the Western Australian species native to the Stirling Ranges \u2013 \"B.\u00a0solandri\", \"B.\u00a0oreophila\", \"B.\u00a0brownii\" and \"B.\u00a0montana\" \u2013 survive at high elevations.\nStudies of the south-western species have found the distribution of \"Banksia\" species to be primarily constrained by rainfall. With the exception of \"B.\u00a0rosserae\", no species tolerates annual rainfall of less than 200 millimetres, despite many species surviving in areas that receive less than 400 millimetres. \"Banksia\" species are present throughout the region of suitable rainfall, with greatest speciation in cooler, wetter areas. Hotter, drier regions around the edges of its range tend to have fewer species with larger distributions. The greatest species richness occurs in association with uplands, especially the Stirling Range.\nEvolutionary history and fossil record.\nThere are many fossils of \"Banksia\". The oldest of these are fossil pollen between 65 and 59\u00a0million years old. There are fossil leaves between 59 and 56\u00a0million years old found in southern New South Wales. The oldest fossil cones are between 47.8 and 41.2\u00a0million years old, found in Western Australia. Although \"Banksia\" is now only native to Australia and New Guinea, there are fossils from New Zealand, between 21 and 25\u00a0million years old.\nEvolutionary scientists Marcell Cardillo and Renae Pratt have proposed a southwest Australian origin for banksias despite their closest relatives being north Queensland rainforest species.\nEcology.\nBanksias are heavy producers of nectar, making them an important source of food for nectivorous animals, including honeyeaters and small mammals such as rodents, antechinus, honey possums, pygmy possums, gliders and bats. Many of these animals play a role in pollination of \"Banksia\". Various studies have shown mammals and birds to be important pollinators. In 1978, Carpenter observed that some banksias had a stronger odour at night, possibly to attract nocturnal mammal pollinators. Other associated fauna include the larvae of moths (such as the Dryandra Moth) and weevils, which burrow into the \"cones\" to eat the seeds and pupate in the follicles; and birds such as cockatoos, who break off the \"cones\" to eat both the seeds and the insect larvae.\nA number of \"Banksia\" species are considered rare or endangered. These include \"B.\u00a0brownii\" (feather-leaved banksia), \"B.\u00a0cuneata\" (matchstick banksia), \"B.\u00a0goodii\" (Good's banksia), \"B.\u00a0oligantha\" (Wagin banksia), \"B.\u00a0tricuspis\" (pine banksia), and \"B.\u00a0verticillata\" (granite banksia).\nResponse to fire.\n\"Banksia\" plants are naturally adapted to the presence of regular bushfires in the Australian landscape. About half of \"Banksia\" species are killed by bushfire, but these regenerate quickly from seed, as fire also stimulates the opening of seed-bearing follicles and the germination of seed in the ground. The remaining species usually survive bushfire, either by resprouting from a woody base known as a lignotuber or, more rarely, epicormic buds protected by thick bark. In Western Australia, banksias of the first group are known as 'seeders' and the second group as 'sprouters'.\nInfrequent bushfires at expected intervals pose no threat, and are in fact beneficial for regeneration of \"banksia\" populations. However, too frequent bushfires can seriously reduce or even eliminate populations from certain areas, by killing seedlings and young plants before they reach fruiting age. Many fires near urban areas are caused by arson, and thus the frequency is often much higher than fires would have been prior to human habitation. Furthermore, residents who live in areas near bushland may pressure local councils to burn areas near homes more frequently, to reduce fuel-load in the bush and thus reduce ferocity of future fires. Unfortunately there are often discrepancies in agreed frequency between these groups and conservation groups.\nDieback.\nAnother threat to \"Banksia\" is the water mould \"Phytophthora cinnamomi\", commonly known as \"dieback\". Dieback attacks the roots of plants, destroying the structure of the root tissues, \"rotting\" the root, and preventing the plant from absorbing water and nutrients. \"Banksia\"'s proteoid roots, which help it to survive in low-nutrient soils, make it highly susceptible to this disease. All Western Australian species are vulnerable, although most eastern species are fairly resistant.\nVulnerable plants typically die within a few years of infection. In southwest Western Australia, where dieback infestation is widespread, infested areas of \"Banksia\" forest typically have less than 30% of the cover of uninfested areas. Plant deaths in such large proportions can have a profound influence on the makeup of plant communities. For example, in southwestern Australia \"Banksia\" often occurs as an understorey to forests of jarrah (\"Eucalyptus marginata\"), another species highly vulnerable to dieback. Infestation kills both the jarrah overstorey and the original \"Banksia\" understorey, and over time these may be replaced by a more open woodland consisting of an overstorey of the resistant marri (\"Corymbia calophylla\"), and an understorey of the somewhat resistant \"Banksia sessilis\" (parrot bush).\nA number of species of \"Banksia\" are threatened by dieback. Nearly every known wild population of \"B.\u00a0brownii\" shows some signs of dieback infection, which could possibly wipe it out within years. Other vulnerable species include \"B.\u00a0cuneata\", and \"B.\u00a0verticillata\".\nDieback is notoriously difficult to treat, although there has been some success with phosphite and phosphorous acid, which are currently used to inoculate wild \"B.\u00a0brownii\" populations. However this is not without potential problems as it alters the soil composition by adding phosphorus. Some evidence suggests that phosphorous acid may inhibit proteoid root formation.\nBecause dieback thrives in moist soil conditions, it can be a severe problem for banksias that are watered, such as in the cut flower industry and urban gardens.\nUses.\nGardening.\nMost of species are shrubs, only few of them can be found as trees and they are very popular because of their size, the tallest species are: \"B.\u00a0integrifolia\" having its subspecies \"B.\u00a0integrifolia\" subsp. \"monticola\" notable for reaching the biggest size for the genus and it is the most frost tolerant in this genus, \"B.\u00a0seminuda\", \"B.\u00a0littoralis\", \"B.\u00a0serrata\"; species that can grow as small trees or big shrubs: \"B.\u00a0grandis\", \"B.\u00a0prionotes\", \"B.\u00a0marginata\", \"B.\u00a0coccinea\", \"B.\u00a0speciosa\" and \"B.\u00a0menziesii\". Due to their size these species are popularly planted in parks, gardens and streets, the remaining species in this genus are only shrubs.\nBanksias are popular garden plants in Australia because of their large, showy flower heads, and because the large amounts of nectar they produce attracts birds and small mammals. Popular garden species include \"B.\u00a0spinulosa\", \"B.\u00a0ericifolia\", \"B.\u00a0aemula\" (Wallum Banksia ), \"B.\u00a0serrata\" (Saw Banksia), \"Banksia media\" (Southern Plains Banksia) and the cultivar \"Banksia\" 'Giant Candles'. \"Banksia\" species are primarily propagated by seed in the home garden as cuttings can be difficult to strike. However, commercial nurserymen extensively utilize the latter method (indeed, cultivars by nature must be vegetatively propagated by cuttings or grafting).\nOver time, dwarf cultivars and prostrate species are becoming more popular as urban gardens grow ever smaller. These include miniature forms under 50\u00a0cm high of \"B.\u00a0spinulosa\" and \"B.\u00a0media\", as well as prostrate species such as \"B.\u00a0petiolaris\" and \"B.\u00a0blechnifolia\".\nBanksias possibly require more maintenance than other Australian natives, though are fairly hardy if the right conditions are provided (sunny aspect and well drained sandy soil).\nThey may need extra water during dry spells until established, which can take up to two years. If fertilised, only slow-release, low-phosphorus fertilizer should be used, as the proteoid roots may be damaged by high nutrient levels in the soil. All respond well to some form of pruning.\nWithin the Australian horticultural community there is an active subculture of \"Banksia\" enthusiasts who seek out interesting flower variants, breed and propagate cultivars, exchange materials and undertake research into cultivation problems and challenges. The main forum for exchange of information within this group is ASGAP's \"Banksia Study Group\".\nCut flower industry.\nWith the exception of the nursery industry, \"Banksia\" have limited commercial use. Some species, principally \"B.\u00a0coccinea\" (scarlet banksia), \"B.\u00a0baxteri\", \"B.\u00a0hookeriana\" (Hooker's banksia), \"B.\u00a0sceptrum\" (sceptre banksia), and \"B.\u00a0prionotes\" (acorn banksia), and less commonly \"B.\u00a0speciosa\" (showy banksia), \"B.\u00a0menziesii\" (Menzies' banksia), \"B.\u00a0burdettii\" and \"B.\u00a0ashbyi\" are grown on farms in Western and Southern Australia, as well as Israel and Hawaii, and the flower heads harvested for the cut flower trade. Eastern species, such as \"B. ericifolia\", \"B. robur\" and \"B. plagiocarpa\", are sometimes cultivated for this purpose. The nectar is also sought by beekeepers, not for the quality of the dark-coloured honey, which is often poor, but because the trees provide an abundant and reliable source of nectar at times when other sources provide little.\nWoodworking.\n\"Banksia\" wood is reddish in color with an attractive grain but it is rarely used as it warps badly on drying. It is occasionally used for ornamental purposes in wood turning and cabinet paneling. It has also been used to make keels for small boats. Historically, the wood of certain species such as \"B. serrata\" was used for yokes and boat parts. The large \"cones\" or seed pods of \"B.\u00a0grandis\" are used for woodturning projects. They are also sliced up and sold as drink coasters; these are generally marketed as souvenirs for international tourists. Woodturners throughout the world value \"Banksia\" pods for making ornamental objects.\nIndigenous uses.\nThe Indigenous people of south-western Australia would suck on the flower spikes to obtain the nectar, they also soaked the flower spikes in water to make a sweet drink. The Noongar people of southwest Western Australia also used infusions of the flower spikes to relieve coughs and sore throats. The Girai wurrung peoples of the western district of Victoria used the spent flower cones to strain water by placing the cones in their mouths and using them like a straw. \"Banksia\" trees are a reliable source of insect larvae which are extracted as food.\nCultural references.\nField guides and other technical resources.\nA number of field guides and other semi-technical books on the genus have been published. These include:\nWritten by Ivan Holliday and Geoffrey Watton and first published in 1975, this book contained descriptions and colour photographs of species known at the time. It was largely outdated by the publication of Alex George's classic 1981 monograph, but a revised and updated second edition was released in 1990.\nThis three volume monograph contains watercolour paintings of every \"Banksia\" species by renowned botanical illustrator Celia Rosser, with accompanying text by Alex George. Its publication represents the first time that such a large genus has been entirely painted. Published by Academic Press in association with Monash University, the three volumes were published in 1981, 1988 and 2000 respectively.\nBegun by Australian photographer Fred Humphreys and Charles Gardner, both of whom died before its completion, \"The Banksia Book\" was eventually completed by Alex George and first published in 1984. It included every species known at the time, with a second edition appearing in 1987 and third in 1996.\nIn 1983 the Australian Biological Resources Study (ABRS) decided to pilot an Australia-wide distribution study of a significant plant genus. \"Banksia\" was chosen because it was a high-profile, widely distributed genus that was easily identified, but for which distribution and habitat was poorly known. The study mobilised over 400 volunteers, collecting over 25,000 field observations over a two-year period. Outcomes included the discovery of two new species, as well as new varieties and some rare colour variants, and discoveries of previously unknown populations of rare and threatened species. The collated data was used to create \"The Banksia Atlas\", which was first published in 1988.\nWritten by J. W. Wrigley and M. Fagg, this was published by Collins Publishers in 1989. A comprehensive text on all the Proteaceae genera with good historical notes and an overview of the 1975 Johnson &amp; Briggs classification. It is out of print and hard to find.\nMay Gibb's \"Banksia men\".\nPerhaps the best known cultural reference to \"Banksia\" is the \"big bad Banksia men\" of May Gibbs' children's book \"Snugglepot and Cuddlepie\". Gibb's \"Banksia men\" are modelled on the appearance of aged \"Banksia\" \"cones\", with follicles for eyes and other facial features. There is some contention over which species actually provided the inspiration for the \"Banksia men\": the drawings most resemble the old cones of \"B.\u00a0aemula\" or \"B.\u00a0serrata\", but \"B.\u00a0attenuata\" (slender banksia) has also been cited, as this was the species that Gibbs saw as a child in Western Australia.\nOther cultural references.\nIn 1989, the Banksia Environmental Foundation was created to support and recognise people and organizations that make a positive contribution to the environment. The Foundation launched the annual Banksia Environmental Awards in the same year.\nAnnounced in June 2023, the exoplanet WASP-19b was named \"Banksia\" in the third NameExoWorlds competition. The approved name was proposed by a team from Brandon Park Primary School in Wheelers Hill (Melbourne, Australia), led by scientist Lance Kelly and teacher David Maierhofer, after various types of \"Banksia\" plants.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "39685", "revid": "13157623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39685", "title": "Figure skating jumps", "text": "Figure skating jumps are an element of three competitive figure skating disciplines: men's singles, women's singles, and pair skating\u00a0\u2013 but not ice dancing. Jumping in figure skating is \"relatively recent\". They were originally individual compulsory figures, and sometimes special figures; many jumps were named after the skaters who invented them or from the figures from which they were developed. Jumps may be performed individually or in combination with each other.\nIt was not until the early part of the 20th century, well after the establishment of organized skating competitions, that jumps with the potential of being completed with multiple revolutions were invented, and when jumps were formally categorized. In the 1920s, Austrian skaters began to perform the first double jumps in practice. Skaters experimented with jumps, and by the end of the period, the modern repertoire of jumps had been developed. Jumps did not have a major role in free skating programs during international competitions until the 1930s. During the post-war period and into the 1950s and early 1960s, triple jumps became more common for both male and female skaters, and a full repertoire of two-revolution jumps had been fully developed. In the 1980s, men were expected to complete four or five difficult triple jumps, and women had to perform the easier triples. By the 1990s, after compulsory figures were removed from competitions, multi-revolution jumps became more important in figure skating.\nThe six most common jumps can be divided into two groups: toe jumps (the toe loop, the flip, and the Lutz) and edge jumps (the Salchow, the loop, and the Axel). The Euler jump, which was known as a half-loop before 2018, is an edge jump. Jumps are also classified by the number of revolutions. Pair skaters perform two types of jumps: side-by-side jumps, in which jumps are accomplished side by side and in unison, and throw jumps, in which the woman performs the jump when assisted and propelled by her partner.\nAccording to the International Skating Union (ISU), jumps must have the following characteristics to earn the most points: they must have \"very good height and very good length\"; they must be executed effortlessly, including the rhythm demonstrated during jump combinations; and they must have good takeoffs and landings. The following are not required, but also taken into consideration: there must be steps executed before the beginning of the jump, or it must have either a creative or unexpected entry; the jump must match the music; and the skater must have, from the jump's takeoff to its landing, a \"very good body position\". A jump combination is executed when a skater's landing foot of the first jump is also the takeoff foot of the following jump. All jumps are considered in the order they are completed. Pair teams, both juniors and seniors, must perform one solo jump during their short programs.\nThe execution of a jump is divided into eight parts: the set-up, load, transition, pivot, takeoff, flight, landing, and exit. All jumps except the Axel and waltz jumps are taken off while skating backward; Axels and waltz jumps are entered into by skating forward. A skater's body absorbs up to 13\u201314 g-forces on landing a jump, which may contribute to overuse injuries and stress fractures. Factors such as angular momentum, the moment of inertia, angular acceleration, and the skater's center of mass determine if a jump is successfully completed. Skaters add variations or unusual entries and exits to jumps to increase difficulty. \nHistory.\nAccording to figure skating historian James R. Hines, jumping in figure skating is \"relatively recent\". Jumps were viewed as \"acrobatic tricks, not as a part of a skater's art\" and \"had no place\" in the skating practices in England during the 19th century, although skaters experimented with jumps from the ice during the last 25 years of the 1800s. Hops, or jumps without rotations, were done for safety reasons, to avoid obstacles, such as hats, barrels, and tree logs, on natural ice. In 1881, \"Spuren Auf Dem Eise\" (\"Tracing on the Ice\"), \"a monumental publication describing the state of skating in Vienna\", briefly mentioned jumps, describing three jumps in two pages. Jumping on skates was a part of the athletic side of free skating and was considered inappropriate for female skaters.\nHines says free skating movements such as spirals, spread eagles, spins, and jumps were originally individual compulsory figures, and sometimes special figures. For example, Norwegian skater Axel Paulsen, whom Hines calls \"progressive\", performed the first jump in competition, the Axel, which was named after him, at the first international competition in 1882, as a special figure. Jumps were also related to their corresponding figure; for example, the loop jump. Other jumps, such as the Axel and the Salchow, were named after the skaters who invented them.\nIt was not until the early part of the 20th century, well after the establishment of organized skating competitions, when jumps with the potential of being completed with multiple revolutions were invented and when jumps were formally categorized. These jumps became elements in athletic free skating programs, but they were not worth more points than no-revolution jumps and half-jumps. In the 1920s, Austrian skaters began to perform the first double jumps in practice and refine rotations in the Axel. Skaters experimented with jumps, and by the end of the period, the modern repertoire of jumps had been developed.\nJumps did not have a major role in free skating programs during international competitions until the 1930s. Athleticism in the sport increased between the world wars, especially by women like Norwegian world and Olympic champion Sonia Henie, who popularized short skirts which allowed female skaters to maneuver and perform jumps. When international competitions were interrupted by World WarII, double jumps by both men and women had become commonplace, and all jumps, except for the Axel, were being doubled. According to writer Ellyn Kestnbaum the development of rotational technique required for Axels and double jumps continued, especially in the United States and Czechoslovakia. Post-war skaters, according to Hines, \"pushed the envelope of jumping to extremes that skaters of the 1930s would not have thought possible\". For example, world champion Felix Kasper from Austria was well known for his athletic jumps, which were the longest and highest in the history of figure skating. Hines reported that his Axel measured four feet high and 25 feet from takeoff to landing. Both men and women, including women skaters from Great Britain, were doubling Salchows and loops in their competition programs.\nDuring the post-war period, American skater Dick Button, who \"intentionally tried to bring a greater athleticism to men's skating\", performed the first double Axel in competition in 1948 and the first triple jump, a triple loop, in 1952. Triple jumps, especially triple Salchows, became more common for male skaters during the 1950s and early 1960s, and female skaters, especially in North America, included a full repertoire of two-revolution jumps. By the late 1960s and early 1970s, men commonly performed triple Salchows and women regularly performed double Axels in competitions. Men would also include more difficult multi-revolution jumps like triple flips, Lutzes, and loops; women included triple Salchows and toe loops. In the 1980s men were expected to complete four or five difficult triple jumps, and women had to perform the easier triples such as the loop jump. By the 1990s, after compulsory figures were removed from competitions, multi-revolution jumps became more important in figure skating. According to Kestnbaum, jumps like the triple Lutz became more important during women's skating competitions. The last time a woman won a gold medal at the Olympics without a triple jump was Dorothy Hamill at the 1976 Olympics.\nProgress in women's single skating in the 2010s is associated with the rapid increase in the technical complexity of programs. Alina Zagitova, representing Eteri Tutberidze's team from Russia, claimed victory at the 2018 Winter Olympics with a performance that approached the theoretical limit of a program without triple axels and quadruple jumps. Following this, the next generation of figure skaters, such as Rika Kihira from Japan and Alena Kostornaia (Tutberidze team), began setting records by incorporating the triple Axel into their programs. According to sports reporter Dvora Meyers, the \"quad revolution in women's figure skating\" began in 2018, when Kostornaia's teammate Alexandra Trusova began performing a quadruple Salchow when she was still competing as a junior. She became the first female skater to successfully land a quadruple Lutz, a quadruple flip, and a quadruple toe loop. \nAmerican skater Ilia Malinin is the first and only person to successfully land a fully rotated quadruple Axel in international competition, a jump widely regarded as the most difficult in figure skating.\nAnomalies in the takeoff and landing are highlighted in bold and italic.\nAll basic figure skating jumps are landed backwards.\nTypes of jumps.\nThe six most common jumps can be divided into two groups: toe jumps (the toe loop, the flip, and the Lutz) and edge jumps (the Salchow, the loop, and the Axel). The Euler jump, which was known as a half-loop before 2018, is an edge jump. The ISU classifies jumps in order of their difficulty: the toe loop, the Salchow, the loop, the flip, the Lutz, and the Axel; and by the number of revolutions. All single jumps, except for the Axel, include one revolution, double jumps include two revolutions, and so on. More revolutions earn skaters more points. Jumps with more revolutions have increased in importance \"as a measure of technical and athletic ability, with attention paid to clean takeoffs and landings\". Pair skaters perform two types of jumps: side-by-side jumps, in which jumps are accomplished side by side and in unison, and throw jumps, in which the woman performs the jump when assisted and propelled by her partner. Quintuple jumps are not allowed in the short program.\nToe jumps tend to be higher than edge jumps because skaters press the toe pick of their skate into the ice on takeoff. Both feet are on the ice at the time of takeoff, and the toe-pick in the ice at takeoff acts as a pole vault. It is impossible to add a half-revolution to toe jumps. Skaters accomplish edge jumps by leaving the ice from any of their skates' four possible edges; lift is \"achieved from the spring gained by straightening of a bent knee in combination with a swing of the free leg\". They require precise rotational control of the skater's upper body, arms, and free leg, and of how well they lean into the takeoff edge. The preparation going into the jump and its takeoff, as well as controlling the rotation of the preparation and takeoff, must be precisely timed. When a skater executes an edge jump, they must extend their leg and use their arms more than when they execute toe jumps.\nEuler.\nThe Euler is an edge jump. It was known as the half-loop jump in International Skating Union (ISU) regulations prior to the 2018\u20132019 season, when the name was changed. In Europe, the Euler is also called the Thor\u00e9n jump, after its inventor, Swedish figure skater Per Thor\u00e9n. The Euler is executed when a skater takes off from the back outside edge of one skate and lands on the opposite foot and edge. It is most commonly done prior to the third jump during a three-jump combination, and serves as a way to put a skater on the correct edge in order to attempt a Salchow jump or a flip jump. It can be accomplished only as a single jump. The Euler has a base point value of 0.50 points, when used in combination between two listed jumps, and also becomes a listed jump.\nToe loop.\nThe toe loop jump is the simplest jump in figure skating. It was invented in the 1920s by American professional figure skater Bruce Mapes. In competition, the base value of a single toe loop is 0.40; the base value of a double toe loop is 1.30; the base value of a triple toe loop is 4.20; the base value of a quadruple toe loop is 9.50; and the base value of the quintuple toe loop is 14.00.\nThe toe loop is considered the simplest jump because not only do skaters use their toe-picks to execute it, but their hips are already facing the direction in which they will rotate. The toe loop is the easiest jump to add multiple rotations to because the toe-assisted takeoff adds power to the jump and because a skater can turn their body towards the assisting foot at takeoff, which slightly reduces the rotation needed in the air. It is often added to more difficult jumps during combinations, and is the most common second jump performed in combinations. It is also the most commonly attempted jump, as well as \"the most commonly cheated on take off jump\", or a jump in which the first rotation starts on the ice rather than in the air. Adding a toe loop to combination jumps does not increase the difficulty of skaters' short or free skating programs.\nFlip.\nThe ISU defines a flip jump as \"a toe jump that takes off from a back inside edge and lands on the back outside edge of the opposite foot\". It is executed with assistance from the toe of the free foot. In competition, the base value of a single flip is 0.50; the base value of a double flip is 1.80; the base value of a triple flip is 5.30; the base value of a quadruple flip is 11.00; and the base value of a quintuple flip is 14.00.\nLutz.\nThe ISU defines the Lutz jump as \"a toe-pick assisted jump with an entrance from a back outside edge and landing on the back outside edge of the opposite foot\". It is the second-most difficult jump in figure skating and \"probably the second-most famous jump after the Axel\". It is named after figure skater Alois Lutz from Vienna, Austria, who first performed it in 1913. In competition, the base value of a single Lutz is 0.60; the base value of a double Lutz is 2.10; the base value of a triple Lutz is 5.90; the base value of a quadruple Lutz is 11.50; and the value of a quintuple Lutz is 14.00. A \"cheated\" Lutz jump without an outside edge is commonly called a \"flutz\".\nSalchow.\nThe Salchow jump is an edge jump. It was named after its inventor, Ulrich Salchow, in 1909. The Salchow is accomplished with a takeoff from the back inside edge of one foot and a landing on the back outside edge of the opposite foot. It is \"usually the first jump that skaters learn to double, and the first or second to triple\". Timing is critical when performing the Salchow because both the takeoff and the landing must be on the backward edge. A Salchow is deemed cheated if the skate blade starts to turn forward before the takeoff, or if it has not turned completely backward when the skater lands back on the ice.\nIn competition, the base value of a single Salchow is 0.40; the base value of a double Salchow is 1.30; the base value of a triple Salchow is 4.30; the base value of a quadruple Salchow is 9.70; and the value of a quintuple Salchow is 14.00.\nLoop.\nThe loop jump is an edge jump. It was believed to be created by German figure skater Werner Rittberger, and is known as the Rittberger in Russian and German. It also gets its name from the shape the blade would leave on the ice if the skater performed the rotation without leaving the ice. According to U.S. Figure Skating, the loop jump is \"the most fundamental of all the jumps\". The skater executes it by taking off from the back outside edge of the skating foot, turning one rotation in the air, and landing on the back outside edge of the same foot. It is often performed as the second jump in a combination.\nIn competition, the base value of the single loop jump is 0.50; the base value of a double loop is 1.70; the base value of a triple loop is 4.90; the base value of a quadruple loop is 10.50; and the value of a quintuple loop jump.\nAxel.\nThe Axel jump, also called the Axel Paulsen jump for its creator, Norwegian figure skater Axel Paulsen, is an edge jump. It is figure skating's oldest and most difficult jump. The Axel jump is the most studied jump in figure skating. It is the only jump that begins with a forward takeoff, which makes it the easiest jump to identify. A double or triple Axel is required in the short program for both senior and junior men, and for senior women. An Axel-type jump is required in the free skating program for all levels of single skating. Junior pair skaters have the choice of performing either a double Axel or double loop in the short programs. Pair skaters can also choose, in their free skating program, a double Axel for one of their jumps in the jump combination or jump sequence.\nThe Axel has an extra half-rotation, which, as figure skating expert Hannah Robbins says, makes a triple Axel \"more a quadruple jump than a triple\". Sports reporter Nora Princiotti says, about the triple Axel, \"It takes incredible strength and body control for a skater to get enough height and to get into the jump fast enough to complete all the rotations before landing with a strong enough base to absorb the force generated\". According to American skater Mirai Nagasu, \"Falling on the triple Axel is really brutal.\"\nIn competition, the base value of a single Axel is 1.10; the base value of a double Axel is 3.30; the base value of a triple Axel is 8.00; the base value of a quadruple Axel is 12.50; and the base value of a quintuple Axel is 14.00. According to \"The New York Times\", the triple Axel has become more common for male skaters to perform; as of 2025, Ilia Malinin from the U.S. is the only skater to successfully complete a quadruple Axel.\nRules and regulations.\nThe ISU defines a jump element for both single skating and pair skating disciplines as \"an individual jump, a jump combination or a jump sequence\".&lt;ref name=\"S&amp;P/ID 2024-103\"&gt;S&amp;P/ID 2024, p. 103&lt;/ref&gt; Jumps are not allowed in ice dance.\nAlso according to the ISU, jumps must have the following characteristics to earn the most points: they must have \"very good height and very good length\"; they must be executed effortlessly, including the rhythm demonstrated during jump combinations; and they must have good takeoffs and landings. The following are not required, but also taken into consideration: there must be steps executed before the beginning of the jump, or it must have either a creative or unexpected entry; the jump must match the music; and the skater must have, from the jump's takeoff to its landing, a \"very good body position\".\nA jump combination consists of \"two jumps performed in an immediate and consecutive order\". In a jump combination, the landing foot of the first jump must be the take-off foot of the second jump. The skater can also execute one full revolution on the ice between the jumps, meaning that their free foot can touch the ice with no weight transfer. An Euler jump can be included in a jump combination, although not during the short program, and only once during the free skating program.&lt;ref name=\"S&amp;P/ID 2024-103\"&gt;S&amp;P/ID 2024, p. 103&lt;/ref&gt;\nA jump sequence consists of \"two or three jumps in Single Skating or two jumps in Pair Skating of any number of revolutions in which the second and/or the third jump is an Axel type jump with a direct step from the landing curve of the first/second jump into the take-off curve of the Axel jump\".&lt;ref name=\"S&amp;P/ID2024-104\"&gt;S&amp;P/ID 2024, p. 104&lt;/ref&gt; The free foot can touch the ice, but there must be no weight transfer on it, and if the skater makes one full revolution between the jumps, the element continues to be deemed a jump sequence and receives its full value. Prior to the 2022-23 season, the skater received only 80% of the base value of the jumps executed in a jump sequence. \nAll jumps are considered in the order they are completed. If an extra jump or jumps are executed, the extra jump(s) not in accordance with requirements will have no value. The limitation on the number of jumps skaters can perform in their programs, called the \"Zayak Rule\" after American skater Elaine Zayak, has been in effect since 1983, after Zayak performed six triple jumps, four toe loop jumps, and two Salchows in her free skating program at the 1982 World Championships. Writer Ellyn Kestnbaum says the ISU established the rule \"in order to encourage variety and balance rather than allowing a skater to rack up credit for demonstrating the same skill over and over\". Kestnbaum also says that as rotations in jumps for both men and women have increased skaters have increased the difficulty of jumps by adding more difficult combinations and by adding difficult steps immediately before or after their jumps, resulting in \"integrating the jumps more seamlessly into the flow of the program\".\nSingle skating.\nSkaters earn extra points for executing jumps in the second half of their programs. In their short programs, they receive a bonus on their final jumping pass executed in the second half of the program. In their free skating programs, the bonus applies to the final three jumping passes, also if they execute the jumps during the second half of the program. \"International Figure Skating\" magazine called this regulation the \"Zagitova Rule\", named for Alina Zagitova from Russia, who won the gold medal at the 2018 Winter Olympics by \"backloading\" her free skating program, or placing all her jumps in the second half of the program in order to take advantage of the rule in place at the time that awarded a ten percent bonus to jumps performed during the second half of the program. Also starting in 2018, single skaters could repeat the same two triple or quadruple jumps only in their free skating programs. They could repeat four-revolution jumps only once, and the base value of the triple Axel and quadruple jumps were \"reduced dramatically\". As of 2022, jump sequences consisted of two or three jumps, but the second or third jump had to be an Axel. Jump sequences began to be counted for their full value and skaters could include single jumps in their step sequences as choreographic elements without incurring a penalty.\nJunior men and women single skaters are not allowed to perform quadruple jumps in their short programs. In their short programs, both junior and senior skaters have to perform either a double or triple Axel jump, one triple or quadruple jump, and a jump combination. In their free-skating programs, both junior and senior skaters have to complete seven jump elements, one of which has to be an Axel-type jump.\nPair skating.\nPair teams, both juniors and seniors, must perform one solo jump during their short programs; it can include a double loop or double Axel for juniors, or any kind of double or triple jump for seniors. In the free skating program, for both juniors and seniors, skaters are limited to a maximum of one jump combination or sequence. A jump sequence consists of two or three jumps of any number of revolutions, in which the second and/or the third jump is an Axel type jump. Jumps during the short program that do not satisfy the requirements (including the wrong number of revolutions) will have no value. In the free skating program, when the partners perform an unequal number of revolutions as a solo jump, or as part of a jump combination or jump sequence, the jump with the smaller number of revolutions is counted. When they \"definitely perform\" different types of jumps, they receive no credit. In the free skating program, repeated jumps executed with over two revolutions \"of the same name and number of revolutions\" are not counted, although the two jumps may be the same within the same jump combination or jump sequence. The ISU also states, \"Jumps are considered in the order of their combination\".\nThrow jumps are \"partner-assisted jumps in which the Woman is thrown into the air by the Man on the takeoff and lands without assistance from her partner on a backward outside edge\". Skate Canada says, \"The male partner assists the female into flight.\" The types of throw jumps include: the throw Axel, the throw Salchow, the throw toe loop, the throw loop, the throw flip, and the throw Lutz. The throw triple Axel is a difficult throw to accomplish because the woman must perform three-and-one-half revolutions after being thrown by the man, a half-revolution more than other triple jumps, and because it requires a forward takeoff. The speed of the team's entry into the throw jump and the number of rotations performed increases its difficulty, as well as the height and/or distance they create. Pair teams must perform one throw jump during their short programs; senior teams can perform any double or triple throw jump, and junior teams must perform a double or triple toe loop, or a double or triple flip or Lutz. If a throw jump in the short program is not done correctly, including if it has the wrong number of revolutions, it receives no value. Both juniors and seniors must complete a maximum of two different throw jumps in their free skating programs. \nExecution.\nAccording to Kestbaum, jumps are divided into eight parts: the set-up, load, transition, pivot, takeoff, flight, landing, and exit. All jumps, except for the Axel, are taken off while skating backward; Axels are entered into by skating forward. Skaters travel in three directions simultaneously while executing a jump: vertically (up off the ice and back down); horizontally (continuing along the direction of travel before leaving the ice); and around. They travel in an up and across, arc-like path while executing a jump, much like the projectile motion of a pole-vaulter. A jump's height is determined by vertical velocity and its length is determined by vertical and horizontal velocity. The trajectory of the jump is established during takeoff, so the shape of the arc cannot be changed once a skater is in the air. Their body absorbs up to 13\u201314 g-forces each time they land from a jump, which sports researchers Lee Cabell and Erica Bateman say contributes to overuse injuries and stress fractures.\nSkaters add variations or unusual entries and exits to jumps to increase difficulty. For example, they will perform a jump with one or both arms overhead or extended at the hips, demonstrating their ability to generate rotation from the takeoff edge and their entire body, rather than relying solely on their arms. It also demonstrates their back strength and technical ability to complete the rotation without relying on their arms. Unusual entries into jumps demonstrate that skaters are able to control both the jump and, with little preparation, the transition from the previous move to the jump. Skaters rotate more quickly when their arms are pulled in tightly to their bodies, which requires strength to keep their arms from being pulled away from their bodies as they rotate.\nAccording to Deborah King and her colleagues from Ithaca College, there are basic physics common to all jumps, regardless of the skating techniques required to execute them. Factors such as angular momentum, the moment of inertia, angular acceleration, and the skater's center of mass determine if a jump is successfully completed. Unlike jumping from dry land, which is fundamentally a linear movement, jumping on the ice is more complicated because of angular momentum. For example, most jumps involve rotation. Scientist James Richards from the University of Delaware says successful jumps depend upon \"how much angular momentum do you leave the ice with, how small can you make your moment of inertia in the air, and how much time you can spend in the air\". Richards found that a skater tends to spend the same amount of time in the air when performing triple and quadruple jumps, but their angular momentum at the start of triples and quadruples is slightly higher than it is for double jumps. The key to completing higher-rotation jumps is controlling the moment of inertia. Richards also found that many skaters, although they were able to gain the necessary angular momentum for takeoff, had difficulty gaining enough rotational speed to complete the jump. King and her colleagues agree that skaters must be in the air long enough, have enough jump height to complete the required revolutions, and gain enough vertical velocity as they jump off the ice. However, different jumps require different patterns of movement. Skaters performing quadruple jumps tend to be in the air longer and have more rotational speed. King also found that most skaters \"actually tended to skate slower into their quads as compared to their triples\", although the differences in the speed at which they approached triples and quadruples were small. King conjectured that slowing their approach into the jumps was due to skaters' \"confidence and a feeling of control and timing for the jump\", rather than any difference in how they executed them. Vertical takeoff velocity, however, was higher for both quadruple and triple toe loops, resulting in \"higher jumps and more time in the air to complete the extra revolution for the quadruple toe-loop\". As Tanya Lewis of \"Scientific American\" puts it, executing quadruple jumps, which as of 2022, has become more common in both male and female single skating competitions, requires \"exquisite strength, speed and grace\".\nFor example, a skater could successfully complete a jump by making small changes to their arm position partway through the rotation, and a small bend in the hips and knees allows a skater \"to land with a lower center of mass than they started with, perhaps seeking out a few precious degrees of rotation and a better body position for landing\". When they execute a toe jump, they must use their skate's toe pick to complete a pole-vaulting-type motion off the ice, which along with extra horizontal speed, helps them store more energy in their leg. As they rotate over their leg, their horizontal motion converts into tangential velocity. King, who believes quintuple jumps are mathematically possible, says that in order to execute more rotations, they could improve their rotational momentum as they execute their footwork or approach into their takeoff, creating torque about the rotating axis as they come off the ice. She also says that if skaters can increase their rotational momentum while \"still exploding upward\" they can rotate faster and increase the number of revolutions they perform. Sports writer Dvora Meyers, reporting on Russian coaching techniques, says female skaters executing more quadruple jumps in competition use what experts call pre-rotation, or the practice of twisting their upper bodies before they take off from the ice, which allows them to complete four revolutions before landing. Meyers also says the technique depends on the skater's being small, light, and young, and that it puts more strain on the back because they do not use as much leg strength. As a skater ages and goes through puberty, however, they tend not to be able to execute quadruple jumps because \"the technique wasn't sound to start with\". They also tend to retire before the age of 18 due to the increase in back injuries.\nSince the tendency of an edge is toward the center of the circle created by that edge, a skater's upper body, arms, and free leg also have a tendency to be pulled along by the force of the edge. If the upper body, arms, and free leg are allowed to follow passively, they will eventually overtake the edge's rotational edge and will rotate faster, a principle that is also used to create faster spins. The inherent force of the edge and the force generated by a skater's upper body, arms, and free leg tend to increase rotation, so successful jumping requires precise control of these forces. Leaning into the curvature of the edge is how skaters regulate the edge's inherent angular momentum. Their upper body, arms, and free leg are controlled by what happens at the time of preparation for the jump and its takeoff, which are designed to produce the correct amount of rotation on the takeoff. If they do not have enough rotation, they will not be at the correct position at the takeoff; if they rotate too much, their upper body will not be high enough in the air. Skaters must keep track of the many different movements and body positions, as well as the timing of those movements relative to each other and to the jump itself, which requires hours of practice but once mastered, becomes natural.\nThe number of possible combinations jumps is limitless; if a turn or change of feet is permitted between combination jumps, any number of sequences is possible, although if the landing of one jump is the takeoff of the next, as is the case in loop combinations, how the skater lands will dictate the possibilities going into subsequent jumps. Rotational momentum tends to increase during combination jumps, so skaters should control rotation at the landing of each jump; if a skater does not control rotation, they will over-rotate on subsequent jumps and probably fall. The way skaters control rotation differs depending on the nature of the landing and takeoff edges, and the way they use their arms, which regulate their shoulders and upper body position, and their free leg, which dictates the positioning of their hips. If the landing on one jump leads directly into the takeoff of the jump that follows it, the bend on the landing leg of the first jump serves as preparation for the spring of the takeoff of the subsequent jump. If some time elapses between the completion of the first jump and the takeoff of the subsequent one, or if a series of movements serves as preparation for the subsequent jump, the leg bend for the spring can be separated from the bend of the landing leg.\nHistory of first jumps.\nThe following table lists first recorded jumps in competition for which there is secure information.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39686", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39686", "title": "Figure skating spins", "text": "Element in competitive figure skating\nSpins are an element in figure skating in which the skater rotates, centered on a single point on the ice, while holding one or more body positions. They are performed by all disciplines of the sport, single skating, pair skating, and ice dance, and are a required element in most figure skating competitions. As \"The New York Times\" says, \"While jumps look like sport, spins look more like art. While jumps provide the suspense, spins provide the scenery, but there is so much more to the scenery than most viewers have time or means to grasp\". According to world champion and figure skating commentator Scott Hamilton, spins are often used \"as breathing points or transitions to bigger things\".\nFigure skating spins, along with jumps, spirals, and spread eagles were originally individual compulsory figures, sometimes special figures. Unlike jumps, spins were a \"graceful and appreciated\" part of figure skating throughout the 19th century. They advanced between World War I and World War II; by the late 1930s, all three basic spin positions were used. \nThere are two types of spins, the forward spin and the backward spin. There are three basic spin positions: the upright spin, the sit spin, and the camel spin. Skaters also perform flying spins and spin combinations. The International Skating Union (ISU), figure skating's governing body, delineates rules, regulations, and scoring points for each type and variety of spin.\nBackground.\nFigure skating spins, along with jumps, spirals, and spread eagles were originally individual compulsory figures, sometimes special figures. Unlike jumps, spins were a \"graceful and appreciated\" part of figure skating throughout the 19th century. Jean Garcin, who wrote one of the first books about figure skating in the early 1800s, recognizes their beauty, especially when used as a way to conclude a figure artistically. Figure skater and historian Irving Brokaw categorizes spin variations not into positions as they are categorized today, but into different changes of the skating foot. He writes in the early 1900s about the importance of spins and insists that advanced skaters should be able to execute one or more spin varieties on either foot. Spins were performed in the early days of pair skating by more skilled and experienced skaters, often as conclusions to their programs. Figure skating historian James Hines states that even in modern skating, spins are placed at the end of programs to make them more exciting.\nSpins \"advanced greatly\" between World War I and World War II. The spins performed by Norwegian skater Sonja Henie, which can be viewed in her films made during the 1930s, often reached 40 or more revolutions and were \"usually well-centered, fast, and as exciting to watch today as they were then\". By the late 1930s, all three basic spin positions were used. Skaters were expected to spin in both directions at the time, but as spins became faster and more difficult, they were only expected to spin in one direction. Skaters like American Ronnie Robertson in the 1950s, Swiss Denise Biellmann in the 1980s, and Swiss Lucinda Ruh in the 1990s, had \"an uncanny ability to perform spins\", and were sometimes able to execute up to five revolutions per second in the upright position. Canadian figure skater Olivia Oliver holds the Guinness World Record for the fastest spin, 342 rotations per minute, which she completed in Warsaw in 2015. However, as researchers Lee Cabell and Erica Bateman stated in 2018, \"Unfortunately, modern figure skaters often do not achieve these types of revolutions because the rules require skaters to perform spins in different body positions\".\nWorld champion and commentator Scott Hamilton reported that Robertson would spin so fast that he would break blood vessels in his hands. Hamilton also stated that Robertson and Ruh were so good at executing spins that they \"would find that part of the blade that had no friction with the ice, and they would spin at the same speed forever. It just seemed like it would never end, and they could change positions and then recrank the spin and make it happen again\". Ruh, however, suffered from chronic nausea and dizziness and would regularly lose consciousness during practices or in hotel rooms. She was eventually diagnosed with mini-concussions that were probably linked to executing spins and the forces generated by them, especially during layback spins. Ruh also later stated that the rotational speeds she was able to maintain and the long hours practicing and performing them most likely contributed to the severity of her injuries.\nPair spins became part of competitive figure skating between the world wars; side-by-side spins, along with death spirals, lifts, throw jumps, side-by-side jumps, and side-by-side footwork sequences, were a part of pair skating by the 1930s. In ice dance, there were limitations to dance spins, as well as for other moves associated with pair skating like jumps and lifts, when ice dance became a competitive sport and throughout the 1950s. Spins were limited to a maximum of one-and-a-half revolutions when done by one partner and to two-and-a-half revolutions when they spun around each other. These limitations were put in place to ensure its distinction from pair skating.\nExecution.\nAs \"The New York Times\" says, \"While jumps look like sport, spins look more like art. While jumps provide the suspense, spins provide the scenery, but there is so much more to the scenery than most viewers have time or means to grasp\". According to Scott Hamilton, spins are often used \"as breathing points or transitions to bigger things\" and are more difficult to explain to the audience \"because there is so much going on\". Hamilton stated that explaining the intricacies of spins, like edge changes, is challenging because they are difficult to see.\nMost beginning skaters learn how to execute spins in the counter-clockwise direction, but some may execute them clockwise. Most spins are executed on one foot, except for the two-foot spin, which beginning skaters tend to learn first, and the cross-foot spin. The two-foot spin consists of three essential parts\u2014the setup, the windup, and the spin\u2014as well as the exit, which can be done by rotating in a closed spinning position until stopping or by using a back inside edge with a change of foot.\nThe effect of linear and rotational forces is most apparent and most powerful when performing spins. The successful accomplishment of spins depends on the effective management of angular momentum, which occurs during the entrance of a spin and ends once a skater is in the spin and all linear force is translated into angular velocity. The skater rotates around the point at which their blade touches the ice, the most important point in the vertical axis made by their body, and a fixed vertical axis that extends from the blade on the ice to the highest point in their body. The absence of angular momentum means that fewer variables, or vectors, influence the resulting motion, so if the center of gravity is maintained, spins should be easier to perform than other elements such as jumps. The change from angular momentum to angular speed around a fixed vertical axis is difficult to control, though, as is the change from one force to another in general. Moving forward quickly also cannot be efficiently converted into fast angular speed, so the conversion of fast linear motion, which produces a lot of force, into fast rotational motion is small. Therefore, is it a waste of energy to build up speed going into a spin; entering a spin slowly achieves the same result and will probably be more consistent.\nA spin consists of the following parts: preparation, entry, spin, and exit. During the preparation phase, skaters decrease the radius of the skating curve and velocity/speed, which means that the skater must increase how much they lean into the spin. As researchers Lee Cabell and Erica Bateman state, \"A step against the gliding edge exerts a force on the ice; the resultant torque about the axis of rotation results in the angular momentum that is used during the spin\". Greater force during the initial push of the spin's preparation phase results in greater torque and angular momentum, which will result in a faster spin. The exit coming out of a spin occurs in two stages: breaking the spin's rotational spin and the exit itself. There are many exit variations of spins.\nThe entry phase of a spin produces a logarithmic curve with an indefinite number of radii, smallest at the end and largest at the beginning. When the entry curve radius is decreased, the skater will change the angle of their lean towards the vertical axis, gradually reducing the velocity/speed. The curve ends with a 3 turn, then the center of gravity is slightly lower, resulting in the skater beginning to spin. After the initiation of the actual spin, they will exhibit a large moment of inertia. Their shoulders are square to the hips and rotating with each other at the same angular velocity. The skater's center of gravity must be directly above their base of support (for example, where the blade is in contact with the ice) in order for them to execute a balanced spin. If the spin is not balanced and centered, the vertical projection of the center of gravity moves away from its base of support, which results in the spinning blade making small loops on the ice.\nThe skater's goal for most spins is to rotate as quickly as possible, to have a well-defined and pleasing body position, to maintain perfect balance before, during, and after the spin, and to remain in one place, called centering, while executing a spin. A good spin should rotate in one place on the ice, \"drawing a series of tiny overlapping circles on top of each other\" into the ice. A skater who executes a spin that is not centered will travel across the ice, \"producing a series of loops strung out along a curve or straight line, so that the skater will end the spin several feet away from the spot on the ice where she began it\". In order to rotate rapidly, the skater must increase their speed (rotations per minute), which is accomplished by reducing the distance of the vertical axis from the parts of their body. This is done by bringing their arms and free leg closer to their body, in line with the vertical axis. Since the true center of gravity is at the point in which the blade meets the ice, the skater must also lower their arms and free leg toward that point. The force created by the spin is generated outward and upward, or via the path of least resistance, as their speed increases. When skaters allow the force to follow the path of least resistance, however, they will lose some of the force that contributes to rotational speed, so when they increase a spin's speed, they must move their arms and free leg inward and downward. Exactly how this is done varies depending on the type of spin skaters perform.\nSkaters experience dizziness during spins because as they spin, their eyes focus on an immobile object and follows it until the object passes beyond their peripheral vision. Then their eyes race ahead to focus on a new object and as the spin ends, their eyes continue to follow this pattern, causing dizziness. It takes practice to train the eyes to return to normal, which dissipates the experience of dizziness.\nTypes/positions of spins.\nThere are two types of spins, the forward spin and the backward spin. The forward spin is executed on the back inside edge of the skate and is entered into by the forward outside edge and 3 turn; the equivalent movement is ballet in the \"pirouette en dedans\". The backward spin, which is executed on the back outside edge, is entered into by the forward inside edge and 3 turn; the equivalent movement in ballet is the \"pirouette en dehors\".\nThere are three basic spin positions: the upright spin, the sit spin, and the camel spin.\nUpright spin.\nThe upright spin is one of the three basic figure skating spin positions. The ISU defines an upright spin as a spin with \"any position with the skating leg extended or slightly bent which is not a camel position\".&lt;ref name=\"S&amp;P/ID2024-104\"&gt;S&amp;P/ID 2024, p. 104&lt;/ref&gt; It was invented by British figure skater Cecilia Colledge, who was the first to execute it. Variations of the upright spin include the layback spin, the Biellman spin (created by world champion Denise Biellmann), the full layback, the split, the back upright spin, the forward upright spin, the scratch spin (also called the blur spin), and the sideways leaning spin.\nSit spin.\nThe sit spin, invented by American figure skater Jackson Haines, \"represents one of the most important spins in skating\". It is executed on one foot, in a sitting position, with the knee of the skating leg bent in a one-legged crouch position and the free leg held in front, to the side, or to the back. It is difficult to learn, requires a great deal of energy, and may not be as exciting to perform as other elements, such as jumps, but it has variations that make it more creative and pleasurable to watch.\nCamel spin.\nColledge was responsible for the invention of the camel spin (also called the parallel spin); she was the first to perform it in the mid-1930s. Writer Ellyn Kestnbaum speculates that the camel and layback spins, which \"heightened the visual function of the skater creating interesting shapes with her body\", were, for the first ten years after their inventions, performed mostly by women and not by men because it was easier for women to achieve the interesting shapes the camel spin creates than it is for men. American skater Dick Button, however, performed the first forward camel spin, a variation of the camel spin, and spins became a regular part of the repertoire of male skaters. The camel spin is executed on one foot and is an adaptation of the arabesque ballet pose to the ice. When executed well, the stretch of the body should create a slight arch or straight line.\nFlying spins.\nA flying spin is the combination of a jump and a spin. A flying spin can be appealing for the audience to watch and exciting for the skater to perform. Petrovich describes three types of flying spins: the flying camel, the flying sit spin, and the butterfly. The flying camel consists of a jump from a left forward outside edge, about one revolution in the air, with the landing executed in a camel spin. Dick Button might have been the first skater to successfully execute the flying camel; for many years, it was called the \"Button camel\". The flying sit spin was first performed by Buddy Vaughn and Bill Grimditch, who were students of figure skating coach Gustav Lussi, but Button and Ronnie Robertson made it famous. It consists of a take-off from a left forward outside edge, a sit spin position in the air during one-and-a-half revolutions, and a landing in a sit spin. According to Petkevich, \"When the jump is high, it can be an exhilarating maneuver for skater and audience alike\". The butterfly spin is so named because it describes the position in the air. It consists of a take-off from both feet, a body position horizontal to the ice, and a landing in a back spin. It is often performed at the end of a skater's program because, although it adds to a program's technical content, it does not require much precision or energy to execute.\nThe jump section of flying spins is executed at the beginning of the spin and is part of the entrance into it. The angular momentum at the entrance, like for all spins, must be converted into pure rotational momentum. In ordinary jumps, angular momentum allows the skater to travel a long distance across the rink and propel high into the air, but for flying spins, the principles that govern the spin dominate the jump portion of the spin. The goal is to minimize forward motion on the jump portion. Creating speed on the spin portion is also a goal, but a flying spin never achieves the speed of a basic spin because some of the forces assigned to achieving the speed in a basic spin must be used to achieve height on the flying spin's jump portion. Centering the spin after the jump depends on converting all the angular momentum into rotational momentum. Mastering the flying spin takes less time and practice if skaters have already mastered basic spin techniques and good jumping ability.\nSpin combinations.\nSpin combinations are required in the short programs and free skating programs of single skaters and pair skaters. Flying spins and basic spins can be combined in any number of variations. The maintenance, or acceleration, of the rotational momentum created on the entrance of the first spin is the most important principle governing the execution of spin combinations, which require quick movements during the spins' transitions. When a change of feet is required to successfully perform spin combinations, the center of rotation of subsequent spins should be as close as possible to the center of rotation of the first spin of the combination. Spin combinations must include more than one position and may or may not involve a change of foot.\nRules and regulations.\nSingle skating.\nIf a skater performs a spin that has no basic position with only two revolutions, or with less than two revolutions, they do not fulfill the position requirement for the spin, and receives no points for it. A spin with less than three revolutions is not considered a spin; rather, it is considered a skating movement. The flying spin and any spin that only has one position must have six revolutions; spin combinations must have 10 revolutions. Required revolutions are counted from when the skater enters the spin until they exit out of it, except for flying spins and the spins in which the final wind-up is in one position.&lt;ref name=\"S&amp;P/ID2018-110\"&gt;S&amp;P/ID 2024, p. 114&lt;/ref&gt; Skaters increase the difficulty of camel spins by grabbing their leg or blade while performing the spin.\nA skater must make at least two revolutions in one position, without interruption; if this requirement is not fulfilled, the position is not counted. A change of foot of any spin, with at least three revolutions, must occur both before and after a spin position. If they fall while entering a spin, the skater can fill the lost time by executing a spin or spinning movement immediately afterwards; however, this movement will not be counted as an element.&lt;ref name=\"S&amp;P/ID2024-105\"&gt;S&amp;P/ID 2024, p. 105&lt;/ref&gt; The ISU states, \"If the spinning centers (before and after the change of foot) are too far apart and the criteria of 'two spins' is fulfilled (there is a curve of exit after the first part and the curve of entry into the second part), only the part before the change of foot\" will earn points.\nDifficult spin variations increase the level of a spin and are worth more points. These variations include movements of the body part, head, leg, arm, or hand that require flexibility or physical strength and that affect the balance of the skater's main body core. There are 11 categories of difficult spin variations; three are in the camel spin position, based on the direction of the skater's shoulder line.\nA spin combination must have at least \"two different basic positions with two revolutions in each of these positions anywhere within the spin\". Skaters earn the full value of a spin combination when they include all three basic positions. The number of revolutions in non-basic positions is included in the total number of revolutions, but changing to a non-basic position is not considered a change of position. The change of foot and change of position can be made at the same time or separately, and can be performed as a jump or a step-over movement. Non-basic positions are allowed during spins executed in one position or, for single skaters, during a flying spin.\nPair skating.\nSolo spin combinations.\nThe solo spin combination must be performed once during the short program of pair skating competitions, with at least two revolutions in two basic positions. Both partners must include all three basic positions to earn the full possible points. There must be a minimum of five revolutions made on each foot. Spins can be commenced with jumps and must have at least two different basic positions, and both partners must include two revolutions in each position. A solo spin combination must have all three basic positions (the camel spin, the sit spin, and upright positions) performed by both partners at any time during the spin to receive the full value of points, and must have all three basic positions performed by both partners to receive full value for the element. A spin with less than three revolutions is not counted as a spin; rather, it is considered a skating movement. If a skater changes to a non-basic position, it is not considered a change of position. The number of revolutions in non-basic positions, which may be considered difficult variations, is counted towards the team's total number of revolutions. Only positions, whether basic or non-basic, must be performed by the partners at the same time.\nIf a skater falls while entering into the spin, they can perform another spin or spinning movement immediately after the fall, to fill the time lost from the fall, but it is not counted as a solo spin combination. A change of foot, in the form of a jump or step over, is allowed, and the change of position and change of foot can be performed separately or at the same time. \nPair spin combinations.\nBoth junior and senior pair teams must perform one pair spin combination, which may begin with a fly spin, during their free skating programs. Pair spin combinations must have at least eight revolutions; the minimum number of required revolutions \"must be counted from the entry of the spin until its exit\". If spins are done with less than two revolutions, pairs receive zero points; if they have less than three revolutions, they are considered a skating movement, not a spin. Pair teams cannot stop, except for a short step when changing directions, while performing a rotation. Spins must have at least two different basic positions, with two revolutions in each position performed by both partners anywhere within the spin; full value for pair spin combinations is awarded only when both partners perform all three basic positions. A spin executed in both clockwise and counterclockwise directions is considered one spin. When a team simultaneously performs spins in both directions that immediately follow each other, they earn more points, but they must execute a minimum of three revolutions in each direction without any changes in position. \nPair teams receive more points if the spin contains three difficult variations, two of which can be non-basic positions, although each partner must have at least one difficult variation. The pair team must each perform at least one change of foot, although not necessarily at the same time. The spin can also begin with a fly spin; they earn more points if one or both partners perform a difficult entrance or any fly entrance. They also earn more points if they perform a difficult exit. A difficult exit, in which the skaters exit the spin in a lift or spinning movement, is defined as \"an innovative move that makes the exit significantly more difficult\". They earn more points if their change in directions immediately follow each other, if the man lifts the woman while he is one foot for at least one revolution, and when they perform at least six revolutions \"without any changes in position/variation and foot (camel, sit, difficult upright)\". If one or both partners fall while entering a spin, they can execute a spin or a spinning movement to fill up the time lost during the fall. \nIce dance spins.\nThe ISU defines a dance spin as \"a spin skated by the Couple together in any hold\".&lt;ref name=\"S&amp;P/ID2024-134\"&gt;S&amp;P/ID 2024, p. 134&lt;/ref&gt; The ISU also states, \"It should be performed on the spot around a common axis on one foot by each partner simultaneously\".&lt;ref name=\"S&amp;P/ID2018-125\"&gt;S&amp;P/ID 2021, p. 125&lt;/ref&gt; The solo spin, or pirouette, is allowed and defined as \"a spinning movement performed on one foot\", with or without the partner's assistance, performed by both partners at the same time but around separate centers. The ISU announces dance spin variations or combinations at the beginning of each season.\nDance spins have three positions. The upright position is performed on one foot with the skating leg slightly bent or straight and with the upper body upright, bent to the side, or with an arched back. The sit position is done on one foot, with \"the skating leg bent in a one-legged crouch position and with the free leg forward, either to the back or the side\".&lt;ref name=\"S&amp;P/ID2024-135\"&gt;S&amp;P/ID 2024, p. 135&lt;/ref&gt; The camel position is done on one foot, with \"the skating leg straight or slightly bent forward, and with the free leg extended or bent forward horizontally or higher\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39687", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39687", "title": "Norwich, Vermont", "text": "Norwich is a town in Windsor County, Vermont, United States. The population was 3,612 at the 2020 census. Home to some of the state of Vermont's wealthiest residents, the municipality is a commuter town for nearby Hanover, New Hampshire across the Connecticut River. The town is part of the Dresden School District, the first in the United States, signed into law by President John F. Kennedy. The town contains the Norwich Mid-Century Modern Historic District.\nHistory.\nThe boundaries of Norwich were established on July 4, 1761, when Governor Benning Wentworth of New Hampshire defined the boundaries of townships in Vermont. The first settlers reached the area in 1763 and began to clear the wilderness and erect the first hand-hewn log buildings, wintering over for the first time in 1765. Early settlements occurred along the Ompompanoosuc River. Later, the current village site became settled. The first town meeting occurred in April 1768. The first Congregational church was founded in 1770 and a structure built in 1778. The population grew from 206 in 1771 to 1,158 in 1791 and 2,316 in 1830.\nThe town was named after Norwich, Connecticut, the state from which the first settlers originated. In the original charter, the name was spelled \"Norwhich\", but the additional 'h' was dropped shortly after the town was chartered. Originally pronounced \"Norritch\" (similar to the English pronunciation of the city of Norwich, England), the town name has in more recent times become more commonly pronounced \"Nor-wich\".\nAlden Partridge and the founding of Norwich University.\nIn 1819 native son, Alden Partridge, a former Superintendent of the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, founded the private \"American Literary, Scientific and Military Academy\" in Norwich. He hoped to establish a new \"American system\" for training cadets that included both humanities and science topics in the curriculum, in addition to military science. In his six years of Norwich residency, Partridge achieved an academy population of nearly 500 \"cadets\". He moved that school back to Middletown, Connecticut, in 1825, but returned in 1835 with a charter from the U.S. Congress to found another military academy, which remained in Norwich until 1866, when it burned to the ground. The school then relocated to Northfield, Vermont, where it exists today as Norwich University.\nGeography.\nNorwich lies on the western bank of the Connecticut River, which forms Vermont's boundary with New Hampshire, opposite its companion town, Hanover, New Hampshire. The Ledyard Bridge connects the two towns. The Vermont towns bordering Norwich are Thetford to the north, Sharon to the west, and Hartford to the south.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and , or 0.05%, is water. The Ompompanoosuc River flows into the Connecticut River in the northeastern part of the town.\nThe landscape is hilly and wooded. The elevation of the town center is . The hills in the town include the Griggs Mountain in the southwestern section and the Gile Mountain in the northwestern section.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 3,544 people, 1,367 households, and 944 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 1,505 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 95.97% White, 0.48% African American, 0.20% Native American, 1.61% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.62% from other races, and 1.10% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 0.79% of the population.\nThere were 1,367 households, out of which 41.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.1% were married couples living together, 8.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.9% were non-families. 24.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.59 and the average family size was 3.10.\nIn the town, the population was spread out, with 29.3% under the age of 18, 4.9% from 18 to 24, 23.6% from 25 to 44, 31.3% from 45 to 64, and 11.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.1 males.\nThe median income for a household in the town was $66,000, and the median income for a family was $78,178. Males had a median income of $49,350 versus $33,871 for females. The per capita income for the town was $35,285. About 1.5% of families and 3.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.1% of those under age 18 and 6.2% of those age 65 or over.\nCommerce and culture.\nThe town commercial center features a traditional, but actively used, general store. Adjacent to the general store is a restored historic inn with a restaurant and brew pub. \nThe Montshire Museum of Science and King Arthur Baking Company are located in Norwich.\nEducation.\nNorwich maintains one of the few interstate public school systems, the Dresden School District, commissioned by President John F. Kennedy, which is shared by the towns of Norwich and Hanover, New Hampshire. Students attend Marion Cross School in Norwich for kindergarten through sixth grade, Richmond Middle School in Hanover for grades seven and eight, and Hanover High School in Hanover for grades nine through twelve.\nTransportation.\nMajor transportation routes, which run parallel through the Connecticut River valley, include Interstate 91 (Exit 13 serves the town), U.S. Route 5 and the former Boston and Maine Railroad right of way, now owned by the State of Vermont. The Appalachian Trail passes south to east through the town from Hartford to Hanover, New Hampshire.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39688", "revid": "4071608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39688", "title": "Ni\u02bbihau", "text": "Seventh largest island in Hawaii\nNi\u02bbihau, sometimes written Niihau, is the seventh largest island in Hawaii and the westernmost of the main islands. It is southwest of Kaua\u02bbi across the Kaulakahi Channel. Its area is . Several intermittent playa lakes provide wetland habitats for the Hawaiian coot, the Hawaiian stilt, and the Hawaiian duck. The island is designated as critical habitat for \"Brighamia insignis\", an endemic and endangered species of Hawaiian lobelioid. The United States Census Bureau defines Niihau and the neighboring island and State Seabird Sanctuary of Lehua as Census Tract 410 of Kaua\u02bbi County, Hawaii. Its 2010 census population was 170, most of them native Hawaiians. As of the 2020 census, the population had fallen to 84. The people of Ni\u02bbihau are noted for their gemlike \"lei p\u016bp\u016b\" (shell lei) craftsmanship. They speak Hawaiian as a primary language.\nElizabeth Sinclair purchased Ni\u02bbihau in 1864 for US$10,000 from the Kingdom of Hawai\u02bbi. The island's private ownership passed on to her descendants, the Robinsons. \nThe island is currently managed by brothers Bruce and Keith Robinson. The island has attracted some controversy for the strict rules the Robinson family imposes on the island and its inhabitants. Known as \"the Forbidden Isle\", it is off-limits to all outsiders except the Robinson family and their relatives, U.S. Navy personnel, government officials, and invited guests. From 1987 onward, a limited number of supervised activity tours and hunting safaris have opened to tourists.\nDuring World War II, the island was the site of the Ni\u02bbihau incident, in which, following the attack on Pearl Harbor, a Japanese navy fighter pilot crashed on the island and received help from the island's residents of Japanese descent.\nGeography.\nNi\u02bbihau is located about west of Kaua\u02bbi, and the tiny, uninhabited island of Lehua lies north of Ni\u02bbihau. Ni\u02bbihau's dimensions are 6.2 miles by 18.6 miles (10km \u00d7 30km). The maximum elevation, Paniau, is . The island is about 6 million years old, making it geologically older than the 5.8-million-year-old neighboring island of Kaua\u02bbi to the northeast. Ni\u02bbihau is the remnant of the southwestern slope of what was once a much larger volcano. The entire summit and other slopes collapsed into the ocean in a giant prehistoric landslide.\nClimate.\nThe island is relatively arid because it lies in the rain shadow of Kaua\u02bbi and lacks the elevation needed to catch significant amounts of trade wind rainfall. Ni\u02bbihau, therefore, depends on winter Kona storms for its rain, when more southerly weather systems intrude into the region. As such, the island is subject to long periods of drought. Historical droughts on Ni\u02bbihau have been recorded several times, one in 1792 by Captain James Cook's former junior officer, George Vancouver, who had been told that the people of Ni\u02bbihau had abandoned the island because of a severe drought and had moved to Kaua\u02bbi to escape famine.\nFlora and fauna.\nAs an arid island, Ni\u02bbihau was barren of trees for centuries \u2013 Captain James Cook reported it treeless in 1778. Aubrey Robinson, grandfather of current owners Bruce Robinson and Keith Robinson, planted 10,000 trees per year during much of his ownership of the island; Robinson's afforestation efforts increased rainfall in the dry climate. Island co-owner Keith Robinson, a noted conservationist, preserved and documented many of Ni\u02bbihau's natural plant resources. The island is designated as a critical habitat for the \"\u02bb\u02bb\u014dlulu\", an endemic and endangered species of Hawaiian lobelioid. \"Pritchardia aylmer-robinsonii\", a palm tree named for Keith Robinson's uncle Aylmer Robinson, is an endangered species native to Ni\u02bbihau.\nSeveral bird species thrive on Ni\u02bbihau. The largest lakes on the island are H\u0101lali\u02bbi Lake, Halulu Lake and Nonopapa Lake. These intermittent playa lakes on the island provide wetland habitats for the \"\u02bb\u02bbalae ke\u02bboke\u02bbo\" (Hawaiian coot), the \"\u0101e\u02bbo\" (Hawaiian subspecies of Black-necked Stilt), and the \"koloa maoli\" (Hawaiian duck). The critically endangered Hawaiian monk seal (\"Monachus schauinslandi\") is found in high numbers on Ni\u02bbihau's shores. Robinson states that Ni\u02bbihau's secluded shoreline offers them a safe haven from habitat encroachments. According to Robinson, conditions there are better than the government refuges of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. When the Robinsons originally purchased Ni\u02bbihau, no monk seals were present, because they lived in the northwestern part of the Hawaiian island chain, Necker and Midway islands. They have been relocated to the main Hawaiian island chain by NOAA fisheries over the past thirty years, and some have found homes on Ni\u02bbihau.\nBig game herds, imported from stock on Moloka\u02bbi Ranch in recent years, roam Ni\u02bbihau's forests and flatlands. Eland and aoudad are abundant, along with oryxes, wild boars and feral sheep. These big game herds provide income from hunting safari tourism.\nHistory.\nPrior to the unification of the Kingdom of Hawaii under Kamehameha I, Ni\u02bbihau was ruled by the . Kahelelani was the first of the Ni\u02bbihau ali\u02bbi. His name is now used to refer to the \"Ni\"\u02bb\"ihau kahelelani\", the puka shell of the wart turbans (\"Leptothyra verruca\"), used to make exquisite Ni\u02bbihau shell jewelry. K\u0101\u02bbeok\u016blani was a ruler of northern Ni\u02bbihau who unified the island after defeating his rival, a chief named Kawaihoa. A stone wall () across a quarter of the island's southern end marked the boundaries of the two chiefs: K\u0101\u02bbeo's land was identified by black stones and Kawaihoa's by white stones. Eventually, a great battle took place, known as Pali Kamakaui. K\u0101\u02bbeo's two brothers from the island of Maui, Ka\u02bbiana and his half-brother Kahekili II, the King of Maui, fought for K\u0101\u02bbeo, and Ni\u02bbihau was united under his rule. Kawaihoa was banished to the south end of the island and K\u0101\u02bbeo moved to the middle of the island to govern. K\u0101\u02bbeo married the Queen Kamakahelei, and a future king of Ni\u02bbihau and Kaua\u02bbi named Kaumuali\u02bbi was born in 1790. Kaua\u02bbi and Ni\u02bbihau are said to have carried the \"highest blood lines\" in the Hawaiian Islands.\nKamehameha managed to unify all of the islands by 1795, except for Kaua\u02bbi and Ni\u02bbihau. Two attempts to conquer those islands had failed, and Kamehameha lost many men: bodies covered the beaches on Kaua\u02bbi's eastern shores. Finally, in 1810, Kamehameha amassed a great fleet, and Kaumuali\u02bbi, the last independent , surrendered rather than risk further bloodshed. Independence again became feasible after Kamehameha's death in 1819, but was put down when Kamehameha's widow Ka\u02bbahumanu kidnapped Kaumuali\u02bbi and forced him to marry her. Thereafter Ni\u02bbihau remained part of the unified Hawaiian Kingdom.\nElizabeth McHutchison Sinclair (1800\u20131892) purchased Ni\u02bbihau and parts of Kaua\u02bbi from Kamehameha V in 1864 for US$10,000 in gold (roughly $1.75 million as of July 2025). Sinclair chose Ni\u02bbihau over other options, including Waik\u012bk\u012b and Pearl Harbor. By around 1875, Ni\u02bbihau's population consisted of about 350 Native Hawaiians, with 20,000 sheep. This era marked the end of the art of Hawaiian mat-weaving made famous by the people of Ni\u02bbihau. (\"Cyperus laevigatus\"), a native sedge, used to grow on the edges of Ni\u02bbihau's three intermittent lakes. The stems were harvested and used to weave (mats), considered the \"finest sleeping mats in Polynesia\". The mats were valued by and foreign visitors alike, but by the end of the 19th century, Hawaiians had stopped weaving due to changes in population, culture, economics, and the environment.\nIn 1915, Sinclair's grandson Aubrey Robinson closed the island to most visitors. Even relatives of the inhabitants could visit only by special permission. Upon Aubrey's death in 1939 the island passed to his son Aylmer, and in 1968 to Aylmer's youngest brother Lester. Upon Lester's wife Helen's death, the island passed to his sons Bruce Robinson and Keith Robinson, the current co-owners. (See Sinclair-Robinson family tree)\nThe Robinson family has attracted controversy over the strict rules they have imposed on the island\u2019s inhabitants, largely enforced by Bruce Robinson\u2019s wife, Leiana Robinson. The rules include a ban on alcohol and cigarettes, being prohibited from talking about Ni\u2019ihau to the media, a permanent ban from the island if a resident leaves for an extended amount of time, and a ban on long hair and beards for men. The island lacks electricity and running water.\nThe Ni\u02bbihau incident.\nNi\u02bbihau was the site of an event not long after the attack on Pearl Harbor that has come to be known as the Ni\u02bbihau Incident (or the Battle of Ni\u02bbihau). On December 7, 1941, a Japanese pilot whose Zero had been hit crash-landed on the island hoping to rendezvous with a rescue submarine. The pilot was apprehended and later escaped with the assistance of local Japanese residents, but he was killed shortly afterwards.\nDespite its self-imposed isolation, Ni\u02bbihau has a long-standing relationship with the U.S. military dating from 1924. There is a small Navy installation on the island. No military personnel are permanently stationed there, but the U.S. military has used the island for training special operations units, which included hiring Hawaiians who live on Ni\u02bbihau as \"enemy\" trackers.\nSociety.\nPolitics.\nThe island of Ni\u02bbihau was considered as a possible location for the United Nations headquarters in 1944 by Franklin D. Roosevelt, who had visited Hawaii in 1934. Under Cordell Hull, Roosevelt's Secretary of State, the State Department seriously studied the proposal.\nIn 2004, President George W. Bush received all but one of the 40 votes cast on the island. The remaining vote was cast for Green Party nominee David Cobb. Fifty-one registered voters did not cast ballots. In 2006, Dan Akaka received 60% of votes in the 2006 Senate election to Cynthia Thielen's 36%. In 2008, Ni\u02bbihau's precinct was one of only three of Hawai\u02bbi's 538 precincts to support John McCain over Barack Obama.\nPopulation.\nThe 2010 census states that there were 170 people living on the island. However, witness accounts estimate that the population actually ranges between 35 and 50 people. Some support themselves largely by subsistence fishing and farming, while others depend on welfare. All residents live rent-free, and meat is free. Ni\u02bbihau has no telephone services and no paved roads. Horses are the main form of transportation; bicycles are also used. There are no power lines; solar power provides all electricity. There is no plumbing or running water on the island. Water comes from rainwater catchment. The Robinson family established most of these conditions. There is no hotel, and barges deliver groceries from Kaua\u02bbi, often purchased by relatives, with free shipping.\nResidents generally speak the Ni\u02bbihau dialect of Hawaiian as their first language, in part encouraged by terms in the original purchase contract which obligated the new owners to help preserve Hawaiian culture and tradition. The Ni\u02bbihau dialect differs from modern standard Hawaiian in that, for example, and are the most common realizations of the phonemes and , respectively. Ni\u02bbihau is the only island where Hawaiian is spoken as a primary language. Oral tradition maintains that the Ni\u02bbihau dialect is closer to the Hawaiian register spoken during the time of contact with Europeans; there is linguistic evidence to support this claim, such as the pronunciation of k as . English is the second language.\nSome residents have radio and television sets, although limited reception effectively limits the latter to watching pre-recorded media. Ni\u02bbihau is subject to regular droughts that occasionally force the population to evacuate to Kaua\u02bbi temporarily, until rainfall replenishes their water supply. Residents commonly also commute to Kaua\u02bbi for work, medical care, or school, and many of them call both islands home. To avoid a long boat ride, the island's owners maintain an Agusta A109 helicopter for emergencies and for transporting Navy contractors and residents to and from Kaua\u02bbi. Helicopter tours and safaris help offset the costs of this service.\nA form of ipu art is known to have developed solely on the island of Ni\u02bbihau. In this method, after a design is carved in the skin of a fresh gourd, it is filled with dye which, after several weeks, changes the color of the uncarved portions of the surface where the skin is intact. Hawaiian music plays a central role on the island, with a cappella singers making use of only two or three tones and changing rhythms. Ukulele and guitar playing is nearly ubiquitous among the islanders, and there are three separate styles of slack-key music, with an older style originating from Kohala.\nEducation.\nThe Hawaii Department of Education operates the Ni\u02bbihau School, a K\u201312 school. Academic subjects and computer literacy are combined with teaching students to \"thrive from the land\". The school is powered entirely by solar power. The number of students varies from 25 to 50 since families often travel between Ni\u02bbihau and Kaua\u02bbi. Schoolchildren may stay with relatives in west Kaua\u02bbi, where they attend one of two Ni\u02bbihau-focused public charter schools. At the Ke Kula Ni\u02bbihau o Kekaha school, students speak primarily the Ni\u02bbihau dialect through the early elementary grades, and then Hawaiian and English through grade 12. The school has a digital recording and video system, which helps to preserve and teach traditional Ni\u02bbihau and Hawaiian culture. At the other west Kaua\u02bbi school, Kula Aupuni Ni\u02bbihau a Kahelelani Aloha (KANAKA), English is used in all grades, while still supporting the Ni\u02bbihau dialect. Both schools foster the culture, values, and spirituality of Ni\u02bbihau. Efforts to establish KANAKA began in 1993 and its current version was established in 1999.\nEconomy.\nApproximately 80% of Ni\u02bbihau's income comes from a small Navy installation atop 1,300-foot-high cliffs. Remote-controlled tracking devices are used for testing and training with Kaua'i's Pacific Missile Range Facility. Modern missile defense tests are conducted at the site for the U.S. and its allies. The installation brings in millions of dollars a year, and provides the island with a stable economic base without the complexity of tourism or industrial development.\nThe sale of shells and shell jewelry is an additional source of income. Its beaches are known for their \"p\u016bp\u016b\", tiny shells that wash onto shore during winter months. Species used for shell leis includes \"momi\" (\"Euplica varians\"), \"laiki\" or rice shells (\"Mitrella margarita\") and \"kahelelani\" (\"Leptothyra verruca\"). The shells and jewelry are so popular that Governor Linda Lingle signed a bill in 2004 to protect \"lei p\u016bp\u016b o Ni\u02bbihau\" (Ni\u02bbihau shell leis) from counterfeiting. A single, intricate Ni\u02bbihau shell lei can sell for thousands of dollars.\nMany residents of Ni\u02bbihau were once employees of Ni\u02bbihau Ranch, farming cattle and sheep until the Robinsons shut down the operation in 1999. It had not been profitable for most of the 20th century. Honey cultivation was also no longer viable by 1999. Kiawe charcoal was once a large-scale export, but aggressive Mexican price competition ended that as well. Mullet farming has been popular on Ni\u02bbihau, with ponds and lakes stocked with baby mullet, which reach apiece before being harvested and sold on Kaua\u02bbi and O\u02bbahu.\nAs of 2010, Bruce Robinson, Ni\u02bbihau's co-owner, was considering new ventures on the island. Considered possibilities included JP-8 (jet fuel) generation by the lignocellulose process; increased military activity, including a possible runway; and windmill energy production. Stating his opposition to possible environmental impact, Robinson has declined offers to purchase sand from Ni\u02bbihau's beaches.\nTourism.\nNi\u02bbihau's owners have offered half-day helicopter and beach tours of the island since 1986 or 1987, although contact with residents is avoided and no accommodation exists. Since 1992, hunting safaris provide income from tourists who pay to visit the island to hunt eland, aoudad, and oryx, as well as wild sheep and boars. Any meat the hunters do not take with them is given to the village.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39689", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39689", "title": "Hawaii/Niihau", "text": ""}
{"id": "39690", "revid": "1328244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39690", "title": "Hawaii Five-O (1968 TV series)", "text": "American police procedural drama TV series\nHawaii Five-O is an American police procedural drama series produced by CBS Productions and created by Leonard Freeman. Set in Hawaii, the show aired for 12 seasons on CBS from September 20, 1968, to April 5, 1980. The show starred Jack Lord as Detective Captain Stephen \"Steve\" McGarrett, the head of a fictional state police task force in Hawaii. The theme music composed by Morton Stevens became especially popular. Many episodes in the series would end with McGarrett's catchphrase, \"Book 'em, Danno!\"\nAt the airing of its finale, it was the longest-running police drama in American television history, and the last scripted primetime show that debuted in the 1960s to leave the air.\nOverview.\nThe CBS television network produced \"Hawaii Five-O\", which aired from September 20, 1968, to April 5, 1980. The program continues to be broadcast in syndication worldwide. Created by Leonard Freeman, \"Hawaii Five-O\" was shot on location in Honolulu, Hawai\u02bbi, and throughout the island of O\u02bbahu and elsewhere in the Hawaiian Islands with occasional filming in locales such as Los Angeles, Singapore, and Hong Kong.\nThe show centers on a fictional state police force led by former U.S. naval officer Steve McGarrett (played by Jack Lord), a detective captain, who is appointed by the Governor, Paul Jameson. In the show, McGarrett oversees state police officers \u2013 the young Danny \"Danno\" Williams, veteran Chin Ho Kelly (Kam Fong Chun), and streetwise Kono Kalakaua for seasons one through four. Honolulu Police Department Officer Duke Lukela joined the team as a regular, as did Ben Kokua, who replaced Kono beginning with season five. Occasionally, McGarrett's Five-O team is assisted by other officers as needed: Det. Frank Kamana (Douglas Mossman), P.O. Sandi Wells (Amanda McBroom), medical examiner Doc Bergman (Al Eben), forensic specialist Che Fong (Harry Endo), and a secretary. The first secretary was May, then Jenny, and later Malia, Lani, and Luana.\nThe title of the show refers to Hawai\u02bbi's status as the fiftieth U.S. state. At the time of the show's premier, Hawai\u02bbi had officially been a U.S. state for only nine years. The \"Five-O\" team consists of three to five members (small for a real state police unit), and is portrayed as occupying a suite of offices in \u02bbIolani Palace. Five-O lacks its own radio network, necessitating frequent requests by McGarrett to the Honolulu Police Department dispatchers.\nFor 12 seasons, McGarrett and his team pursued international secret agents, criminals, and organized crime syndicates plaguing the Hawaiian Islands. With the aid of District Attorney and later Hawai\u02bbi's Attorney General John Manicote, McGarrett is successful in sending most of his enemies to prison. One such crime syndicate was led by crime family patriarch Honore Vashon, a character introduced in the fifth season. Other criminals and organized crime bosses on the islands were played by actors such as Ricardo Montalb\u00e1n, Gavin MacLeod, and Ross Martin as Tony Alika.\nBy the 12th and final season, series regular James MacArthur had left the show (in 1996, he admitted that he had become tired of the role and wanted to do other things), as had Kam Fong. Unlike other characters before him, Fong's character, Chin Ho Kelly, at Fong's request, was killed off, murdered while working undercover to expose a protection ring in Chinatown in the last episode of season 10. New characters Jim 'Kimo' Carew (William Smith), Lori Wilson (Sharon Farrell), and Truck (Moe Keale) were introduced in season 12 alongside returning regular character Duke Lukela.\nMost episodes of \"Hawaii Five-O\" ended with the arrest of criminals and McGarrett snapping, \"Book 'em.\" The offense occasionally was added after this phrase, for example, \"Book 'em, murder one.\" In many episodes, this was directed to Danny \"Danno\" Williams and became McGarrett's catchphrase: \"Book 'em, Danno.\" This catchphrase also expanded to sports in the mid-1970s with former Pittsburgh Penguins announcer Mike Lange, who would utter the line for some Penguins goals.\nMcGarrett's tousled yet immaculate hairstyle, as well as his proclivity for wearing a dark suit and tie on all possible occasions (uncommon in the islands), rapidly entered popular culture. While the other members of \"Five-O\" \"dressed mainland\" much of the time, they also often wore local styles, such as the ubiquitous aloha shirt.\nIn many episodes (including the pilot), McGarrett is drawn into the world of international espionage and national intelligence. McGarrett's nemesis is a rogue intelligence officer of the People's Republic of China named Wo Fat. The communist rogue agent was played by veteran actor Khigh Dhiegh. In the show's final episode in 1980, titled \"Woe to Wo Fat\", McGarrett finally sees his foe go to jail.\nUnlike the reboot, the show's action and straightforward storytelling left little time for personal stories involving wives or girlfriends, though a two-part story in the first season dealt with the loss of McGarrett's sister's baby. Occasionally, a show would flash back to McGarrett's younger years or to a romantic figure.\nIn the episode \"Number One with a Bullet, Part 2\", McGarrett tells a criminal, \"It was a bastard like you who killed my father.\" His 42-year-old father had been run down and killed by someone who had just held up a supermarket. Because Steve McGarrett is also a commander in the Naval Reserve, he sometimes uses their resources to help investigate and solve crimes. The United States Navy as well as the U.S. Coast Guard provided some locations and resources for filming, hence the closing credits of some episodes acknowledge the assistance of the United States Navy. A 1975 episode involving Danno's aunt, played by MacArthur's mother Helen Hayes, provided a bit of Williams' back story.\nCreation of the show.\nSources differ on how the show came to be. Producer Leonard Freeman moved to Hawai\u02bbi to recuperate after suffering a heart attack. One source states the idea for the show may have come from a conversation Freeman had with Hawai\u02bbi's then-Governor John A. Burns.\nAnother source instead claims that Freeman wanted to set a show in San Pedro, Los Angeles, California until his friend Richard Boone convinced him to shoot it entirely in Hawai\u02bbi. A third source claims Freeman discussed the show with Governor Burns only after pitching the idea to CBS. Before settling on the name \"Hawaii Five-O\", Freeman considered titling the show \"The Man\".\nCasting.\nFreeman offered Richard Boone the part of McGarrett, but Boone turned it down; Gregory Peck and Robert Brown were also considered. Ultimately, Jack Lord \u2013 then living in Beverly Hills \u2013 was asked at the last moment. Lord read for the part on a Wednesday, was cast, and flew to Hawai\u02bbi two days later. On the following Monday, Lord was in front of the cameras. Freeman and Lord had worked together previously on an unsold TV pilot called \"Grand Hotel\".\nTim O'Kelly originated the role of Danny \"Danno\" Williams in the pilot episode, \"Cocoon\". Test audiences apparently were not positive on O'Kelly, however, and the producers replaced him with James MacArthur.\nKam Fong Chun, an 18-year veteran of the Honolulu Police Department, auditioned for the part of the lead villain Wo Fat, but Freeman cast him in the part of Chin Ho Kelly instead. Freeman took the name Wo Fat from a restaurant in downtown Honolulu. The name Chin Ho came from Chinn Ho, the owner of the Ilikai Hotel where the penthouse shot of Steve McGarrett in the opening title sequence was taken. Richard Denning, who played the governor, had retired to Hawai\u02bbi and came out of retirement for the show. Zulu was a Waik\u012bk\u012b beach boy and local DJ with no acting experience when he was cast for the part of Kono, which he played for the next four years.\nProduction.\nThe first season was shot in a rusty military Quonset hut in Pearl City, which the various cast members quickly nicknamed \"Mongoose Manor\". The roof tended to leak, and rats would often gnaw at the cables. The show then moved to a Fort Ruger location for seasons two to eight. A third studio was built at Diamond Head, and was used during the last four seasons.\nA problem from the beginning was the lack of a movie industry in Hawai\u02bbi. Much of the crew and cast, including many locals who ended up participating in the show, had to learn their respective jobs as they went along. Jack Lord was known as a perfectionist who insisted on the best from everyone. His temper flared when he felt that others did not give their best, but in later reunions they admitted that Lord's hard-driving force had made them better actors and made \"Hawaii Five-O\" a better show. Lord's high standards helped the show last another six years after Leonard Freeman's death from heart trouble during the sixth season.\nTo critics and viewers, there was no question that Jack Lord was the center of the show, and that the other actors frequently served as little more than props, standing and watching while McGarrett emoted and paced around his office, analyzing the crime. But occasionally episodes would focus on the other actors, and let them showcase their own talents, such as Danno defusing bombs in \"The Clock Struck Twelve\".\nVery few episodes were shot outside of Hawai\u02bbi. At least two episodes were shot on location in Los Angeles, one in Hong Kong, and one in Singapore as McGarrett traveled to those locales for Investigations.\nCredits.\nThe opening title sequence was created by television director Reza S. Badiyi. Early shows began with a cold open suggesting the sinister plot for that episode, then cut to a shot of a big ocean wave and the start of the theme song. A fast zoom-in to the top balcony of the Ilikai Hotel followed, showing McGarrett turning to face the camera, followed by many quick-cuts and freeze-frames of Hawaiian scenery, including Punchbowl Cemetery, and Hawaiian-Chinese-English model Elizabeth Malamalamaokalani Logue turning to face the camera. A grass-skirted hula dancer from the pilot episode was also included, played by Helen Kuoha-Torco, who later became a business professor at Windward Community College. The opening scene ended with shots of the supporting players, and the flashing blue light of a police motorcycle racing through a Honolulu street.\nAt the conclusion of each episode, Jack Lord narrated a promo for the next episode, often emphasizing the \"guest villain\", especially if the villain is a recurring character, such as that played by actor Hume Cronyn (2 episodes). The line he spoke was, \"This is Jack Lord inviting you to be with us next week for &lt;name of episode&gt;\" and then, \"Be here. Aloha.\" The promos were removed from the syndicated episodes but most have been restored in DVD releases from the second season through the ninth. Most of the promos are slightly edited to remove references to \"next week\".\nThis tradition has been continued in the 2010 version of \"Hawaii Five-0\", but is not limited to Alex O'Loughlin. All of the primary cast members take turns with the \"Be here. Aloha.\" line at the end of the preview segment.\nThere were two versions of the closing credits portion of the show. During the first season, the theme music was played over a short film of a flashing blue light attached to the rear of a police motorcycle in Waik\u012bk\u012b heading west (the film is shown at twice the normal speed, as can be seen from people crossing a street behind the police motorcycle). In later seasons, the same music was played over film of outrigger canoeists battling the surf.\nIn a 2010 issue of \"TV Guide\", the show's opening title sequence ranked No. 4 on a list of TV's top 10 credits sequences, as selected by readers.\nLegacy.\nThe show was the longest-running police procedural show on American television until \"Law &amp; Order\" surpassed it in 2002, and was the first to enjoy an uninterrupted run that exceeded a decade (it has since been joined in that distinction by several other series including ', ' and \"NCIS\").\nWhen the show premiered in 1968, Hawai\u02bbi had been a state for only nine years and was relatively obscure to Americans who had never served in the Pacific Theater, but as a geographic part of Polynesia it had an exotic image.\nKnown for the location, theme song, and ensemble cast, \"Hawaii Five-O\" contains a heavy use of exterior location shooting throughout the entire 12 seasons. A typical episode, on average, would have at least two-thirds of all footage shot on location, as opposed to a \"typical\" show of the time which would be shot largely on sound stages and backlots. It is also remembered for its unusual setting during a time when most crime dramas of the era were set in or around the Los Angeles or New York City areas.\nThe Hawaii-based television show \"Magnum, P.I.\" was created after \"Hawaii Five-O\" ended its run, in order to make further use of the expensive production facilities created there for \"Five-O\". The first few \"Magnum P.I.\" episodes made direct references to \"Five-O\", suggesting that it takes place in the same fictional setting. In Episode 10 of Season 2, \"The Taking of Dick McWilliams,\" Rick Wright answers Thomas Magnum when asked about a license plate search that the car belonged to someone on Five-O named McGarrett. \"Magnum\"'s producers made a few attempts to coax Jack Lord out of retirement for a cameo appearance, but he refused.\nMany local people were cast in the show, which was ethnically diverse by the standards of the late 1960s. The first run and syndication were seen by an estimated 400 million people around the world.\n\"Bored, She Hung Herself\", the 16th episode of the second season, depicted a Five-O investigation into the apparent suicide of a woman by hanging, which she was supposedly practicing as part of a health regimen. A viewer reportedly died trying the same technique, and as a result, the episode was not rebroadcast, was never included in any syndication packages, and has not been included on any DVD release of the show to date. The family of the person who died in the real-life hanging sued CBS over the episode.\nRemake projects.\n1990s.\nIn July 1996, it was announced producer George Litto had partnered with Leonard Freeman's estate and his widow, Rose, in developing a theatrical adaptation of \"Hawaii Five-O\" with a $50 million-$70 million budget and franchise potential. For the lead role of Steve McGarrett, Litto expressed a desire for Mel Gibson, Michael Douglas or Harrison Ford while former McGarrett actor Jack Lord would play a Governor or Senator from Hawaii. Directors whom Litto expressed interest in helming the project included Andrew Davis, Brian De Palma, and Paul Verhoeven. Development on a feature film was stonewalled when CBS filed suit against the Freeman estate claiming ownership and usage of \"Hawaii Five-O\" rested with them and not the Freemans. The suit was eventually settled in favor of Freeman and Litto.\nA one-hour pilot for a new series was made in 1996 but never aired. Produced and written by Stephen J. Cannell, it starred Gary Busey and Russell Wong as the new Five-O team. James MacArthur returned as Dan Williams, having become governor of Hawaii. Several cameos were made by other \"Five-O\" regulars, including Kam Fong as Chin Ho Kelly (even though the character had been killed off at the end of Season 10).\n\"Hawaii Five-0\".\nA remake pilot, called \"Hawaii Five-0\" (the last character is a zero instead of the letter \"O\"; the original series used an \"O\" as zero was typed as a capital O), aired September 20, 2010, on CBS. It lasted for 10 seasons until the 240th and final episode was aired on April\u00a03, 2020. The remake version \"Hawaii Five-0\" used the same principal character names as the original, and the new Steve McGarrett's late father's vintage 1974 Mercury Marquis was the actual car driven by Lord in the original series' final seasons.\nThe new series opening credit sequence was an homage to the original; the theme song was cut in half, from 60 to 30 seconds, but was an otherwise identical instrumentation. Most of the iconic shots were replicated, beginning with the helicopter approach and close-up turn of McGarrett at the Ilikai Hotel penthouse, the jet engine nacelle, a hula dancer's hips, the quickly stepped zoom-in to the face of the Lady Columbia statue at Punchbowl, the close-up of the Kamehameha Statue's face, and the ending with a police motorcycle's flashing blue light.\nThe surname of recurring character Governor Sam Denning (played by Richard T. Jones) was a nod to actor Richard Denning, who played the Governor in the original series. Starting with Season 7, many of the clips that were part of the original opening were removed and more action shots of the cast were included. On the March\u00a019, 2012 episode, Ed Asner reprised his role as \"August March\", a character he first played in a 1975 episode. Clips from the 1975 episode were included in the new one, even though the 2010 series was intended to be in a different narrative universe than the Jack Lord series. The 2016 episode \"Makaukau \u02bboe e Pa\u02bbani?\" features a sequence in which McGarrett (played by Alex O'Loughlin) briefly interacts with a CGI reconstruction of Jack Lord.\nTheme music.\nAnother legacy of the show is the popularity of the \"Hawaii Five-O\" theme music. The tune was composed by Morton Stevens, who also composed numerous episode scores performed by the CBS Orchestra. The theme was later recorded by the Ventures, whose version reached No.\u00a04 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 pop chart, and is particularly popular with college and high school marching bands, especially at the University of Hawai\u02bbi where it has become the unofficial fight song. The tune has also been heard at Robertson Stadium after Houston Dynamo goals scored by Brian Ching, a native of Hawaii. Because of the tempo of the music, the theme gained popularity in the UK with followers of Northern soul and was popular on dance floors in the 1970s.\nSlang term for police.\nThe phrase \"five-O\" (or any variation, such as \"5\u20130\", \"5-O\", and \"five O\") ) has often come to refer to the police in the United States.\nBroadcast history.\nSyndication.\n\"Hawaii Five-O\" survived long enough to overlap with reruns of early episodes, which were broadcast by CBS in their late night schedule while new episodes were still being produced. Once the program entered syndication after the original run of the series, CBS broadcast reruns of season 12 in late night under the title \"McGarrett\" to avoid confusion with the episodes in syndication broadcast under the title \"Hawaii Five-O.\" \nIn the United Kingdom, the series first aired on ITV on July 19, 1970, in a Saturday evening time slot.\nIn Hawaii, reruns of the series aired on 13 Alanui beginning on August 1, 2001 (the day 13 Alanui began broadcasting) and continued until December 30, 2011.\nFrom September 2021 to mid October 2023, the series aired in Ontario, Canada intermittently weekdays either at 1pm or 2pm on CHCH TV 11. CHCH did air the HD remastered version of the series in its original unedited broadcast versions. CHCH did air all 12 seasons in broadcast order.\nSince 2023, the series first 10 seasons streams three episodes per day on Pluto TV in Canada. Episodes are also remastered in HD and uncut.\nStreaming media.\nCBS Interactive had presented the entire first season of the show online via Adobe Flash streaming media.\nAs of July 2017, almost every episode is available at CBS.com.\nThe first 10 episodes of season 1 are available free of charge. All other episodes require a CBS All Access subscription to view. As of 2025, the series is available on Paramount+.\nHome media.\nCBS DVD (distributed by Paramount) has released all twelve seasons on DVD in Region 1. The first eight seasons have been released in region 2 and the first seven seasons in region 4.\nIn September 2019 (Region 4, Australia), Via Vision Entertainment released a \"Season 1-7 Boxset\" followed by \"Season 8-12 Boxset\" in February 2020. The Via Vision Entertainment releases are only available in these box sets and not individual seasons.\nThe episode \"Bored, She Hung Herself\" is not included in \"The Second Season\" set. The omission is mentioned on the back of the box. Only some Australian bootlegs have had the episode. Seasons 2\u20138 contain episode promos by Jack Lord.\nOn December 3, 2013, Paramount released \"Hawaii Five-O \u2013 The Complete Series\" on DVD in Region 1. On April 18, 2017, \"The Complete Series\" set was reissued.\nOther media.\nA soundtrack album featuring Morton Stevens' theme and incidental music from the pilot and the first two seasons was issued by Capitol Records in 1970. Unlike many albums of television music of the time, the music was taken directly from the scoring sessions rather than being specially re-recorded for album release. One of the instrumental pieces on the album, \"Call to Danger\", was originally recorded for the unsold 1967 pilot of the same name and also excerpted as background music accompanying a \"Special Presentation\" logo that CBS used to introduce its prime time television specials throughout the 1970s and 1980s. The album was re-issued on compact disc by Film Score Monthly in 2010.\n\"Hawaii Five-O\" was the subject of six original novels. The first two books were published by Signet Paperbacks in 1968 and 1969. After that were two juvenile hard covers published by Whitman publishing in 1969 and 1971 and finally two more books were published in England.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39692", "revid": "823", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39692", "title": "Window system", "text": ""}
{"id": "39693", "revid": "50286177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39693", "title": "Bobsleigh", "text": "Olympic team winter sport\nBobsleigh or bobsled is a winter sport in which teams of 2 to 4 athletes make timed speed runs down narrow, twisting, banked, iced tracks in a gravity-powered sleigh. International bobsleigh competitions are governed by the International Bobsleigh and Skeleton Federation (formerly the FIBT). \nThe first bobsleds were built in the late 19th century in St. Moritz, Switzerland, by wealthy tourists from Victorian Britain who were staying at the Palace Hotel owned by Caspar Badrutt. The early sleds were adapted from boys' delivery sleds and toboggans. These eventually evolved into bobsleighs, luges and skeletons. Initially the tourists would race their hand-built contraptions down the narrow streets of St. Moritz; however, as collisions increased, growing opposition from St. Moritz residents led to bobsledding being eventually banned from public highways. In the winter of 1884, Badrutt had a purpose-built run constructed near the hamlet of Cresta. The Cresta Run remains the oldest in the world and is the home of the St. Moritz Tobogganing Club. It has hosted two Olympic Winter Games and as of 2022 was still in use.\nModern bobsleigh teams compete to complete a downhill route in the fastest times. An aggregate time from several runs is used to determine the winners. The four-man event has been featured since the first Winter Games in 1924 in Chamonix, France. The only exception was the 1960 games in Squaw Valley (now known as Olympic Valley), California, United States, when the organizing committee decided not to build a track to reduce costs. The two-man event was introduced at the 1932 games and a two-woman event was first contested at the 2002 Winter Olympics. The women's monobob event was introduced in the 2022 games.\nEtymology.\nThe name is derived from the action some early competitors adopted of bobbing back and forth inside their sleds to increase speed.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nAlthough sledding on snow or ice had long been popular in many northern countries, the origins of bobsleighing as a modern sport are relatively recent. It developed after hotelier Caspar Badrutt (1848\u20131904) convinced some wealthy English regular guests to remain through the entire winter at his hotel in the mineral spa town of St. Moritz, Switzerland. He had been frustrated that his hotel was only busy during the summer months. By keeping his guests entertained with food, alcohol and activities, he quickly established the concept of \"winter resorting\". Within a few years, wintering at Badrutt's St. Moritz hotel became very fashionable in Victorian Britain. However, with increased numbers this led some guests to search for new diversions. In the early 1870s some adventurous Englishmen began adapting boys' delivery sleds for recreational purposes.\nHowever, when they began colliding with pedestrians in the icy lanes, alleyways and roads of St. Moritz, this led to the invention of \"steering means\" for the sleds. The basic bobsleigh (bobsled) consisted of two crestas (skeleton sleds) attached together with a board that had a steering mechanism at the front. The ability to steer meant the sleds could make longer runs through the town. Longer runs also meant higher speeds on curves. Local sentiment about these informal competitions varied, but eventually complaints grew so vociferous that Badrutt had to do something. His solution, in the late 1870s, was to build a basic natural-ice run for his guests outside the town near the small hamlet named Cresta. He took action because he did not want to make enemies in the town, and he had worked hard and invested a lot of time and money in popularizing wintering in St. Moritz, so he was not going to let boredom induce customers not to visit the area.\nCompetitive discipline.\nFormal competitions began down the natural-ice Cresta Run in 1884, which was built in an annual partnership between guests and local people. The run, which was still in operation as of 2014[ [update]], has served as a host track for skeleton at two Winter Olympic Games (1928 and 1948). As one of the few natural weather tracks in the world, it does not use artificial refrigeration. It is not known how much the original track evolved in the early years as the three sports matured and stabilized. The first club was formed in 1897, and the first purpose-built track solely for bobsleds opened in 1902 outside St. Moritz. Over the years, bobsleigh tracks evolved from straight runs to twisting and turning tracks. The original wooden sleds gave way to streamlined fiberglass and metal ones.\nThe International Bobsleigh and Skeleton Federation (IBSF) was founded in 1923. Men's four-man bobsleigh appeared in the first ever Winter Olympics in 1924, and the men's two-man bobsleigh event was added in 1932. Though not included in the 1960 Winter Olympics, bobsleigh has featured in every Winter Olympics since. Women's bobsleigh competition began in the US in 1983 with two demonstration races in Lake Placid, New York, one held in February and the second held during the World Cup races in March 1983. Two-woman bobsleigh made its Olympic debut at the 2002 Winter Olympics. Bobsleigh is also contested at American, European, and World Cup championships.\nGermany and Switzerland have proven the most successful bobsleighing nations, measured by overall success in European, World, World Cup, and Olympic championships. Since the 1990s Germans have dominated in international competition, having won more medals than any other nation. Italy, Austria, Canada and the United States also have strong bobsleigh traditions.\nBobsleighs can attain speeds of , with the reported world record being set on March 3, 2019 at the Whistler World Championships in 2019.\nModern era.\nTracks.\nModern tracks are made of concrete, coated with ice. They are required to have at least one straight section and one labyrinth (three turns in quick succession without a straight section). Ideally, a modern track should be long and have at least fifteen curves. Speeds may exceed , and some curves can subject the crews to as much as 5 \"g\".\nSome bobsleigh tracks are also used for luge and skeleton competition.\nSome tracks offer tourists rides in bobsleighs, including those at Sigulda, Latvia; Innsbruck-Igls, Austria; Whistler, British Columbia, Canada; Lillehammer, Norway; Cesana Pariol, Italy; Lake Placid, US; Salt Lake City, Utah, US; and La Plagne, France.\nSleighs and crews.\nModern-day sleighs combine light metals, steel runners, and an aerodynamic composite body. Competition sleighs must be a maximum of long (4-crew) or long (2-crew). The runners on both are set at gauge. Until the weight-limit rule was added in 1952, bobsleigh crews tended to be very heavy to ensure the greatest possible speed. Nowadays the maximum weight, including crew, is (4-man), (2-man), or (2-woman), which can be reached via the addition of metal weights. The bobsleighs themselves are designed to be as light as possible to allow dynamic positioning of mass through the turns of the bobsleigh course.\nAlthough bobsleighs once were ridden by five or six, crews were reduced in the 1930s to either two or four people. The four-person crew consists of a pilot, a brakeman, and two pushers. Athletes are selected for their speed and strength, which are necessary to push the sleigh to a competitive speed at the start of the race. Pilots must have the skill, timing, and finesse to steer the sleigh along the path, or \"line\", that will produce the greatest speed.\nIn modern bobsleighs, the steering system consists of two metal rings that actuate a pulley system located in the forward cowling that turns the front runners. For example, to turn left, the pilot would pull the left ring. Only subtle steering adjustments are necessary to guide the sled; at speeds up to , anything larger would result in a crash. The pilot does most of the steering, and the brakeman stops the sled after crossing the finish line by pulling the sled's brake lever.\nWomen compete in women's bobsleigh (which is always two-woman) and men in both two- and four-man competitions. Women were confirmed as being able to compete in any four-\"man\" bobsleigh event, as from 25 September 2014, either as part of a mixed-sex team or an all-female team. However, because women are on average lighter than men (and thus at a competitive disadvantage in a gravity sport), and because most sliding nations have fewer women able to compete than men, this option has not proved popular with teams.\nMonobob.\nA single-person bobsleigh is called a \"monobob\". Single-person sleds were introduced into international competition for both adaptive bobsleigh (for athletes who are able to drive a sled but not push) and as a youth sport (for younger athletes who have not yet developed the ability to push a heavy two- or four-person sled). After the 2018 Winter Olympics, the International Olympic Committee and the IBSF agreed to add women's monobob as an Olympic sport for the 2022 Winter Olympics, so that there would be an equal number of women's and men's events in bobsleigh.\nPrior to the 2020\u201321 competitive season, monobobs were traditionally constructed on one-piece chassis. Starting with the 2020\u201321 season, competitors in IBSF-sanctioned races must use articulated (two-section) monobobs manufactured by the IBSF's sole source sled builder, iXent. The sled must weigh a minimum of without the athlete (but including timing equipment and any ballast weights) and a maximum of including the athlete; runners are the same as for two-person bobsleighs. This implies a maximum athlete weight limit of .\nRacing.\nIndividual runs down the course, or \"heats\", begin from a standing start, with the crew pushing the sled for up to before boarding; though the pilot does not steer, grooves in the ice make steering unnecessary until the sled leaves the starting area. While poor form during the initial push can lose a team the heat, it is otherwise rarely, if ever, decisive. Over the rest of the course, a sleigh's speed depends on its weight, aerodynamics, runners, the condition of the ice, and the skill of the pilot.\nRace times are recorded in hundredths of seconds, so even seemingly minor errors \u2013 especially those at the beginning, which affect the remainder of the heat \u2013 can have a measurable impact on the final race standings.\nThe men's and women's standings for normal races are calculated over the aggregate of two runs or heats. At the Olympic Winter Games and World Championships, all competitions (for both men and women) consist of four heats.\nSafety.\nBrain trauma.\nSledding at a competitive level involves sledders repeatedly subjecting themselves to high-G forces and multiple small collisions of their head into their helmet as sharp turns are taken. Additionally, when mistakes happen and the sled crashes, there are no \"seatbelts\" or other protections; the sledders can simply be falling down the course at high speed with their helmet grinding along the surface or bouncing off the interior of the sled. One sledder described his experience during crashes as being equivalent to his head being inside a jet engine. Even ignoring crashes, repetitive shaking from small imperfections in the course is hypothesized to cause small tears in the brain, especially if performed repeatedly. The culture of competitive bobsledders (especially before this danger was recognized) also made injured participants hesitant to speak up and request breaks, fearful of being dropped from the team. Bobsledders who train frequently have reported issues such as chronic headaches, a heightened sensitivity to bright lights and loud noises, forgetfulness, a \"mental fog\", and psychological problems. Repeated mild brain trauma has caused issues for boxers, rugby players, and football players with chronic traumatic encephalopathy, and fears have arisen that bobsledding carries a similar danger, at least with the steeper and faster courses used in competitions. A brain scan of one bobsledder, Christina Smith, revealed damage to the rear and frontal lobes, consistent with micro-tears in the brain's white matter.\nA significant number of athletes have either died by suicide or died of drug overdoses. Examples include medal-winning bobsledders Eugenio Monti and Pavle Jovanovic, who died by suicide; Steven Holcomb died of an overdose. Since 2013, three North American former bobsledders have taken their lives, another attempted it, and two others died of overdoses; this is far over expectation of the group from chance, as only a few hundred athletes participate seriously in bobsled and other sliding sports such as luge and skeleton at any one time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39696", "revid": "44585572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39696", "title": "Oak", "text": "Tree or shrub in the genus Quercus\nAn oak is a hardwood tree or shrub in the genus Quercus of the beech family. They have spirally arranged leaves, often with lobed edges, and a nut called an acorn, borne within a cup. The genus is widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere, with some 500 species, both deciduous and evergreen. Fossil oaks date back to the Middle Eocene. Molecular phylogeny shows that the genus is divided into Old World and New World clades, but many oak species hybridise freely, making the genus's history difficult to resolve.\nEcologically, oaks are keystone species in habitats from Mediterranean semi-desert to subtropical rainforest. They live in association with many kinds of fungi including truffles. Oaks support more than 950 species of caterpillar, many kinds of gall wasp which form distinctive galls (roundish woody lumps such as the oak apple), and a large number of pests and diseases. Oak leaves and acorns contain enough tannin to be toxic to cattle, but pigs are able to digest them safely. Oak timber is strong and hard, and has found many uses in construction and furniture-making. The bark was traditionally used for tanning leather. Wine barrels are made of oak; these are used for aging alcoholic beverages such as sherry and whisky, giving them a range of flavours, colours, and aromas. The spongy bark of the cork oak is used to make traditional wine bottle corks. Almost a third of oak species are threatened with extinction due to climate change, invasive pests, and habitat loss.\nIn culture, the oak tree is a symbol of strength and serves as the national tree of many countries. In Indo-European and related religions, the oak is associated with thunder gods. Individual oak trees of cultural significance include the Royal Oak in Britain, the Charter Oak in the United States, and the Guernica Oak in the Basque Country.\nEtymology.\nThe generic name \"Quercus\" is Latin for \"oak\", derived from Proto-Indo-European \"*kwerkwu-\", \"oak\", which is also the origin of the name \"fir\", another important or sacred tree in Indo-European culture. The word \"cork\", for the bark of the cork oak, similarly derives from \"Quercus\". The common name \"oak\" is from Old English \"ac\" (seen in placenames such as Acton, from \"ac\" + \"tun\", \"oak village\"), which in turn is from Proto-Germanic \"*aiks\", \"oak\".\nDescription.\nOaks are hardwood (dicotyledonous) trees, deciduous or evergreen, with spirally arranged leaves, often with lobate margins; some have serrated leaves or entire leaves with smooth margins. Many deciduous species are marcescent, not dropping dead leaves until spring. In spring, a single oak tree produces both male and female flowers. The staminate (male) flowers are arranged in catkins, while the small pistillate (female) flowers produce an acorn (a\u00a0kind of nut) contained in a cupule. Each acorn usually contains one seed and takes 6\u201318 months to mature, depending on the species. The acorns and leaves contain tannic acid, which helps to guard against fungi and insects. There are some 500 extant species of oaks.\nTrees in the genus are usually large and slow-growing; \"Q.\u00a0alba\" can reach an age of 600 years, a diameter of and a height of . The Granit oak in Bulgaria, a \"Q.\u00a0robur\" specimen, has an estimated age of 1,637 years, making it the oldest oak in Europe. The Wi'aaSal tree, a live oak in the reservation of the Pechanga Band of Indians, California, is at least 1,000 years old, and might be as much as 2,000 years old, which would make it the oldest oak in the US. Among the smallest oaks is \"Q.\u00a0acuta\", the Japanese evergreen oak. It forms a bush or small tree to a height of some .\nEvolution.\nFossil history.\nPotential records of \"Quercus\" have been reported from Late Cretaceous deposits in North America and East Asia. These are not considered definitive, as macrofossils older than the Paleogene, and possibly from before the Eocene are mostly poorly preserved without critical features for certain identification. Amongst the oldest unequivocal records of \"Quercus\" are pollen from Austria, dating to the Paleocene-Eocene boundary, around 55 million years ago. The oldest records of \"Quercus\" in North America are from Oregon, dating to the Middle Eocene, around 44 million years ago, with the oldest records in Asia from the Middle Eocene of Japan; both forms have affinities to the \"Cyclobalanopsis\" group.\nExternal phylogeny.\n\"Quercus\" forms part, or rather two parts, of the Quercoideae subfamily of the Fagaceae, the beech family. Modern molecular phylogenetics suggests the following relationships:\nInternal phylogeny.\nMolecular techniques for phylogenetic analysis show that the genus \"Quercus\" consisted of Old World and New World clades. The entire genome of \"Quercus robur\" (the pedunculate oak) has been sequenced, revealing an array of mutations that may underlie the evolution of longevity and disease resistance in oaks. In addition, hundreds of oak species have been compared (at RAD-seq loci), allowing a detailed phylogeny to be constructed. However, the high signal of introgressive hybridization (the transfer of genetic material by repeated backcrossing with hybrid offspring) in the genus has made it difficult to resolve an unambiguous, unitary history of oaks. The phylogeny from Hipp et al. 2019 is:\nTaxonomy.\nTaxonomic history.\nThe genus \"Quercus\" was circumscribed by Carl Linnaeus in the first edition of his 1753 \"Species Plantarum\". He described 15 species within the new genus, providing type specimens for 10 of these, and giving names but no types for \"Q.\u00a0cerris\", \"Q.\u00a0coccifera\", \"Q.\u00a0ilex\", \"Q.\u00a0smilax\", and \"Q.\u00a0suber\". He chose \"Q.\u00a0robur\", the pedunculate oak, as the type species for the genus.\nA 2017 classification of \"Quercus\", based on multiple molecular phylogenetic studies, divided the genus into two subgenera and eight sections:\nThe subgenus division supports the evolutionary diversification of oaks among two distinct clades: the Old World clade (subgenus \"Cerris\"), including oaks that diversified in Eurasia; and the New World clade (subgenus \"Quercus\"), oaks that diversified mainly in the Americas.\nSubgenus \"Cerris\".\nThe type species is \"Quercus cerris\".\nDistribution.\nThe genus \"Quercus\" is native to the Northern Hemisphere and includes deciduous and evergreen species extending from cool temperate to tropical latitudes in the Americas, Asia, Europe, and North Africa. North America has the largest number of oak species, with approximately 160 species in Mexico, of which 109 are endemic, and about 90 in the United States. The second greatest area of oak diversity is China, with approximately 100 species.\nIn the Americas, \"Quercus\" is widespread from Vancouver and Nova Scotia in the south of Canada, south to Mexico and across the whole of the eastern United States. It is present in a small area of the west of Cuba; in Mesoamerica it occurs mainly above . The genus crossed the isthmus of Panama when the northern and southern continents came together and is present as one species, \"Q.\u00a0humboldtii\", above 1,000\u00a0metres in Colombia. The oaks of North America are of many sections (\"Protobalanus\", \"Lobatae\", \"Ponticae\", \"Quercus\", and \"Virentes\") along with related genera such as \"Notholithocarpus\".\nIn the Old World, oaks of section \"Quercus\" extend across the whole of Europe including European Russia apart from the far north, and north Africa (north of the Sahara) from Morocco to Libya. In Mediterranean Europe, they are joined by oaks of the sections \"Cerris\" and \"Ilex\", which extend across Turkey, the Middle East, Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan\",\" while section \"Ponticae\" is endemic to the western Caucasus in Turkey and Georgia. Oaks of section \"Cyclobalanopsis\" extend in a narrow belt along the Himalayas to cover mainland and island Southeast Asia as far as Sumatra, Java, Borneo, and Palawan. Finally, oaks of multiple sections (\"Cyclobalanopsis\", \"Ilex\", \"Cerris\", \"Quercus\" and related genera like \"Lithocarpus\" and \"Castanopsis\") extend across east Asia including China, Korea, and Japan.\nEcology.\nOaks are keystone species in a wide range of habitats from Mediterranean semi-desert to subtropical rainforest. They are important components of hardwood forests; some species grow in associations with members of the Ericaceae in oak\u2013heath forests. Several kinds of truffles, including two well-known varieties \u2013 black P\u00e9rigord truffle and the white Piedmont truffle \u2013 have symbiotic relationships with oak trees. Similarly, many other fungi, such as \"Ramaria flavosaponaria\", associate with oaks.\nOaks support more than 950 species of caterpillars, an important food source for many birds. Mature oak trees shed widely varying numbers of acorns (known collectively as mast) annually, with large quantities in mast years. This may be a predator satiation strategy, increasing the chance that some acorns will survive to germination.\nAnimals including squirrels and jays \u2013 Eurasian jays in the Old World, blue jays in North America \u2013 feed on acorns, and are important agents of seed dispersal as they carry the acorns away and bury many of them as food stores. However, some species of squirrel selectively excise the embryos from the acorns that they store, meaning that the food store lasts longer and that the acorns will never germinate.\nHybridisation.\nInterspecific hybridization is quite common among oaks, but usually between species within the same section only, and most common in the white oak group. White oaks cannot discriminate against pollination by other species in the same section. Because they are wind pollinated and have weak internal barriers to hybridization, hybridization produces functional seeds and fertile hybrid offspring. Ecological stresses, especially near habitat margins, can also cause a breakdown of mate recognition as well as a reduction of male function (pollen quantity and quality) in one parent species.\nFrequent hybridization among oaks has consequences for oak populations around the world; most notably, hybridization has produced large populations of hybrids with much introgression and the evolution of new species. Introgression has caused different species in the same populations to share up to 50% of their genetic information. As a result, genetic data often does not differentiate between clearly morphologically distinct species, but instead differentiates populations. The maintenance of particular loci for adaptation to ecological niches may explain the retention of species identity despite significant gene flow.\nThe Fagaceae, or beech family, to which the oaks belong, is a slowly-evolving clade compared to other angiosperms, and the patterns of hybridization and introgression in \"Quercus\" pose a significant challenge to the concept of a species as a group of \"actually or potentially interbreeding populations which are reproductively isolated from other such groups.\" By this definition, many species of \"Quercus\" would be lumped together according to their geographic and ecological habitat, despite clear distinctions in morphology and genetic data.\nDiseases and pests.\nOaks are affected by a large number of pests and diseases. For instance, \"Q. robur\" and \"Q. petraea\" in Britain host 423 insect species. This diversity includes 106 macro-moths, 83 micro-moths, 67 beetles, 53 cynipoidean wasps, 38 heteropteran bugs, 21 auchenorrhynchan bugs, 17 sawflies, and 15 aphids. The insect numbers are seasonal: in spring, chewing insects such as caterpillars become numerous, followed by insects with sucking mouthparts such as aphids, then by leaf miners, and finally by gall wasps such as \"Neuroterus\". Several powdery mildews affect oak species. In Europe, the species \"Erysiphe alphitoides\" is the most common. It reduces the ability of leaves to photosynthesize, and infected leaves are shed early.\nAnother significant threat, the oak processionary moth (\"Thaumetopoea processionea\"), has emerged in the UK since 2006. The caterpillars of this species defoliate the trees and are hazardous to human health; their bodies are covered with poisonous hairs which can cause rashes and respiratory problems. A little-understood disease of mature oaks, acute oak decline, has affected the UK since 2009. \nIn California, goldspotted oak borer (\"Agrilus auroguttatus\") has destroyed many oak trees, while sudden oak death, caused by the oomycete pathogen \"Phytophthora ramorum\", has devastated oaks in California and Oregon, and is present in Europe. Japanese oak wilt, caused by the fungus \"Raffaelea quercivora\", has rapidly killed trees across Japan.\nGall communities.\nMany galls are found on oak leaves, buds, flowers, and roots. Examples are oak artichoke gall, oak marble gall, oak apple gall, knopper gall, and spangle gall. These galls are the handiwork of tiny wasps from the Cynipidae. In a complex ecological relationship, these gall wasps become hosts to parasitoid wasps\u2014primarily from the order Chalcidoidea\u2014which lay their larvae inside the gall wasps, ultimately leading to the hosts' demise. Additionally, inquilines live commensally within the galls without harming the gall wasps.\nConservation.\nAn estimated 31% of the world's oak species are threatened with extinction, while 41% of oak species are considered to be of conservation concern. The countries with the highest numbers of threatened oak species (as of 2020) are China with 36 species, Mexico with 32 species, Vietnam with 20 species, and the US with 16 species. Leading causes are climate change and invasive pests in the US, and deforestation and urbanization in Asia. \nIn the Himalayan region of India, oak forests are being invaded by pine trees due to global warming. The associated pine forest species may cross frontiers and integrate into the oak forests. \nOver the past 200 years, large areas of oak forest in the highlands of Mexico, Central America, and the northern Andes have been cleared for coffee plantations and cattle ranching. There is a continuing threat to these forests from exploitation for timber, fuelwood, and charcoal. In the US, entire oak ecosystems have declined due to a combination of factors thought to include fire suppression, increased consumption of acorns by growing mammal populations, herbivory of seedlings, and introduced pests. However, disturbance-tolerant oaks may have benefited from grazers like bison, and suffered when the bison were removed following European colonization.\nToxicity.\nThe leaves and acorns of oaks are poisonous to livestock, including cattle and horses, if eaten in large amounts, due to the toxin tannic acid, which causes kidney damage and gastroenteritis. An exception is the domestic pig, which, under the right conditions, may be fed entirely on acorns, and has traditionally been pastured in oak woodlands (such as the Spanish \"dehesa\" and the English system of pannage). Humans can eat acorns after leaching out the tannins in water.\nUses.\nTimber.\nOak timber is a strong and hard wood with many uses, such as for furniture, floors, building frames, and veneers. The wood of \"Quercus cerris\" (the Turkey oak) has better mechanical properties than those of the white oaks \"Q.\u00a0petraea\" and \"Q.\u00a0robur\"; the heartwood and sapwood have similar mechanical properties. Of the North American red oaks, the northern red oak, \"Quercus rubra\", is highly prized for lumber.\nThe wood is resistant to insect and fungal attack.\nWood from \"Q.\u00a0robur\" and \"Q.\u00a0petraea\" was used in Europe for shipbuilding, especially of naval men of war, until the 19th century. In hill states of India such as Uttarakhand, along with being used for fuelwood and timber, oak wood is used for agricultural implements, while the leaves serve as fodder for livestock during lean periods.\nOther traditional products.\nOak bark, with its high tannin content, was traditionally used in the Old World for tanning leather. Oak galls were used for centuries as a main ingredient in iron gall ink for manuscripts, harvested at a specific time of year. In Korea, sawtooth oak bark is used to make shingles for traditional roof construction. The dried bark of the white oak was used in traditional medical preparations; its tannic acid content made it astringent and antiseptic. Acorns have been ground to make a flour, and roasted for acorn coffee.\nCulinary.\nBarrels for aging wines, sherry, and spirits such as brandy and Scotch whisky are made from oak, with single barrel malt whiskies fetching a premium. The use of oak in wine adds a range of flavours. Oak barrels, which may be charred before use, contribute to their contents' colour, taste, and aroma, imparting a desirable oaky vanillin flavour. A dilemma for wine producers is to choose between French and American oakwoods. French oaks (\"Quercus robur\", \"Q.\u00a0petraea\") give greater refinement and are chosen for the best, most expensive wines. American oak contributes greater texture and resistance to ageing, but produces a more powerful bouquet.\nOak wood chips are used for smoking foods such as fish, meat, and cheese. In Japan, Children's Day is celebrated with rice cakes, filled with a sweet red bean paste, and wrapped in a oak leaf.\nThe bark of the cork oak is used to produce cork stoppers for wine bottles. This species grows around the Mediterranean Sea; Portugal, Spain, Algeria, and Morocco produce most of the world's supply.\nAcorns of various oak species have been used as food for millennia, in Asia, Europe, the Middle East, North Africa, and among the native peoples of North America. In North Africa, acorns have been pressed to make acorn oil: the oil content can be as high as 30%. Oaks have also been used as fodder, both leaves and acorns being fed to livestock such as pigs. Given their high tannin content, acorns have often been leached to remove tannins before use as fodder.\nCulture.\nSymbols.\nThe oak is a widely used symbol of strength and endurance. It is the national tree of many countries, including the US, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus (golden oak), Estonia, France, Germany, Moldova, Jordan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Serbia, and Wales. Ireland's fifth-largest city, Derry, is named for the tree, from , meaning 'oak'. Oak branches are displayed on some German coins, both of the former Deutsche Mark and the euro.\nOak leaves symbolize rank in armed forces including those of the United States. Arrangements of oak leaves, acorns, and sprigs indicate different branches of the United States Navy staff corps officers. The oak tree is used as a symbol by several political parties and organisations. It is the symbol of the Conservative Party in the United Kingdom, and formerly of the Progressive Democrats in Ireland.\nReligion.\nThe prehistoric Indo-European tribes worshipped the oak and connected it with a thunder god, and this tradition descended to many classical cultures. In Greek mythology, the oak is the tree sacred to Zeus, king of the gods. In Zeus's oracle in Dodona, Epirus, the sacred oak was the centerpiece of the precinct, and the priests would divine the pronouncements of the god by interpreting the rustling of the oak's leaves. Mortals who destroyed such trees were said to be punished by the gods since the ancient Greeks believed beings called hamadryads inhabited them. In Norse and Baltic mythology, the oak was sacred to the thunder gods Thor and Perk\u016bnas respectively. In Celtic polytheism, the name druid, Celtic priest, is connected to Proto-Indo-European \"*deru\", meaning oak or tree. Veneration of the oak survives in Serbian Orthodox Church tradition. Christmas celebrations include the \"badnjak\", a branch taken from a young and straight oak ceremonially felled early on Christmas Eve morning, similar to a yule log.\n Category: \nHistory.\nSeveral oak trees hold cultural importance; such as the Royal Oak in Britain, the Charter Oak in the United States, and the Guernica oak in the Basque Country. \"The Proscribed Royalist, 1651\", a famous painting by John Everett Millais, depicts a Royalist hiding in an oak tree while fleeing from Cromwell's forces.\nIn the Roman Republic, a crown of oak leaves was given to those who had saved the life of a citizen in battle; it was called the \"Civic Crown\". In his 17th century poem \"The Garden\", Andrew Marvell critiqued the desire to be awarded such a leafy crown: \"How vainly men themselves amaze / To win the palm, the oak, or bays; And their uncessant labors see / Crowned from some single herb or tree, ...\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39699", "revid": "50495668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39699", "title": "Frederick Barbarossa", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 1155 to 1190\nFrederick Barbarossa (December 1122 \u2013 10 June 1190), also known as Frederick I (; ), was the Holy Roman Emperor from 1155 until his death in 1190. He was elected King of Germany in Frankfurt on 4 March 1152 and crowned in Aachen on 9 March 1152. He was crowned King of Italy on 24 April 1155 in Pavia and emperor by Pope Adrian\u00a0IV on 18 June 1155 in Rome. Two years later, the term ' (\"holy\") first appeared in a document in connection with his empire. He was later formally crowned King of Burgundy, at Arles on 30 June 1178. His nickname of ' (meaning \"Red Beard\" in Italian) \"was first used by the Florentines only in 1298 to differentiate the emperor from his grandson, Frederick II ... and was never employed in medieval Germany\" (the colour red was \"also associated in the Middle Ages with malice and a hot temper\"; in reality, Frederick's hair was \"blond\", although his beard was described by a contemporary as \"reddish\"). In German, he was known as \"\", which in English means \"Emperor Redbeard\". The prevalence of the Italian nickname, even in later German usage, reflects the centrality of the Italian campaigns under his reign, and \"remains to this day one of the [most] powerful historical monikers.\"\nFrederick was by inheritance Duke of Swabia (1147\u20131152, as Frederick III) before his imperial election in 1152. He was the son of Duke Frederick II of the Hohenstaufen dynasty and Judith, daughter of Henry\u00a0IX, Duke of Bavaria, from the rival House of Welf. Frederick, therefore, descended from the two leading families in Germany, making him an acceptable choice for the Empire's prince-electors. Frederick joined the Third Crusade and opted to travel overland to the Holy Land. In 1190, Frederick drowned attempting to cross the Saleph River, leading to most of his army abandoning the Crusade before reaching Acre.\nHistorians consider him among the Holy Roman Empire's greatest medieval emperors. He combined qualities that made him appear almost superhuman to his contemporaries: his longevity, his ambition, his extraordinary skills at organization, his battlefield acumen, and his political perspicacity. His contributions to Central European society and culture include the re-establishment of the \"\", or the Roman rule of law, which counterbalanced the papal power that had dominated the German states since the conclusion of the Investiture controversy. Due to his popularity and notoriety, in the 19th and early 20th centuries, he was used as a political symbol by many movements and regimes: the Risorgimento, the Wilhelmine government in Germany (especially under Emperor Wilhelm I), and the Nazi movement (Operation Barbarossa, Barbarossa decree) resulting in mixed legacies. Modern researchers, while exploring the legacy of Frederick, attempt to untangle legend from historical reality\u2014these efforts result in new perspectives on both the emperor as a person and the social developments associated with him.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nFrederick was born in mid-December 1122 in Haguenau, to Duke Frederick II of Swabia and Judith of Bavaria. His father was from the Hohenstaufen family, and his mother was from the Welf family, the two most powerful families in The Holy Roman Empire. The Hohenstaufens were often called Ghibellines, which derives from the Italianized name for Waiblingen castle, the family seat in Swabia; the Welfs, in a similar Italianization, were called Guelfs. Frederick was also a descendant of the Salian dynasty through his paternal grandmother Agnes as she was the daughter of Emperor Henry IV and Bertha of Savoy. He also had ties to the Ottonian dynasty through his mother Judith as she hailed from Emperor Otto II and his wife Theophanu. Therefore, Frederick carried on the bloodline of Emperor Otto the Great and his wives, Eadgyth and Adelaide. He learned to ride, hunt and use weapons at an early age, but could neither read nor write, and was also unable to speak the Latin language until later in life. He took part in several \"Hoftage\" during the reign of his uncle, King Conrad III, which were a form of informal and irregular assembly popular among the nobles of the Holy Roman Empire. One took place in 1141 in Strasbourg, another in 1142 in Konstanz, 1143 in Ulm, 1144 in W\u00fcrzburg and 1145 in Worms.\nSecond Crusade.\nIn early 1147, Frederick decided to join the Second Crusade after his uncle, King Conrad III, had taken the crusader vow in public on 28 December 1146. Frederick's father, Duke Frederick II, strongly objected to this and according to Otto of Freising, the duke berated his brother for permitting his son to go. The elder Frederick, who was dying, expected his son to look after his widow and younger half-brother once he had passed on, not risk his life by going on a crusade. Perhaps in preparation for the crusade, Frederick married Adelaide of Vohburg sometime before March 1147. His father died on 4 or 6 April and Frederick succeeded him as the Duke of Swabia. The German crusader army departed from Regensburg seven weeks later.\nIn August 1147, while crossing the Byzantine Empire, an ill crusader stopped in a monastery outside Adrianople to recuperate. There he was robbed and killed. Conrad ordered Frederick to avenge him. The duke of Swabia razed the monastery, captured and executed the robbers and demanded they return the stolen money. The intervention of the Byzantine general Prosuch prevented further escalation. A few weeks later, on 8 September, Frederick and Welf VI were among the few German crusaders who survived when a flash flood destroyed the main camp. They had decided to encamp on a hill a ways away from the main army. The remains of the army reached Constantinople the following day.\nConrad III attempted to lead the army across Anatolia but finding this too difficult in the face of constant Turkish attacks near Dorylaeum, decided to turn back. The rearguard was subsequently annihilated. Conrad sent Frederick ahead to inform King Louis VII of France of the disaster and ask for help. The two armies, French and German, then advanced together. When Conrad fell ill around Christmas in Ephesus, he returned to Constantinople by ship with his personal retinue, which included Frederick. With Byzantine ships and money, the German army once again left Constantinople on 7 March 1148 and arrived in Acre on 11 April. After Easter, Conrad and Frederick visited Jerusalem, where Frederick was impressed by the charitable works of the Knights Hospitaller. He took part in the council of Acre on 24 June, where a decision was reached that the crusaders would attack Damascus.\nThe Siege of Damascus (24\u201328 July) lasted a mere five days and ended in failure. Gilbert of Mons, writing fifty years later, recorded that Frederick \"prevailed in arms before all others in front of Damascus\". On 8 September, the German army sailed out of Acre. On the route home, Conrad III and Frederick stopped in Thessaloniki where they swore oaths to uphold the treaty that Conrad had agreed with Emperor Manuel I Komnenos the previous winter. This treaty obligated the Germans to attack King Roger II of Sicily in cooperation with the Byzantines. After confirming the treaty, Frederick was sent ahead to Germany. He passed through Bulgaria and Hungary and arrived in Germany in April 1149.\nElection.\nWhen Conrad died in February 1152, only Frederick and the prince-bishop of Bamberg were at his deathbed. Both asserted afterwards that Conrad had, in full possession of his mental faculties, handed the royal insignia to Frederick and indicated that he, rather than Conrad's own six-year-old son, the future Frederick IV, Duke of Swabia, succeed him as king. Frederick energetically pursued the crown and at Frankfurt on 4 March 1152 the kingdom's princely electors designated him as the next German king. He was crowned King of the Romans at Aachen several days later, on 9 March 1152.\nThe reigns of Henry IV and Henry V left the status of the German empire in disarray, its power waning under the weight of the investiture controversy. For a quarter of a century following the death of Henry V in 1125, the German monarchy was largely a nominal title with no real power behind it. The king, chosen by the prince-electors, was given no resources outside those of his own duchy, and he was at the same time prevented from exercising any real authority or leadership. The royal title was furthermore passed from one family to another to preclude the development of any dynastic interest in the German crown. When Frederick was chosen as king in 1152, royal power had been in effective abeyance for over twenty-five years, and to a considerable degree for more than eighty years. The only real claim to wealth lay in the rich cities of northern Italy, which were still within the nominal control of the German king. The Salian line had died out with the death of Henry V in 1125, and the German princes refused to give the crown to his nephew, the duke of Swabia, for fear he would try to regain the imperial power held by Henry V. Instead, they chose Lothair III (1125\u20131137), who found himself embroiled in a long-running dispute with the Hohenstaufens, and who married into the Welfs. One of the Hohenstaufens gained the throne as Conrad III of Germany (1137\u20131152). When Frederick Barbarossa succeeded his uncle in 1152, there seemed to be excellent prospects for ending the feud, since he was a Welf on his mother's side. The Welf duke of Saxony, Henry the Lion, would not be appeased, however, remaining an implacable enemy of the Hohenstaufen monarchy. Barbarossa had the duchies of Swabia and Franconia, the force of his own personality, and very little else to construct an empire.\nThe Germany that Frederick tried to unite was a patchwork of more than 1,600 individual states, each with its own prince. A few of these, such as Bavaria and Saxony, were large. Many were too small to pinpoint on a map. The titles afforded to the German king were \"Caesar\", \"Augustus\", and \"Emperor of the Romans\". By the time Frederick would assume these, they were little more than propaganda slogans with little other meaning. Frederick was a pragmatist who dealt with the princes by finding a mutual self-interest. Frederick did not attempt to end medieval feudalism, but rather tried to restore it, though this was beyond his ability. The great players in the German civil war had been the Pope, Emperor, Ghibellines and the Guelfs, but none of these had emerged as the winner.\nRise to power.\nEager to restore the Empire to the position it had occupied under Charlemagne and Otto I the Great, the new king saw clearly that the restoration of order in Germany was a necessary preliminary to the enforcement of the imperial rights in Italy. Issuing a general order for peace, he made lavish concessions to the nobles. Abroad, Frederick intervened in the Danish civil war between Svend III and Valdemar I of Denmark and began negotiations with the Eastern Roman Emperor, Manuel I Comnenus. It was probably about this time that the king obtained papal assent for the annulment of his childless marriage with Adelheid of Vohburg, on the grounds of consanguinity (his great-great-grandfather was a brother of Adela's great-great-great-grandmother, making them fourth cousins, once removed). He then made a vain attempt to obtain a bride from the court of Constantinople. On his accession, Frederick had communicated the news of his election to Pope Eugene III, but had neglected to ask for papal confirmation. In March 1153, Frederick concluded the Treaty of Constance with the Pope, wherein he promised, in return for his coronation, to defend the papacy, to make no peace with king Roger II of Sicily or other enemies of the Church without the consent of Eugene, and to help Eugene regain control of the city of Rome.\nFirst Italian Campaign: 1154\u201355.\nFrederick undertook six expeditions into Italy. In the first, beginning in October 1154, his plan was to launch a campaign against the Normans under King William\u00a0I of Sicily. He marched down and almost immediately encountered resistance to his authority. Obtaining the submission of Milan, he successfully besieged Tortona on 13 February 1155, razing it to the ground on 18 April. He moved on to Pavia, where he according to some historians received the Iron Crown and the title of King of Italy on 24 April in the Basilica of San Michele Maggiore. Other historians instead suggest his coronation took place in Monza on 15 April. Moving through Bologna and Tuscany, he was soon approaching the city of Rome. There, Pope Adrian\u00a0IV was struggling with the forces of the republican city commune led by Arnold of Brescia, a student of Abelard. As a sign of good faith, Frederick dismissed the ambassadors from the revived Roman Senate, and Imperial forces suppressed the republicans. Arnold was captured and hanged for treason and rebellion. Despite his unorthodox teaching concerning theology, Arnold was not charged with heresy.\nAs Frederick approached the gates of Rome, the Pope advanced to meet him. At the royal tent the king received him, and after kissing the pope's feet, Frederick expected to receive the traditional kiss of peace. Frederick had declined to hold the Pope's stirrup while leading him to the tent, however, so Adrian refused to give the kiss until this protocol had been complied with. Frederick hesitated, and Adrian\u00a0IV withdrew; after a day's negotiation, Frederick agreed to perform the required ritual, reportedly muttering, \"\"Pro Petro, non Adriano\" \u2013 For Peter, not for Adrian.\" Rome was still in an uproar over the fate of Arnold of Brescia, so rather than marching through the streets of Rome, Frederick and Adrian retired to the Vatican.\nThe next day, 18 June 1155, Adrian\u00a0IV crowned Frederick I Holy Roman Emperor at St Peter's Basilica, amidst the acclamations of the German army. The Romans began to riot, and Frederick spent his coronation day putting down the revolt, resulting in the deaths of over 1,000 Romans and many more thousands injured. The next day, Frederick, Adrian, and the German army travelled to Tivoli. From there, a combination of the unhealthy Italian summer and the effects of his year-long absence from Germany meant he was forced to put off his planned campaign against the Normans of Sicily. On their way northwards, they attacked Spoleto and encountered the ambassadors of Manuel\u00a0I Comnenus, who showered Frederick with costly gifts. At Verona, Frederick declared his fury with the rebellious Milanese before finally returning to Germany.\nDisorder was again rampant in Germany, especially in Bavaria, but general peace was restored by Frederick's vigorous, but conciliatory, measures. The duchy of Bavaria was transferred from Henry\u00a0II Jasomirgott, margrave of Austria, to Frederick's formidable younger cousin Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxony, of the House of Guelph, whose father had previously held both duchies. Henry\u00a0II Jasomirgott was named Duke of Austria in compensation for his loss of Bavaria. As part of his general policy of concessions of formal power to the German princes and ending the civil wars within the kingdom, Frederick further appeased Henry by issuing him with the Privilegium Minus, granting him unprecedented entitlements as Duke of Austria. This was a large concession on the part of Frederick, who realized that Henry the Lion had to be accommodated, even to the point of sharing some power with him. Frederick could not afford to make an outright enemy of Henry.\nOn 9 June 1156 at W\u00fcrzburg, Frederick married Beatrice of Burgundy, daughter and heiress of Renaud\u00a0III, thus adding to his possessions the sizeable realm of the County of Burgundy. In an attempt to create comity, Emperor Frederick proclaimed the Peace of the Land, written between 1152 and 1157, which enacted punishments for a variety of crimes, as well as systems for adjudicating many disputes. He also declared himself the sole Augustus of the Roman world, ceasing to recognise Manuel\u00a0I at Constantinople.\nSecond, Third and Fourth Italian Campaigns: 1158\u20131174.\nThe retreat of Frederick in 1155 forced Pope Adrian\u00a0IV to come to terms with King William\u00a0I of Sicily, granting to William\u00a0I territories that Frederick viewed as his dominion. This aggrieved Frederick, and he was further displeased when Papal legates chose to interpret a letter from Adrian to Frederick in a manner that seemed to imply that the imperial crown was a gift from the Papacy and that in fact the Empire itself was a fief of the Papacy. Disgusted with the pope, and still wishing to crush the Normans in the south of Italy, in June 1158, Frederick set out upon his second Italian expedition, accompanied by Henry the Lion and his Saxon troops. This expedition resulted in the revolt and capture of Milan, the Diet of Roncaglia that saw the establishment of imperial officers and ecclesiastical reforms in the cities of northern Italy, and the beginning of the long struggle with Pope Alexander III. Milan soon rebelled again and humiliated Empress Beatrice (see Legend below).\nThe death of Pope Adrian IV in 1159 led to the election of two rival popes, Alexander\u00a0III and the antipope Victor\u00a0IV, and both sought Frederick's support. Frederick, busy with the siege of Crema, appeared unsupportive of Alexander\u00a0III, and after the sacking of Crema demanded that Alexander appear before the emperor at Pavia and to accept the imperial decree. Alexander refused, and Frederick recognised Victor IV as the legitimate pope in 1160. In response, Alexander III excommunicated both Frederick\u00a0I and Victor\u00a0IV. Frederick attempted to convoke a joint council with King Louis\u00a0VII of France in 1162 to decide the issue of who should be pope. Louis neared the meeting site, but when he became aware that Frederick had stacked the votes for Victor, Louis decided not to attend the council. As a result, the issue was not resolved at that time.\nThe political result of the struggle with Pope Alexander was an alliance formed between the Norman state of Sicily and Pope Alexander\u00a0III against Frederick. In the meantime, Frederick had to deal with another rebellion at Milan, in which the city surrendered on 6 March 1162; much of it was destroyed three weeks later on the emperor's orders. The fate of Milan led to the submission of Brescia, Placentia, and many other northern Italian cities. In August 1162 he triumphantly entered Turin and was crowned with his consort in the cathedral on August 15. Returning to Germany towards the close of 1162, Frederick prevented the escalation of conflicts between Henry the Lion from Saxony and a number of neighbouring princes who were growing weary of Henry's power, influence, and territorial gains. He also severely punished the citizens of Mainz for their rebellion against Archbishop Arnold. In Frederick's third visit to Italy in 1163, his plans for the conquest of Sicily were ruined by the formation of a powerful league against him, brought together mainly by opposition to imperial taxes.\nIn 1164, Frederick took what are believed to be the relics of the \"Biblical Magi\" (the Wise Men or Three Kings) from the Basilica di Sant'Eustorgio in Milan and gave them as a gift (or as loot) to the Archbishop of Cologne, Rainald of Dassel. The relics had great religious significance and could be counted upon to draw pilgrims from all over Christendom. Today they are kept in the Shrine of the Three Kings in the Cologne Cathedral. After the death of the antipope Victor\u00a0IV, Frederick supported antipope Paschal III, but he was soon driven from Rome, leading to the return of Pope Alexander\u00a0III in 1165.\nIn the meantime Frederick was focused on restoring peace in the Rhineland, where he organized a magnificent celebration of the canonization of Charlemagne at Aachen, under the authority of the antipope Paschal\u00a0III. Concerned over rumours that Alexander III was about to enter into an alliance with the Byzantine Emperor Manuel\u00a0I, in October 1166 Frederick embarked on his fourth Italian campaign, hoping as well to secure the claim of Paschal\u00a0III and the coronation of his wife Beatrice as Holy Roman Empress. This time, Henry the Lion refused to join Frederick on his Italian trip, tending instead to his own disputes with neighbors and his continuing expansion into Slavic territories in northeastern Germany. In 1167 Frederick began besieging Ancona, which had acknowledged the authority of Manuel\u00a0I; at the same time, his forces achieved a great victory over the Romans at the Battle of Monte Porzio. Heartened by this victory, Frederick lifted the siege of Ancona and hurried to Rome, where he had his wife crowned empress and also received a second coronation from Paschal\u00a0III. His campaign was halted by the sudden outbreak of an epidemic (malaria or the plague), which threatened to destroy the Imperial army and drove the emperor as a fugitive to Germany, where he remained for the ensuing six years. During this period, Frederick decided conflicting claims to various bishoprics, asserted imperial authority over Bohemia, Poland, and Hungary, initiated friendly relations with Manuel\u00a0I, and tried to come to a better understanding with Henry\u00a0II of England and Louis\u00a0VII of France. Many Swabian counts, including his cousin the young Duke of Swabia, Frederick\u00a0IV, died in 1167, so he was able to organize a new mighty territory in the Duchy of Swabia under his reign in this time. Consequently, his younger son Frederick\u00a0V became the new Duke of Swabia in 1167, while his eldest son Henry was crowned King of the Romans in 1169, alongside his father who also retained the title.\nLater years.\nIncreasing anti-German sentiment swept through Lombardy, culminating in the restoration of Milan in 1169. In 1174 Frederick made his fifth expedition to Italy. (It was probably during this time that the famous \"Tafelg\u00fcterverzeichnis\", a record of the royal estates, was made.) He was opposed by the pro-papal Lombard League (now joined by Venice, Sicily and Constantinople), which had previously formed to stand against him. The cities of northern Italy had become exceedingly wealthy through trade, representing a marked turning point in the transition from medieval feudalism. While continental feudalism had remained strong socially and economically, it was in deep political decline by the time of Frederick Barbarossa. When the northern Italian cities inflicted a defeat on Frederick at Alessandria in 1175, the European world was shocked. With the refusal of Henry the Lion to bring help to Italy, the campaign was a complete failure. Frederick suffered a heavy defeat at the Battle of Legnano near Milan, on 29 May 1176, where he was wounded and for some time was believed to be dead. This battle marked the turning point in Frederick's claim to empire. He had no choice other than to begin negotiations for peace with Alexander III and the Lombard League. In the Peace of Anagni in 1176, Frederick recognized Alexander III as pope, and in the Peace of Venice in 1177, Frederick and Alexander III were formally reconciled. With decisions of Paschal III nullfied, Beatrice ceased to be referred as empress.\nThe scene was similar to that which had occurred between Pope Gregory VII and Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor at Canossa a century earlier. The conflict was the same as that resolved in the Concordat of Worms: Did the Holy Roman Emperor have the power to name the pope and bishops? The Investiture controversy from previous centuries had been brought to a tendentious peace with the Concordat of Worms and affirmed in the First Council of the Lateran. Now it had recurred, in a slightly different form. Frederick had to humble himself before Alexander III at Venice. The emperor acknowledged the pope's sovereignty over the Papal States, and in return Alexander acknowledged the emperor's overlordship of the Imperial Church. Also in the Peace of Venice, a truce was made with the Lombard cities, which took effect in August 1178. The grounds for a permanent peace were not established until 1183, however, in the Peace of Constance, when Frederick conceded their right to freely elect town magistrates. By this move, Frederick recovered his nominal domination over Italy, which became his chief means of applying pressure on the papacy.\nIn a move to consolidate his reign after the disastrous expedition into Italy, Frederick was formally crowned King of Burgundy at Arles on 30 June 1178. Although traditionally the German kings had automatically inherited the royal crown of Arles since the time of Conrad II, Frederick felt the need to be crowned by the Archbishop of Arles, regardless of his laying claim to the title from 1152.\nFrederick did not forgive Henry the Lion for refusing to come to his aid in 1176. By 1180, Henry had successfully established a powerful state comprising Saxony, Bavaria, and substantial territories in the north and east of Germany. Taking advantage of the hostility of other German princes to Henry, Frederick had Henry tried in absentia by a court of bishops and princes in 1180, declared that imperial law overruled traditional German law, and had Henry stripped of his lands and declared an outlaw. He then invaded Saxony with an imperial army to force his cousin to surrender. Henry's allies deserted him, and he finally had to submit to Frederick at an Imperial Diet in Erfurt in November 1181. Henry spent three years in exile at the court of his father-in-law Henry II of England in Normandy before being allowed back into Germany. He finished his days in Germany, as the much-diminished Duke of Brunswick. Frederick's desire for revenge was sated. Henry the Lion lived a relatively quiet life, sponsoring arts and architecture. Frederick's victory over Henry did not gain him as much in the German feudalistic system as it would have in the English feudalistic system. While in England the pledge of fealty went in a direct line from overlords to those under them, the Germans pledged oaths only to the direct overlord, so that in Henry's case, those below him in the feudal chain owed nothing to Frederick. Thus, despite the diminished stature of Henry the Lion, Frederick did not gain his allegiances.\nFrederick was faced with the reality of disorder among the German states, where continuous civil wars were waged between pretenders and the ambitious who wanted the crown for themselves. Italian unity under German rule was more myth than truth. Despite proclamations of German hegemony, the pope was the most powerful force in Italy. When Frederick returned to Germany after his defeat in northern Italy, he was a bitter and exhausted man. The German princes, far from being subordinated to royal control, were intensifying their hold on wealth and power in Germany and entrenching their positions. There began to be a generalized social desire to \"create greater Germany\" by conquering the Slavs to the east.\nAlthough the Italian city states had achieved a measure of independence from Frederick as a result of his failed fifth expedition into Italy, the emperor had not given up on his Italian dominions. In 1184, he held a massive celebration, the Diet of Pentecost, when his two eldest sons were knighted, and thousands of knights were invited from all over Germany. While payments upon the knighting of a son were part of the expectations of an overlord in England and France, only a \"gift\" was given in Germany for such an occasion. Frederick's monetary gain from this celebration is said to have been modest. Later in 1184, Frederick again moved into Italy, this time joining forces with the local rural nobility to reduce the power of the Tuscan cities. In 1186, he engineered the marriage of his son Henry to Constance of Sicily, heiress to the Kingdom of Sicily, over the objections of Pope Urban III.\nPope Urban III died shortly after, and was succeeded by Pope Gregory VIII, who even as Papal Chancellor had pursued a more conciliatory line with the Emperor than previous popes and was more concerned with troubling reports from the Holy Land than with a power struggle with Barbarossa.\nThird Crusade.\nAround 23 November 1187, Frederick received letters that had been sent to him from the rulers of the Crusader states in the Near East urging him to come to their aid. Around 1 December, Cardinal Henry of Marcy preached a crusade sermon before Frederick and a public assembly in Strasbourg. Frederick expressed support for the crusade but declined to take the cross on the grounds of his ongoing conflict with Archbishop Philip of Cologne. He did, however, urge King Philip II of France to take the cross through messengers and then in a personal meeting on 25 December on the border between Ivois and Mouzon.\nOn 27 March 1188, at the Diet of Mainz, the archbishop of Cologne submitted to Frederick. Bishop of W\u00fcrzburg, Godfrey of Spitzenberg, preached a crusade sermon and Frederick asked the assembly whether he should take the cross. At the universal acclaim of the assembly, he took the crusader's vow. His second son, the duke of Swabia, followed suit. The eldest, Henry VI, was to remain behind in Germany as regent. At Mainz Frederick proclaimed a \"general expedition against the pagans\". He set the period of preparation as 17 April 1188 to 8 April 1189 and scheduled the army to assemble at Regensburg on 23 April 1189.\nAt Strasbourg, Frederick had imposed a small tax on the Jews of Germany to fund the crusade. He also put the Jews under his protection and forbade anyone to preach against the Jews. When mobs threatened the Jews of Mainz on the eve of the assembly in March, Frederick sent the imperial marshal Henry of Kalden to disperse them. Rabbi Moses then met with the emperor, which resulted in an imperial edict threatening maiming or death for anyone who maimed or killed a Jew. On 29 March, Frederick and the rabbi rode through the streets together. Frederick successfully prevented a repeat of the massacres that had accompanied the First Crusade and Second Crusade in Germany.\nBecause Frederick had signed a treaty of friendship with Saladin in 1175, he felt it necessary to give Saladin notice of the termination of their alliance. On 26 May 1188, he sent Count Henry II of Dietz to present an ultimatum to Saladin. A few days after Christmas 1188, Frederick received Hungarian, Byzantine, Serbian and Seljuk envoys in Nuremberg. The Hungarians and Seljuks promised provisions and safe-conduct to the crusaders. The envoys of Stefan Nemanja, grand prince of Serbia, announced that their prince would receive Frederick in Ni\u0161. Only with difficulty was an agreement reached with the Byzantine envoy, John Kamateros. Frederick sent a large embassy ahead to make preparations in Byzantium.\nOn 15 April 1189 in Haguenau, Frederick formally and symbolically accepted the staff and scrip of a pilgrim and set out. His crusade was \"the most meticulously planned and organized\" up to that time. According to one source written in the 1220s, Frederick organized a grand army of 100,000 men (including 20,000 knights) and set out on the overland route to the Holy Land; This number is believed to be inaccurate by modern scholars using incomplete contemporary sources that place the size of his army at 12,000\u201315,000 men, including 3,000\u20134,000 knights.\nOn 11 May 1189, after the majority of his army had already departed toward Hungary on land, Frederick sailed from Regensburg down the River Danube. When he came to the village of Mauthausen, Frederick ordered the village to be burned for levying a toll on the crusader army. The Crusaders then passed through Hungary, Serbia, and Bulgaria before entering Byzantine territory. While in Hungary, Barbarossa personally asked the Hungarian Prince G\u00e9za, brother of King B\u00e9la III of Hungary, to join the Crusade. The king agreed, and a Hungarian army of 2,000 men led by G\u00e9za escorted the German emperor's forces. Later on, Frederick camped in Philippopolis, then in Adrianople in the autumn of 1189 to avoid the winter climate in Anatolia, in the meantime, he received imprisoned German emissaries who were held in Constantinople, and exchanged hostages with Isaac II, as a guarantee that the crusaders would not sack local settlements until they depart the Byzantine territory. In March 1190, Frederick left Adrianople for Gallipoli at the Dardanelles, to embark to Asia Minor.\nThe armies coming from western Europe pushed on through Anatolia, where they were victorious at the Battle of Philomelium and defeated the Turks in the Battle of Iconium, eventually reaching as far as Cilician Armenia. The approach of Barbarossa's victorious German army greatly concerned Saladin, who was forced to weaken his force at the Siege of Acre and send troops to the north to block the arrival of the Germans.\nDeath and burials.\nBarbarossa opted on the local Armenians' advice to follow a shortcut along the Saleph River. Meanwhile, the army started to traverse the mountain path. On 10 June 1190, he drowned near Silifke Castle in the Saleph River. There are several conflicting accounts of the event:\nJacques de Vitry, a historian of the Crusades, outlined Frederick's endeavors and Saladin's dilemma, in which he reported:\nFrederick's death caused several thousand German soldiers to leave the force and return home through the Cilician and Syrian ports. The German-Hungarian army was struck with an onset of disease near Antioch, weakening it further. Only 5,000 soldiers, a third of the original force, arrived in Acre. Barbarossa's son, Frederick VI of Swabia, carried on with the remnants of the German army, along with the Hungarian army under the command of Prince G\u00e9za, with the aim of burying the emperor in Jerusalem, but efforts to preserve his body in vinegar failed. Hence, his flesh was interred in the Cathedral of Saint Peter in Antioch, his bones in the Cathedral of the Holy Cross, Tyre, and his heart and inner organs in Saint Paul's Church, Tarsus.\nThe unexpected demise of Frederick left the Crusader army under the command of Leopold V during the siege at Acre. They then came under the command of Frederick's rivals Philip II and Richard, who had traveled to Palestine separately by sea, and this ultimately led to its dissolution. Richard continued to the East where he fought Saladin, winning territories along the shores of Palestine, but ultimately failed to win the war by conquering Jerusalem itself before he was forced to return to his own territories in north-western Europe, known to modern historians as the Angevin Empire. He returned home after he signed the Treaty of Ramla agreeing that Jerusalem would remain under Muslim control while allowing unarmed Christian pilgrims and traders to visit the city. The treaty also reduced the Latin Kingdom to a geopolitical coastal strip extending from Tyre to Jaffa.\nFrederick and the Justinian code.\nThe increase in wealth of the trading cities of northern Italy led to a revival in the study of the Justinian Code, a Latin legal system that had become extinct centuries earlier. Legal scholars renewed its application. It is speculated that Pope Gregory VII personally encouraged the Justinian rule of law and had a copy of it. The historian Norman Cantor described Corpus Juris Civilis (Justinian Body of Civil Law) as \"the greatest legal code ever devised\". It envisaged the law of the state as a reflection of natural moral law, the principle of rationality in the universe. By the time Frederick assumed the throne, this legal system was well established on both sides of the Alps. He was the first to use the availability of the new professional class of lawyers. The Civil Law allowed Frederick to use these lawyers to administer his kingdom in a logical and consistent manner. It also provided a framework to legitimize his claim to the right to rule both Germany and northern Italy. In the old days of Henry IV and Henry V, the claim of divine right of kings had been severely undermined by the Investiture controversy. The Church had won that argument in the common man's mind. There was no divine right for the German king to also control the church by naming both bishops and popes. The institution of the Justinian code was used, perhaps unscrupulously, by Frederick to lay claim to divine powers.\nIn Germany, Frederick was a political realist, taking what he could and leaving the rest. In Italy, he tended to be a romantic reactionary, reveling in the antiquarian spirit of the age, exemplified by a revival of classical studies and Roman law. It was through the use of the restored Justinian code that Frederick came to view himself as a new Roman emperor. Roman law gave a rational purpose for the existence of Frederick and his imperial ambitions. It was a counterweight to the claims of the Church to have authority because of divine revelation. The Church was opposed to Frederick for ideological reasons, not the least of which was the humanist nature found in the revival of the old Roman legal system. When Pepin the Short sought to become king of the Franks in the 8th century, the church needed military protection, so Pepin found it convenient to make an ally of the pope. Frederick, however, desired to put the pope aside and claim the crown of old Rome simply because he was in the likeness of the great emperors of old, who tended to have a domineering role over the church, Caesaropapism. Pope Adrian IV was naturally opposed to this view and undertook a vigorous propaganda campaign designed to diminish Frederick and his ambition. To a large extent, this was successful.\nEconomic policy.\nFrederick did little to encourage economic development in Germany prior to the autumn of 1165. In that year he visited the lower Rhineland, the most economically advanced region in Germany. He had already travelled to northern Italy, the most economically advanced region in the Empire, three times. From 1165 on, Frederick pursued economic policies to encourage growth and trade. There is no question that his reign was a period of major economic growth in Germany, but it is impossible now to determine how much of that growth was owed to Frederick's policies.\nThe number of mints in Germany increased ninefold in the reign of Frederick and his son Henry, from about two dozen mints at the start of his reign to 215 mints in 1197 and from a mere two royal mints to 28. Frederick himself established at least twelve royal mints, including those of Aachen, Donauw\u00f6rth, Ulm, Haguenau, Duisburg, Kaiserswerth, Frankfurt, Gelnhausen and Dortmund. He also granted privileges exempting the merchants of Aachen, Gelnhausen, Haguenau, Monza, Rome, Pisa and Venice from all tolls within the Empire.\nCultural depictions.\nCharismatic leader.\nOtto of Freising, Frederick's uncle, wrote an account of his reign entitled \"Gesta Friderici I imperatoris\" (Deeds of the Emperor Frederick), which is considered to be an accurate history of the king. Otto's other major work, the \"Chronica sive Historia de duabus civitatibus\" (\"Chronicle or History of the Two Cities\") had been an exposition of the \"Civitas Dei\" (\"The City of God\") of Augustine of Hippo, full of Augustinian negativity concerning the nature of the world and history. His work on Frederick is of opposite tone, being an optimistic portrayal of the glorious potentials of imperial authority. Otto died after finishing the first two books, leaving the last two to Rahewin, his provost. Rahewin's text is in places heavily dependent on classical precedent, although it \"was 'typical of medieval writers' to embellish their texts with choice quotations from earlier authors\". For example, Rahewin's physical description of Frederick reproduces word-for-word (except for details of hair and beard) a description of another monarch, Theodoric II written nearly eight hundred years earlier by Sidonius Apollinaris:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His character is such that not even those envious of his power can belittle its praise. His person is well-proportioned. He is shorter than very tall men, but taller and more noble than men of medium height. His hair is golden, curling a little above his forehead\u00a0... His eyes are sharp and piercing, his beard reddish [\"barba subrufa\"], his lips delicate\u00a0... His whole face is bright and cheerful. His teeth are even and snow-white in color\u00a0... Modesty rather than anger causes him to blush frequently. His shoulders are rather broad, and he is strongly built\nIn the opinion of Norman Cantor, Frederick's charisma led to a fantastic juggling act that, over a quarter of a century, restored the imperial authority in the German states. His formidable enemies defeated him on almost every side, yet in the end he emerged triumphant. When Frederick came to the throne, the prospects for the revival of German imperial power were extremely thin. The great German princes had increased their power and land holdings. The king had been left with only the traditional family domains and a vestige of power over the bishops and abbeys. The backwash of the Investiture controversy had left the German states in continuous turmoil. Rival states were in perpetual war. These conditions allowed Frederick to be both warrior and occasional peace-maker, both to his advantage.\nLegend.\nFrederick is the subject of many legends, including that of a Kyffh\u00e4user legend. Legend says he is not dead, but asleep with his knights in a cave in the Kyffh\u00e4user mountains in Thuringia or Mount Untersberg at the border between Bavaria, Germany, and Salzburg, Austria, and that when the ravens cease to fly around the mountain he will awake and restore Germany to its ancient greatness. According to the story, his red beard has grown through the table at which he sits. His eyes are half closed in sleep, but now and then he raises his hand and sends a boy out to see if the ravens have stopped flying. A similar story, set in Sicily, was earlier attested about his grandson, Frederick II. To garner political support the German Empire built atop the Kyffh\u00e4user the Kyffh\u00e4user Monument, which declared Kaiser Wilhelm I the reincarnation of Frederick; the 1896 dedication occurred on 18 June, the day of Frederick's coronation.\nIn medieval Europe, the \"Golden Legend\" became refined by Jacopo da Voragine. This was a popularized interpretation of the Biblical end of the world. It consisted of three things: (1) terrible natural disasters; (2) the arrival of the Antichrist; (3) the establishment of a good king to combat the anti-Christ. These millennial fables were common and freely traded by the populations on Continental Europe. End-time accounts had been around for thousands of years, but entered the Christian tradition with the writings of the Apostle Peter. German propaganda played into the exaggerated fables believed by the common people by characterizing Frederick Barbarossa and Frederick II as personification of the \"good king\".\nAnother legend states that when Barbarossa was in the process of seizing Milan in 1158, his wife, the Empress Beatrice, was taken captive by the enraged Milanese and forced to ride through the city on a donkey in a humiliating manner. Some sources of this legend indicate that Barbarossa implemented his revenge for this insult by forcing the magistrates of the city to remove a fig from the anus of a donkey using only their teeth. Another source states that Barbarossa took his wrath upon every able-bodied man in the city, and that it was not a fig they were forced to hold in their mouth, but excrement from the donkey. To add to this debasement, they were made to announce, \"Ecco la fica\" (meaning \"behold the fig\"), with the feces still in their mouths. It used to be said that the insulting gesture (called fico), of holding one's fist with the thumb in between the middle and forefinger came by its origin from this event.\nFrederick's legend was further reinforced in the early twentieth century, when Adolf Hitler named Nazi Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union after him.\nHistoriography.\nScholarly evaluations of Frederick began in the nineteenth century, but have been hampered by the unfortunate deaths of key researchers who did not have the chance to complete their works (such as Henry Simonsfeld who died in 1913, Wilhelm von Giesebrecht who died in 1889 and Johannes Laudage who died in an accident in 2008). Nevertheless, the two volumes about Frederick (that focus on his relationship with the Welfs and the Papacy) in Wilhelm von Giesebrecht's \"Geschichte der Deutschen Kaiserzeit\" (1855\u201388), completed by his student Bernhard von Simson in 1895, later became the scholarly standard work on the emperor's life.\nIn 1975, Frederick's charters were published. This and the postwar abandonment of the Kyffh\u00e4user myth have led to the publications of several new biographies. The notable recent authorities among German-speaking historians include Ferdinand Opll, Johannes Laudage, and Knut G\u00f6rich. Opll's \"Friedrich Barbarossa\" (1990) presents the emperor as a pragmatic leader with a capacity of adaptation and recovery after defeat. Laudage investigates the important role of the concept of honour in Frederick's decisions while explaining the far-reaching visions of the emperor and his advisers, while G\u00f6rich (who also emphasizes the honour, or \"honor imperii\" factor) questions whether traditional researchers have overemphasized the intentional side of Frederick's politics and instead highlights his flexibility and consensus-building capability as a leader.\nIn Italy, the scholarly attention towards Frederick's person and his reign is also considerable, with notable contributions including Franco Cardini's sympathetic 1985 biography or the 1982 work \"Federico Barbarossa nel dibattito storiografico in Italia e in Germania\", edited by Manselli and Riedmann, considered by Schumann to be a definite synthesis of non-nationally oriented historiography approaches (combining German and Italian research results) of the last forty years.\nChildren.\nFrederick's first marriage, to Adelheid of Vohburg, did not produce any children and was annulled.\nFrom his second marriage to Beatrice of Burgundy, he had the following children:\nSome modern authorities list a daughter named Sophia, who was betrothed to William VI of Montferrat but died before the marriage in 1187. Her existence is first recorded the \"Thesaurus rerum Suevicarum\" of Johann Reinhard Wegelin in 1757. If she really existed, she was born between about 1168 and 1180 and was an illegitimate child.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39700", "revid": "50880149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39700", "title": "Dari", "text": "Eastern variety of Persian\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nDari, also known as Farsi Dari, Dari Persian, Eastern Persian, or Afghan Persian, is the variety of the Persian language spoken in Afghanistan. Dari is the Afghan government's official term for the Persian language; it is known as Afghan Persian or Eastern Persian in many Western sources. The decision to rename the local variety of Persian in 1964 was more political than linguistic to support an Afghan state narrative. Dari Persian is most closely related to Tajiki Persian as spoken in Tajikistan and the two share many phonological and lexical similarities. Apart from a few basics of vocabulary, there is little difference between formal written Persian of Afghanistan and Iran; the languages are mutually intelligible. Dari is the official language for approximately 30.6 million people in Afghanistan and it serves as the common language for inter-ethnic communication in the country.\nAs defined in the 2004 Constitution of Afghanistan, Dari is one of the two official languages of Afghanistan; the other is Pashto. Dari is the most widely spoken language in Afghanistan and the native language of approximately 25\u201355% of the population. Dari serves as the lingua franca of the country and is understood by up to 78% of the population.\nDari Persian served as the preferred literary and administrative language among non-native speakers, such as the Turco-Mongol peoples including the Mughals, for centuries before the rise of modern nationalism. Also, like Iranian Persian and Tajiki Persian, Dari Persian is a continuation of Middle Persian, the official religious and literary language of the Sasanian Empire (224\u2013651 AD), itself a continuation of Old Persian, the language of the Achaemenids (550\u2013330 BC). In historical usage, \"Dari\" refers to the Middle Persian court language of the Sassanids.\nEtymology.\nDari is a name given to the New Persian language since the 10th century, widely used in Arabic (compare Al-Estakhri, Al-Muqaddasi and Ibn Hawqal) and Persian texts.\nSince 1964, it has been the official name in Afghanistan for the Persian spoken there. In Afghanistan, Dari refers to a modern dialect form of Persian that is the standard language used in administration, government, radio, television, and print media. Because of a preponderance of Dari native speakers, who normally refer to the language as \"Farsi\" (, \"Persian\"), it is also known as \"Afghan Persian\" in some Western sources.\nThere are different opinions about the origin of the word \"Dari\". The majority of scholars believe that \"Dari\" refers to the Persian word or (), meaning 'court', as it was the formal language of the Sassanids. The original meaning of the word \"dari\" is given in a notice attributed to Ibn al-Muqaffa\u02bf (cited by Ibn al-Nadim in \"Al-Fehrest\"). According to him, was the language spoken by priests, scholars, and the like; it is the language of Fars.\" This language refers to Middle Persian. As for , he says, \"it is the language of the cities of Mad\u0101'en; it is spoken by those who are at the king's court. [Its name] is connected with presence at court. Among the languages of the people of Khorasan and the east, the language of the people of Balkh is predominant.\"\nDari Persian spoken in Afghanistan is not to be confused with the language of Iran called Dari or Gabri, which is a language of the Central Iranian subgroup spoken in some Zoroastrian communities.\nHistory.\nDari comes from Middle Persian which was spoken during the rule of the Sassanid dynasty. In general, Iranian languages are known from three periods, usually referred to as Old, Middle, and New (Modern) periods. These correspond to three eras in Iranian history, the old era being the period from some time before, during, and after the Achaemenid period (that is, to 300 BCE), the Middle Era being the next period, namely, the Sassanid period and part of the post-Sassanid period, and the New era being the period afterward down to the present day.\nThe first person in Europe to use the term \"Deri\" for \"Dari\" may have been Thomas Hyde in his chief work, (1700).\n\"Dari\" or \"Deri\" has two meanings. It may mean the language of the court:\n \"the Zebani Deri (Zeban i Deri or Zaban i Dari = the language of Deri), or the language of the court, and the Zebani Farsi, the dialect of Persia at large (...)\"\nIt may also indicate a form of poetry used from Rudaki to Jami. In the fifteenth century it appeared in Herat under the Persian-speaking Timurid dynasty. The Persian-language poets of the Indian subcontinent who used the Indian verse methods or rhyme methods, like Bedil and Muhammad Iqbal, became familiar with the \"araki\" form of poetry. Iqbal loved both styles of literature and poetry, when he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;1\nThis can be translated as:\n Even though in euphonious Hindi is sugar\u00a0\u2013\n Rhyme method in Dari is sweeter\n usually means 'bliss', 'delight', 'sweetness'; in language, literature and poetry, also means 'euphonious' or 'melodic'.\nReferring to the 14th-century Persian poet Hafez, Iqbal wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEnglish translation:\n All the parrots of India will crack sugar\n Through this Persian Candy which is going to Bengal\nHere ('Rock candy of Persia') is a metaphor for the Persian language and poetry.\nPersian replaced the Central Asian languages of the Eastern Iranic peoples. Ferghana, Samarkand, and Bukhara were starting to be influenced by Dari, and were originally Khwarezmian and Sogdian-speaking areas during Samanid rule. Dari Persian spread around the Oxus River region, Afghanistan, and Khorasan after the Arab conquests and during Islamic-Arab rule. The replacement of the Pahlavi script with the Arabic script in order to write the Persian language was done by the Tahirids in 9th century Khorasan. Dari Persian spread and led to the extinction of Eastern Iranian languages like Bactrian and Khwarezmian with only a tiny amount of Sogdian descended Yaghnobi speakers remaining, as the ancestors of Tajiks started speaking Dari after relinquishing their original language (most likely Bactrian) around this time, due to the fact that the Arab-Islamic army which invaded Central Asia also included some Persians who governed the region like the Sassanids. Persian was a prestigious high-ranking language and was further rooted into Central Asia by the Samanids. Persian also phased out Sogdian. The role of lingua franca that Sogdian originally played was succeeded by Persian after the arrival of Islam.\nGeographical distribution.\nDari is one of the two official languages of Afghanistan. In practice though, it serves as the de facto lingua franca among the various ethnolinguistic groups.\nDari Persian is spoken by approximately 25\u201380% of the population of Afghanistan. Tajiks, who comprise 27\u201339% of the population, are the primary native speakers, followed by Hazaras (9%) and Aym\u0101qs (4%). Moreover, while Pashtuns (37\u201348%) natively speak Pashto, those living in Tajik and Hazara dominated areas also use Dari Persian as their main or secondary language. Thus, non-native Persian speaking groups have contributed to the increased number of Persian speakers within Afghanistan. The World Factbook states that about 80% of the Afghan population speaks Dari Persian. About 2.5\u00a0million Afghans in Iran and Afghans in Pakistan, part of the wider Afghan diaspora, also speak Dari Persian as one of their primary languages.\nDari Persian dominates the northern, western, and central areas of Afghanistan, and is the common language spoken in cities such as Balkh, Mazar-i-Sharif, Herat, Fayzabad, Panjshir, Bamiyan, and the Afghan capital of Kabul where all ethnic groups are settled. Dari Persian-speaking communities also exist in southwestern and eastern Pashtun-dominated areas such as in the cities of Ghazni, Farah, Zaranj, Lashkar Gah, Kandahar, and Gardez.\nCultural influence.\nDari Persian has contributed to the majority of Persian borrowings in several Indo-Aryan languages, such as Urdu, Hindi, Punjabi, Bengali and others, as it was the administrative, official, cultural language of the Persianate Mughal Empire and served as the lingua franca throughout the Indian subcontinent for centuries. Often based in Afghanistan, Turkic Central Asian conquerors brought the language into South Asia. The basis in general for the introduction of Persian language into the subcontinent was set, from its earliest days, by various Persianised Central Asian Turkic and Afghan dynasties. The sizable Persian component of the Anglo-Indian loan words in English and in Urdu therefore reflects the Dari Persian pronunciation. For instance, the words dopiaza and pyjama come from the Afghan Persian pronunciation; in Iranian Persian they are pronounced \"do-piy\u0101zeh\" and \"pey-j\u0101meh\". Persian lexemes and certain morphological elements (e.g., the \"ez\u0101fe\") have often been employed to coin words for political and cultural concepts, items, or ideas that were historically unknown outside the South Asian region, as is the case with the aforementioned \"borrowings\". Dari Persian has a rich and colorful tradition of proverbs that deeply reflect Afghan culture and relationships, as demonstrated through the works of Rumi and other literature.\nDifferences between Iranian and Afghan Persian.\nThere are phonological, lexical, and morphological differences between Afghan Persian and Iranian Persian. For example, Afghan Farsi has more vowels than Iranian Farsi.\nPhonological differences.\nThe phonology of Dari Persian as spoken in Kabul, compared with Classical Persian, is overall more conservative than the accent of Iran's standard register. In this regard Dari Persian is more similar to Tajiki Persian. The principal differences between standard Iranian Persian and Afghan Persian as based on the Kabul dialect are:\nDialect continuum.\nThe dialects of Dari spoken in Northern, Central, and Eastern Afghanistan, for example in Kabul, Mazar, and Badakhshan, have distinct features compared to Iranian Persian. However, the dialect of Dari spoken in Western Afghanistan stands in between the Afghan and Iranian Persian. For instance, the Herati dialect shares vocabulary and phonology with both Afghan and Iranian Persian. Likewise, the dialect of Persian in Eastern Iran, for instance in Mashhad, is quite similar to the Herati dialect of Afghanistan.\nDialects of Dari Persian.\nIn a paper jointly published by Takhar University and the Ministry of Education in 2018, researchers studying varieties of Persian from Iran to Tajikistan, Identified 3 dialect groups (or macro dialects) present within Afghanistan. In an article about various languages spoken in Afghanistan, Encyclopaedia Iranica identified a nearly identical categorization but considered varieties spoken in the Sistan region to constitute a distinct group.\nTakhar and the MOE only discussed vocabulary differences between the dialect groups and did not extensively discuss phonological differences between these groups. However, there was a noticeable difference in the romanizations of the Western dialects and the South-Eastern dialects. Chiefly that the vowel diacritic \"pesh\" (Kasrah) was romanized with an \"i\" for South-Eastern dialects but as an \"e\" for western dialects. This is presumably due to a difference in quality, however the paper itself did not explain why the vowels were transliterated differently.\nSoutheastern.\nThe Southeastern group constitutes dialects spoken in and around Kabul, Parwan, Balkh, Baghlan, Samangan, Kunduz, Takhar, Badakhshan and others. A distinctive character of this group is its conservative nature compared to, for example, the Tehrani dialect. This can be seen in its Phonology (e.g. its preservation of \"Majhul\" vowels), Morhphonology and Syntax, and its Lexicon. A further distinction may be made between dialects in and near Kabul and dialects in and near Afghan Turkistan. With dialects near Kabul exhibiting some influences from languages in southern Afghanistan and South Asia and dialects in Afghan Turkistan exhibiting more influence from Tajik. All Southeastern varieties exhibited some influence from Uzbek. Despite the Afghanistan Ministry of Education referring to this group as \"Southeastern\" some of the dialects included are in the north.\nAs seen in many Hazaragi dialects, certain Eastern Dialects have developed a system of retroflex consonants under pressure from Pashto. They are not widespread, however.\nThe Kabuli dialect has become the standard model of Dari Persian in Afghanistan, as has the Tehrani dialect in relation to the Persian in Iran. Since the 1940s, Radio Afghanistan has broadcast its Dari programs in Kabuli Dari, which ensured the homogenization between the Kabuli version of the language and other dialects of Dari Persian spoken throughout Afghanistan. Since 2003, the media, especially the private radio and television broadcasters, have carried out their Dari programs using the Kabuli variety.\nWestern.\nThe Western group includes various dialects spoken in and around: Herat, Badghis, Farah and Ghor. Dialects in this group share many features with the dialects of Persian spoken in Eastern Iran, and one may make many comparisons between the speech of Herat and Mashhad.\nCentral/Hazaragi.\nThe Central group recognized by Afghanistan Ministry of Education consists of the Hazaragi dialects spoken mostly by the Hazara people. These dialects are spoken throughout Afghanistan, like in the capital city of Kabul. The \"Central\" label stems from Hazara majority regions in central Afghanistan. As a group, the Hazaragi dialects are distinguished by the presence of retroflex consonants and distinctive vocabulary. It has been shown that Hazaragi dialects are accurately a group of sub-dialects of Dari and not their own varieties of Persian.\nSistani.\nAfghanistan's Ministry of Education does not make a distinction between varieties of the Sistan region and the varieties in the Western group. However Encyclopaedia Iranica considers the Sistani dialect to constitute their own distinctive group, with notable influences from Balochi.\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nDari does not distinguish [] and [] in any position, these are distinct phonemes in English but are in un-conditional free variation in nearly all dialects of Dari. There are no environmental factors related to the appearance of [] or [] and native Dari speakers do not perceive them as different phonemes (that is to say, the English words bet [bt] and bit [bt] would be nearly indistinguishable to a native Dari speaker). However, speakers in Urban regions of Kabul, Panj\u0161ir and other nearby provinces in southern and eastern Afghanistan tend to realize the vowel as []. Speakers of Dari in central Afghanistan (i.e. Hazaragi speakers) tend to realize the vowel in proximity to, or identically to, [], unless the following syllable contains a high-back vowel. Speakers in western Afghanistan (such as in the Herat or Farah province) and some rural regions in the Kabul province (not the city) most commonly realize the vowel as []. Additionally, in some varieties of Dari, the phoneme [] appears as an allophone of [a].\nPolitical views and disputes on the language.\nSuccessive governments of Afghanistan have promoted New Persian as an official language of government since the time of the Delhi Sultanate (1206\u20131526), even as those governments were dominated by Pashtun people. Sher Ali Khan of the Barakzai dynasty (1826\u20131973) first introduced the Pashto language as an additional language of administration. The local name for the Persian variety spoken in Afghanistan was officially changed from Farsi to Dari, meaning \"court language\", in 1964. Zaher said there would be, as there are now, two official languages, Pashto and Farsi, though the latter would henceforth be named Dari. Within their respective linguistic boundaries, Dari Persian and Pashto are the media of education.\nThe term continues to divide opinion in Afghanistan today. While Dari has been the official name for decades, \"Farsi\" is still the preferred name to many Persian speakers of Afghanistan. Omar Samad, an Afghan analyst and ambassador, says of the dispute:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This debate pits those who look at language as a shared heritage that includes thinkers, writers, and poets of the Farsi language against those who believe that Dari has older roots and provides a distinct identity that cannot be confused with Iran's claim.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39701", "revid": "32579849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39701", "title": "Highway 1", "text": ""}
{"id": "39702", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39702", "title": "Pashtu", "text": ""}
{"id": "39704", "revid": "50633743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39704", "title": "Social contract", "text": "Concept in political philosophy\nIn moral and political philosophy, the social contract is an idea, theory, or model that usually, although not always, concerns the legitimacy of the authority of the state over the individual. Conceptualized in the Age of Enlightenment, it is a core concept of constitutionalism, while not necessarily convened and written down in a constituent assembly and constitution.\nSocial contract arguments typically are that individuals have consented, either explicitly or tacitly, to surrender some of their freedoms and submit to the authority (of the ruler, or to the decision of a majority) in exchange for protection of their remaining rights or maintenance of the social order. The relation between natural and legal rights is often a topic of social contract theory. The term takes its name from \"The Social Contract\" (French: \"Du contrat social ou Principes du droit politique\"), a 1762 book by Jean-Jacques Rousseau that discussed this concept. Although the antecedents of social contract theory are found in antiquity, in Greek and Stoic philosophy and Roman and Canon Law, the heyday of the social contract was the mid-17th to early 19th centuries, when it emerged as the leading doctrine of political legitimacy.\nThe starting point for most social contract theories is an examination of the human condition absent any political order (termed the \"state of nature\" by Thomas Hobbes). In this condition, individuals' actions are bound only by their personal power and conscience, assuming that 'nature' precludes mutually beneficial social relationships. From this shared premise, social contract theorists aim to demonstrate why rational individuals would voluntarily relinquish their natural freedom in exchange for the benefits of political order.\nProminent 17th- and 18th-century theorists of the social contract and natural rights included Hugo de Groot (1625), Thomas Hobbes (1651), Samuel von Pufendorf (1673), John Locke (1689), Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1762) and Immanuel Kant (1797), each approaching the concept of political authority differently. Grotius posited that individual humans had natural rights. Hobbes famously said that in a \"state of nature\", human life would be \"solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short\". In the absence of political order and law, everyone would have unlimited natural freedoms, including the \"right to all things\" and thus the freedom to plunder, rape and murder; there would be an endless \"war of all against all\" (\"bellum omnium contra omnes\"). To avoid this, free men contract with each other to establish political community (civil society) through a social contract in which they all gain security in return for subjecting themselves to an absolute sovereign, one man or an assembly of men. Though the sovereign's edicts may well be arbitrary and tyrannical, Hobbes saw absolute government as the only alternative to the terrifying anarchy of a state of nature. Hobbes asserted that humans consent to abdicate their rights in favor of the absolute authority of government (whether monarchical or parliamentary).\nAlternatively, Locke and Rousseau argued that individuals acquire civil rights by accepting the obligation to respect and protect the rights of others, thereby relinquishing certain personal freedoms in the process.\nThe central assertion that social contract theory approaches is that law and political order are not natural, but human creations. The social contract and the political order it creates are simply the means towards an end\u2014the benefit of the individuals involved\u2014and legitimate only to the extent that they fulfill their part of the agreement. Hobbes argued that government is not a party to the original contract; hence citizens are not obligated to submit to the government when it is too weak to act effectively to suppress factionalism and civil unrest.\nOverview.\nThe model of the social contract.\nThere is a general form of social contract theories, which is: \"I\" chooses \"R\" in \"M\" and this gives \"I*\" reason to endorse and comply with \"R\" in the real world insofar as the reasons \"I\" has for choosing \"R\" in \"M\" are (or can be) shared by \"I*.\"With \"M\" being the deliberative setting; \"R\" rules, principles or institutions; \"I\" the (hypothetical) people in original position or state of nature making the social contract; and \"I*\" being the individuals in the real world following the social contract.\nHistory.\nClassical thought.\nSocial contract formulations are preserved in many of the world's oldest records. The Indian Buddhist text of the second century BC \"Mah\u0101vastu\" recounts the legend of Mahasammata. The story goes as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the early days of the cosmic cycle mankind lived on an immaterial plane, dancing on air in a sort of fairyland, where there was no need of food or clothing, and no private property, family, government or laws. Then gradually the process of cosmic decay began its work, and mankind became earthbound, and felt the need of food and shelter. As men lost their primeval glory, distinctions of class arose, and they entered into agreements with one another, accepting the institution of private property and the family. With this theft, murder, adultery, and other crime began, and so the people met together and decided to appoint one man from among them to maintain order in return for a share of the produce of their fields and herds. He was called \"the Great Chosen One\" (Mahasammata), and he received the title of raja because he pleased the people.\nIn his rock edicts, the Indian Buddhist king Asoka was said to have argued for a broad and far-reaching social contract. The Buddhist \"vinaya\" also reflects social contracts expected of the monks; one such instance is when the people of a certain town complained about monks felling saka trees, the Buddha tells his monks that they must stop and give way to social norms.\nEpicurus in the fourth century BC seemed to have had a strong sense of social contract, with justice and law being rooted in mutual agreement and advantage, as evidenced by these lines, among others, from his \"Principal Doctrines\" (see also Epicurean ethics):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;31. Natural justice is a pledge of reciprocal benefit, to prevent one man from harming or being harmed by another.\n32. Those animals which are incapable of making binding agreements with one another not to inflict nor suffer harm are without either justice or injustice; and likewise for those peoples who either could not or would not form binding agreements not to inflict nor suffer harm.\n33. There never was such a thing as absolute justice, but only agreements made in mutual dealings among men in whatever places at various times providing against the infliction or suffering of harm.\nThe concept of the social contract was originally posed by Glaucon, as described by Plato in \"The Republic\", BookII.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They say that to do injustice is, by nature, good; to suffer injustice, evil; but that the evil is greater than the good. And so when men have both done and suffered injustice and have had experience of both, not being able to avoid the one and obtain the other, they think that they had better agree among themselves to have neither; hence there arise laws and mutual covenants; and that which is ordained by law is termed by them lawful and just. This they affirm to be the origin and nature of justice;\u2014it is a mean or compromise, between the best of all, which is to do injustice and not be punished, and the worst of all, which is to suffer injustice without the power of retaliation; and justice, being at a middle point between the two, is tolerated not as a good, but as the lesser evil, and honoured by reason of the inability of men to do injustice. For no man who is worthy to be called a man would ever submit to such an agreement if he were able to resist; he would be mad if he did. Such is the received account, Socrates, of the nature and origin of justice.\nThe social contract theory also appears in \"Crito\", another dialogue from Plato. Over time, the social contract theory became more widespread after Epicurus (341\u2013270 BC), the first philosopher who saw justice as a social contract, and not as existing in Nature due to divine intervention (see below and also Epicurean ethics), decided to bring the theory to the forefront of his society. As time went on, philosophers of traditional political and social thought, such as Locke, Hobbes, and Rousseau put forward their opinions on social contract, which then caused the topic to become much more mainstream.\nRenaissance developments.\nQuentin Skinner has argued that several critical modern innovations in contract theory are found in the writings from French Calvinists and Huguenots, whose work in turn was invoked by writers in the Low Countries who objected to their subjection to Spain and, later still, by Catholics in England. Francisco Su\u00e1rez (1548\u20131617), from the School of Salamanca, might be considered an early theorist of the social contract, theorizing natural law in an attempt to limit the divine right of absolute monarchy. All of these groups were led to articulate notions of popular sovereignty by means of a social covenant or contract, and all of these arguments began with proto-\"state of nature\" arguments, to the effect that the basis of politics is that everyone is by nature free of subjection to any government.\nThese arguments, however, relied on a corporatist theory found in Roman law, according to which \"a populus\" can exist as a distinct legal entity. Thus, these arguments held that a group of people can join a government because it has the capacity to exercise a single will and make decisions with a single voice in the absence of sovereign authority\u2014a notion rejected by Hobbes and later contract theorists.\nPhilosophers.\nThomas Hobbes' \"Leviathan\" (1651).\nThe first modern philosopher to articulate a detailed contract theory was Thomas Hobbes (1588\u20131679). According to Hobbes, the lives of individuals in the state of nature were \"solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short\", a state in which self-interest and the absence of rights and contracts prevented the \"social\", or society. Life was \"anarchic\" (without leadership or the concept of sovereignty). Individuals in the state of nature were apolitical and asocial. This state of nature is followed by the social contract.\nThe social contract was seen as an \"occurrence\" during which individuals came together and ceded some of their individual rights so that others would cede theirs. This resulted in the establishment of the state\u2014a sovereign entity like the individuals (now under its rule) used to be, which would create laws to regulate social interactions. Human life was thus no longer \"a war of all against all\".\nThe state system, which grew out of the social contract, was, however, also anarchic (without leadership). Just as the individuals in the state of nature had been sovereigns and thus guided by self-interest and the absence of rights, so states now acted in their self-interest in competition with each other. Just like the state of nature, states were thus bound to be in conflict because there was no sovereign over and above the state (more powerful) capable of imposing some system such as social-contract laws on everyone by force. Indeed, Hobbes' work helped to serve as a basis for the realism theories of international relations, advanced by E. H. Carr and Hans Morgenthau. Hobbes wrote in \"Leviathan\" that humans (\"we\") need the \"terrour of some Power\" otherwise humans will not heed the law of reciprocity, \"(in summe) doing to others, as wee would be done to\".\nJohn Locke's \"Second Treatise of Government\" (1689).\nJohn Locke's conception of the social contract differed from Hobbes' in several fundamental ways, retaining only the central notion that individuals in a state of nature would willingly come together to form a state. Locke believed that individuals in a state of nature would be bound morally, by the Law of Nature, in which man has the \"power... to preserve his property; that is, his life, liberty and estate against the injuries and attempts of other men\". Without government to defend them against those seeking to injure or enslave them, Locke further believed people would have no security in their rights and would live in fear. Individuals, to Locke, would only agree to form a state that would provide, in part, a \"neutral judge\", acting to protect the lives, liberty, and property of those who lived within it.\nWhile Hobbes argued for near-absolute authority, Locke argued for inviolate freedom under law in his \"Second Treatise of Government\". Locke argued that a government's legitimacy comes from the citizens' delegation to the government of their absolute right of violence (reserving the inalienable right of self-defense or \"self-preservation\"), along with elements of other rights (e.g. property will be liable to taxation) as necessary to achieve the goal of security through granting the state a monopoly of violence, whereby the government, as an impartial judge, may use the collective force of the populace to administer and enforce the law, rather than each man acting as his own judge, jury, and executioner\u2014the condition in the state of nature.\nJean-Jacques Rousseau's \"Du Contrat social\" (1762).\nJean-Jacques Rousseau (1712\u20131778), in his influential 1762 treatise \"The Social Contract\", outlined a different version of social-contract theory, as the foundations of society based on the sovereignty of the \"general will\".\nRousseau's political theory differs in important ways from that of Locke and Hobbes. Rousseau's collectivist conception is most evident in his development of the \"luminous conception\" (which he credited to Denis Diderot) of the \"general will\". Summarised, the \"general will\" is the power of all the citizens' collective interest\u2014not to be confused with their individual interests.\nAlthough Rousseau wrote that the British were perhaps at the time the freest people on earth, he did not approve of their representative government, nor any form of representative government. Rousseau believed that society was only legitimate when the sovereign (i.e. the \"general will\") were the sole legislators. He also stated that the individual must accept \"the total alienation to the whole community of each associate with all his rights\". In short, Rousseau meant that in order for the social contract to work, individuals \"must\" forfeit their rights to the whole so that such conditions were \"equal for all\".&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The social contract] can be reduced to the following terms: \"Each of us puts his person and all his power in common under the supreme direction of the general will; and in a body, we receive each member as an indivisible part of the whole.\"\nRousseau's other writings assert that his striking phrase that man must \"be forced to be free\" should be understood this way: since the indivisible and inalienable popular sovereignty decides what is good for the whole, if an individual rejects this \"civil liberty\" in place of \"natural liberty\" and self interest, disobeying the law, he will be forced to listen to what was decided when the people acted as a collective (as citizens). Thus the law, inasmuch as it is created by the people acting as a body, is not a limitation of individual freedom, but rather its expression. The individual, as a citizen, explicitly agreed to be constrained if, as a private individual, he did not respect his own will as formulated in the general will.\nBecause laws represent the restraint of \"natural liberty\", they represent the leap made from humans in the state of nature into civil society. In this sense, the law is a civilizing force. Therefore, Rousseau believed that the laws that govern a people help to mould their character.\nRousseau also analyses the social contract in terms of risk management, thus suggesting the origins of the state as a form of mutual insurance.\nPierre-Joseph Proudhon's individualist social contract (1851).\nWhile Rousseau's social contract is based on popular sovereignty and not on individual sovereignty, there are other theories espoused by individualists, libertarians, and anarchists that do not involve agreeing to anything more than negative rights and creates only a limited state, if any.\nPierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809\u20131865) advocated a conception of social contract that did not involve an individual surrendering sovereignty to others. According to him, the social contract was not between individuals and the state, but rather among individuals who refrain from coercing or governing each other, each one maintaining complete sovereignty upon him- or herself:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What really is the Social Contract? An agreement of the citizen with the government? No, that would mean but the continuation of [Rousseau's] idea. The social contract is an agreement of man with man; an agreement from which must result what we call society. In this, the notion of commutative justice, first brought forward by the primitive fact of exchange, ... is substituted for that of distributive justice ... Translating these words, contract, commutative justice, which are the language of the law, into the language of business, and you have commerce, that is to say, in its highest significance, the act by which man and man declare themselves essentially producers, and abdicate all pretension to govern each other.\u2014\u200a\nJohn Rawls' \"Theory of Justice\" (1971).\nBuilding on the work of Immanuel Kant with its presumption of limits on the state, John Rawls (1921\u20132002), in \"A Theory of Justice\" (1971), proposed a contractarian approach whereby rational people in a hypothetical \"original position\" would set aside their individual preferences and capacities under a \"veil of ignorance\" and agree to certain general principles of justice and legal organization. This idea is also used as a game-theoretical formalization of the notion of fairness.\nDavid Gauthier's \"Morals by Agreement\" (1986).\nDavid Gauthier's \"neo-Hobbesian\" theory argues that cooperation between two independent and self-interested parties is indeed possible, especially when it comes to understanding morality and politics. Gauthier notably points out the advantages of cooperation between two parties when it comes to the challenge of the prisoner's dilemma. He proposes that, if two parties were to stick to the original agreed-upon arrangement and morals outlined by the contract, they would both experience an optimal result. In his model for the social contract, factors including trust, rationality, and self-interest keep each party honest and dissuade them from breaking the rules.\nPhilip Pettit's \"Republicanism\" (1997).\nPhilip Pettit (b. 1945) has argued, in \"Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government\" (1997), that the theory of social contract, classically based on the consent of the governed, should be modified. Instead of arguing for explicit consent, which can always be manufactured, Pettit argues that the absence of an effective rebellion against it is a contract's only legitimacy.\nApplication.\nElections.\nRousseau argued that societal laws are upheld by the collective will of the citizens whom they represent. Thus, in obeying laws, the citizen \"remains free.\" Within elections, the will of the establishment is the will of the collective. Barring corruption, the legitimacy of the democratic government is absolute.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In every real democracy, magistracy is not an advantage, but a burdensome charge which cannot justly be imposed on one individual rather than another. The law alone can lay the charge on him on whom the lot falls. For, the conditions being then the same for all, and the choice not depending on any human will, there is no particular application to alter the universality of the law.\u2014\u200a\nAccording to other social contract theorists, when the government fails to secure their natural rights (Locke) or satisfy the best interests of society, citizens can withdraw their obligation to obey or change the leadership through elections or other means including, when necessary, violence. Locke believed that natural rights were inalienable, and therefore the rule of God superseded government authority, while Rousseau believed that democracy (majority-rule) was the best way to ensure welfare while maintaining individual freedom under the rule of law. The Lockean concept of the social contract was invoked in the United States Declaration of Independence.\nInfluence on the US Declaration of Independence.\nIdeas related to the social contract theory, particularly those of John Locke, intellectually inspired the United States Declaration of Independence. His ideas on every individual\u2019s\u2019 right to \u2018life, liberty, and property\u2019 as well as the people\u2019s \u2018right to revolt\u2019 were particularly influential.\nLife, Liberty, and Property.\nLocke\u2019s idea that everyone has the right to 'life, liberty, and property' inspired the founding document. The Declaration posits, \u201cWe hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness\u201d. The terms \u2018life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness\u2019 reflect the ideas of John Locke, who argued for human beings\u2019 natural rights to \u2018life, liberty, and property.\u2019 In The Second Treatise of Government, Locke has asserted that \u201cthe state of Nature (...) teaches all mankind who will but consult it, that being all equal and independent, no one ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty or possessions. Since the \u201cstate of nature,\u201d which largely means the condition in which humans used to live before civilization, teaches humans to learn that all were born \u201cequal and independent,\u201d Locke emphasizes the inherent equality that exists among human beings, which is reflected in the Declaration's idea that \"all men are created equal.\" Furthermore, Locke argued that men \u201chave rights to life, (...) liberty, or possessions\u201d and that \u201cno one ought to harm another\u201d in these rights. Since the rights to \u2018life\u2019 and \u2018liberty,\u2019 which constitute two of the three essential rights protected under the social contract, are repeated in the Declaration, Locke\u2019s idea on the natural rights of human beings proves to be influential. As the John Locke Foundation, an independent and nonprofit think tank, establishes, \"Locke\u2019s influence can be seen throughout the Declaration of Independence\" through the phrase \u201clife, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.\u201d \nThe Right to Revolt.\nLocke\u2019s idea of \u2018the right to revolt\u2019 was also influential. The Declaration posits that, when the natural rights of human beings are violated under the social contract, \u201cit is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new Government\u201d. The usage of the word \u201cright\u201d not only shows how people should be allowed to revolt, but have a moral obligation to overthrow a tyrannical government. In a similar vein, Locke posited that people have \u2018the right to revolt\u2019 when their natural rights are violated. According to the philosopher, \u201cWhenever the legislators endeavour to take away and destroy the property of the people, or to reduce them to slavery under arbitrary power, they put themselves into a state of war with the people, who are thereupon absolved from any farther obedience\u201d and gain the \u201cright to resume their original liberty\u201d. In short, if a government becomes tyrannical, such as by infringing on people\u2019s right to property or on their freedoms, its constituents gain the freedom to overthrow the government at will. This aligns closely with the Declaration\u2019s assertion that people gain the right to \u201cabolish\u201d and to \u201cinstitute\u201d a new government, showing another way in which Locke's ideas pertaining to the social contract intellectually inspired the Declaration. \nThomas Jefferson's Letter.\nThomas Jefferson, one of the main authors of the Declaration, wrote in a 1825 letter that \u201cLocke,\u201d along with figures such as \u201cAristotle, Cicero, (...) [and] Sidney,\u201d served as great intellectual foundations for the Declaration, as the text\u2019s \u201cauthority rests then on the harmonising sentiments\u201d of such writers. An explicit mention of Locke\u2019s name, adding to the letter\u2019s admission that his influence proved to be significant in serving as an inspiration for the text, further strengthens the claim that Locke's ideas, particularly those pertaining to the social contract, inspired the Declaration.\nCriticism.\nConsent of the governed.\nAn early critic of social contract theory was Rousseau's friend the philosopher David Hume, who in 1742 published an essay \"Of Civil Liberty\". The second part of this essay, entitled \"Of the Original Contract\", stresses that the concept of a \"social contract\" is a convenient fiction: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As no party, in the present age can well support itself without a philosophical or speculative system of principles annexed to its political or practical one; we accordingly find that each of the factions into which this nation is divided has reared up a fabric of the former kind, in order to protect and cover that scheme of actions which it pursues. ... The one party [defenders of the absolute and divine right of kings, or Tories], by tracing up government to the DEITY, endeavor to render it so sacred and inviolate that it must be little less than sacrilege, however tyrannical it may become, to touch or invade it in the smallest article. The other party [the Whigs, or believers in constitutional monarchy], by founding government altogether on the consent of the PEOPLE suppose that there is a kind of original contract by which the subjects have tacitly reserved the power of resisting their sovereign, whenever they find themselves aggrieved by that authority with which they have for certain purposes voluntarily entrusted him.\nHume argued that consent of the governed was the ideal foundation on which a government should rest, but that it had not actually occurred this way in general. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My intention here is not to exclude the consent of the people from being one just foundation of government where it has place. It is surely the best and most sacred of any. I only contend that it has very seldom had place in any degree and never almost in its full extent. And that therefore some other foundation of government must also be admitted.\u2014\u200a\nNatural law and constitutionalism.\nThe legal scholar Randy Barnett has argued that, while presence in the territory of a society may be necessary for consent, this does not constitute consent to \"all\" rules the society might make regardless of their content. A second condition of consent is that the rules be consistent with underlying principles of justice and the protection of natural and social rights, and have procedures for effective protection of those rights (or liberties). This has also been discussed by O.A. Brownson, who argued that, in a sense, three \"constitutions\" are involved: first, the \"constitution of nature\" that includes all of what the Founders called \"natural law\"; second, the \"constitution of society\", an unwritten and commonly understood set of rules for the society formed by a social contract before it establishes a government, by which it does establish the third, a \"constitution of government\". To consent, a necessary condition is that the rules be \"constitutional\" in that sense.\nTacit consent.\nThe theory of a tacit social contract holds that by remaining in the territory controlled by some society, which usually has a government, people give consent to join that society and be governed by its government if any. This consent is what gives legitimacy to such a government.\nOther writers have argued that consent to join the society is not necessarily consent to its government. For that, the government must be set up according to a constitution of government that is consistent with the superior unwritten constitutions of nature and society.\nExplicit consent.\nThe theory of an implicit social contract also goes under the principles of explicit consent. The main difference between tacit consent and explicit consent is that explicit consent is meant to leave no room for misinterpretation. Moreover, you should directly state what it is that you want and the person has to respond in a concise manner that either confirms or denies the proposition.\nContracts must be consensual.\nAccording to the will theory of contract, a contract is not presumed valid unless all parties voluntarily agree to it, either tacitly or explicitly, without coercion. Lysander Spooner, a 19th-century lawyer who argued before the Supreme Court of the United States and a staunch supporter of a right of contract between individuals, argued in his essay \"No Treason\" that a supposed social contract cannot be used to justify governmental actions such as taxation because government will initiate force against anyone who does not wish to enter into such a contract. As a result, he maintains that such an agreement is not voluntary and therefore cannot be considered a legitimate contract at all. As an abolitionist, he made similar arguments about the unconstitutionality of slavery in the US.\nJoseph Kary asserts that Modern Anglo-American law, like European civil law, is based on a will theory of contract, according to which all terms of a contract are binding on the parties because they chose those terms for themselves. This was less true when Hobbes wrote \"Leviathan\"; at that time more importance was attached to consideration (meaning a mutual exchange of benefits necessary to the formation of a valid contract) and most contracts had implicit terms that arose from the nature of the contractual relationship rather than from the choices made by the parties. Accordingly, it has been argued that social contract theory is more consistent with the contract law of the time of Hobbes and Locke than with the contract law of the present time and that certain features in the social contract which seem anomalous, such as the belief that people are bound by a contract formulated by their distant ancestors, would not have seemed as strange to Hobbes' contemporaries as they do to people today.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39705", "revid": "1302184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39705", "title": "Speech (disambiguation)", "text": "Speech is the vocal form of human communication.\nSpeech or speaking \nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39709", "revid": "50738658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39709", "title": "Edward V", "text": "King of England in 1483\nEdward V (2 November 1470 \u2013 presumably July 1483) was King of England from 9 April to 25 June 1483. He succeeded his father, Edward IV, upon the latter's death. Edward V was never crowned, and his brief reign was dominated by the influence of his uncle and Lord Protector, the Duke of Gloucester, who deposed him to reign as King Richard III; this was confirmed by the \"Titulus Regius\", an Act of Parliament which denounced any further claims through Edward IV's heirs by delegitimising Edward V and all of his siblings. This was later repealed by Henry VII, who subsequently married Elizabeth of York, Edward V's eldest sister.\nEdward V and his younger brother, Richard of Shrewsbury, are known as the Princes in the Tower. They disappeared after being sent to heavily guarded royal lodgings in the Tower of London. Responsibility for their disappearance (and presumed deaths) is widely attributed to Richard III, who sent them to the Tower, but the lack of conclusive evidence and conflicting contemporary accounts allow for other possibilities.\nEarly life.\nEdward was born on 2 November 1470 at Cheyneygates, the medieval house of the Abbot of Westminster, adjoining Westminster Abbey. His mother, Elizabeth Woodville, had sought sanctuary there from Lancastrian supporters who had deposed his father, the Yorkist king Edward IV, during the course of the Wars of the Roses. Edward was created Prince of Wales in June 1471, following his father's restoration to the throne, and in 1473 was established at Ludlow Castle on the Welsh Marches as nominal president of a newly created Council of Wales and the Marches. In 1479, his father conferred the earldom of Pembroke on him; it became merged into the crown on his succession.\nPrince Edward was placed under the supervision of the queen's brother Anthony Woodville, 2nd Earl Rivers, a noted scholar. In a letter to Rivers, Edward IV set down precise conditions for the upbringing of his son and the management of the prince's household. He was to \"arise every morning at a convenient hour, according to his age\". His day would begin with matins and then Mass, which he was to receive uninterrupted. After breakfast, the business of educating the prince began with \"virtuous learning\". Dinner was served from ten in the morning, and then he was to be read \"noble stories ... of virtue, honour, cunning, wisdom, and of deeds of worship\" but \"of nothing that should move or stir him to vice\". Perhaps aware of his own vices, the king was keen to safeguard his son's morals, and instructed Rivers to ensure that no one in the prince's household was a habitual \"swearer, brawler, backbiter, common hazarder, adulterer, [or user of] words of ribaldry\". After further study, in the afternoon the prince was to engage in sporting activities suitable for his class, before evensong. Supper was served from four, and curtains were to be drawn at eight. Following this, the prince's attendants were to \"enforce themselves to make him merry and joyous towards his bed\". They would then watch over him as he slept.\nDominic Mancini reported of the young Edward V:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In word and deed he gave so many proofs of his liberal education, of polite nay rather scholarly, attainments far beyond his age; ... his special knowledge of literature ... enabled him to discourse elegantly, to understand fully, and to declaim most excellently from any work whether in verse or prose that came into his hands, unless it were from the more abstruse authors. He had such dignity in his whole person, and in his face such charm, that however much they might gaze, he never wearied the eyes of beholders.\nAs with several of his other children, Edward IV planned a prestigious European marriage for his eldest son, and in 1480 concluded an alliance with Francis II, Duke of Brittany, whereby Prince Edward was betrothed to the duke's four-year-old daughter and heiress to the duchy, Anne. The two were to be married upon their majority, with their eldest son inheriting England and their second son Brittany.\nReign.\nIt was at Ludlow that the 12-year-old Edward received the news, on Monday 14 April 1483, of his father's sudden death five days before. Edward IV's will, which has not survived, nominated his trusted brother Richard, Duke of Gloucester, as Protector during the minority of his son. The new king left Ludlow on 24 April, with Richard leaving York a day earlier, planning to meet at Northampton and travel to London together. However, when Richard reached Northampton, Edward and his party had already travelled onward to Stony Stratford, Buckinghamshire. The Earl Rivers travelled back to Northampton to meet Richard and Buckingham, who had now arrived. On the night of 29 April Richard dined with Rivers and Edward's half-brother, Richard Grey, but the following morning Rivers, Grey and the king's chamberlain, Thomas Vaughan, were arrested and sent north. Despite Richard's assurances, all three were subsequently executed. Dominic Mancini, an Italian who visited England in the 1480s, reports that Edward protested, but the remainder of his entourage was dismissed and Richard escorted him to London. On 19 May 1483, the new king took up residence in the Tower of London; on 16 June, his younger brother Richard of Shrewsbury, Duke of York joined him there.\nThe Privy Council had at first hoped for a speedy coronation, to avoid the need for a protectorate. This had previously happened with Richard II, who had become king at the age of ten. Another precedent was Henry VI, whose protectorate (which started when he inherited the crown aged 9 months) had ended with his coronation aged seven. Richard, however, repeatedly postponed the coronation.\nOn 22 June, Ralph Shaa preached a sermon declaring that Edward IV had already been contracted to marry Lady Eleanor Butler when he married Elizabeth Woodville, thereby rendering his marriage to Elizabeth invalid and their children together illegitimate. The children of Richard's older brother George, Duke of Clarence, were barred from the throne by their father's attainder, and therefore, on 25 June, an assembly of Lords and Commons declared Richard to be the lawful king. This was later confirmed by the act of parliament, \"Titulus Regius\". The following day he acceded to the throne as King Richard III.\nDisappearance.\nDominic Mancini recorded that after Richard III seized the throne, Edward and his brother Richard were taken into the \"inner apartments of the Tower\" and then were seen less and less until the end of the summer to the autumn of 1483, when they disappeared from public view altogether. During this period Mancini records that Edward was regularly visited by a doctor, who reported that Edward, \"like a victim prepared for sacrifice, sought remission of his sins by daily confession and penance, because he believed that death was facing him.\" The Latin reference to had previously been translated as \"a doctor from Strasbourg\", because the Latin name for the city of Strasbourg, , was still current at the time; however, D. E. Rhodes suggests it may actually refer to \"Doctor Argentine\", whom Rhodes identifies as John Argentine, an English physician who would later serve as provost of King's College, Cambridge, and as doctor to Arthur, Prince of Wales, eldest son of King Henry VII of England (Henry Tudor).\nThe princes' fate after their disappearance remains unknown, but the most widely accepted theory is that they were murdered on the orders of their uncle, King Richard. Thomas More (1478-1535) wrote that they were smothered to death with their pillows, and his account forms the basis of William Shakespeare's play \"Richard III\", in which Tyrrell murders the princes on Richard's orders. In the absence of hard evidence a number of other theories have been put forward, of which the most widely discussed are that they were murdered on the orders of Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham, or by Henry Tudor. However, A. J. Pollard points out that these theories are less plausible than the straightforward one that they were murdered by their uncle who in any case controlled access to them and was therefore regarded as responsible for their welfare. In the period before the boys' disappearance, Edward was regularly being visited by a doctor; historian David Baldwin extrapolates that contemporaries may have believed Edward had died of an illness (or as the result of attempts to cure him). An alternative theory is that Perkin Warbeck, a pretender to the throne, was indeed Richard, Duke of York, as he claimed, having escaped to Flanders after his uncle's defeat at Bosworth to be raised by his aunt, Margaret, Duchess of Burgundy.\nIn 1486 Edward IV's daughter Elizabeth, sister of Edward V, married Henry VII, thereby uniting the Houses of York and Lancaster. In 1516, Dame Margaret Capel bequeathed a chain that had belonged to Edward V to her son Giles Capel. This is one of the few known references to the personal possessions of the Princes in the Tower.\nIn 2021, researchers from \"The Missing Princes Project\" claimed to have found evidence that Edward may have lived out his days in the rural Devon village of Coldridge. They linked the 13-year-old prince with a man named John Evans, who arrived in the village around 1484, and was immediately given an official position and the title of Lord of the Manor. Researcher John Dike noted Yorkist symbols and stained glass windows depicting Edward V in a Coldridge chapel commissioned by Evans and built around 1511, unusual for the location.\nBones belonging to two children were discovered in 1674 by workmen rebuilding a stairway in the Tower. On the orders of King Charles II, these were subsequently placed in Westminster Abbey, in an urn bearing the names of Edward and Richard. The bones were re-examined in 1933, at which time it was discovered the skeletons were incomplete and had been interred with animal bones. It has never been proven that the bones belonged to the princes, and it is possible that they were buried before the reconstruction of that part of the Tower of London. Permission for a subsequent examination has been refused.\nIn 1789, workmen carrying out repairs in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, rediscovered and accidentally broke into the vault of Edward IV and Elizabeth Woodville. Adjoining this was another vault, which was found to contain the coffins of two children. This tomb was inscribed with the names of two of Edward IV's children who had predeceased him: George, Duke of Bedford, and Mary. However, the remains of these two children were later found elsewhere in the chapel, leaving the occupants of the children's coffins within the tomb unknown.\nMissing Princes Project.\nIn 2022, Philippa Langley led \"The Missing Princes Project\" to discover the fate of the Princes in the Tower. The project began in 2015, following the reburial of Richard III in Leicester and was formally launched in July the following year. In 2023 she claimed to have discovered new evidence that disproved the theory that Richard III was responsible for the deaths of the princes. Along with Rob Rinder, she hosted a Channel 4 programme called \"Princes in the Tower: The New Evidence\", in which she revealed her own theories and new archival discoveries. Although praising Langley's discoveries, \"The Spectator\"'s reviewer called the programme \"a calculated insult to the viewer\"; \"The Times\" called it \"compelling\" and awarded the documentary its \"Critics Choice.\" The programme achieved a large audience with Richard III and the Princes in the Tower trending on Twitter / X. The Richard III Society issued a press release stating: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The disappearance of the princes has always been described as a great unsolved mystery. Why? Because there was no evidence of their fate. Their murder was never more than conjecture, but it was put about by the authorities and \u2013 for safety\u2019s sake \u2013 only the brave dared to think differently. From now on, history must take account of this new breakthrough evidence. No longer can anyone confidently claim the princes were killed by Richard III.\nThree leading members of the Dutch Research Group who had assisted in the project subsequently distanced themselves from Langley's documentary and book, arguing that the documents they had discovered \"are in our own opinion open to various interpretations and do not constitute irrefutable proof\" for the survival of the princes. Langley responded that her conclusions were based on \"the totality of evidence thus assembled and the outcomes of a modern police missing person investigation methodology ... (and not through a traditional historical research method)\". Historian Michael Hicks said that the new documents \"do add to knowledge of the Tudor impostors, but they fall short of proof that either Edward V or Richard Duke of York survived beyond their disappearance in the autumn of 1483\".\nEpitaph.\nAs outlined above, on the orders of Charles II, the presumed bones of Edward V and his brother Richard were interred in Westminster Abbey; Edward was thus buried in the place of his birth. The white marble sarcophagus was designed by Sir Christopher Wren and made by Joshua Marshall. The sarcophagus can be found in the north aisle of the Henry VII Chapel, near Elizabeth I's tomb.\nThe Latin inscription on the urn can be translated as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here lie the relics of Edward V, King of England, and Richard, Duke of York. These brothers being confined in the Tower of London, and there stifled with pillows, were privately and meanly buried, by the order of their perfidious uncle Richard the Usurper; their bones, long enquired after and wished for, after 191 years in the rubbish of the stairs (those lately leading to the Chapel of the White Tower) were on the 17th day of July AD 1674 by undoubted proofs discovered, being buried deep in that place. Charles II, a most compassionate king, pitying their severe fate, ordered these unhappy princes to be laid amongst the monuments of their predecessors, AD 1678, in the 30th year of his reign.\nThe original Latin text is as follows (original all in capitals):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPortrayals in fiction.\nEdward appears as a character in the play \"Richard III\" by William Shakespeare. Edward appears alive in only one scene of the play (Act 3 Scene 1), during which he and his brother are portrayed as bright, precocious children who see through their uncle's ambitions. Edward in particular is portrayed as wiser than his years (something his uncle notes) and ambitious about his kingship. Edward and his brother's deaths are described in the play, but occur offstage. Their ghosts return in one more scene (Act 5 Scene 3) to haunt their uncle's dreams and promise success to his rival, Richmond (i.e. King Henry VII). In film and television adaptations of this play, Edward V has been portrayed by the following actors:\nEdward V is also featured as a mute role in another of Shakespeare's plays, \"Henry VI, Part 3\", where he appears as a newborn baby in the final scene. His father Edward IV addresses his own brothers thus: \"Clarence, and Gloster, [\"sic\"] love my lovely queen, And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.\" Gloster, the future Richard III, is at the close of this play already encompassing his nephew's demise, as he mutters in an aside, \"To say the truth, so Judas kiss'd his master, And cried \u2013 All hail! when as he meant \u2013 all harm.\"\nEdward appears in \"The White Queen\", a 2009 historical novel by Philippa Gregory and in the subsequent 2013 TV miniseries \"The White Queen\"; in the latter, he is played by Sonny Ashbourne Serkis.\nHeraldry.\nAs heir apparent, Edward bore the royal arms (quarterly France and England) differenced by a label of three points argent. During his brief reign, he used the royal arms undifferenced, supported by a lion and a hart as had his father. His livery badges were the traditional Yorkist symbols of the fetterlocked falcon and the rose argent.\nSources.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39714", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39714", "title": "Obliquity of the ecliptic", "text": ""}
{"id": "39715", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39715", "title": "Fertile Crescent", "text": "Region of the Middle East\nThe Fertile Crescent ( \"al-hil\u0101l al-\u1e35a\u1e63\u012bb\") is a crescent-shaped region in the Middle East, spanning modern-day Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine, and Syria, together with northern Kuwait, south-eastern Turkey, and western Iran. Some authors also include Cyprus and northern Egypt.\nThe Fertile Crescent is believed to be the first region where settled farming emerged as people started the process of clearance and modification of natural vegetation to grow newly domesticated plants as crops. Early human civilizations such as Sumer in Mesopotamia flourished as a result. Technological advances in the region include the development of agriculture and the use of irrigation, of writing, the wheel, and glass, most emerging first in Mesopotamia.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"Fertile Crescent\" was popularized by archaeologist James Henry Breasted in \"Outlines of European History\" (1914) and \"Ancient Times, A History of the Early World\" (1916).&lt;ref name=\"Breasted 1914/1916\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It lies like an army facing south, with one wing stretching along the eastern shore of the Mediterranean and the other reaching out to the Persian Gulf, while the center has its back against the northern mountains. The end of the western wing is Palestine; Assyria makes up a large part of the center; while the end of the eastern wing is Babylonia. [...] This great semicircle, for lack of a name, may be called the Fertile Crescent.\nThere is no single term for this region in antiquity. At the time that Breasted was writing, it roughly corresponded with the territories of the Ottoman Empire ceded to Britain and France in the Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement. Historian Thomas Scheffler has noted that Breasted was following a trend in Western geography to \"overwrite the classical geographical distinctions between continents, countries and landscapes with large, abstract spaces\", drawing parallels with the work of Halford Mackinder, who conceptualised Eurasia as a 'pivot area' surrounded by an 'inner crescent', Alfred Thayer Mahan's Middle East, and Friedrich Naumann's \"Mitteleuropa\".\nIn current usage, the Fertile Crescent includes Israel, Palestine, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, and Jordan, as well as the surrounding portions of Turkey and Iran. In addition to the Tigris and Euphrates, riverwater sources include the Jordan River. The boundaries are delimited by the dry climate of the Syrian Desert to the south, the Sahara Desert to the west, the Anatolian and Armenian highlands to the north and the Iranian plateau to the east.\nBiodiversity and climate.\nAs crucial as rivers and marshlands were to the rise of civilization in the Fertile Crescent, they were not the only factor. The area is geographically important as the \"bridge\" between North Africa and Eurasia, which has allowed it to retain a greater amount of biodiversity than either Europe or North Africa, where climate changes during the Ice Age led to repeated extinction events when ecosystems became squeezed against the waters of the Mediterranean Sea. The Saharan pump theory posits that this Middle Eastern land bridge was extremely important to the modern distribution of Old World flora and fauna, including the spread of humanity.\nThe area has borne the brunt of the tectonic divergence between the African and Arabian plates and the converging Arabian and Eurasian plates, which has made the region a very diverse zone of high snow-covered mountains.\nThe Fertile Crescent had many diverse climates, and major climatic changes encouraged the evolution of many \"r\" type annual plants, which produce more edible seeds than \"K\" type perennial plants. The region's dramatic variety in elevation gave rise to many species of edible plants for early experiments in cultivation. Most importantly, the Fertile Crescent was home to the eight Neolithic founder crops important in early agriculture (i.e., wild progenitors to emmer wheat, einkorn, barley, flax, chick pea, pea, lentil, bitter vetch), and four of the five most important species of domesticated animals\u2014cows, goats, sheep, and pigs; the fifth species, the horse, lived nearby. The Fertile Crescent flora comprises a high percentage of plants that can self-pollinate, but may also be cross-pollinated. These plants, called \"selfers\", were one of the geographical advantages of the area because they did not depend on other plants for reproduction.\nHistory.\nAs well as possessing many sites with the skeletal and cultural remains of both pre-modern and early modern humans (e.g., at Tabun and Es Skhul caves), later Pleistocene hunter-gatherers, and Epipalaeolithic semi-sedentary hunter-gatherers (the Natufians); the Fertile Crescent is most famous for its sites related to the origins of agriculture. The western zone around the Jordan and upper Euphrates rivers gave rise to the first known Neolithic farming settlements (referred to as Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA)), which date to around 9,000 BCE and includes very ancient sites such as G\u00f6bekli Tepe, Chogha Golan, and Jericho (Tell es-Sultan).\nThis region, alongside Mesopotamia (Greek for \"between rivers\", between the rivers Tigris and Euphrates, lies in the east of the Fertile Crescent), also saw the emergence of early complex societies during the succeeding Bronze Age. There is also early evidence from the region for writing and the formation of hierarchical state level societies. This has earned the region the nickname \"The cradle of civilization\".\nFrom ancient times empires arose and fell in the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river basin, including Sumer, Akkad, Babylonia, Assyria, and the Abbasid Caliphate.\nIt is in this region where the first libraries appeared about 4,500 years ago. The oldest known libraries are found in Nippur (in Sumer) and Ebla (in Syria), both from c.\u20092500 BCE.\nBoth the Tigris and Euphrates start in the Taurus Mountains of what is modern-day Turkey. Farmers in southern Mesopotamia had to protect their fields from flooding each year. Northern Mesopotamia had sufficient rain to make some farming possible. To protect against flooding they made levees.\nSince the Bronze Age, the region's natural fertility has been greatly extended by irrigation works, upon which much of its agricultural production continues to depend. The last two millennia have seen repeated cycles of decline and recovery as past works have fallen into disrepair through the replacement of states, to be replaced under their successors. Another ongoing problem has been salination\u2014gradual concentration of salt and other minerals in soils with a long history of irrigation.\nEarly domestications.\nPrehistoric seedless figs were discovered at Gilgal I in the Jordan Valley, suggesting that fig trees were being planted some 11,400 years ago. Cereals were already grown in Syria as long as 9,000 years ago. Small cats (\"Felis silvestris\") also were domesticated in this region. Also, legumes including peas, lentils and chickpea were domesticated in this region.\nDomesticated animals include the cattle, sheep, goat, domestic pig, cat, and domestic goose.\nCosmopolitan diffusion.\nModern analyses comparing 24 craniofacial measurements reveal a relatively diverse population within the pre-Neolithic, Neolithic and Bronze Age Fertile Crescent, supporting the view that several populations occupied this region during these time periods. Similar arguments do not hold true for the Basques and Canary Islanders of the same time period, as the studies demonstrate those ancient peoples to be \"clearly associated with modern Europeans\". Additionally, no evidence from the studies demonstrates Cro-Magnon influence, contrary to former suggestions.\nThe studies further suggest a diffusion of this diverse population away from the Fertile Crescent, with the early migrants moving away from the Near East\u2014westward into Europe and North Africa, northward to Crimea, and northeastward to Mongolia. They took their agricultural practices with them and interbred with the hunter-gatherers whom they subsequently came in contact with while perpetuating their farming practices. This supports prior genetic and archaeological studies which have all arrived at the same conclusion.\nConsequently, contemporary \"in situ\" peoples absorbed the agricultural way of life of those early migrants who ventured out of the Fertile Crescent. This is contrary to the suggestion that the spread of agriculture disseminated out of the Fertile Crescent by way of sharing of knowledge. Instead, the view now supported by a preponderance of evidence is that it occurred by actual migration out of the region, coupled with subsequent interbreeding with indigenous local populations whom the migrants came in contact with.\nA 2005 craniometric study found that not all present-day Europeans share strong affinities to the Neolithic and Bronze Age inhabitants of the Fertile Crescent; the closest ties to the Fertile Crescent rest with Southern Europeans. The same study further demonstrates all present-day Europeans to be closely related. Genetics research finds that most present-day Europeans, across Europe, derive from at least three ancient populations, including the Early European Farmers, who descended from the Near Eastern migrants that brought agriculture to Europe. This ancient farmer population was genetically distinct from European hunter-gatherers and close to present-day Near Easterners.\nLanguages.\nLinguistically, the Fertile Crescent was a region of great diversity. Historically, Semitic languages generally prevailed in the modern regions of Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, Sinai and the fringes of southeast Turkey and northwest Iran, as well as the Sumerian (a language isolate) in Iraq, whilst in the mountainous areas to the east and north a number of generally unrelated language isolates were found, including; Elamite, Gutian and Kassite in Iran, and Hattic, Kaskian and Hurro-Urartian in Turkey. The precise affiliation of these, and their date of arrival, remain topics of scholarly discussion. However, given lack of textual evidence for the earliest era of prehistory, this debate is unlikely to be resolved in the near future.\nThe evidence that does exist suggests that, by the third millennium BCE and into the second, several language groups already existed in the region. These included:\nLinks between Hurro-Urartian and Hattic and the indigenous languages of the Caucasus have frequently been suggested, but are not generally accepted.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39716", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39716", "title": "Fertile crescent", "text": ""}
{"id": "39719", "revid": "963183758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39719", "title": "Stakeholder (law)", "text": ""}
{"id": "39721", "revid": "2909459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39721", "title": "1936 Summer Olympics", "text": "Multi-sport event in Berlin, Germany\nThe 1936 Summer Olympics (), officially the Games of the XI Olympiad () and officially branded as Berlin 1936, were an international multi-sport event held from 1 to 16 August 1936 in Berlin, then capital of Nazi Germany. Berlin won the bid to host the Games over Barcelona at the 29th International Olympic Committee meeting on 26 April 1931. The 1936 Games marked the second and most recent time the IOC gathered to vote in a city bidding to host those Games. Later rule modifications forbade cities hosting the bid vote from being awarded the games.\nTo outdo the 1932 Los Angeles Games, Chancellor Adolf Hitler had a new 100,000-seat track and field stadium built, as well as six gymnasiums and other smaller arenas. The Games were the first to be televised, with radio broadcasts reaching 41 countries. Filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl was commissioned by the German Olympic Committee to film the Games for $7 million. Her film, titled \"Olympia\", pioneered many of the techniques now common in the filming of sports.\nHitler saw the 1936 Games as an opportunity to promote his government and ideals of racial supremacy and antisemitism, and the official Nazi Party paper, the , wrote in the strongest terms that Jews should not be allowed to participate in the Games. German Jewish athletes were barred or prevented from taking part in the Games by a variety of methods, although some female swimmers from the Jewish sports club Hakoah Vienna did participate. Jewish athletes from other countries were said to have been sidelined to avoid offending the Nazi regime. Lithuania was expelled from the Olympic Games due to Berlin's position regarding Lithuanian anti-Nazi policy, particularly because of the 1934\u201335 Trial of Neumann and Sass in Klaip\u0117da.\nTotal ticket revenues were 7.5million Reichsmark (equivalent to \u20ac in 2021), for a profit of over one million \u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01. The official budget did not include outlays by the city of Berlin (which issued an itemized report detailing its costs of 16.5million R.M.) or the outlays of the German national government (which did not make its costs public, but is estimated to have spent US$30million).\nJesse Owens of the United States won four gold medals in the sprint and long jump events, and became the most successful athlete to compete in Berlin, while Germany was the most successful country overall with 101 medals (38 of them gold); the United States placed a distant second with 57 medals. These were the final Olympic Games under the presidency of Henri de Baillet-Latour. For the next 12 years, no Olympic Games were held due to the immense world disruption caused by the Second World War. The next Olympic Games were held in 1948 (the Winter Games in St. Moritz, Switzerland, and then the Summer Games in London, England).\nHost City Selection.\nAt the 28th IOC Session, held in May 1930 in Berlin, 14 cities announced their intention to bid to host the 1936 Summer Olympic Games. By the time of the 29th IOC Session in Barcelona in April 1931, only Barcelona and Berlin were left in contention. The other cities that announced an intention to hold the games, but withdrew from the race, were Alexandria, Budapest, Buenos Aires, Cologne, Dublin, Frankfurt, Helsinki, Lausanne, Montevideo, Nuremberg, Rio de Janeiro, and Rome. Helsinki, Rome, Barcelona, and Rio de Janeiro would go on to host the Olympic Games in 1952, 1960, 1992, and 2016, respectively. Rome withdrew on the eve of the 1931 Session.\nThe city of Barcelona held a multi-sport festival at the same time as the 1931 IOC Session. This included a football match between Spain and the Irish Free State, which was watched by 50,000 spectators. The political uncertainty around the declaration of the Second Spanish Republic, which had happened days before the IOC Session, was likely a great factor in the decision taken by delegates regarding the host city for 1936.\nThe games were the first for which the host was decided by a vote of each individual IOC member. The deadline for votes was 13 May 1931, two weeks after the Barcelona Session. Of the 67 voting IOC members, 19 submitted ballots during the Session, and 40 by post to the IOC headquarters in Lausanne; the other 8 abstained. The vote was 43 for Berlin, and 16 for Barcelona.\nAfter the Nazis took control of Germany and began instituting anti-Semitic policies, the IOC held private discussions among its delegates about changing the decision to hold the Games in Berlin. However, Hitler's regime gave assurances that Jewish athletes would be allowed to compete on a German Olympic team. One year before the games, the American Olympic Association suggested to change the venue to Rome; they saw Rome as a good replacement because Rome was originally selected to hold the 1908 Summer Olympics. The proposal was not seriously discussed.\nOrganization.\nHans von Tschammer und Osten, as \"Reichssportf\u00fchrer\" (head of the National Socialist League of the Reich for Physical Exercise (\"Deutscher Reichsbund f\u00fcr Leibes\u00fcbungen\", DRL) and the Reich Sports Office) played a major role in the structure and organisation of the Olympics. He promoted the idea that the use of sports would harden the German spirit and instill unity among German youth. At the same time, he also believed that sports was a \"way to weed out the weak, Jewish, and other undesirables\".\nVon Tschammer entrusted the details of the organisation of the Games to the president of the German Olympic Committee, Theodor Lewald, and Carl Diem, the former president and secretary of the DRL, the forerunner of the Reich Sports Office. Among Diem's ideas for the Berlin Games was the introduction of the Olympic torch relay between Greece and the host nation. Lewald would be replaced, owing to his paternal grandmother's Jewish roots, by Von Tschammer himself.\nTorch Relay.\nThe 1936 Summer Olympics torch relay was the first of its kind, following on from the reintroduction of the Olympic Flame at the 1928 Games. It pioneered the modern convention of moving the flame via a relay system from Greece to the Olympic venue. Leni Riefenstahl filmed the relay for the 1938 film \"Olympia\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The sportive, knightly battle awakens the best human characteristics. It doesn't separate but unites the combatants in understanding and respect. It also helps to connect the countries in the spirit of peace. That's why the Olympic Flame should never die.\u2014\u200a\nBroadcasting.\nThe Games were the first to have live television coverage in black-and-white. The German Post Office, using equipment from Telefunken, broadcast over 70 hours of coverage to special viewing rooms throughout Berlin and Potsdam and a few private TV sets, transmitting from the Paul Nipkow TV Station. They used three different types of TV cameras, so blackouts would occur when changing from one type to another. The Games were also the first photographed and filmed in color using newly invented Agfacolor.\nOlympic Village.\nThe 1936 Olympic village was located at Elstal in Wustermark (at ), on the western edge of Berlin. The site, which is from the centre of the city, consisted of one and two-floor dormitories, a large dining hall, \"Dining Hall of the Nations\", a swimming facility, a gymnasium, track, and other training facilities. Its layout was designed and construction was overseen by the appointed village commander \"Hauptmann\" Wolfgang F\u00fcrstner beginning in 1934. Less than two months before the start of the Olympic Games, F\u00fcrstner was abruptly demoted to vice-commander, and replaced by \"Oberstleutnant\" Werner von Gilsa, commander of the Berlin Guard-Regiment. The official reason for the replacement was that F\u00fcrstner had not acted \"with the necessary energy\" to prevent damage to the site as 370,000 visitors passed through it between 1 May and 15 June. However, this was just a cover story to explain the sudden demotion of the half-Jewish officer. The 1935 Nuremberg Laws, passed during the period F\u00fcrstner was overseeing the Olympic Village, had classified him as a Jew, and as such, the career officer was to be expelled from the \"Wehrmacht\". Two days after the conclusion of the Berlin Olympics, vice-commander F\u00fcrstner had been removed from active \"Wehrmacht\" duty, and committed suicide a day later because he realised he had no future under the Nazis.\nAfter the completion of the Olympic Games, the village was repurposed for the \"Wehrmacht\" into the Olympic D\u00f6beritz Hospital (), and Army Infantry School (), and was used as such through the Second World War. In 1945 it was taken over by the Soviet Union and became a military camp of the Soviet occupation forces. Late 20th-century efforts were made to restore parts of the former village, but little progress was made. More recently, the vast majority of the land of the Olympic Village has been managed by the DKB Foundation, with more success; efforts are being made to restore the site into a living museum. The dormitory building used by Jesse Owens, Meissen House, has been fully restored, with the gymnasium and swimming hall partially restored. Seasonally, tours are given daily to small groups and students.\nThe site remains relatively unknown even in Germany, but some tournaments are held at the site to boost knowledge of the venues.\nVenues.\nTwenty-two venues were used for the 1936 Summer Olympics. Many were located in the Reich Sportsfeld complex.\nSailing was held in the Bay of Kiel, which would serve as the same sporting venue for the 1972 Summer Olympics held in Munich. The Olympic Stadium would later be part of two FIFA World Cups and then host an IAAF World Championships in Athletics along with undergoing a renovation in the early 2000s to give new life to the stadium. Avus Motor Road (AVUS) was started in 1907, but was not completed until 1921 due to World War I. The track was rebuilt for the 1936 Games. AVUS continued being used after World War II though mainly in Formula 2 racing. The German Grand Prix was last held at the track in 1959. Dismantling of the track first took place in 1968 to make way for a traffic crossing for touring cars that raced there until 1998.\nBSV 92 Field was first constructed in 1910 for use in football, handball, athletics, and tennis. The Reich Sports Field, which consisted of the Olympic Stadium, the Dietrich Eckert Open-Air Theatre, the Olympic Swimming Stadium, Mayfield, the Hockey Stadiums, the Tennis Courts, and the Haus des Deutschen Sports, was planned for the aborted 1916 Summer Olympics, but was not completed until 1934. Mayfield was the last venue completed prior to the 1936 Games in April 1936. Deutschland Hall was opened in 1935. Mommenstadion opened in 1930. Basketball was held outdoors at the request of the International Basketball Federation (FIBA). The tennis courts were used, which turned to mud during heavy rain at the final. The K-1 1000 m canoeing final was also affected by heavy rain at Gr\u00fcnau that included thunder and lightning. During World War II, Deutschlandhalle in Berlin, suffered heavy aerial bombing damage. After the war, the hall was reconstructed and expanded. The Deutschlandhalle was used as a venue, but was increasingly closed for repairs, last in 2009. It was demolished in December 2011. The Mommsenstadion was renovated in 1987 and was still in use as of 2010[ [update]].\nThe Olympic Stadium was used as an underground bunker in World War II as the war went against Nazi Germany's favor. The British reopened the Stadium in 1946 and parts of the stadium were rebuilt by the late 1950s. As a host venue for the 1974 FIFA World Cup, the stadium had its roof partially covered on the North and South Stands. British occupation of the stadium ended in 1994. Restoration was approved in 1998 with a contractor being found to do the work in 2000. This restoration ran from 2000 to 2004. The modernized Stadium reopened in 2004, with a capacity of 74,228 people. The seating has been changed greatly, especially the sections that were reserved for German and international political leaders. The stadium now plays host to Hertha BSC (1963\u2013present), and is expected to remain the home of the team for years to come. For the 2006 FIFA World Cup, the venue was where the final took place between Italy and France. Three years later, the venue hosted the World Athletics Championships.\nGames.\nOpening Ceremony.\nThe opening ceremony was held at the Berlin Olympic Stadium on 1 August 1936. A flyover by the German airship \"Hindenburg\" flying the Olympic flag behind it was featured early in the opening ceremonies. After the arrival of Hitler and his entourage, the parade of nations proceeded, each nation with its own unique costume. As the birthplace of the Olympics, Greece entered the stadium first. The host nation, Germany, entered last. Some nations' athletes purposefully gave the Nazi salute as they passed Hitler. Others gave the Olympic salute (a similar one, given with the same arm), or a different gesture entirely, such as hats-over-hearts, as the United States, India, and China did. All nations lowered their flags as they passed the F\u00fchrer, save the United States, the United Kingdom, Switzerland and the Commonwealth of the Philippines. (The United States doing this was explained later as an army regulation, and the country traditionally avoids dipping its flag at the Olympics.) Writer Thomas Wolfe, who was there, described the opening as an \"almost religious event, the crowd screaming, swaying in unison and begging for Hitler. There was something scary about it; his cult of personality.\"\nAfter a speech by the president of the German Olympic Committee, the games were officially declared open by Adolf Hitler who quoted (in German): \"I proclaim open the Olympic Games of Berlin, celebrating the Eleventh Olympiad of the modern era.\" This sentence was written by IOC President Baillet-Latour as part of a compromise the IOC struck to prevent Hitler from turning the speech into a propaganda event, and he was to follow it strictly, to which Hitler reportedly joked \"Count, I'll take the trouble to learn it by heart\". Hitler opened the games from his own box, on top of others. Writer David Wallechinsky has commented on the event, saying, \"This was his event, he wanted to be glorified.\"\nAlthough the Olympic flame was first introduced in the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam, this was the first instance of the torch relay. The Germans invented the concept of the torch run from ancient Olympia to the host city. Thus as swimmer Iris Cummings later related, \"once the athletes were all in place, the torch bearer ran in through the tunnel to go around the stadium\". A young man chosen for this task ran up the steps all the way up to the top of the stadium there to light a cauldron which would start this eternal flame that would burn through the duration of the games.\nBut despite all the pomp and ceremony, and the glorification of Hitler, all did not go according to plan, and there was a rather humorous aspect in the opening ceremony. U.S. distance runner Louis Zamperini, one of the athletes present, related it on camera:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They released 25,000 pigeons, the sky was clouded with pigeons, the pigeons circled overhead, and then they shot a cannon, and they scared the poop out of the pigeons, and we had straw hats, flat straw hats, and you could heard the pitter-patter on our straw hats, but we felt sorry for the women, for they got it in their hair, but I mean there were a mass of droppings, and I say it was so funny...\nEvents.\n129 events in 25 disciplines, comprising 19 sports, were part of the Olympic program in 1936. The number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBasketball, canoeing, and handball made their debut at the Olympics. Handball did not appear again on the program until the next German summer Olympic games in Munich in 1972. There were two demonstration sports: baseball and gliding. Art competitions for medals were also held, and medals were awarded at the closing ceremony for feats of alpinism and aeronautics. Unofficial exhibition events included Indian sports, wushu and motor racing.\nNotable achievements.\nGermany had a successful year in the equestrian events, winning individual and team gold in all three disciplines, as well as individual silver in dressage. In the cycling match sprint finals, German Toni Merkens fouled Arie van Vliet of the Netherlands. Instead of being disqualified, he was fined 100 \u211b\u2133 and kept his gold. German gymnasts Konrad Frey and Alfred Schwarzmann both won three gold medals.\nAmerican Jesse Owens won four gold medals in the sprint and long jump events. His German competitor Luz Long offered Owens advice after he almost failed to qualify in the long jump. Mack Robinson, brother of Jackie Robinson, won the 200-meter sprint silver medal behind Owens by 0.4 seconds. Although he did not win a medal, future American war hero Louis Zamperini, lagging behind in the 5,000-meter final, made up ground by clocking a 56-second final lap. In one of the most dramatic 800-meter races in history, American John Woodruff won gold after slowing to jogging speed in the middle of the final to free himself from being boxed in. Glenn Edgar Morris, a farm boy from Colorado, won gold in the decathlon. British rower Jack Beresford won his fifth Olympic medal in the sport, and his third gold medal. The U.S. eight-man rowing team from the University of Washington won the gold medal, coming from behind to defeat the Germans and Italians with Hitler in attendance. 13-year-old American sensation Marjorie Gestring won the women's 3 meter diving event.\nJack Lovelock of New Zealand won the 1500\u00a0m gold medal, coming through a strong field to win in the world record time of 3:47.8.\nIn the marathon, the ethnic Koreans Sohn Kee-chung and Nam Sung-yong won one gold and one bronze medal; as Korea was annexed by Japan at the time, they were running for Japan.\nIndia won the gold medal in the field hockey event once again (they won the gold in all Olympics from 1928 to 1956), defeating Germany 8\u20131 in the final. Indians were considered Indo-Aryans by the German authorities and there was no controversy regarding the victory.\nRie Mastenbroek of the Netherlands won three gold medals and a silver in swimming. Estonian heavyweight wrestler Kristjan Palusalu won two gold medals, and he became the first and only wrestler in Olympic history ever to win both the Greco-Roman and freestyle heavyweight events. Berlin 1936 marked the last time Estonia competed as an independent nation in the Olympics until 1992.\nAfter winning the middleweight class, the Egyptian weightlifter Khadr El Touni continued to compete for another 45 minutes, finally exceeding the total of the German silver medalist by 35\u00a0kg. The 20-year-old El Touni lifted a total of 387.5\u00a0kg, crushing two German world champions and breaking the then-Olympic and world records, while the German lifted 352.5\u00a0kg. Furthermore, El Touni had lifted 15\u00a0kg more than the light-heavyweight gold medalist, a feat only El Touni has accomplished. El Touni's new world records stood for 13 years. Fascinated by El Touni's performance, Adolf Hitler rushed down to greet this human miracle. Prior to the competition, Hitler was said to have been sure that Rudolf Ismayr and Adolf Wagner would embarrass all other opponents. Hitler was so impressed by El Touni's domination in the middleweight class that he ordered a street named after him in Berlin's Olympic village. The Egyptian held the No. 1 position on the IWF list of history's 50 greatest weightlifters for 60 years, until the 1996 Games in Atlanta where Turkey's Naim S\u00fcleymano\u011flu surpassed him to top the list.\nItaly's football team continued their dominance under head coach Vittorio Pozzo, winning the gold medal in these Olympics between their two consecutive World Cup victories (1934 and 1938). Much like the successes of German athletes, this triumph was claimed by supporters of Benito Mussolini's regime as a vindication of the superiority of the fascist system. Austria won the silver; a controversial win after Hitler called for a rematch of the quarterfinals match to discount Peru's 4\u20132 win over Austria. The Peruvian national Olympic team refused to play the match again and withdrew from the games. In the quarter-finals of the football tournament, Peru beat Austria 4\u20132 in extra-time. Peru had rallied from a two-goal deficit in the final 15 minutes of normal time. During extra-time, Peruvian fans allegedly ran onto the field and attacked an Austrian player. In the chaos, Peru scored twice and won, 4\u20132. However, Austria protested and the International Olympic Committee ordered a replay without any spectators. The Peruvian government refused and their entire Olympic squad left in protest as did Colombia.\nA remarkable story from the track and field competition was the gold medal won by the US women's 4 \u00d7 100\u00a0m relay team. The German team were the heavy favourites, but dropped the baton at one hand-off. Of notable interest on the US team was Betty Robinson. She was the first woman ever awarded an Olympic gold medal for track and field, winning the women's 100\u00a0m event at the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam. In 1931, Robinson was involved in a plane crash, and was severely injured. Her body was discovered in the wreckage and it was wrongly thought that she was dead. She was placed in the trunk of a car and taken to an undertaker, where it was discovered that she was not dead, but in a coma. She awoke from the coma seven months later, although it was another six months before she could get out of a wheelchair, and two years before she could walk normally again. Due to the length of her recovery, she had to miss participating in the 1932 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, in her home country.\nParticipating nations.\nA total of 49 nations attended the Berlin Olympics, up from 37 in 1932. Five nations made their first official Olympic appearance at these Games: Afghanistan, Bermuda, Bolivia, Costa Rica and Liechtenstein.\nThe nations that returned to the games were Bulgaria, Chile, Egypt, Iceland, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Peru, Romania and Turkey.\nThe nations that participated in the previous games in Los Angeles in 1932 but were absent in Berlin in 1936 were Ireland and Spain.\nAt the time, Australia and New Zealand were dominions of the British Empire. Both nations had not yet ratified the Statute of Westminster 1931. India and Bermuda were also part of the British Empire, but were not dominions. And Philippines was an unincorporated territory and commonwealth of the United States.\nMedal count.\nThe twelve nations that won the most medals at the 1936 Games.\nPolitical aspects.\nHitler saw the Games as an opportunity to promote his government and ideals of Aryan racial supremacy. The official Nazi party paper, the \"V\u00f6lkischer Beobachter\", wrote in the strongest terms that Jewish and black people should not be allowed to participate in the Games. However, when threatened with a boycott of the Games by other nations, he relented and allowed black and Jewish people to participate, and added one token participant to the German team\u2014Helene Mayer, a woman of Jewish descent. Hitler was an adroit player of sexual affairs and he used his liaison with Unity Mitford to good advantage in the public sphere, for example when he gave her a private Olympic stadium box, to which she invited her connections in British high society. In an attempt to \"clean up\" the host city, the German Ministry of the Interior authorized the chief of police to arrest all Romani and keep them in a \"special camp\", the Berlin-Marzahn concentration camp. The 'Jews Not Welcome' signs were removed for the duration of the Olympics.\nOn the Olympic stage.\nAmerican Olympic Committee president Avery Brundage became a main supporter of the Games being held in Germany, arguing that \"politics has no place in sport\", despite having initial doubts.\nFrench Olympians gave a Roman salute at the opening ceremony: known as the \"salut de Joinville\" per the battalion, , the Olympic salute was part of the Olympic traditions since the 1924 games. However, due to the different context this action was mistaken by the crowd for a support to fascism, and the Olympic salute was discarded after 1946.\nAlthough Haiti attended only the opening ceremony, an interesting vexillological fact was noticed: its flag and the flag of Liechtenstein were coincidentally identical, and this was not discovered until then. The following year, a crown was added to Liechtenstein's to distinguish one flag from the other.\nMarty Glickman and Sam Stoller were originally slated to compete in the American 4x100 relay team but were replaced by Jesse Owens and Ralph Metcalfe prior to the start of the race. There were speculations that their Jewish heritage contributed to the decision \"not to embarrass the German hosts\"; however, given that African-Americans were also heavily disliked by the Nazis, Glickman and Stoller's replacement with black American athletes does not support this theory. Others said that they were in a better physical condition, and that was the main reason behind the replacement.\nDomestic antisemitism.\nThe German Olympic Committee, in accordance with Nazi directives, virtually barred Germans who were Jewish or Roma or had such an ancestry from participating in the Games (Helene Mayer, who had one Jewish parent, was the only German Jew to compete at the Berlin Games). This decision meant exclusion for many of the country's top athletes such as shotputter and discus thrower Lilli Henoch, who was a four-time world record holder and 10-time German national champion, and Gretel Bergmann who was suspended from the German team just days after she set a record of 1.60 meters in the high jump. Daniel Prenn, Erich Seelig and Johann Trollmann were also excluded.\nBoycott debate.\nPrior to and during the Games, there was considerable debate outside Germany over whether the competition should be allowed or discontinued. Berlin had been selected by the IOC as the host city in 1931 during the Weimar Republic, but after Adolf Hitler's rise to power in 1933, observers in many countries began to question the morality of going ahead with an Olympic Games hosted by the Nazi regime. A number of brief campaigns to boycott or relocate the Games emerged in the United Kingdom, France, Sweden, Czechoslovakia, the Netherlands, and the United States. Exiled German political opponents of Hitler's regime also campaigned against the Berlin Olympics through pro-Communist newspapers such as the \"Arbeiter-Illustrierte-Zeitung\".\nThe protests were ultimately unsuccessful; forty-nine teams from around the world participated in the 1936 Games, the largest number of participating nations of any Olympics to that point.\nFrance.\nFencer Albert Wolff qualified for the French Olympic Team but boycotted the 1936 Summer Olympics, withdrawing from France's national team on principle because he was Jewish. He said: \"I cannot participate in anything sponsored by Adolf Hitler, even for France.\"\nSouth Africa.\nIndividual Jewish athletes from several countries chose to boycott the Berlin Olympics, including South African Sid Kiel.\nSpain.\nThe Spanish government led by the newly elected left-wing Popular Front boycotted the Games and the Government of Catalonia organized the People's Olympiad as a parallel event in Barcelona. Some 6,000 athletes from 49 countries registered. However, the People's Olympiad was aborted because of the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War just one day before the event was due to start.\nSoviet Union.\nThe Soviet Union had not participated in international sporting events since the 1920 Summer Olympics. The Soviet government was not invited to the 1920 Games, with the Russian Civil War still raging, and they did not participate in the 1924 Summer Olympics and forward on ideological grounds. Instead, through the auspices of the Red Sport International, it had participated in a left-wing workers' alternative, the Spartakiad, since 1928. The USSR had intended to attend the People's Olympiad in Barcelona until it was cancelled; the Soviets did attend the Spartakiad-sponsored 1937 Workers' Summer Olympiad in Antwerp, Belgium. The Soviet Union started competing in the Olympics in 1952, when Joseph Stalin realized that they could use the event to fulfil their political and ideological agenda.\nTurkey.\nHalet \u00c7ambel and Suat Fetgeri A\u0219ani, the first Turkish and Muslim women athletes to participate in the Olympics (fencing), refused an offer by their guide to be formally introduced to Adolf Hitler, saying they would not shake hands with him due to his approach to Jews, as stated by Ms. \u00c7ambel in a \"Milliyet\" newspaper interview in 2000.\nUnited States.\nTraditionally, the United States sent one of the largest teams to the Olympics, and there was a considerable debate over whether the nation should participate in the 1936 Games. Americans Milton Green and Norman Cahners refused to attend, and the American Jewish Congress and the Jewish Labor Committee supported a boycott.\nThose involved in the debate on whether to boycott the Olympics included Ernest Lee Jahncke, Judge Jeremiah T. Mahoney, and future IOC President Avery Brundage. Some within the United States considered requesting a boycott of the Games, as to participate in the festivity might be considered a sign of support for the Nazi regime and its antisemitic policies. However, others such as Brundage (see below) argued that the Olympic Games should not reflect political views, but rather should be strictly a contest of the greatest athletes.\nBrundage, then of the American Olympic Committee, opposed the boycott, stating that Jewish athletes were being treated fairly and that the Games should continue. Brundage asserted that politics played no role in sports, and that they should never be entwined. Brundage also believed that there was a \"Jewish-Communist conspiracy\" that existed to keep the United States from competing in the Olympic Games. Somewhat ironically, Brundage would be later accused of being a Soviet dupe for his controversial stance on the Soviet sports system that allowed them to circumvent the amateur rules. On the subject of Jewish discrimination, he stated, \"The very foundation of the modern Olympic revival will be undermined if individual countries are allowed to restrict participation by reason of class, creed, or race.\"\nDuring a trip to Germany in 1934 to ascertain whether German Jews were being treated fairly, Brundage found no discrimination when he interviewed Jews and his Nazi handlers translated for him, and he commiserated with his hosts that he belonged to a sports club in Chicago that did not allow Jews entry, either.\nUnlike Brundage, Mahoney supported a boycott of the Games. Mahoney, the president of the Amateur Athletic Union, led newspaper editors and anti-Nazi groups to protest against American participation in the Berlin Olympics. He contested that racial discrimination was a violation of Olympic rules and that participation in the Games was tantamount to support for the Third Reich.\nMost African-American newspapers supported participation in the Olympics. The Philadelphia \"Tribune\" and the \"Chicago Defender\" both agreed that black victories would undermine Nazi views of Aryan supremacy and spark renewed African-American pride. American Jewish organizations, meanwhile, largely opposed the Olympics. The American Jewish Congress and the Jewish Labor Committee staged rallies and supported the boycott of German goods to show their disdain for American participation. The JLC organized the World Labor Athletic Carnival, held on 15 and 16 August at New York's Randall's Island, to protest the holding of the 1936 Olympics in Nazi Germany.\nEventually, Brundage won the debate, convincing the Amateur Athletic Union to close a vote in favor of sending an American team to the Berlin Olympics. Mahoney's efforts to incite a boycott of the Olympic games in the United States failed, although some athletes like Harvard University track star Milton Green chose to sit at home.\nUS President Franklin Delano Roosevelt and his administration did not become involved in the debate, due to a tradition of allowing the US Olympic Committee to operate independently of government influence. However, several American diplomats including William E. Dodd, the American ambassador to Berlin, and George Messersmith, head of the US legation in Vienna, deplored the US Olympic Committee's decision to participate in the games.\nAftermath.\nIn 1937, 20th Century Fox released the film \"Charlie Chan at the Olympics\". The plot concerned members of the Berlin police force helping the Chinese detective apprehends a group of spies (of unnamed nationality) trying to steal a new aerial guidance system. Despite pertaining to the Berlin Olympics, actual Games' footage used by the filmmakers was edited to remove any Nazi symbols.\nAfter the Olympics, Jewish participation in German sports was further limited, and persecution of Jews started to become ever more lethal. The Olympic Games provided a nine-month period of relative calmness.\nAt least two Polish Jewish Olympians (Roman Kantor and Ilia Szrajbman) who attended the 1936 Games later died in Majdanek concentration camp as part of the Holocaust.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39722", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39722", "title": "I.O.C", "text": ""}
{"id": "39723", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39723", "title": "I.O.C.", "text": ""}
{"id": "39724", "revid": "15935301", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39724", "title": "1936 Berlin Games", "text": ""}
{"id": "39727", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39727", "title": "Beta emission", "text": ""}
{"id": "39731", "revid": "11642524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39731", "title": "Roger Williams", "text": "English Baptist minister, theologian, author, and founder of Rhode Island\nRoger Williams (c.\u20091603\u00a0\u2013 March 1683) was an English-born New England minister, theologian, author, and founder of the Providence Plantations, which became the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations and later the State of Rhode Island. He was a staunch advocate for religious liberty, separation of church and state, and fair dealings with the Native Americans.\nInitially a Puritan minister, his beliefs evolved and he questioned the authority of the Puritan church in enforcing religious conformity. He was expelled by the Puritan leaders from the Massachusetts Bay Colony, and he established Providence Plantations in 1636 as a refuge offering what he termed \"liberty of conscience\" making Rhode Island the first government in the Western world to guarantee religious freedom in its founding charter. His ideas on religious tolerance and civil government directly influenced the principles later enshrined in the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. He briefly became a Baptist, and in 1638 he founded the First Baptist Church in America in Providence. He then moved beyond organized religion, becoming a \"seeker\" who did not identify with any specific church. Williams studied the language of the New England Native Americans and published the first book-length study of it in English.\nToday, Williams' legacy continues to shape debates on religious liberty and the role of government in matters of conscience, with his writings cited in legal arguments and Supreme Court decisions on the separation of church and state.\nEarly life.\nRoger Williams was born in London, and many historians cite 1603 as the probable year of his birth. His birth records were destroyed when St. Sepulchre Church burned during the Great Fire of London in 1666, and his entry in \"American National Biography\" notes that Williams gave contradictory information about his age throughout his life. His father was James Williams (1562\u20131620), a merchant tailor in Smithfield, and his mother was Alice Pemberton (1564\u20131635).\nAt an early age, Williams had a spiritual conversion of which his father disapproved. As an adolescent, he apprenticed under Sir Edward Coke (1552\u20131634), the famous jurist, and was educated at Charterhouse School under Coke's patronage. Williams later attended Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he received a Bachelor of Arts in 1627. He demonstrated a facility with languages, acquiring familiarity with Latin, Hebrew, Greek, Dutch, and French at an early age. Years later, he tutored John Milton in Dutch and Native American languages in exchange for refresher lessons in Hebrew and Greek.\nWilliams took holy orders in the Church of England in connection with his studies, but he became a Puritan at Cambridge and thus ruined his chance for preferment in the Anglican Church. After graduating from Cambridge, he became the chaplain to Sir William Masham. In April 1629, Williams proposed marriage to Jane Whalley, the niece of Lady Barrington, but she declined. Later that year, he married Mary Bernard (1609\u201376), the daughter of Rev. Richard Bernard, a notable Puritan preacher and author; they were married at the Church of High Laver in Epping Forest District, Essex, around 20 miles north-east of London. They had six children, all born in America: Mary, Freeborn, Providence, Mercy, Daniel, and Joseph.\nWilliams knew that Puritan leaders planned to immigrate to the New World. He did not join the first wave of settlers, but later decided that he could not remain in England under the administration of Archbishop William Laud. Williams regarded the Church of England as corrupt and false, and he had arrived at the Separatist position by 1630; on December 1, he and his wife boarded the Boston-bound \"Lyon\" in Bristol.\nFirst years in America.\nArrival in Boston.\nOn February 5, 1631, the \"Lyon\" anchored in Nantasket outside of Boston. The church of Boston offered him the opportunity to serve during the vacancy of Rev. John Wilson, who had returned to England to bring his wife back to America. Williams declined the position on grounds that it was \"an unseparated church.\" In addition, he asserted that civil magistrates must not punish any sort of \"breach of the first table\" of the Ten Commandments such as idolatry, Sabbath-breaking, false worship, and blasphemy, and that individuals should be free to follow their own convictions in religious matters. These three principles later became central tenets of Williams's teachings and writings.\nSalem and Plymouth.\nAs a Separatist, Williams considered the Church of England irredeemably corrupt and believed that one must completely separate from it to establish a new church for the true and pure worship of God. The Salem church was also inclined to Separatism, and they invited him to become their teacher. In response, leaders in Boston vigorously protested, leading Salem to withdraw its offer. As the summer of 1631 ended, Williams moved to Plymouth Colony where he was welcomed, and informally assisted the minister. At Plymouth, he regularly preached. Plymouth Governor William Bradford wrote that \"his teachings were well approved.\"\nAfter a time, Williams decided that the Plymouth church was not sufficiently separated from the Church of England. Furthermore, his contact with the Narragansett Native Americans had caused him to question the validity of colonial charters that did not include legitimate purchase of Native American land. Governor Bradford later wrote that Williams fell \"into some strange opinions which caused some controversy between the church and him.\"\nIn December 1632, Williams wrote a lengthy tract that openly condemned the King's charters and questioned the right of Plymouth to the land without first buying it from the Native Americans. He even charged that King James had uttered a \"solemn lie\" in claiming that he was the first Christian monarch to have discovered the land. Williams moved back to Salem by the fall of 1633 and was welcomed by Rev. Samuel Skelton as an unofficial assistant. Williams soon found himself in disagreement with the authority of one of the new ecclesiastical clergy who were consolidating their control over the churches.\nLitigation and exile.\nThe Massachusetts Bay authorities were not pleased at Williams's return. In December 1633, they summoned him to appear before the General Court in Boston to defend his tract attacking the King and the charter. The issue was smoothed out, and the tract disappeared forever, probably burned. In August 1634, Williams became acting pastor of the Salem church, the Rev. Skelton having died. In March 1635, he was again ordered to appear before the General Court, and he was summoned yet again for the Court's July term to answer for \"erroneous\" and \"dangerous opinions.\" The Court finally ordered that he be removed from his church position. \nThis latest controversy welled up as the town of Salem petitioned the General Court to annex some land on Marblehead Neck. The Court refused to consider the request unless the church in Salem removed Williams. The church felt that this order violated their independence, and sent a letter of protest to the other churches. However, the letter was not read publicly in those churches, and the General Court refused to seat the delegates from Salem at the next session. Support for Williams began to wane under this pressure, and he withdrew from the church and began meeting with a few of his most ardent followers in his home.\nFinally, the General Court tried Williams in October 1635 and convicted him of sedition and heresy. They declared that he was spreading \"diverse, new, and dangerous opinions\" and ordered that he be banished. The execution of the order was delayed because Williams was ill and winter was approaching, so he was allowed to stay temporarily, provided that he ceased publicly teaching his opinions. He did not comply with this demand, and the sheriff came in January 1636, only to discover that he had slipped away three days earlier during a blizzard. He traveled 55 miles on foot through the deep snow, from Salem to Raynham, Massachusetts, where the local Wampanoags offered him shelter at their winter camp. Sachem Massasoit hosted Williams there for the three months until spring.\nSettlement at Providence.\nIn the spring of 1636, Williams and a number of others from Salem began a new settlement on land which he had bought from Massasoit in Rumford. After settling, however, Plymouth Governor William Bradford sent him a friendly letter which nonetheless warned him that he was still within jurisdiction of Plymouth Colony and concerned that this might antagonize the leaders in Boston. \nAccordingly, Williams and Thomas Angell crossed the Seekonk River in search of a new location suitable for settlement. Upon reaching the shore, Williams and Angell were met by Narragansett people who greeted them with the words \"What cheer, Netop\" (transl.\u2009Hello, friend). The settlers then continued westward along the Providence River, where they encountered a cove and freshwater spring. Finding the area suitable for settlement, Williams acquired the tract from sachems Canonicus and Miantonomi. Here, Williams and his followers established a new, permanent settlement, convinced that divine providence had brought them there. They named it Providence Plantations.\nWilliams wanted his settlement to be a haven for those \"distressed of conscience,\" and it soon attracted a growing number of families who did not see eye-to-eye with the leaders in Massachusetts Bay. From the beginning, a majority vote of the heads of households governed the new settlement, but only in civil things. Newcomers could also be admitted to full citizenship by a majority vote. In August 1637 the Providence Civil Compact formally restricted the government to civil things. In 1640 this was superseded by the Providence Combination, signed by 39 freemen (men who had full citizenship and voting rights) who declared their determination \"still to hold forth liberty of conscience.\" Thus, Williams founded the first place in modern history where citizenship and religion were separate, providing religious liberty and separation of church and state. This was combined with the principle of majoritarian democracy.\nIn November 1637, the General Court of Massachusetts exiled a number of families during the Antinomian Controversy, including Anne Hutchinson and her followers. John Clarke was among them, and he learned from Williams that Aquidneck Island might be purchased from the Narragansetts; Williams helped him to make the purchase, along with William Coddington and others, and they established the settlement of Portsmouth. In spring 1638, some of those settlers split away and founded the nearby settlement of Newport, also situated on Rhode Island (now called Aquidneck).\nIn 1638, Williams and about 12 others were baptized and formed a congregation. Today, Williams's congregation is recognized as the First Baptist Church in America.\nPequot War and relations with Native Americans.\nIn the meantime, the Pequot War had broken out. Massachusetts Bay asked for Williams's help, which he gave despite his exile, and he became the Bay colony's eyes and ears, and also dissuaded the Narragansetts from joining with the Pequots. Instead, the Narragansetts allied themselves with the colonists and helped to defeat the Pequots in 1637\u201338.\nWilliams formed firm friendships and developed deep trust among the Native American tribes, especially the Narragansetts. He was able to keep the peace between the Native Americans and the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations for nearly 40 years by his constant mediation and negotiation. He twice surrendered himself as a hostage to the Native Americans to guarantee the safe return of a great sachem from a summons to a court: Pessicus in 1645 and Metacom (\"King Philip\") in 1671. The Native Americans trusted Williams more than any other Colonist, and he proved trustworthy.\nSecuring Charters.\nWilliams arrived in London in the midst of the English Civil War. Puritans held power in London, and he was able to obtain a charter through the offices of Sir Henry Vane the Younger despite strenuous opposition from Massachusetts's agents. His book \"A Key into the Language of America\" proved crucial to the success of his charter, albeit indirectly. It was published in 1643 in London and combined a phrase-book with observations about life and culture as an aid to communicate with the Native Americans of New England. It covered everything from salutations to death and burial. Williams also sought to correct the attitudes of superiority displayed by the colonists towards Native Americans:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Boast not proud English, of thy birth &amp; blood;\nThy brother Indian is by birth as Good.\nOf one blood God made Him, and Thee and All,\nAs wise, as fair, as strong, as personal.\nGregory Dexter printed the book, which was the first book-length study of a Native American language. In England, it was well received by readers who were curious about the Native American tribes of the New World.\nWilliams secured his charter from Parliament for Providence Plantations in July 1644, after which he published his most famous book \"The Bloudy Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience\". The publication produced a great uproar; between 1644 and 1649, at least 60 pamphlets were published addressing the work's arguments. Parliament responded to Williams on August 9, 1644, by ordering the public hangman to burn all copies. By this time, however, Williams was already on his way back to New England where he arrived with his charter in September.\nIt took Williams several years to unify the settlements of Narragansett Bay under a single government, given the opposition of William Coddington. The settlements of Providence, Portsmouth, Newport, and Warwick finally united in 1647 into the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations. Freedom of conscience was again proclaimed, and the colony became a safe haven for people who were persecuted for their beliefs, including Baptists, Quakers, and Jews. However, Coddington disliked Williams and did not enjoy his position of subordination under the new charter government. He sailed to England and returned to Rhode Island in 1651 with his own patent making him \"Governor for Life\" over Rhode Island and Conanicut Island.\nAs a result, Providence, Warwick, and Coddington's opponents on the island dispatched Williams and John Clarke to England, seeking to cancel Coddington's commission. Williams sold his trading post at Cocumscussec (near Wickford, Rhode Island) to pay for his journey even though it had provided his primary source of income. He and Clarke succeeded in rescinding Coddington's patent, with Clarke remaining in England for the following decade to protect the colonists' interests and secure a new charter. Williams returned to America in 1654 and was immediately elected the colony's president. He subsequently served in many offices in town and colonial governments.\nSlavery.\nWilliams did not write extensively about slavery. He consistently expressed disapproval of it, though generally he did not object to the enslavement of captured enemy combatants for a fixed duration, a practice that was the normal course of warfare in that time. Williams struggled with the morality of slavery and raised his concerns in letters to Massachusetts Bay Governor John Winthrop concerning the treatment of the Pequots during the Pequot War (1636\u20131638). In these letters, he requested Winthrop to prevent the enslavement of Pequot women and children, as well as to direct the colonial militia to spare them during the fighting. In another letter to Winthrop written on July 31, 1637, Williams conceded that the capture and indenture of remaining Pequot women and children would \"lawfully\" ensure that remaining enemy combatants were \"weakned and despoild\", but pleaded that their indenture not be permanent.\nDespite his reservations, Williams formed part of the colonial delegation sent to conduct negotiations at the end of the Pequot War, where the fates of the captured Pequots were decided upon between the colonists of New England and their Native American allies the Narragansetts, Mohegans, and Niantics. Williams reported to Winthrop that he and Narragansett sachem Miantonomoh discussed what to do with a group of captured Pequots; initially they discussed the possibility of distributing them as slaves among the four victorious parties, which Miantonomoh \"liked well\", though at Williams's suggestion, the non-combatants were relocated to an island in Niantic territory \"because most of them were families\". Miantonomoh later requested an enslaved female Pequot from Winthrop, to which Williams objected, stating that \"he had his share sent to him\". Instead, Williams suggested that he \"buy one or two of some English man\".\nIn July 1637, Winthrop gave Williams a Pequot boy as an indentured servant. The child had been captured by Israel Stoughton in Connecticut. Williams renamed the child \"Will.\"\nSome of the Native American allies aided in the export of enslaved Pequots to the West Indies, while others disagreed with the practice, believing that they should have been given land and provisions to contribute to the wellbeing of colonial settlements. Many enslaved Pequots frequently ran away, where they were taken in by surrounding Native American settlements. Williams aided colonists in distributing and selling Pequot captives and fielded requests from colonists to track down and return runaways, using his connections with Miantonomoh, Ayanemo, and other Native leaders to find escapees. Williams recorded experiences of abuse and rape recounted by the Natives he apprehended, and Margaret Ellen Newell speculates that Williams's letters encouraging Winthrop to limit terms of servitude were informed by his acquaintance with escapees.\nIn 1641, the Massachusetts Bay Colony passed laws sanctioning slavery. In response, under Williams's leadership, Providence Plantations passed a law in 1652 restricting the amount of time for which an individual could be held in servitude and tried to prevent the importation of slaves from Africa. The law established terms for slavery that mirrored that of indentured servitude; enslavement was to be limited in duration and not passed down to children. Upon the unification of the mainland and island settlements, residents of the island refused to accept this law, ensuring that it became dead legislation.\nTensions escalated with the Narragansetts during King Philip's War, despite Williams's efforts to maintain peace, during which his home was burned to the ground. During the war, Williams led the committee responsible for processing and selling Rhode Island's Native American captives into slavery. Williams's committee recommended that Providence allow residents to keep Native American slaves in spite of earlier municipal statutes. The committee appraised the prices of various Native American captives and brokered their sale to residents. Williams's son transported additional captives to be sold in Newport. Williams also organized the trial and execution of a captured Native American man who had been a ring leader in the war.\nRelations with the Baptists.\nEzekiel Holliman baptized Williams in late 1638. A few years later, Dr. John Clarke established the First Baptist Church in Newport, Rhode Island, and both Roger Williams and John Clarke became the founders of the Baptist faith in America. Williams did not affiliate himself with any church, but he remained interested in the Baptists, agreeing with their rejection of infant baptism and most other matters. Both enemies and admirers sometimes called him a \"Seeker,\" associating him with a heretical movement that accepted Socinianism and Universal Reconciliation, but Williams rejected both of these ideas.\nKing Philip's War.\nKing Philip's War (1675\u20131676) pitted the colonists against the Wampanoags, along with some of the Narragansetts with whom Williams had previously maintained good relations. Williams was elected captain of Providence's militia, even though he was in his 70s. On March 29, 1676, Narragansetts led by Canonchet burned Providence; nearly the entire town was destroyed, including Williams's home.\nDeath and memorialization.\nWilliams died sometime between January 16 and March 16, 1683 and was buried on his own property. Fifty years later, his house collapsed into the cellar and the location of his grave was forgotten.\nProvidence residents were determined to raise a monument in his honor in 1860; they \"dug up the spot where they believed the remains to be, they found only nails, teeth, and bone fragments. They also found an apple tree root,\" which they thought followed the shape of a human body; the root followed the shape of a spine, split at the hips, bent at the knees, and turned up at the feet.\nThe Rhode Island Historical Society has cared for this tree root since 1860 as representative of Rhode Island's founder. Since 2007, the root has been displayed at the John Brown House.\nThe few remains discovered alongside the root were reinterred in Prospect Terrace Park in 1939 at the base of a large stone monument.\nSeparation of church and state.\nWilliams was a staunch advocate of the separation of church and state. He was convinced that civil government had no basis for meddling in matters of religious belief. He declared that the state should concern itself only with matters of civil order, not with religious belief, and he rejected any attempt by civil authorities to enforce the \"first Table\" of the Ten Commandments, those commandments that deal with an individual's relationship with and belief in God. Williams believed that the state must confine itself to the commandments dealing with the relations between people: murder, theft, adultery, lying, honoring parents, etc. He wrote of a \"hedge or wall of Separation between the Garden of the Church and the Wilderness of the world.\" Thomas Jefferson later used the metaphor in his 1801 \"Letter to Danbury Baptists\".\nWilliams considered the state's sponsorship of religious beliefs or practice to be \"forced worship\", declaring \"Forced worship stinks in God's nostrils.\" He also believed Constantine the Great to be a worse enemy to Christianity than Nero because the subsequent state involvement in religious matters corrupted Christianity and led to the death of the first Christian church and the first Christian communities. He described laws concerning an individual's religious beliefs as \"rape of the soul\" and spoke of the \"oceans of blood\" shed as a result of trying to command conformity. The moral principles in the Scriptures ought to guide civil magistrates, he believed, but he observed that well-ordered, just, and civil governments existed even where Christianity was not present. Thus, all governments had to maintain civil order and justice, but Williams decided that none had a warrant to promote or repress any religious views. Most of his contemporaries criticized his ideas as a prescription for chaos and anarchy, and the vast majority believed that each nation must have its national church and could require that dissenters conform.\nWritings.\nWilliams's career as an author began with \"A Key into the Language of America\" (London, 1643), written during his first voyage to England. His next publication was \"Mr. Cotton's Letter lately Printed, Examined and Answered\" (London, 1644; reprinted in \"Publications of the Narragansett Club\", vol. ii, along with John Cotton's letter which it answered). His most famous work is \"The Bloudy Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience\" (published in 1644), considered by some to be one of the best defenses of liberty of conscience.\nAn anonymous pamphlet was published in London in 1644 entitled \"Queries of Highest Consideration Proposed to Mr. Tho. Goodwin, Mr. Phillip Nye, Mr. Wil. Bridges, Mr. Jer. Burroughs, Mr. Sidr. Simpson, all Independents, etc.\" which is now ascribed to Williams. These \"Independents\" were members of the Westminster Assembly; their \"Apologetical Narration\" sought a way between extreme Separatism and Presbyterianism, and their prescription was to accept the state church model of Massachusetts Bay.\nWilliams published \"The Bloody Tenent yet more Bloudy: by Mr. Cotton's Endeavor to wash it white in the Blood of the Lamb; of whose precious Blood, spilt in the Bloud of his Servants; and of the Blood of Millions spilt in former and later Wars for Conscience sake, that most Bloody Tenent of Persecution for cause of Conscience, upon, a second Tryal is found more apparently and more notoriously guilty, etc.\" (London, 1652) during his second visit to England. This work reiterated and amplified the arguments in \"Bloudy Tenent\", but it has the advantage of being written in answer to Cotton's \"A Reply to Mr. Williams his Examination\".\nOther works by Williams include:\nA volume of his letters is included in the Narragansett Club edition of Williams's \"Works\" (7 vols., Providence, 1866\u201374), and a volume was edited by John Russell Bartlett (1882).\nBrown University's John Carter Brown Library has long housed a 234-page volume referred to as the \"Roger Williams Mystery Book\". The margins of this book are filled with notations in handwritten code, believed to be the work of Roger Williams. In 2012, Brown University undergraduate Lucas Mason-Brown cracked the code and uncovered conclusive historical evidence attributing its authorship to Williams. Translations are revealing transcriptions of a geographical text, a medical text, and 20 pages of original notes addressing the issue of infant baptism. Mason-Brown has since discovered more writings by Williams employing a separate code in the margins of a rare edition of the \"Eliot Indian Bible\".\nLegacy.\nWilliams's defense of the Native Americans, his accusations that Puritans had reproduced the \"evils\" of the Anglican Church, and his insistence that England pay the Native Americans for their land all put him at the center of many political debates during his life. He was considered an important historical figure of religious liberty at the time of American independence, and he was a key influence on the thinking of the Founding Fathers.\nTributes.\nTributes to Williams include:\nSlate Rock.\nSlate Rock is a prominent boulder on the west shore of the Seekonk River (near the current Gano Park) that was once one of Providence's most important historic landmarks. It was believed to be the spot where the Narragansetts greeted Williams with the famous phrase \"What cheer, netop?\" The historic rock was accidentally blown up by city workers in 1877. They were attempting to expose a buried portion of the stone, but used too much dynamite and it was \"blasted to pieces.\" A memorial in Roger Williams Square commemorates the location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39732", "revid": "3965251", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39732", "title": "The Brady Bunch", "text": "American sitcom (1969\u20131974)\nThe Brady Bunch is an American sitcom created by Sherwood Schwartz that aired five seasons from September 26, 1969, to March 8, 1974, on ABC. The series revolves around a large blended family of six children, with three boys and three girls. After its cancellation in 1974, the series debuted in syndication in September 1975. Though it was never a ratings hit or a critical success during its original run, the program has since become a popular syndicated staple, especially among children and teenage viewers.\n\"The Brady Bunch\"'s success in syndication led to several television reunion films and spin-off series: \"The Brady Bunch Hour\" (1976\u201377), \"The Brady Girls Get Married\" (1981), \"The Brady Brides\" (1981), \"A Very Brady Christmas\" (1988), and \"The Bradys\" (1990). In 1995, the series was adapted into a satirical comedy theatrical film titled \"The Brady Bunch Movie\", followed by \"A Very Brady Sequel\" in 1996. A second sequel, \"The Brady Bunch in the White House\", aired on Fox in November 2002 as a made-for-television film.\nIn 1997, \"Getting Davy Jones\" (season three, episode 12) was ranked number 37 on \"TV Guide\"'s 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time. The show's enduring popularity has resulted in its widespread recognition as an American cultural icon.\nPremise.\nMike Brady (Robert Reed), a widowed architect with three sons\u2014Greg (Barry Williams), Peter (Christopher Knight), and Bobby (Mike Lookinland)\u2014marries Carol Martin (Florence Henderson), who herself has three daughters: Marcia (Maureen McCormick), Jan (Eve Plumb), and Cindy (Susan Olsen). Mike and Carol adopt each other's children and Carol and her daughters take the Brady surname. Included in the blended family are Mike's live-in housekeeper, Alice Nelson (Ann B. Davis), and the boys' dog, Tiger. (In the pilot episode, the girls also have a pet: a cat named Fluffy who never appears in any other episodes.) The setting is a large two-story house designed by Mike, located in a Los Angeles suburb. The show never addressed what happened to Carol's first husband. While show creator Sherwood Schwartz always intended for Carol to be divorced from her first husband, ABC preferred for her to be widowed due to more conservative American stance on marriage at the time the first episode aired in 1969, which led to a compromise that resulted in not revealing the first husband's fate on the show. However, other factors also prevented Carol from being revealed as being divorced on the show as well, such as the potential portrayal of both custody arrangement and explanations for the divorce, with Mike, who even was able to adopt Carol's daughters, always being portrayed as the only father Carol's daughters accepted.\nIn the first season, awkward adjustments, accommodations, gender rivalries, and resentments inherent in blended families dominate the storylines. The show being centered on a blended family household was considered unique for the time, as most other shows were still focused on single family households. In an early episode, Carol tells Bobby that the only \"steps\" in their household lead to the second floor (in other words, that the Bradys are not a \"stepfamily\", only \"a family\"). Thereafter, episodes focus on typical teen and preteen concerns such as sibling rivalry, puppy love, self-image, character building, responsibility, dating, school grades and getting along in social company. Noticeably absent is any political commentary, especially regarding the Vietnam War, which was being waged at its largest extent during the height of the series. Despite some elements of the show being considered revolutionary for its time, including Mike and Carol's sleeping arrangements, \"The Brady Bunch\" would maintain traditional family-friendly entertainment and avoided scandalous and challenging fare.\nCast and characters.\nMain.\nThe regular cast appears in an opening title sequence in which video \"headshots\" are arranged in a three-by-three grid, with cast members appearing to look around at one another. The sequence used the then-new \"multi-dynamic image technique\" created by Canadian filmmaker Christopher Chapman; as a result of the popular attention it garnered in this sequence, it was referred to in the press as \"the Brady Bunch effect\". In a 2010 issue of \"TV Guide\", the show's opening title sequence ranked number eight on a list of TV's top-10 credits sequences, as selected by readers.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nIn 1966, following the success of his TV series \"Gilligan's Island\", Sherwood Schwartz conceived the idea for \"The Brady Bunch\" after reading in the \"Los Angeles Times\" that \"30% of marriages [in the United States] have a child or children from a previous marriage\". He set to work on a pilot script for a series tentatively titled \"Mine and Yours\". Schwartz then developed the script to include three children for each parent. While Mike Brady is depicted as being a widower, Schwartz originally wanted the character of Carol Brady to have been a divorc\u00e9e, but the network objected to this. A compromise was reached whereby Carol's marital status (whether she was divorced or widowed) was never directly revealed.\nSchwartz shopped the series to the \"big three\" television networks of the era. ABC, CBS, and NBC all liked the script, but each network wanted changes before they would commit to filming, so Schwartz shelved the project. Although similarities exist between the series and two 1968 theatrical release films, United Artists' \"Yours, Mine and Ours\" (starring Henry Fonda and Lucille Ball) and CBS's \"With Six You Get Eggroll\" (starring Brian Keith and Doris Day), the original script for \"The Brady Bunch\" predated the scripts for both of these films. Nonetheless, the outstanding success of \"Yours, Mine and Ours\" (the 11th-highest-grossing film of 1968) was a factor in ABC's decision to order episodes for the series.\nAfter receiving a commitment for 13 weeks of television shows from ABC in 1968, Schwartz hired film and television director John Rich to direct the pilot, then called \"The Brady Brood\", cast the six children from 264 interviews during that summer, and hired the actors to play the mother, father, and housekeeper roles. The hair colors of the parents were intended to be contrasting from the beginning, so Schwartz intended to keep in reserve three blonde boys, three brunette boys, three blonde girls and three brunette girls until the parents' actors would be confirmed. For the part of the father, Schwartz originally cast Bob Holiday, who was well known for portraying Superman in a Broadway musical, but since Holiday had little on-camera experience, network executives overrode Schwartz's decision; also considered was Gene Hackman, who, however, was largely unknown at the time, so in the end, the role was given to TV veteran Robert Reed, because he was already under contract to Paramount and he had name recognition from The Defenders. For the mother's role, comedic actress Joyce Bulifant was close to be cast, to play a somewhat wacky mom. She already did some of the screen tests with the various child actors, in fact, Eve Plumb was cast because of her resemblance to Bulifant. However, after comedic actress Ann B. Davis was cast as the housekeeper, she was deemed to be \"more than wacky enough\", and a more grounded, down-to-earth mother was needed to maintain a balance, so Florence Henderson was cast instead. As the sets were built on Paramount Television stage 5, adjacent to the stage where \"H.R. Pufnstuf\" was filmed by Sid and Marty Krofft, who later produced \"The Brady Bunch Hour\", the production crew prepared the backyard of a home in Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles, as the exterior location for the chaotic backyard wedding scene. Filming of the pilot began on Friday, October 4, 1968, and lasted eight days.\nTheme song and credits sequence.\nThe theme song, written by Schwartz and Frank De Vol, and originally arranged, sung, and performed by Paul Parrish, Lois Fletcher, and John Beland under the name the Peppermint Trolley Company, quickly communicated to audiences that the Bradys were a blended family. As described above, the Brady family is shown in a three-by-three grid, tic-tac-toe board-style graphic with Carol in the top center, Alice in the middle block, and Mike in the bottom center. To the right are three blocks with the boys from the oldest on top to the youngest. To the left are three blocks with the girls from the oldest to the youngest. In season two, the Brady kids took over singing the theme song. In season three, the boys sing the first verse, girls sing the second verse, and all sing together for the third and last verse. In season four, a new version is recorded with the same structure as the season three version, but in season five, the season three version returns. Utilizing Christopher Chapman's \"multi-dynamic image technique\", a version of which had famously appeared in the 1968 film \"The Thomas Crown Affair\", the sequence was created and filmed by Howard A. Anderson Jr., a visual effects pioneer who worked on the title sequences for many popular television series. The use of this innovation here became so familiar through the sitcom's popularity that it was referred to in the press as the \"Brady Bunch effect\". \nThe end credits feature an instrumental version of the theme song's third verse. In season one, it was recorded by the Peppermint Trolley Company. From season two on, the theme was recorded in-house by Paramount musicians.\nThe Brady house.\nThe house built in 1959, by Harry M. Londelius Jr., and used in exterior shots, is located in Studio City, within the city limits of Los Angeles. It originally bore little relation to the interior of the Bradys' on-screen home, but was gutted and renovated in 2018 to match the layout of the soundstage sets. According to a 1994 article in the \"Los Angeles Times\", the San Fernando Valley house was built in 1959 and selected as the Brady residence because series creator Schwartz felt it looked like a home where an architect would live. A false window was attached to the front's A-frame section to give the illusion that it had two full stories (the 2018/19 renovation installed a real window where the false one was in the TV show footage). Contemporary establishing shots of the house were filmed with the owner's permission for the 1990 TV series \"The Bradys\". The owner refused to allow Paramount to restore the property to its 1969 look for \"The Brady Bunch Movie\" in 1995, so a facade resembling the original home was built around an existing house.\nThe house was put up for sale, for the first time since 1973, in the summer of 2018 with an asking price of $1.885 million. Cable network HGTV outbid seven others for it, including NSYNC's Lance Bass. HGTV has expanded the home for its original series \"A Very Brady Renovation\", with the goal of recreating each of the interior rooms used in the TV series (which had only existed as a Paramount Studios set) while maintaining the original exterior look from the street, and to make it fully habitable (unlike the sets made on Paramount soundstage #5). The six actors who played the TV children, and who also actively participated in the 2018/19 renovation, posed for a photo in front on November 1 the same year. In May 2023, it was announced that HGTV was selling the house for $5.5 million. The house was bought on September 11, 2023, by media executive Tina Trahan, the wife of former HBO chief executive Chris Albrecht and a longtime fan of the show, for $3.2 million. She said she will leave the house as is and not renovate nor update it, and no one will be living in the house, and plans to use it for charity events and fundraisers.\nIn the series, the address of the house was given as 4222 Clinton Way (as read aloud by Carol from an arriving package in the first-season episode entitled \"Lost Locket, Found Locket\", and \"Clinton Way\" is clearly legible on Marcia's driver permit in the fifth-season episode \"The Driver's Seat\"). Although no city was ever specified, it was presumed from references to the Los Angeles Dodgers, the Los Angeles Rams, and a Hollywood film studio, among many others, that the Bradys lived in Southern California, most likely Los Angeles or one of its suburbs. Episode 2: Dear Libby, revealed that Brady's live \"2000 miles away\" from Illinois, which is same as the distance between Illinois and California. Episode 5: My Sister, Benedict Arnold, has Sheri Cowart, who played Kathy Lawrence doing a cheer implying Greg and Marcia went to Fillmore Junior High. This school, known more formally as, \"Fillmore Middle School\" would probably imply the Brady family lived in Fillmore California. \nThe interior sets of the Brady house were used at least three times for other Paramount TV shows while \"The Brady Bunch\" was still in production: twice for \"Mannix\" and once for \"\". In the case of \"Mission: Impossible\", the Brady furniture was also used. A re-creation of the Brady house was constructed for the \"X-Files\" episode \"Sunshine Days\", which also revolved around \"The Brady Bunch\".\nBroadcast and syndication.\nSince its first syndicated airing in September 1975, an episode of the show has been broadcast somewhere in the United States and abroad every day of the year. Episodes were also shown on ABC Daytime from July 9, 1973, to April 18, 1975, and from June 30 to August 29, 1975, at 11:30\u00a0a.m. EST/10:30 CST.\nThe show aired on TBS starting in the 1980s until 1997, Nickelodeon (as part of the Nick at Nite block in 1995 for a special event, and again from 1998 to 2003 and briefly during the spring of 2012), Noggin (as part of The N block from March to April 2004), TV Land from 2002 to 2015, Nick Jr. Channel (as part of the NickMom block from 2012 to 2013), and Hallmark Channel from January to June 2013 and again starting September 5\u201330, 2016.\nCurrent airings.\nU.S.\nSince its national launch in 2010, the Weigel Broadcasting\u2013owned classic-TV network MeTV has aired a weekly block of the show every Sunday morning promoted as the \"Brady Bunch Brunch\". MeTV's sister network Catchy Comedy airs the show weekday mornings at 8:00 AM EST and Saturdays from 1:00-3:00 PM EST.\nInternational\nIn West Germany, the show premiered on ZDF under the name \"Drei M\u00e4dchen und drei Jungen\" (\"Three Girls and Three Boys\") on August 8, 1971, with episode six \"A Clubhouse Is Not a Home\", and was shown on Sunday afternoons until halfway through Season 4, culminating with episode 77 \"Cyrano De Brady\" on October 5, 1974. Some episodes were omitted. From 1984 to 1998, reruns would sporadically occur on Sat.1. The later reunion show, \"The Brady Girls Get Married/The Brady Brides\" would be broadcast on ZDF as \"Eine Reizende Familie\" (\"A Lovely Family\") from October 18, 1984, to January 10, 1985. The second half of Season 4, Season 5 and the omitted episodes would not premiere before 1997 on Comedy &amp; Co.\nIn Italy, under a RAI-Paramount deal, eight episodes were broadcast on Programma Nazionale (today RAI 1) from April 27 to June 15, 1973, under the name \"Album di famiglia\". In the late-70s, it would be shown again in Italian dub on Swiss and Istrian networks. Years later, RAI bought the distribution rights again, and the show began airing on Rai 1 and later Rai 3 under the name \"\" (\"The Brady Family\") starting on March 11, 1987. It was later bought by Fininvest, that aired it on Italia 1 from July 9, 1990, and on Canale 5 from January 5, 1991.\nITV broadcast the show in a number of United Kingdom regions, including Thames, Granada, Tyne Tees, Grampian and Ulster from 1975 to 1982.\nStreaming\n\"The Brady Bunch\" is also available through video-on-demand services Hulu and Paramount+, although neither streamer offers the complete collection of episodes in its entirety. It was shown dubbed in Argentina under the name \u201cLa tribu Brady\u201d.\nHome media.\nParamount Home Entertainment released all five seasons on DVD in Region 1 from 2005 to 2006, before CBS Home Entertainment took over DVD rights to the Paramount Television library (though CBS DVD releases are still distributed by Paramount). Paramount/CBS has released the series on DVD in other countries as well.\nIn April 2007, CBS Home Entertainment and Paramount Home Entertainment released the complete series box set, which includes the TV films \"A Very Brady Christmas\" and \"The Brady 500\" (an episode of \"The Bradys\"), as well as two episodes of \"The Brady Kids\" animated series. The box art for this set features green shag carpeting and 1970s-style wood paneling.\n8 years later on April 7, 2015, CBS Home Entertainment and Paramount Home Entertainment re-released the complete series box set, a repackaged version at a lower price, but it does not include the bonus disc that was part of the original complete series release.\nThe TV film \"A Very Brady Christmas\" was released as a stand-alone DVD in Region 1 on October 10, 2017.\nIn conjunction with the 50th anniversary of the original series, CBS/Paramount released \"The Brady-est Brady Bunch TV &amp; Movie Collection\" in Region 1 on June 4, 2019. The collection contains every episode of \"The Brady Bunch\", \"The Brady Kids\", \"The Brady Brides\", and \"The Bradys\", as well as the films \"A Very Brady Christmas\", \"The Brady Bunch Movie\", \"A Very Brady Sequel\", \"The Brady Bunch in the White House\", and \"Growing Up Brady\".\nThe first two seasons are also available on Region 2 DVD for the UK, with audio in English and subtitle choices in Norwegian, Swedish, Danish, or Finnish.\nThe series has also been released on VHS.\nReception.\nU.S. television ratings.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRatings data prior to 1972 is scarce for shows that did not place in the Top 30. Beginning in 2017, The TV Ratings Guide began publishing vintage television ratings as they became readily available from old newspaper publishings. Season 4 ratings came from \"Variety\" year-end rankings dated May 30, 1973. \"The Brady Bunch\" earned steady ratings during its primetime run (but never placed in the top 30 during the five years it aired) and was cancelled in 1974 after five seasons and 117 episodes; it was cancelled shortly after the series crossed the minimum threshold for syndication. At that point in the storyline, Greg graduated from high school and was about to enroll in college.\nAwards and honors.\n\"The Brady Bunch\" was not an award-winning show at the time of its original broadcast in the 1970s. The series and its cast and crew were not nominated for an award until 1989, when Barry Williams was honored with the Former Child Star Lifetime Achievement Award at the 10th Youth in Film Awards.\nAll other awards and nominations for the series have come from the TV Land Awards:\nDiscography.\nDuring the series' original run, the six Brady kids recorded several albums on Paramount's record label, all credited to \"The Brady Bunch\". Note that Florence Henderson and Robert Reed did not participate in these recordings, and are not pictured on the album sleeves. \nWhile session musicians provided backing, the actors from the series provided their own singing voices (which was not always the case for early 1970s television crossover acts). In addition, Chris Knight &amp; Maureen McCormick issued a duet LP in 1973, and five of the six Brady kids also released solo singles between 1970 and 1974; only Susan Olsen did not. None of the singles from The Brady Bunch, or any single or album from the assorted spin-off acts, ever became hits on any national music charts. The group's 1972 album \"Meet The Brady Bunch\" was their only charting release, hitting No. 108 on Billboard's album charts.\nSingles.\nAlso includes solo singles as indicated.\nSpin-offs, sequels, and reunions.\nSeveral spin-offs, and sequels, and reality series to the original series have been made, featuring all or most of the original cast. These include another sitcom, an animated series, a variety show, television films, a dramatic series, a stage play, theatrical films, and a reality series.\n\"Kelly's Kids\" / \"Together We Stand\" / \"Nothing Is Easy\".\nA final-season \"Brady Bunch\" episode, \"Kelly's Kids\", was intended as a pilot for a prospective spin-off series of the same name. Ken Berry starred as Ken Kelly, a friend and neighbor of the Bradys, who with his wife Kathy (Brooke Bundy) adopted three orphaned boys of different racial backgrounds. One of the adopted sons was played by Todd Lookinland, the younger brother of Mike Lookinland. While \"Kelly's Kids\" was not subsequently picked up as a full series, producer Sherwood Schwartz reworked the basic premise for the short-lived 1980s sitcom \"Together We Stand\" starring Elliott Gould and Dee Wallace.\n\"The Brady Kids\".\nA 22-episode animated Saturday morning cartoon series, produced by Filmation and airing on ABC from September 1972 to August 1974, is about the Brady kids having various adventures. The family's adults were never seen or mentioned, and the \"home\" scenes were in a very large, well-appointed tree house. Several animals were regular characters, including two non-English-speaking pandas (Ping and Pong), a talking bird (Merlin) which could do magic, and an ordinary pet dog (Mop Top). The first 17 episodes featured the voices of all six of the original child actors from the show, but Barry Williams and Maureen McCormick were replaced for the last five episodes due to a contract dispute.\n\"The Brady Bunch Variety Hour\".\nOn November 28, 1976, a one-hour television special entitled \"The Brady Bunch Variety Hour\" aired on ABC. Eve Plumb was the only regular cast member from the original show who declined to be in the series and the role of Jan was recast with Geri Reischl. Produced by Sid and Marty Krofft, the sibling team behind \"H.R. Pufnstuf\", \"Donny and Marie\", and other variety shows and children's series of the era, the show was intended to air every fifth week in the same slot as \"The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries\", but ended up being scheduled sporadically throughout the season, leading to inconsistent ratings and its inevitable cancellation.\nIn 2009, \"Brady Bunch\" cast member Susan Olsen, with Lisa Sutton, published a book, \"Love to Love You Bradys\", which dissects and celebrates the \"Variety Hour\" as a cult classic.\n\"The Brady Girls Get Married\" / \"The Brady Brides\".\nA TV reunion film called \"The Brady Girls Get Married\" was produced in 1981. Although scheduled to be shown in its original full-length film format, NBC decided at the last minute to divide it into half-hour segments and show one part a week for three weeks. The fourth week debuted a spin-off sitcom titled \"The Brady Brides\", which carried on from where the reunion film left off. The film featured the entire original cast; this proved to be the only time the entire cast worked together on a single project following the cancellation of the original series (the complete surviving cast also appeared in these official projects together: \"Brady Bunch Home Movies\" from 1995, \"\" from 2004, as well as various reunion programs in 2019 for the 50th anniversary). The film's opening credits featured the season-one \"Grid\" and theme song, with the addition of \"The Brady Girls Get Married\" title. The film shows what the characters had been doing since the original series ended: Mike is still an architect, Carol is a real-estate agent, Greg is a doctor, Marcia is a fashion designer, Peter is in the Air Force, Jan is also an architect, Bobby and Cindy are in college, and Alice has married Sam. Eventually, they all reunite for Marcia and Jan's double wedding.\n\"The Brady Brides\" features Maureen McCormick and Eve Plumb reprising their respective roles as Marcia and Jan Brady. The series begins with Marcia and Jan and their new husbands buying a house and living together. The clashes between Jan's uptight and conservative husband, Phillip Covington III (a college professor in science who is several years older than Jan, played by Ron Kuhlman) and Marcia's tousled and more bohemian husband, Wally Logan (a fun-loving salesman for a large toy company, played by Jerry Houser), were the pivot on which many of the stories were based, not unlike \"The Odd Couple\". Florence Henderson and Ann B. Davis also appeared regularly. Ten episodes were aired before the sitcom was cancelled. This was the only Brady show in sitcom form to be filmed in front of a live studio audience. Bob Eubanks guest-starred as himself in an episode where the two couples appear on \"The Newlywed Game\".\nThroughout the late 1980s and 1990s, \"The Brady Girls Get Married\" was rerun on various networks in its original full-length film format.\nIn 2019, the series was released on DVD for the first time as a part of \"The Brady-est Brady Bunch TV &amp; Movie Collection\".\n\"A Very Brady Christmas\".\nA second TV reunion film, \"A Very Brady Christmas\", aired in December 1988 on CBS and features most of the regular cast (except Susan Olsen, who was on her honeymoon at the time of filming; the role of Cindy was played by Jennifer Runyon), as well as three grandchildren, Peter's girlfriend, Valerie, and the spouses of Greg, Marcia, and Jan (Nora, Wally, and Phillip, respectively). The Nielsen ratings for \"A Very Brady Christmas\" were the highest of any television film that season for CBS.\n\"The Bradys\".\nDue to the success of \"A Very Brady Christmas\", CBS asked \"Brady Bunch\" creator Sherwood Schwartz and son Lloyd to create a new series for the network. According to Lloyd Schwartz, he and his father initially balked at the idea because they felt a new series would harm the Brady franchise. They finally relented because CBS was \"desperate for programming\". A new series featuring the Brady clan was created entitled \"The Bradys\". All original \"Brady Bunch\" cast members returned for the series, except for Maureen McCormick (Marcia), who was replaced with Leah Ayres.\nAs with \"A Very Brady Christmas\", \"The Bradys\" also balanced elements of comedy and drama and featured storylines of a more serious nature than the original series and subsequent spin-offs. Lloyd Schwartz later said he compared \"The Bradys\" to another dramedy of the time, \"thirtysomething\". The two-hour series premiere episode aired on February 9, 1990, at 9 pm on CBS and initially drew respectable ratings. Subsequent episodes were moved to 8 pm, where ratings quickly declined. Due to the decline, CBS cancelled the series after six episodes.\n\"Day by Day\": \"A Very Brady Episode\".\nThe \"Day by Day\" episode titled \"A Very Brady Episode\" (February 5, 1989), on NBC, reunited six of the original \"Brady Bunch\" cast members: Robert Reed, Florence Henderson, Ann B. Davis, Christopher Knight, Mike Lookinland and Maureen McCormick.\n\"Bradymania: A Very Brady Special\".\nA one-hour TV special retrospective of \"The Brady Bunch\" hosted by Florence Henderson who introduces a montage of various episodes of the original series, and also examines the show's phenomenal after-life, illustrated by clips from spin-offs and other incarnations of the series. Also, cast members Christopher Knight, Susan Olsen, Mike Lookinland, Barry Williams, Ann B. Davis, and creator Sherwood Schwartz reflect on the impact of the show on their lives. Directed by Malcolm Leo, the special was originally broadcast on ABC on May 19, 1993.\n\"A Very Brady Renovation\".\nChristopher Knight, Mike Lookinland, Maureen McCormick, Susan Olsen, Eve Plumb, and Barry Williams reunited for the 2019 HGTV series \"A Very Brady Renovation\", which follows a full renovation (interior mostly) of the real house, used for the sitcom's exterior shots, into the fictional Brady house.\n\"Chopped\".\nIn conjunction with the Renovation series, in the autumn of 2019, The Food Network aired two episodes of their program \"Chopped\" with the siblings as guest judges. Season 43, episode 3 - \"Brady Bunch Bash\" features Williams, Plumb, and Lookinland judging meals made from Hawaiian ingredients. Season 43, episode 4 - \"A Very Brady Chopped\" features McCormick, Knight, and Olsen judging meals from \"groovy\" ingredients of the '70s.\n\"A Very Brady Musical\".\nIn October 2020, during the global Covid-19 virus pandemic, Ogunquit Playhouse did a live stream broadcast of \"A Very Brady Musical\", a brand new musical adventure for the stage created by Lloyd J. Schwartz (son of Brady Bunch creator Sherwood Schwartz), Hope Juber (book/lyrics), and Laurence Juber (music/lyrics) and directed by Richard Israel. It was co-produced by Ogunquit Playhouse, Purple Mountain Productions, and Broadway and Beyond Theatricals. More in the vein of the Brady films, this PG-13 story follows the Brady kids\u2019 misadventures when they come to the mistaken conclusion that Mike and Carol are headed for divorce. After consulting Alice, the kids raise money to pay for marriage counseling, learning valuable lessons along the way, as their respective well-intentioned ideas land them in outrageous trouble. Barry Williams and Christopher Knight were on hand for a post-show question and answer session on all things Brady.\n\"Dragging the Classics: The Brady Bunch\".\nOn June 30, 2021, streaming service Paramount+ celebrated Pride Month with the premiere of a combining \"The Brady Bunch\" and the reality television series \"RuPaul's Drag Race\". In the crossover event, original \"Brady\" cast members and former \"Drag Race\" competitors come together to recreate a \"Brady Bunch\" episode. Christopher Knight and Mike Lookinland reprise their roles of Peter and Bobby Brady, respectively, while the original Greg Brady, Barry Williams, switches parts to play family patriarch Mike; Greg Brady is portrayed by \"Drag Race\" Season 6 and \"All Stars 3\" competitor BenDeLaCreme. Season 6 winner Bianca Del Rio fills the role of mother Carol Brady, and daughters Marcia, Jan, and Cindy are portrayed by \"All Stars 5\" winner Shea Coule\u00e9, season 2 and \"All Stars 6\" competitor Kylie Sonique Love, and season 13 runner-up Kandy Muse, respectively. Season 11 Miss Congeniality Nina West appears as housekeeper Alice Nelson.\nThe special, which recreates the season two episode \"Will the Real Jan Brady Please Stand Up?\", also contains cameos by \"Drag Race\" judges RuPaul and Michelle Visage, who appear as employees of a wig shop that Jan patronizes. The original Jan and Cindy Brady, Eve Plumb and Susan Olsen, also appear as children who are guests at the birthday party.\n\"The Real Brady Bros: Podcast\".\nIn January 2022, Christopher Knight and Barry Williams published their new podcast The Real Brady Bros. The weekly podcast recaps episodes of \"The Brady Bunch\". Eve Plumb, Susan Olsen and Mike Lookinland have guested to discuss episodes in which they have featured.\nUnmade revival.\nIn October 2024, during a heated Presidential election cycle, Susan Olsen claimed on a political podcast that due to her right-wing political views, in 2022, a planned Brady Bunch revival, which would have picked up with the Brady Bunch children as adults, was cancelled. Olsen alleged that Lloyd J. Schwartz questioned her about her political views, and due to her behavior, the project died in early stages and it was unclear whether even a script had been written. Reportedly, in the series, Cindy was going to be a libertarian podcaster. According to Olsen, the project was \"dead in the water\".\nFilm adaptations.\nTwenty years following the conclusion of the original series, a film adaptation, \"The Brady Bunch Movie,\" went into production and was released in 1995 from Paramount Pictures. The film is set in the present day (1990s) and the Bradys, still living their lives as if it were the 1970s, are unfamiliar with their surroundings. It stars Gary Cole and Shelley Long as Mike and Carol Brady, with Christopher Daniel Barnes (Greg), Christine Taylor (Marcia), Paul Sutera (Peter), Jennifer Elise Cox (Jan), Jesse Lee (Bobby), Olivia Hack (Cindy), Henriette Mantel (Alice), and cameo appearances from Ann B. Davis as a long-haul truck driver, Barry Williams as a record label executive, Christopher Knight as a Westdale High gym teacher, RuPaul as a guidance counselor, and Florence Henderson as Carol's mother. Mike Lookinland, Susan Olsen and Maureen McCormick appear in deleted scenes.\nA sequel, \"A Very Brady Sequel\", was released in 1996. The cast of the first film returned for the sequel. Another sequel, \"The Brady Bunch in the White House\", was made-for-television and aired on Fox in 2002. Gary Cole and Shelley Long returned for the third film, while the Brady kids and Alice were recast. \nIn the video game, , there's an achievement (video games) in the add-on \"Dead Money\" called \"Assemble Your Crew\" which parodies the opening title but features numerous Fallout characters, including Vault Boy.\nThe third episode of the Disney+ miniseries \"WandaVision\", \"Now in Color\", pays homage to 1970s sitcoms, including \"The Brady Bunch\", and uses a similar intro for the virtual \"WandaVision\" in-show program.\nUnauthorized adaptations.\nAn unauthorized stage show, \"The Real Live Brady Bunch\", was created by siblings Joey Soloway and Faith Soloway at Chicago\u2019s Annoyance Theatre in 1991. The cast, including Andy Richter as Mike, Jane Lynch as Carol, and Melanie Hutsell as Jan, performed original \"Brady Bunch\" scripts verbatim on stage. The show became a phenomenon in Chicago, with \u201cnew\u201d episodes transcribed and performed every two weeks. Guest performers included Eve Plumb and Davy Jones, while Robert Reed and Susan Olsen attended multiple performances. Paramount was preparing legal action over the stage show when Sherwood Schwartz visited Chicago. Charmed by the tribute, Schwartz agreed to grant rights to the Soloways. The show went on to run in New York and Los Angeles. Joey Soloway became a successful television producer, with credits including \"Transparent\".\nDavid Gilbert\u2019s 2014 short story, \u201cHere\u2019s the Story,\u201d imagines a backstory for the series, in which the original spouses of Carol and Mike are on the verge of beginning an extramarital affair when they both die in the same plane crash. The story ran in \"The New Yorker\" in 2014.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39733", "revid": "1277106580", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39733", "title": "\u00c9lie Ducommun", "text": "Swiss peace activist (1833\u20131906)\n\u00c9lie Ducommun (19 February 1833, Geneva \u2013 7 December 1906, Bern) was a Swiss peace activist. He was a Nobel laureate, awarded the 1902 Nobel Peace Prize, which he shared with Charles Albert Gobat.\nBorn in Geneva, he worked as a tutor, language teacher, journalist and a translator for the Swiss federal Chancellery (1869\u20131873).\nIn 1867 he helped to found the Ligue de la paix et de la libert\u00e9 (League of Peace and Freedom), though he continued working at other positions, including secretary for the Jura-Simplon Steel Company from 1873 to 1891. That year, he was appointed director of the newly formed International Peace Bureau, the first non-governmental international peace organization, based in Bern. He refused to accept a salary for the position, stating that he wished to serve in this capacity solely for reasons of idealism. From 1895 he was made the director of \"Correspondance bi-mensuelle\", journal of the International Peace Office. \nHis keen organizational skills ensured the group's success. He was awarded in the Nobel Peace Prize in 1902, and served as director of the organization until his death in 1906.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39734", "revid": "177837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39734", "title": "LCF", "text": "LCF may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39735", "revid": "17072822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39735", "title": "Edmund of Abingdon", "text": "Catholic saint, Archbishop of Canterbury from 1233 to 1240\nEdmund of Abingdon (also known as Edmund Rich, St Edmund of Canterbury, Edmund of Pontigny, French: St Edme; c. 1174\u00a0\u2013 1240) was an English Catholic prelate who served as Archbishop of Canterbury. He became a respected lecturer in mathematics, dialectics and theology at the Universities of Paris and Oxford, promoting the study of Aristotle. \nHaving already an unsought reputation as an ascetic, he was ordained a priest, took a doctorate in divinity and soon became known not only for his lectures on theology but as a popular preacher, spending long years travelling within England, and engaging in 1227 preaching the Sixth Crusade. \nObliged to accept an appointment as Archbishop of Canterbury by Pope Gregory IX, he combined a gentle personal temperament with a strong public stature and severity towards King Henry III in defence of Magna Carta and in general of good civil and Church government and justice. He also worked for strict observance in monastic life and negotiated peace with Llywelyn the Great. \nHis policies earned him hostility and jealousy from the king, and opposition from several monasteries, including Christ Church Priory, whose monks constituted the clergy of his own Cathedral. He died in France at the beginning of a journey to Rome in 1240. He was canonised in 1246.\nLife.\nEarly life and career.\nEdmund was born circa 1174, possibly on 20 November (the feast of St Edmund the Martyr), in Abingdon in Berkshire (now Oxfordshire), 7 miles south of Oxford, England. Edmund had two sisters and at least one brother.\n\"Rich\" was an epithet sometimes given to his wealthy merchant father, Reynold. It was never applied to Edmund or his siblings in their lifetimes. His father retired, with his wife's consent, to the monastery at Eynsham Abbey, leaving in her hands the education of their family. Her name was Mabel; she was a devout woman who lived an ascetic life and encouraged her children to do the same. Both her daughters took the veil.\nEdmund may have been educated at the monastic school in Abingdon. He developed a taste for religious learning, saw visions while still at school, and at the age of twelve took a vow of perpetual chastity in St Mary's church at Oxford. His early studies were in England, but he completed his higher education in France at the University of Paris. About 1195, in company with his brother Richard, he was sent to the schools of Paris. He studied at the universities of Oxford and Paris and became a teacher about 1200, or a little earlier. For six years he lectured on mathematics and dialectics, apparently dividing his time between Oxford and Paris, and helped introduce the study of Aristotle.\nEdmund became one of Oxford's first lecturers with a Master of Arts degree, but was not Oxford's first Doctor of Divinity. Long hours at night spent in prayer had the result that he often \"nodded off\" during his lectures. There is a long-established tradition that he utilised his lecture-fees to build the Lady Chapel of St Peter's in the East at Oxford. The site where he lived and taught was formed into a mediaeval academic hall in his name and later incorporated as the college of St Edmund Hall.\nHis mother's influence then led to his taking up the study of theology.\nThough for some time Edmund resisted the change, he finally entered upon his new career between 1205 and 1210. He spent a year in retirement with the Augustinian canons of Merton Priory, received ordination, took a doctorate in divinity and soon became known as a lecturer on theology and as an extemporaneous preacher. In this capacity he gained some reputation for eloquence. He spent the fees which he received in charity, and refused to spend upon himself the revenues which he derived from several benefices. He often retired for solitude to Reading Abbey, and it is possible that he would have become a monk if that profession had afforded more scope for his gifts as a preacher and expositor.\nSometime between 1219 and 1222 he was appointed vicar of the parish of Calne in Wiltshire, and treasurer of Salisbury Cathedral. He held this position for eleven years, during which time he also engaged in preaching. In 1227 he preached the Sixth Crusade through a large part of England. He formed a friendship with Ela, countess of Salisbury, and her husband, William Longesp\u00e9e, and was noted for his works of charity and the austerity of his life.\nArchbishop of Canterbury.\nIn 1233 came the news of Edmund's appointment, by Pope Gregory IX, to be Archbishop of Canterbury. The chapter had already made three selections which the pope had declined to confirm. Edmund's name had been proposed as a compromise by Gregory, perhaps on account of his work for the crusade. He was consecrated on 2 April 1234.\nBefore his consecration Edmund became known for supporting ecclesiastical independence from Rome, maintenance of the Magna Carta and the exclusion of foreigners from civil and ecclesiastical office. Reluctant to accept appointment as archbishop, Edmund was persuaded when it was pointed out that if he refused, the Pope might very well appoint a foreign ecclesiastic. He chose as his chancellor Richard of Wich, known to later ages as St Richard of Chichester.\nIn the name of his fellow bishops Edmund admonished Henry III of England at Westminster, on 2 February 1234, to heed the example of his father, John of England. A week after his consecration he again appeared before the king with the barons and bishops, this time threatening Henry with excommunication if he refused to dismiss his councillors, many of them foreign, and particularly Peter des Roches, Bishop of Winchester. Henry yielded, and the favourites were dismissed, Hubert de Burgh (whom they had imprisoned) was released and reconciled to the king and soon the archbishop was sent to Wales to negotiate peace with Llywelyn the Great. Edmund's success, however, turned the king against him.\nEdmund was valued by the local people for his teaching, preaching, study, and his prayer; but his uncompromising stand in favour of good discipline in both civil and ecclesial government, of strict observance in monastic life, and of justice in high quarters brought him into conflict with Henry III, with several monasteries, and with the priests of Canterbury cathedral. He claimed and exercised metropolitan rights of visitation, this was often challenged and he had to resort to litigation to maintain his authority, not the least with his own monastic chapter at Canterbury.\nIn 1236, with the object of emancipating himself from Edmund's control, the king asked the pope to send him a legate. On the arrival of Cardinal Odo in 1237 the archbishop found himself thwarted and insulted at every point. The politically significant marriage between Simon de Montfort and Henry's sister Eleanor, which Edmund had pronounced invalid, was ratified at Rome upon appeal. The king and legate upheld the monks of Canterbury in their opposition to Edmund's authority. Edmund protested to the king, and excommunicated in general terms all who had infringed the liberties of Canterbury. These measures had no impact, and the pope could not be moved to reverse the legate's decisions. Edmund complained that the discipline of the national church was ruined by this conflict of powers, and began to consider retirement.\nJourney to Rome.\nNotwithstanding the gentleness of his disposition, Edmund firmly defended the rights of Church and State against the exactions and usurpations of Henry III. In December 1237 Edmund set out for Rome to plead his cause in person. From this futile mission he returned to England in August 1238 where his efforts to foster reform were frustrated. Edmund submitted to the papal demands and, early in 1240 paid to the pope's agents one fifth of his revenue, which had been levied for the pope's war against Emperor Frederick II. Other English prelates followed his example.\nThe papacy then ordered that 300 English benefices should be assigned to Romans. In 1240 Edmund set out for Rome. At the Cistercian Pontigny Abbey in France he became sick, began travelling back to England, but died only 50 miles further north, on 16 November 1240, at the house of Augustinian Canons at Soisy-Bouy and was taken back to Pontigny.\nVeneration.\nLess than a year after Edmund's death, miracles were alleged to be wrought at his grave. Despite Henry's opposition, he was canonised only six years after his death, in December 1246. His feast day is 16 November. A few years later, the first chapel dedicated to him, St Edmund's Chapel, was consecrated in Dover by his friend Richard of Chichester, making it the only chapel dedicated to one English saint by another; this small building still stands.\nAt Salisbury, a collegiate church founded in 1269 by Bishop de la Wyle was dedicated to Edmund; rebuilt in 1407, the church is now Salisbury Arts Centre. An altar in the cathedral is also dedicated to him.\nToday he is remembered in the name of St Edmund Hall, Oxford and St Edmund's College, Cambridge. His name is given also to St Edmund's College, Ware; St Edmund's School, Canterbury; St Edmund's School, Hindhead; St Edmund's Catholic School, Portsmouth; St Edmund of Abingdon pastoral area of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Clifton; St Edmund's Roman Catholic Primary School, Abingdon, Oxfordshire and St Edmund Preparatory High School, Brooklyn, NY.\nEdmund Rich of Abingdon is remembered in the Church of England with a commemoration on 16 November.\nRelics.\nEdmund's body was never translated to Canterbury, because the Benedictine community there resented what they regarded as Edmund's attacks on their independence. After his death he was taken back to Pontigny Abbey, where his main relics are now found in a baroque reliquary tomb dating to the 17th century.\nAn arm is enshrined in the Chapel of Our Lady of the Assumption at St. Edmund's Retreat on Enders Island off the coast of Mystic, Connecticut. The retreat is operated by the Society of the Fathers and Brothers of St. Edmund.\nIn 1853, the fibula of Edmund's left leg was presented to St Edmund's College, Ware, by Cardinal Wiseman. Many local cures of serious illnesses were attributed to the intercession of St Edmund; one of the earliest of these was of a student who nearly died after a fall in 1871. His complete healing led to the accomplishment of a vow to extend the Pugin chapel with a side chapel to honour the saint.\nThe Islamic silk chasuble, with the main fabric probably made in Al-Andalus, that Edmund had with him at his death remains in the museum in Provins, with a stole and maniple.\nCharacter.\nEdmund's life was one of self-sacrifice and devotion to others. From boyhood he practised asceticism, such as fasting on Saturdays on bread and water, and wearing a hair shirt. After a few hours' sleep, he spent most of the night in prayer and meditation.\nWorks.\nBesides his \"Constitutions\", issued in 1236 (printed in W. Lynwood's \"Constitutiones Angliae\", Oxford, 1679), Edmund wrote a work in the genre of the Speculum literature entitled \"Speculum ecclesiae\" (London, 1521; Eng. transl., 1527; reprinted in M. de la Bigne's \"Bibliotheca veterum patrum\", v., Paris, 1609), which was translated into Anglo-Norman around the second half of the thirteenth century as \"Mirour de Seinte Eglyse\" ('a mirror of the holy Church'), a treatise about the Christian faith aimed at religious practitioners. (The French text was then revised in a version labelled by its editor as a 'lay version', which is attested principally in the manuscript London, British Library, MS Arundel 288).\nReligious Congregation of the Society of St Edmund.\nEdmund's life inspired the formation of the Society of Saint Edmund at Pontigny, France, in 1843 by Jean Baptiste Muard and Pierre Boyer. The Society intended to keep Edmund's memory and life alive by conducting parish missions in the archdiocese of Sens, so as to revitalize the faith of the people who had become alienated from the Church. Members of the Society, based in Pontigny, fled to the United States in 1889 after widespread anticlericalism in France. The Society of Saint Edmund settled in Winooski Park, Vermont and in 1904 established Saint Michael's College where the deeds and values of Edmund's life continue through the college mission. Today members of the Society of Saint Edmund devote themselves to parochial work in the Diocese of Burlington, Vermont, ministry to the African American community through the Edmundite Missions in Selma, Alabama, to higher education at Saint Michael's College, and retreat ministry at Saint Edmund's Retreat (Enders Island) in Connecticut as well as Saint Anne's Shrine in Vermont.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39736", "revid": "46013692", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39736", "title": "Binomial nomenclature", "text": "Species naming system\nIn taxonomy, binomial nomenclature (\"two-term naming system\"), also called binary nomenclature, is a formal system of naming species of living things by giving each a name composed of two parts, both of which use Latin grammatical forms, although they can be based on words from other languages. Such a name is called a binomial name (often shortened to just \"binomial\"), a binomen, binominal name, or a scientific name; more informally, it is also called a Latin name. In the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN), the system is also called binominal nomenclature, with an \"n\" before the \"al\" in \"binominal\", which is not a typographic error, meaning \"two-name naming system\".\nThe first part of the name \u2013 the \"generic name\" \u2013 identifies the genus to which the species belongs, whereas the second part \u2013 the specific name or specific epithet \u2013 distinguishes the species within the genus. For example, modern humans belong to the genus \"Homo\" and within this genus to the species \"Homo sapiens\". \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" is likely the most widely known binomial. The \"formal\" introduction of this system of naming species is credited to Carl Linnaeus, effectively beginning with his work \"Species Plantarum\" in 1753. But as early as 1622, Gaspard Bauhin introduced in his book \"Pinax theatri botanici\" (English, \"Illustrated exposition of plants\") containing many names of genera that were later adopted by Linnaeus. Binomial nomenclature was introduced in order to provide succinct, relatively stable and verifiable names that could be used and understood internationally, unlike common names which are usually different in every language.\nThe application of binomial nomenclature is now governed by various internationally agreed codes of rules, of which the two most important are the \"International Code of Zoological Nomenclature\" (\"ICZN\") for animals and the \"International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants\" (\"ICNafp\" or \"ICN\"). Although the general principles underlying binomial nomenclature are common to these two codes, there are some differences in the terminology they use and their particular rules.\nIn modern usage, the first letter of the generic name is always capitalized in writing, while that of the specific epithet is not, even when derived from a proper noun such as the name of a person or place. Similarly, both parts are italicized in normal text (or underlined in handwriting). Thus the binomial name of the annual phlox (named after botanist Thomas Drummond) is now written as \"Phlox drummondii\". Often, after a species name is introduced in a text, the generic name is abbreviated to the first letter in subsequent mentions (e.g., \"P. drummondii\").\nIn scientific works, the authority for a binomial name is usually given, at least when it is first mentioned, and the year of publication may be specified.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"binomial\" is composed of two elements: (Latin prefix meaning 'two') and (the adjective form of , Latin for 'name'). In Medieval Latin, the related word was used to signify one term in a binomial expression in mathematics. In fact, the Latin word may validly refer to either of the epithets in the binomial name, which can equally be referred to as a (pl. ).\nHistory.\nBefore the adoption of the modern binomial system of naming species, a scientific name consisted of a generic name combined with a specific name that was from one to several words long. Together they formed a system of polynomial nomenclature. These names had two separate functions: to designate or label the species, and to be a diagnosis or description. These two goals were eventually found to be incompatible. In a simple genus that contained few species, it was easy to tell them apart with a one-word genus and a one-word specific name; but as more species were discovered, the names necessarily became longer and unwieldy\u2014for instance, \"Plantago foliis ovato-lanceolatus pubescentibus, spica cylindrica, scapo tereti\" (\"plantain with pubescent ovate-lanceolate leaves, a cylindric spike and a terete scape\"), which we know today as \"Plantago media\".\nSuch \"polynomial names\" may sometimes look like binomials, but are different. For example, Gerard's herbal (as amended by Johnson) describes various kinds of spiderwort: \"The first is called \"Phalangium ramosum\", Branched Spiderwort; the second, \"Phalangium non ramosum\", Unbranched Spiderwort. The other\u00a0... is aptly termed \"Phalangium Ephemerum Virginianum\", Soon-Fading Spiderwort of Virginia\". The Latin phrases are short descriptions, rather than identifying labels.\nThe Bauhins, in particular Caspar Bauhin (1560\u20131624), took some important steps towards the binomial system by pruning the Latin descriptions, in many cases to two words. The adoption by biologists of a system of strictly binomial nomenclature is due to Swedish botanist and physician Carl Linnaeus (1707\u20131778). It was in his 1753 \"Species Plantarum\" that Linnaeus began consistently using a one-word trivial name () after a generic name (genus name) in a system of binomial nomenclature. Trivial names had already appeared in his \"Critica Botanica\" (1737) and \"Philosophia Botanica\" (1751). This trivial name is what is now known as a specific epithet (\"ICNafp\") or specific name (\"ICZN\"). The Bauhins' genus names were retained in many of these, but the descriptive part was reduced to a single word.\nLinnaeus's trivial names introduced the idea that the function of a name could simply be to give a species a unique label, meaning that the name no longer needed to be descriptive. Both parts could, for example, be derived from the names of people. Thus Gerard's \"Phalangium ephemerum virginianum\" became \"Tradescantia virginiana\", where the genus name honoured John Tradescant the Younger, an English botanist and gardener. A bird in the parrot family was named \"Psittacus alexandri\", meaning \"Alexander's parrot\", after Alexander the Great, whose armies introduced eastern parakeets to Greece. Linnaeus's trivial names were much easier to remember and use than the parallel polynomial names, and eventually replaced them.\nValue.\nThe value of the binomial nomenclature system derives primarily from its economy, its widespread use, and the uniqueness and stability of names that the Codes of Zoological and Botanical, Bacterial and Viral Nomenclature provide:\nProblems.\nBinomial nomenclature for species has the effect that when a species is moved from one genus to another, sometimes the specific name or epithet must be changed as well. This may happen because the specific name is already used in the new genus, or to agree in gender with the new genus if the specific epithet is an adjective modifying the genus name. Some biologists have argued for the combination of the genus name and specific epithet into a single unambiguous name, or for the use of uninomials (as used in nomenclature of ranks above species).\nBecause genus names are unique only within a nomenclature code, it is possible for homonyms (two or more species sharing the same genus name) to happen, and even the same binomial if they occur in different kingdoms. At least 1,258 instances of genus name duplication occur (mainly between zoology and botany).\nRelationship to classification and taxonomy.\nNomenclature (including binomial nomenclature) is not the same as classification, although the two are related. Classification is the ordering of items into groups based on similarities or differences; in biological classification, species are one of the kinds of item to be classified. In principle, the names given to species could be completely independent of their classification. This is not the case for binomial names, since the first part of a binomial is the name of the genus into which the species is placed. Above the rank of genus, binomial nomenclature and classification are partly independent; for example, a species retains its binomial name if it is moved from one family to another or from one order to another, unless it better fits a different genus in the same or different family, or it is split from its old genus and placed in a newly created genus. The independence is only partial since the names of families and other higher taxa are usually based on genera.\nTaxonomy includes both nomenclature and classification. Its first stages (sometimes called \"alpha taxonomy\") are concerned with finding, describing and naming species of living or fossil organisms. Binomial nomenclature is thus an important part of taxonomy as it is the system by which species are named. Taxonomists are also concerned with classification, including its principles, procedures and rules.\nDerivation of binomial names.\nA complete binomial name is always treated grammatically as if it were a phrase in the Latin language (hence the common use of the term \"Latin name\" for a binomial name). However, the two parts of a binomial name can each be derived from a number of sources, of which Latin is only one. These include:\nThe first part of the name, which identifies the genus, must be a word that can be treated as a Latin singular noun in the nominative case. It must be unique within the purview of each nomenclatural code, but can be repeated between them. Thus \"Huia recurvata\" is an extinct species of plant, found as fossils in Yunnan, China, whereas \"Huia masonii\" is a species of frog found in Java, Indonesia.\nThe second part of the name, which identifies the species within the genus, is also treated grammatically as a Latin word. It can have one of a number of forms:\nWhereas the first part of a binomial name must be unique within the purview of each nomenclatural code, the second part is quite commonly used in two or more genera (as is shown by examples of \"hodgsonii\" above), but cannot be used more than once within a single genus. The full binomial name must be unique within each code.\nCodes.\nFrom the early 19th century onwards it became ever more apparent that a body of rules was necessary to govern scientific names. In the course of time these became nomenclature codes. The \"International Code of Zoological Nomenclature\" (\"ICZN\") governs the naming of animals, the \"International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants\" (\"ICNafp\") that of plants (including cyanobacteria), and the \"International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria\" (\"ICNB\") that of bacteria (including Archaea). Virus names are governed by the \"International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses\" (\"ICTV\"), a taxonomic code, which determines taxa as well as names. These codes differ in certain ways, e.g.:\nUnifying the different codes into a single code, the \"BioCode\", has been suggested, although implementation is not in sight. (There is also a published code for a different system of biotic nomenclature, which does not use ranks above species, but instead names clades. This is called \"PhyloCode\".)\nDifferences in handling personal names.\nAs noted above, there are some differences between the codes in how binomials can be formed; for example the \"ICZN\" allows both parts to be the same, while the \"ICNafp\" does not. Another difference is in how personal names are used in forming specific names or epithets. The \"ICNafp\" sets out precise rules by which a personal name is to be converted to a specific epithet. In particular, names ending in a consonant (but not \"er\") are treated as first being converted into Latin by adding \"-ius\" (for a man) or \"-ia\" (for a woman), and then being made genitive (i.e. meaning \"of that person or persons\"). This produces specific epithets like \"lecardii\" for Lecard (male), \"wilsoniae\" for Wilson (female), and \"brauniarum\" for the Braun sisters. By contrast, the \"ICZN\" does not require the intermediate creation of a Latin form of a personal name, allowing the genitive ending to be added directly to the personal name. This explains the difference between the names of the plant \"Magnolia hodgsonii\" and the bird \"Anthus hodgsoni\". Furthermore, the \"ICNafp\" requires names not published in the form required by the code to be corrected to conform to it, whereas the \"ICZN\" is more protective of the form used by the original author.\nWriting binomial names.\nBy tradition, the binomial names of species are usually typeset in italics; for example, \"Homo sapiens\". Generally, the binomial should be printed in a font style different from that used in the normal text; for example, \"\"Several more \"Homo sapiens\" fossils were discovered\".\" When handwritten, a binomial name should be underlined; for example, Homo sapiens.\nThe first part of the binomial, the genus name, is always written with an initial capital letter. Older sources, particularly botanical works published before the 1950s, used a different convention: if the second part of the name was derived from a proper noun, e.g., the name of a person or place, a capital letter was used. Thus, the modern form \"Berberis darwinii\" was written as \"Berberis Darwinii\". A capital was also used when the name is formed by two nouns in apposition, e.g., \"Panthera Leo\" or \"Centaurea Cyanus\". In current usage, the second part is never written with an initial capital.\nWhen used with a common name, the scientific name often follows in parentheses, although this varies with publication. For example, \"The house sparrow (\"Passer domesticus\") is decreasing in Europe.\"\nThe binomial name should generally be written in full. The exception to this is when several species from the same genus are being listed or discussed in the same paper or report, or the same species is mentioned repeatedly; in which case the genus is written in full when it is first used, but may then be abbreviated to an initial (and a period/full stop). For example, a list of members of the genus \"Canis\" might be written as \"\"Canis lupus\", \"C. aureus\", \"C. simensis\"\". In rare cases, this abbreviated form has spread to more general use; for example, the bacterium \"Escherichia coli\" is often referred to as just \"E. coli\", and \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" is perhaps even better known simply as \"T. rex\", these two both often appearing in this form in popular writing even where the full genus name has not already been given.\nThe abbreviation \"sp.\" is used when the actual specific name cannot or need not be specified. The abbreviation \"spp.\" (standing for \"species pluralis\", Latin for \"multiple species\") indicates \"several species\". These abbreviations are not italicised (or underlined). For example: \"\"Canis\" sp.\" means \"an unspecified species of the genus \"Canis\", while \"Canis\" spp.\" means \"two or more species of the genus \"Canis\"\". (These abbreviations should not be confused with the abbreviations \"ssp.\" (zoology) or \"subsp.\" (botany), plurals \"sspp.\" or \"subspp.\", referring to one or more subspecies. See trinomen (zoology) and infraspecific name.)\nThe abbreviation \"cf.\" (i.e., \"confer\" in Latin) is used to compare individuals/taxa with known/described species. Conventions for use of the \"cf.\" qualifier vary. In paleontology, it is typically used when the identification is not confirmed. For example, \"\"Corvus\" cf. \"nasicus\"\" was used to indicate \"a fossil bird similar to the Cuban crow but not certainly identified as this species\". In molecular systematics papers, \"cf.\" may be used to indicate one or more undescribed species assumed to be related to a described species. For example, in a paper describing the phylogeny of small benthic freshwater fish called darters, five undescribed putative species (Ozark, Sheltowee, Wildcat, Ihiyo, and Mamequit darters), notable for brightly colored nuptial males with distinctive color patterns, were referred to as \"\"Etheostoma\" cf. \"spectabile\"\" because they had been viewed as related to, but distinct from, \"Etheostoma spectabile\" (orangethroat darter). This view was supported to varying degrees by DNA analysis. The somewhat informal use of taxa names with qualifying abbreviations is referred to as open nomenclature and it is not subject to strict usage codes.\nIn some contexts, the dagger symbol (\"\u2020\") may be used before or after the binomial name to indicate that the species is extinct.\nAuthority.\nIn scholarly texts, at least the first or main use of the binomial name is usually followed by the \"authority\"\u00a0\u2013 a way of designating the scientist(s) who first published the name. The authority is written in slightly different ways in zoology and botany. For names governed by the \"ICZN\" the surname is usually written in full together with the date (normally only the year) of publication. One example of author citation of scientific name is: \"\"Amabela\" M\u00f6schler, 1880.\" The \"ICZN\" recommends that the \"original author and date of a name should be cited at least once in each work dealing with the taxon denoted by that name.\" For names governed by the \"ICNafp\" the name is generally reduced to a standard abbreviation and the date omitted. The International Plant Names Index maintains an approved list of botanical author abbreviations. Historically, abbreviations were used in zoology too.\nWhen the original name is changed, e.g., the species is moved to a different genus, both codes use parentheses around the original authority; the \"ICNafp\" also requires the person who made the change to be given. In the \"ICNafp\", the original name is then called the basionym. Some examples:\nOther ranks.\nBinomial nomenclature, as described here, is a system for naming species. Implicitly, it includes a system for naming genera, since the first part of the name of the species is a genus name. In a classification system based on ranks, there are also ways of naming ranks above the level of genus and below the level of species. Ranks above genus (e.g., family, order, class) receive one-part names, which are conventionally not written in italics. Thus, the house sparrow, \"Passer domesticus\", belongs to the family Passeridae. Family names are normally based on genus names, such as in zoology, although the endings used differ between zoology and botany.\nRanks below species receive three-part names, conventionally written in italics like the names of species. There are significant differences between the \"ICZN\" and the \"ICNafp\". In zoology, the only formal rank below species is subspecies and the name is written simply as three parts (a trinomen). Thus, one of the subspecies of the olive-backed pipit is \"Anthus hodgsoni berezowskii\". Informally, in some circumstances, a form may be appended, though such names are unavailable, and have no formal standing in zoological nomenclature (i.e., they have no recognized author or date, and do not compete for homonymy). For example \"Harmonia axyridis\" f. \"spectabilis\" is the harlequin ladybird in its black or melanic forms having four large orange or red spots. In botany, there are many ranks below species and although the name itself is written in three parts, a \"connecting term\" (not part of the name) is needed to show the rank. Thus, the American black elder is \"Sambucus nigra\" subsp. \"canadensis\"; the white-flowered form of the ivy-leaved cyclamen is \"Cyclamen hederifolium\" f. \"albiflorum\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39737", "revid": "1636825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39737", "title": "Myles Coverdale", "text": "English preacher and theologian (1488\u20131569)\nMyles Coverdale, first name also spelt Miles (c.\u20091488 \u2013 20 January 1569), was an English ecclesiastical reformer chiefly known as a Bible translator, preacher, hymnist and, briefly, Bishop of Exeter (1551\u20131553). In 1535, Coverdale produced the first printed translation of the full Bible into Early Modern English, completing the translations of William Tyndale. \nHis theological development is a paradigm of the progress of the English Reformation from 1530 to 1552. By the time of his death, he had transitioned into an early Puritan, affiliated to Calvin, and a friend of John Knox.\nLife to end of 1528.\nRegarding his probable birth county, Daniell cites John Bale, author of a sixteenth-century scriptorium, giving it as Yorkshire. His birth date is generally regarded as 1488.\nCoverdale studied philosophy and theology at Cambridge, becoming bachelor of canon law in 1513. In 1514 John Underwood, a suffragan bishop and archdeacon of Norfolk, ordained him priest in Norwich. He entered the house of the Augustinian friars in Cambridge, where Robert Barnes had returned from Louvain to become its prior. This is thought to have been about 1520\u20131525.\nAccording to Trueman, Barnes returned to Cambridge in the early to mid-1520s. At Louvain Barnes had studied under Erasmus and had developed humanist sympathies. In Cambridge, he read aloud to his students from St. Paul's epistles in translation and taught from classical authors. This undoubtedly influenced them towards Reform. In February 1526, Coverdale was part of a group of friars that travelled from Cambridge to London to present the defence of their superior, after Barnes was summoned before Cardinal Wolsey. Barnes had been arrested as a heretic after being accused of preaching Lutheran views in the church of St Edward King and Martyr, Cambridge on Christmas Eve. Coverdale is said to have acted as Barnes' secretary during the trial. By the standards of the time, Barnes received relatively lenient treatment, being made to do public penance by carrying a faggot to St Paul's Cross. However on 10 June 1539, Parliament passed the Act of Six Articles, marking a turning point in the progress of radical protestantism.\nBarnes was burned at the stake on 30 July 1540, at Smithfield, along with two other reformers. Also executed that day were three Roman Catholics, who were hanged, drawn and quartered.\nCoverdale probably met Thomas Cromwell some time before 1527. A letter survives showing that later, in 1531, he wrote to Cromwell, requesting his guidance on his behaviour and preaching; also stating his need for books. By Lent 1528, he had left the Augustinians and, wearing simple garments, was preaching in Essex against transubstantiation, the veneration of sacred images, and Confession to a Priest. At that date, such views were very dangerous, for the future course of the religious revolution that began during the reign of Henry VIII was as yet very uncertain. Reforms, both of the forms proposed by Lollardy, and those preached by Luther, were being pursued by a vigorous campaign against heresy. Consequently, towards the end of 1528, Coverdale fled from England to the Continent.\nFirst exile, 1528.\nFrom 1528 to 1535, Coverdale spent most of his time in continental Europe, mainly in Antwerp. Celia Hughes believes that upon arriving there, he rendered considerable assistance to William Tyndale in his revisions and partial completion of his English versions of the Bible. \nIn 1531, Tyndale spoke to Stephen Vaughan of his poverty and the hardships of exile, although he was relatively safe in the English House in Antwerp, where the inhabitants supposedly enjoyed diplomatic immunity. However, in the spring of 1535 a \"debauched and villainous young Englishman wanting money\" named Henry Phillips insinuated himself into Tyndale's trust. Phillips had gambled away money from his father and had fled abroad. He promised the authorities of the Holy Roman Emperor that he would betray Tyndale for cash. On the morning of 21 May 1535, having arranged for the imperial officers to be ready, Phillips tricked Tyndale into leaving the English House, whereupon he was immediately seized. Tyndale languished in prison throughout the remainder of 1535 and despite attempts to have him released, organised by Cromwell through Thomas Poyntz at the English House, Tyndale was strangled and burned at the stake in October 1536. \nMeanwhile, Coverdale continued his work alone to produce what became the first complete English Bible in print, namely the Coverdale Bible. Not proficient in Hebrew or Greek, he used Latin, English and German sources plus the translations of Tyndale himself.\nCoverdale's translation of the Bible, 1535.\nIn 1534 Canterbury Convocation petitioned Henry VIII that the whole Bible might be translated into English. Consequently, in 1535, Coverdale dedicated this complete Bible to the King. After much scholarly debate, it is now considered very probable that the place of printing of the Coverdale Bible was Antwerp. The printing was financed by Jacobus van Meteren. The printing of the first edition was finished on 4 October 1535. \nCoverdale based the text in part on Tyndale's translation of the New Testament (following Tyndale's November 1534 Antwerp edition) and of those books which were translated by Tyndale: the Pentateuch, and the Book of Jonah. Other Old Testament books he translated from the German of Luther and others.\nBased on Coverdale's translation of the Book of Psalms in his 1535 Bible, his later Psalter has remained in use in the 1662 \"Book of Common Prayer\" to the present day, and is retained with various minor corrections in the 1926 Irish \"Book of Common Prayer\", the 1928 US Episcopal \"Book of Common Prayer\", and the 1962 Canadian \"Book of Common Prayer\", etc.\nFurther translations, 1537\u20131539.\nIn 1537 the Matthew Bible was printed, also in Antwerp, at the expense of Richard Grafton and Edward Whitchurch who issued it in London. It comprised Tyndale's Pentateuch; a version of Joshua 2 and Chronicles translated from the Hebrew, probably by Tyndale and not previously published; the remainder of the Old Testament from Coverdale; Tyndale's New Testament from 1535. It was dedicated to Henry VIII who licensed it for general reading. \"Thomas Matthew\", the supposed editor, was an alias for John Rogers.\nThe Matthew Bible was theologically controversial. Furthermore it bore evidence of its origin from Tyndale. If Henry VIII had become aware of this, the position of Cromwell and Cranmer would have been precarious. Consequently in 1538 Coverdale was sent to Paris by Cromwell to superintend the printing of the planned \"Great Bible\". Fran\u00e7ois Regnault, who had supplied all English service books from 1519 to 1534, was selected as the printer because his typography was more sumptuous than that available in England. According to Kenyon, the assent of the French king was obtained. In May 1538 printing began. Nevertheless, a coalition of English bishops together with French theologians at the Sorbonne interfered with the operations and the Pope issued an edict that the English Bibles should be burned and the presses stopped. Some completed sheets were seized, but Coverdale rescued others, together with the type, transferring them to London. Ultimately, the work was completed in London by Grafton and Whitchurch.\nAlso in 1538, editions were published, both in Paris and in London, of a diglot (dual-language) New Testament. In this, Coverdale compared the Latin Vulgate text with his own English translation, in parallel columns on each page.\nAn injunction was issued by Cromwell in September 1538, strengthening an earlier one that had been issued but widely ignored in 1536. This second injunction firmly declared opposition to \"pilgrimages, feigned relics, or images, or any such superstitions\" whilst correspondingly placing heavy emphasis on scripture as \"the very lively word of God\". Coverdale\u2019s Great Bible was now almost ready for circulation and the injunction called for the use of \"one book of the whole Bible of the largest volume\" in every English church. However at the time insufficient Great Bibles were actually printed in London so an edition of the Matthew Bible that had been re-edited by Coverdale started to be used. The laity were also intended to learn other core items of worship in English, including the Creed, the Lord's Prayer and the Ten Commandments.\nIn February 1539, Coverdale was in Newbury communicating with Thomas Cromwell. The printing of the London edition of the Great Bible was in progress. It was finally published in April of the same year. John Winchcombe, son of \"Jack O'Newbury\", a famous clothier, served as a confidential messenger to Coverdale who was performing an ecclesiastical visitation. Coverdale commended Winchcombe for \"his true heart towards the King's Highness\" and in 1540, Henry VIII granted to Winchcombe the manor of Bucklebury, a former demesne of Reading Abbey.\nAlso from Newbury, Coverdale reported to Cromwell via Winchcombe about breaches in the king's laws against papism, sought out churches in the district where the sanctity of Becket was still maintained, and arranged to burn primers and other church books which had not been altered to match the king's proceedings.\nSometime between 1535 and 1540 (the exact dates being uncertain), separate printings were made of Coverdale's translations into English of the psalms. These first versions of his psalm renditions were based mainly or completely upon his translation of the Book of Psalms in the 1535 Coverdale Bible.\nIn the final years of the decade, the conservative clerics, led by Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, were rapidly recovering their power and influence, opposing Cromwell's policies. On 28 June 1539 the Act of Six Articles became law, ending official tolerance of religious reform. Cromwell was executed on 28 July 1540. This was close to the date of the burning of Coverdale's Augustinian mentor Robert Barnes. Cromwell had protected Coverdale since at least 1527 and the latter was obliged to seek refuge again.\nSecond exile, 1540\u20131547.\nIn April 1540 there was a second edition of the Great Bible, this time with a prologue by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer. For this reason, the Great Bible is sometimes known as Cranmer\u2019s Bible although he had no part in its translation. According to Kenyon, there were seven editions in total, up until the end of 1541, with the later versions including some revisions.\nBefore leaving England, Coverdale married Elizabeth Macheson (d. 1565), a Scotswoman of noble family who had come to England with her sister and brother-in-law as religious exiles from Scotland. They went first to Strasbourg, where they remained for about three years. He translated books from Latin and German and wrote an important defence of Barnes. This is regarded as his most significant reforming statement apart from his Bible prefaces. He received the degree of DTh from T\u00fcbingen and visited Denmark, where he wrote reforming tracts. In Strasbourg he befriended Conrad Hubert, Martin Bucer's secretary and a preacher at the church of St Thomas. Hubert was a native of Bergzabern (now Bad Bergzabern) in the duchy of Palatine Zweibr\u00fccken. In September 1543, on the recommendation of Hubert, Coverdale became assistant minister in Bergzabern as well as schoolmaster in the town's grammar school. During this period, he opposed Martin Luther's attack on the Reformed view of the Lord's Supper. He also began to learn Hebrew, becoming competent in the language, as had been Tyndale.\nReturn to England, 1548.\nEdward VI (1547\u201353) was only 9 years old when he succeeded his father on 28 January 1547. For most of his reign he was being educated, whilst his uncle, Edward Seymour, 1st Earl of Hertford, acted as Lord Protector of the Realm and Governor of the King's Person. Immediately upon receiving these appointments he became Duke of Somerset.\nCoverdale did not immediately return to England, although the prospects looked better for him. Religious policy followed that of the chief ministers and during Edward's reign this moved towards Protestantism. However in March 1548 he wrote to John Calvin that he was now returning, after eight years of exile for his faith. He was well received at the court of the new monarch. He became a royal chaplain in Windsor, and was appointed almoner to the queen dowager, Catherine Parr. At Parr's funeral in September 1548, Coverdale delivered what would later be said to have been his \"1st Protestant sermon\".\nOn 10 June 1549, the Prayer Book Rebellion broke out in Devon and Cornwall. There, Coverdale was directly involved in preaching and pacification attempts. Recognising the continuing unpopularity of the Book of Common Prayer in such areas, the Act of Uniformity had been introduced, making the Latin liturgical rites unlawful from Whitsunday 1549 onward. The west-country rebels, many of whom spoke Cornish but not English, complained that the new English liturgy was \"but lyke a Christmas game\" \u2013 men and women should form separate files to receive communion, reminding them of country dancing. \nThe direct spark of rebellion occurred at Sampford Courtenay in Devon where, in attempting to enforce the orders, an altercation led to a death, with a proponent of the changes being run through with a pitchfork.\nUnrest was said also to have been fuelled by several years of increasing social dissatisfaction. Lord John Russell, 1st Earl of Bedford was sent by the Lord Protector to put down the rapidly spreading rebellion and Coverdale accompanied him as chaplain. The Battle of Sampford Courtenay effectively ended the rebellion by the end of August, at a loss of over 1,200 Catholic rebel lives, and several thousands more in previous battles and massacres. \nHowever Coverdale remained in Devon for several more months, helping to pacify the people and doing the work that properly belonged to the Bishop of Exeter. The incumbent, John Vesey, was eighty-six, and had not stirred from Sutton Coldfield in Warwickshire, his birthplace and long-term residence.\nBishop of Exeter, 1551.\nCoverdale spent Easter 1551 in Oxford with the Florentine-born Augustinian reformer Peter Martyr Vermigli. At that time, Martyr was Regius Professor of divinity, belonging to Magdalen College. He had been assisting Cranmer with a revision of the Anglican prayer book. Coverdale attended Martyr's lectures on the Epistle to the Romans and Martyr called him a \"a good man who in former years acted as parish minister in Germany\" who now \"labours greatly in Devon in preaching and explaining the Scriptures\". He predicted that Coverdale would become Bishop of Exeter and this took place on 14 August 1551 when John Vesey was ejected from his see.\nThird exile, 1553\u20131559.\nEdward VI died of tuberculosis on 6 July 1553. Shortly before, he had attempted to deter a Roman Catholic revival by switching the succession from Mary daughter of Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon to Lady Jane Grey. However his settlement of the succession lasted barely a fortnight. After a brief struggle between the opposing factions, Mary was proclaimed Queen of England on 19 July. Historian Eamon Duffy reports that the news broke during a sermon by Bishop Coverdale, during which almost all the congregation walked out one by one (i.e., such was the anti-Protestant affinity of the locals of Devon and Cornwall.)\nThe renewed danger to reformers such as Coverdale was obvious. He was summoned almost immediately to appear before the Privy Council and on 1 September he was placed under house arrest in Exeter. On 18 September, he was ejected from his see and Vesey, now ninety and still in Warwickshire, was reinstated. Following an intervention by his brother-in-law, chaplain to King Christian III of Denmark-Norway, Coverdale and his wife were permitted to leave for that country. They then went on to Wesel, and finally back to Bergzabern.\nOn 24 October 1558, Coverdale received leave to settle in Geneva. Commenting on his contribution to the Geneva Bible (the exact details of which are scarce), Daniell says: \"Although his Hebrew, and ... now his Greek, could not match the local scholars' skills, Coverdale would no doubt have special things to offer as one who nearly two dozen years before had first translated the whole Bible ... the only Englishman to have done so, and then revised it under royal authority for the successive editions of the Great Bible.\" On 29 November 1558 Coverdale was godfather to John Knox's son. On 16 December he became an elder of the English church in Geneva, and participated in a reconciling letter from its leaders to other English churches on the continent.\nLondon, 1559\u20131569.\nIn August 1559, Coverdale and his family returned to London, where they lodged with the Duchess of Suffolk, whom they had known at Wesel. He was appointed as preacher and tutor to her children. He wrote to William Cole in Geneva, saying that the duchess had \"like us, the greatest abhorrence of the ceremonies\" (meaning the increasing reversion to the use of vestments).\nHis stance on vestments was one of the reasons why he was not reinstated to his bishopric. However Hughes believes that it is likely that in his own opinion, he felt too elderly to undertake the responsibility properly. From 1564 to 1566, he was rector of St Magnus the Martyr in the City of London near London Bridge. Coverdale\u2019s first wife, Elizabeth, died early in September 1565, and was buried in St Michael Paternoster Royal, City of London, on the 8th. On 7 April 1566 he married his second wife, Katherine, at the same church. After the summer of 1566, when he had resigned his last living at St Magnus, Coverdale became popular in early Puritan circles, because of his quiet but firm stance against ceremonies and elaborate clerical dress. Due to his opposition to official church practices, he died in poverty aged 80 or 81 on 20 January 1569, in London and was buried at St Bartholomew-by-the-Exchange with a multitude of mourners present. When that church was demolished in 1840 to make way for the new Royal Exchange, his remains were moved to St Magnus, where there is a tablet in his memory on the east wall, close to the altar. Coverdale left no will and on 23 January 1569 letters of administration were granted to his second wife, Katherine. Daniell says that it appears that he has no living descendants.\nLegacy.\nCoverdale's legacy has been far-reaching, especially that of his first complete English Bible of 1535. For the 400th anniversary of the Authorised King James Bible, in 2011, the Church of England issued a resolution, which was endorsed by the General Synod. Starting with the Coverdale Bible, the text included a brief description of the continuing significance of the Authorised King James Bible (1611) and its immediate antecedents:\nAs indicated above, Coverdale was involved with the first four of the above. He was partially responsible for Matthew's Bible. In addition to those mentioned above, he produced a diglot New Testament in 1538. He was extensively involved with editing and producing the Great Bible. He was also part of the group of \"Geneva Exiles\" who produced the Geneva Bible \u2013 the edition preferred, some ninety-five years later, by Oliver Cromwell's army and Parliamentarians.\nCoverdale's translation of the Psalms (based on Luther's version and the Latin Vulgate) have a particular importance in the history of the English Bible. His translation is still used in the Anglican Book of Common Prayer. It is the most familiar translation for many in the Anglican Communion worldwide, particularly those in collegiate and cathedral churches. Many musical settings of the psalms also make use of the Coverdale translation. For example Coverdale's renderings are used in Handel's \"Messiah\", based on the Prayer Book Psalter rather than the King James Bible version. His translation of the Roman Canon is still used in some Anglican and Anglican Use Roman Catholic churches. Less well known is Coverdale\u2019s early involvement in hymn books. Celia Hughes believes that in the days of renewed biblical suppression after 1543, the most important work of Coverdale, apart from his principal Bible translation, was his \"Ghostly Psalms and Spiritual Songs\" . This she calls \"the first English hymn book\" and \"the only one until the publication of the collection by Sternhold and Hopkins.\" (This was more than twenty years later). The undated print probably was done parallel to his Bible translation in 1535. Coverdale\u2019s first three hymns are based on the Latin Veni Creator Spiritus, preceding its other English translations such as that of 1625 by Bishop J. Cosin by more than ninety years. However, the majority of the hymns are based on the Protestant hymnbooks from Germany, particularly Johann Walter's settings of Martin Luther's hymns such as \"Ein feste Burg\". Coverdale intended his \"\"godly songs\" for \"our young men ... and our women spinning at the wheels.\"\" Thus Hughes argues that he realised that for the less privileged, his scriptural teaching could be learnt and retained more readily by song rather than by direct access to the Bible, which could often be prohibited. However, his hymnbook also ended up on the list of forbidden books in 1539, and only one complete copy of it survives, today held in Queen's College, Oxford. Two fragments survived as binding material, one now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and one in the Beinecke Library at Yale.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMiles Coverdale was a man who was loved all his life for that \u2018singular uprightness\u2019 recorded on his tomb. He was always in demand as a preacher of the gospel. He was an assiduous bishop. He pressed forward with great work in the face of the complexities and adversities produced by official policies. His gift to posterity has been from his scholarship as a translator; from his steadily developing sense of English rhythms, spoken and sung; and from his incalculable shaping of the nation's moral and religious sense through the reading aloud in every parish from his \u2018Bible of the largest size\u2019.\nDavid Daniell, \u2018Coverdale, Miles (1488\u20131569)\u2019, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004; online edn, October 2009 http://.\nCoverdale is honoured, together with William Tyndale, with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church (USA) on 6 October. His extensive contacts with English and Continental Reformers were integral to the development of successive versions of the Bible in the English language.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39738", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39738", "title": "Kingdom", "text": "Kingdom commonly refers to:\nKingdom may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39739", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39739", "title": "Confocal", "text": "In geometry, confocal means having the same foci: confocal conic sections.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndex of articles associated with the same name\nThis includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names). &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "39740", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39740", "title": "Szczerbiec", "text": "Polish coronation sword\nSzczerbiec () is the ceremonial sword used in the coronations of most Polish monarchs from 1320 to 1764. It now is displayed in the treasure vault of the royal Wawel Castle in Krak\u00f3w, as the only preserved part of the medieval Polish crown jewels. The sword is noted for its hilt, decorated with magical formulae, Christian symbols, and floral patterns, as well as for the narrow slit in the blade which holds a small shield with the coat of arms of Poland. The name of the sword is derived from the Polish word \"szczerba\" (\"gap\", \"notch\", or \"chip\"), and its meaning is incorrectly perceived as \"the Notched Sword\" or \"the Jagged Sword\" (which is included in the sword's legend), though the edges of its blade are straight and smooth. Proper meaning and rendering into English would be \"the Notching/Jagging Sword\" \u2014 as \"a sword that is meant to notch/jag other weapons\".\nThe legend links Szczerbiec with King Boleslaus I the Brave who was said to have chipped the sword by hitting it against the Golden Gate of Kiev during his intervention in the Kievan succession crisis in 1018. However, the Golden Gate was only constructed in 1037 and the sword is actually dated to the late 12th or 13th century. It was first used as a coronation sword by Ladislaus the Short in 1320. Looted by Prussian troops in 1795, it changed hands several times during the 19th century until it was purchased in 1884 for the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg. The Soviet Union returned it to Poland in 1928 as part of war reparations for their loss against Poland in the Polish-Soviet war. During the Second World War, Szczerbiec was evacuated to Canada and did not return to Krak\u00f3w until 1959. In the 20th century, an image of the sword was adopted as a symbol by Polish nationalist and far-right movements.\nDescription.\nSzczerbiec is a ceremonial sword bearing rich Gothic ornamentation, dated to the mid-13th century. It is classified as a type XII sword with a type I pommel and a type 6 crossguard according to the Oakeshott typology, although the blade may have changed its shape due to centuries of corrosion and intensive cleaning before every coronation.\nHilt.\nThe hilt consists of a round pommel, a flat grip and an arched crossguard. The grip is long, thick, and from wide. It is rectangular in cross-section and its hard edges make it difficult to handle and impractical for fighting, which is indicative of the sword's purely ceremonial usage. The pommel is in diameter and thick, with a chamfered outer ring that is wide. The crossguard forms an arch that is wide in the middle and widens up to at both ends. It is thick near the grip and measures in length along its upper edge.\nThe pommel and the crossguard are made of silver. The core of the grip is a brass chest encasing the tang of the blade. It was probably made in the 19th century to replace an original organic core, which had decomposed. At the same time the tang was riveted to the top of the pommel. The head of the rivet, which is in diameter, rests atop a rectangular washer measuring .\nAll parts of the hilt are covered with golden plates, which are engraved with sharp or rounded styli and decorated with niello, or black metallic inlay that contrasts against the golden background. Each plate is thick and made of about 18-carat gold. The niello designs include inscriptions written in late Romanesque majuscule (with some uncial additions), Christian symbols, and floral patterns. The floral ornaments are in negative, that is, golden against a black, nielloed background.\nOn the obverse side of the hilt, the pommel bears a large stylized letter T on top of a letter C or G (the latter could be just a decorative element of the letter T) between the Greek letters \u0391 and \u03c9 (alpha and omega) surmounted with little crosses. Below the letter T, there is another cross placed within a cloud or flower with twelve petals. On the chamfered edge around this design runs a circular Latin inscription in two rings which reads: \"Rec figura talet ad amorem regum / et principum iras iudicum\" (\"This sign rouses the love of kings and princes, the wrath of judges\"). The grip bears the symbols of two of the Four Evangelists: the lion of Saint Mark and the ox of Saint Luke, as well as an \"Agnus Dei\" (Lamb of God). The crossguard bears the following Latin inscription: \"Quicumque hec / nomina Deii secum tu/lerit nullum periculum / ei omnino nocebit\" (\"Whoever will carry these names of God with him, no danger will harm him\").\nThe reverse side of the pommel is decorated with a vine bush surrounded by a wreath of vine leaves. On the reverse of the grip, there are the eagle of Saint John and the angel of Saint Matthew, and another \"Agnus Dei\". The crossguard bears, above another pattern of vine leaves, an inscription in corrupted Hebrew in Latin script: \"Con citomon Eeve Sedalai Ebrebel\" (\"Fervent faith incite the names of God: Sedalai and Ebrehel\"). On the opposite ends of the crossguard, there are again the symbols of Saints John and Matthew.\nThe circumference of the pommel is decorated with a rhombic pattern, while the upper side of the crossguard \u2013 with a similar triangular pattern. The narrow sides of the grip used to be embellished with inscribed silver plates, which, however, were lost in the 19th century. These lost inscriptions are partly known from graphical documentation made by King Stanislaus Augustus's court painter, Johann Christoph Werner, in 1764 and by Jacek Przybylski in 1792. One of the plates had already been broken by that time with only part of the inscription preserved: \"Liste est glaud... h Bolezlai Duc...\" (\"This is a sword of... Duke Boleslaus...\"); the inscription on the other plate continued: \"Cum quo ei D[omi]n[us] SOS \"[\"Salvator Omnipotens Salvator\"]\" auxiletur ad[ver]sus partes amen\" (\"With whom is the Omnipotent Lord and Savior, to help him against his enemies. Amen\"). The missing part of the first inscription is only known from an old replica of Szczerbiec which once belonged to the Radziwi\u0142\u0142 family \"(see Historical replicas below)\". The full inscription read: \"Iste est gladius Principis et haeredis Boleslai Ducis Poloniae et Masoviae, Lanciciae\" (\"This is a sword of Hereditary Prince Boleslaus, Duke of Poland, Masovia, and \u0141\u0119czyca\"). The identity of this Duke Boleslaus is uncertain.\nUse-wear analysis indicates that the plates on the pommel and the crossguard were made by the same artist, while the plates on the grip were added later. The latter \u2013 obverse and reverse \u2013 were probably decorated in the same workshop and using the same tools, but by two different craftsmen. Moreover, a side plate with a rhombic pattern was added in the 19th century to replace one of the lost inscribed side plates.\nPreserved images of Szczerbiec from various points in time indicate that the decorative plates were several times dismounted and placed again on the hilt in variable configurations. The current composition, with the symbols of the Evangelists duplicated on each side of the hilt, matches that known from the earliest preserved depiction drafted by Johann Christoph Werner in 1794. It is possible, though, that the original placement of the golden plates was different, with the symbols of Saints John and Matthew on the obverse of the grip, so that each side of the hilt displayed the symbols of all four of the Evangelists.\nBlade.\nThe blade is long, up to wide (about 5\u00a0cm from the crossguard) and thick. The fuller is about long and, on average, wide. Metallographic analysis has shown that the blade was forged from unevenly carburized semi-hard bloomery steel. Apart from iron, the material contains, by weight, 0.6 percent of carbon, 0.153 percent of silicon, 0.092 percent of phosphorus, and other elements. Numerous slag inclusions found in the steel are typical for medieval iron smelting technology. Part of the blade was hardened by quenching. Unlike the hilt, the blade would have been fully functional as a weapon of war. The surface of the blade is covered with deep scratches along its length, a result of intensive cleaning from rust before every coronation, probably with sand or brick powder. Inactive spots of corrosion may be also found on the entire surface.\nJust below the hilt, there are three perforations in the fuller of the blade. The largest is a rectangular slot that is long and wide. This opening, known in Polish as \"szczyrba\" or \"szczerba\", was originally caused by rust and, in the 19th century, polished into a regular shape. A small heraldic shield colored with oil paint is fastened to the slot. It is roughly triangular in shape, with the sides measuring from . The shield, bearing the White Eagle of Poland, was originally attached to the scabbard, or sheath. The Gothic scabbard, with a golden or silver locket and chape, was probably created in 1320 and lost between 1819 and 1874. The shield is the only preserved element of the sheath. It was tilted to the left \u2013 from the onlooker's point of view \u2013 while it was fastened to the scabbard's locket, but today it is aligned with the blade. The eagle on the red field of the shield is white, with a golden crown, bands across the wings, ring on the tail, and talons. The two other perforations are round holes, apart. The upper one, just below the slot, is in diameter, while the other measures only . They were probably punched in the 19th century to fasten the heraldic shield to the blade.\nLocation.\nSzczerbiec is owned by the Wawel Royal Castle National Art Collection (inventory number 137) in Krak\u00f3w, the former capital city of Poland. As the only preserved of Polish medieval coronation insignia, it is a prominent part of the museum's Treasury and Armory permanent exhibition. The sword is suspended horizontally inside a glass case in the middle of the Jagie\u0142\u0142o and Hedwig Vault located on the ground floor in the northeastern corner of the Wawel Castle.\nHistory.\nThe Szczerbiec of Boleslaus the Brave.\nHistorical accounts related to the early history of the Polish coronation sword are scant and often mixed with legend. The earliest known use of the name \"Szczerbiec\" appeared in the \"Chronicle of Greater Poland\" at the turn of the 14th century. According to this source, the sword was given to King Boleslaus the Brave (reigned 992\u20131025) by an angel; Polish kings were supposed to always carry it in battle to triumph over their enemies. During Boleslaus's invasion of Kievan Rus', he hit it against the Golden Gate of Kyiv while capturing the city. It was the notch that appeared on the edge of the blade which gave the sword its name. This account, written three centuries after the events it describes, is implausible not only because of the customary reference to the sword's supernatural origin (compare Excalibur), but also because Boleslaus's intervention in the Kievan succession crisis took place in 1018, or about 19 years before the actual construction of the Golden Gate in 1037.\nIt is plausible, though, that Boleslaus did chip his sword by striking it against an earlier gate in Kiev. His great-grandson, Boleslaus the Bold (r. 1058\u20131079), hit the Golden Gate with a sword in 1069, which would indicate that it was a customary gesture of gaining control over a city. It is also possible that this sword was preserved as a souvenir of past victories venerated by Boleslaus the Brave's successors. According to Wincenty Kad\u0142ubek's \"Chronicle\", Boleslaus Wrymouth (r. 1107\u20131138) had a favorite sword he called \"\u017buraw\" or \"Grus\" (\"Crane\"). A scribe who copied the chronicle in 1450 added the word \"Szczurbycz\" above the word \"\u017buraw\", but whether these two swords were one and the same is uncertain.\nAccording to the \"Chronicle of Greater Poland\", the sword was kept in the treasury of the Wawel Cathedral. The ultimate fate of the original Szczerbiec is unknown. It may have been taken to Prague, together with other royal insignia, by King Wenceslaus II of Bohemia after his coronation as king of Poland in Gniezno in 1300. What happened with these insignia thereafter remains a mystery. Although Boleslaus the Brave's notched sword has not been preserved and even its very existence is doubtful, its legend had a great impact on Polish historical memory and the treatment of its successor, the modern Szczerbiec.\nFrom a sword of justice to a coronation sword.\nThe sword currently known as Szczerbiec was forged and decorated in a style characteristic of the late 12th and 13th centuries, so it could not have belonged to any of the three great Boleslauses of the 11th and early 12th centuries. Additionally, it is a purely ceremonial sword which, unlike the original Szczerbiec, was never used in combat. It was originally used as a sword of justice (\"gladius iustitiae\"), or insignia of the sovereign's judicial power, by one of the many local dukes during Poland's Age of Fragmentation. A silver plate, now lost, on the sword's grip bore an inscription which indicated a duke by the name Boleslaus as its original owner. An inscription on the Radziwi\u0142\u0142s' replica of Szczerbiec, now also lost, could provide an additional hint as to the duke's identity: \"Boleslaus, Duke of Poland, Masovia, and \u0141\u0119czyca\" \u2013 except that no duke of this name and titles ever existed. Historians have variously identified the duke in question as Boleslaus the Curly (r. 1146\u20131173), Boleslaus the Chaste (r. 1226\u20131279), Boleslaus I of Masovia (r. 1229\u20131248) or Boleslaus the Pious of Greater Poland (r. 1239\u20131247).\nAs a coronation sword, Szczerbiec was first specifically mentioned by Jan D\u0142ugosz in his account of the crowning of King Casimir IV (r. 1447\u20131492), but it was probably first used in a coronation ceremony by King Ladislaus the Short (r. 1288\u20131333) in 1320, by which time he had reunited most of the core territories of Poland. If Szczerbiec had previously belonged to his uncle, Boleslaus I of Masovia, or his father-in-law, Boleslaus the Pious, then he could have inherited it. If it had belonged to any of the two Boleslauses who had ruled from Krak\u00f3w as high dukes of all Poland, then Ladislaus could have simply found it in the Wawel Cathedral. Thereafter, Szczerbiec became an integral part of the Polish Crown Jewels, shared their fate, and was the principal ceremonial sword used in coronations of all Polish kings until 1764, except Jogaila (1386), Stephen B\u00e1thory (1576), Stanislaus I Leszczy\u0144ski (1705), and Augustus III Wettin (1734).\nSzczerbiec, together with other crown jewels, was removed from the Wawel Hill on several occasions during that period. After his Polish coronation in 1370, King Louis I of Hungary took the crown jewels with him to Buda; his successor on the Hungarian throne, Emperor Sigismund, rendered them to Poland in 1412. On two occasions, in mid-17th and early 18th centuries, they were evacuated across Poland's southern border to protect them from invading Swedish armies. In 1733, during the War of the Polish Succession, supporters of King Stanislaus I concealed the jewels in a Warsaw church for three years to prevent Augustus III from using them in his coronation. In 1764, they were sent to Warsaw again, to be used in a coronation for the last time \u2013 that of Stanislaus Augustus Poniatowski. They were returned to Krak\u00f3w afterwards.\nDuring a typical Polish coronation ceremony in the times of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, the king-elect received Szczerbiec after his anointment and before being crowned and enthroned. The primate of Poland, that is the archbishop of Gniezno, picked up the unsheathed sword from the altar and handed it to the kneeling king. At the same time, he recited a formula which asked the monarch to use the sword to rule justly, defend the Church, fight evil, protect widows and orphans, and to \"rebuild what is damaged, maintain what is rebuilt, avenge what is unjust, reinforce what is well managed,\" etc. Then, the king handed the sword to the Crown sword-bearer (\"miecznik koronny\"), who slid it into the scabbard and passed on to the primate. The primate, aided by the Crown and Lithuanian sword-bearers, fastened the scabbard to the king's belt. The king stood up and, facing onlookers, withdrew Szczerbiec, made three times the sign of the cross with it, and wiped it against his left arm before replacing it in the scabbard. The king's sword-wielding abilities were closely watched by his new subjects during this part of the ritual. When Augustus III betrayed his poor fencing skills at his coronation, nobles joked that they were going to have \"a peaceful lord\". After Szczerbiec, a bishop handed the sovereign the Grunwald Swords symbolizing the monarch's reign over the two constituent nations of the Commonwealth.\nThroughout the period from Casimir the Great (r. 1333\u20131370) to Stanislaus Augustus, Polish crown jewels were commonly believed to date back to the times of Boleslaus the Brave. This conviction helped maintain a sense of continuity of Polish statehood and provide legitimacy for the nation's kings, implicitly making each Polish monarch a successor of the ancient and glorious legacy of the first king of the House of Piast. Accordingly, the coronation sword took over the name and the legend of the original Szczerbiec. The corrosion-induced slit in the blade became associated with the fabled \"szczerba\", or notch that Boleslaus had purportedly made on his sword in Kiev. The power of tradition was so strong that when Stanislaus Augustus's court painter, Marcello Bacciarelli, who had made detailed studies of Polish crown jewels, painted an imaginary portrait of Boleslaus the Brave, he chose to depict Szczerbiec so that its appearance agreed with legend rather than reality. The images of the coronation crown and sword are overall meticulously accurate, but Bacciarelli's Szczerbiec lacks the slit and has a chipped edge instead.\nIn foreign hands.\nIn 1794, during the failed Ko\u015bciuszko Uprising which led to the final partition of Poland a year later, Prussian troops captured Krak\u00f3w. In the following year, on King Frederick William II's orders, the treasure vault of the Wawel Castle was looted and the crown jewels taken to Breslau (now Wroc\u0142aw in Poland), then to Berlin, and finally to K\u00f6nigsberg (now Kaliningrad in Russia). Between 1809 and 1811 most of the jewels were melted down, but some, including Szczerbiec, were put up for sale. The coronation sword was acquired by the future Russian minister of justice, Prince Dmitry Lobanov-Rostovsky, who probably hoped to resell it to one of Polish aristocrats. In 1819, he approached General Wincenty Krasi\u0144ski, speaker of the Sejm (parliament) of the \"Congress\" Kingdom of Poland. The prince did not disclose the actual source of the sword and claimed to have bought it in Moscow from an Armenian merchant who had found the weapon somewhere between Belgrade and Rus\u00e7uk (now Ruse in Bulgaria) during the recent Russo-Turkish War. Krasi\u0144ski, who was a known antique weapon collector, suspected it could be Szczerbiec, but asked Prof. Sebastiano Ciampi, a historian of the Warsaw University, for opinion. Ciampi examined the lithography Krasi\u0144ski had had made of the sword, but was unsure whether it was the actual Szczerbiec. As a consequence, Krasi\u0144ski declined Lobanov-Rostovsky's offer.\nLobanov-Rostovsky ultimately sold Szczerbiec to Prince Anatoly Demidov, who kept it together with the rest of the Demidov collection in his Villa San Donato near Florence. In 1870, the sword was bought for 20,000 French francs by Alexander Basilevsky, Russian ambassador to France and great art collector. In 1878, he displayed Szczerbiec at the World's Fair in Paris. By that time, the scabbard had been lost and the sword itself was presented as of Teutonic origin. It was seen by several Polish visitors who speculated whether it could be the Polish coronation sword. In 1884, the entire Basilevsky collection was purchased by Emperor Alexander III of Russia for the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg. Both Polish and other experts at the time expressed doubts as to the authenticity of Szczerbiec held in Russia's largest museum \"(see Historical replicas below)\". An international museum congress held in Saint Petersburg in 1913 pronounced the sword a 17th-century replica.\nIn 1917, as a result of the October Revolution, Russia became a communist state. In the aftermath of World War I, Poland reemerged as an independent country in the following year. From 1919 to 1921, the two states fought the Polish\u2013Soviet War which was concluded with the Peace of Riga. Article 11 of the peace treaty required that the Soviet side return all culturally significant collections and items that had been removed from Poland since the First Partition in 1772. A special bilateral committee was set up to carry out the restitution of cultural goods. In 1928, the committee's efforts resulted in the return to Poland of, among other national treasures, Szczerbiec, which, after 133 years, was deposited back in the Wawel Castle.\nEvacuation in World War II.\nOn 3 September 1939, two days after Germany invaded Poland triggering the Second World War, began the evacuation of the most precious national treasures, including Szczerbiec, from the Wawel Castle. The cargo was transported on barges, wagons, buses and trucks to Romania. From there, it was shipped by sea to France and later to Britain. On the way from Bordeaux to Falmouth, the ship carrying Polish national treasures came under fire from the Luftwaffe. Karol Estreicher, who oversaw the evacuation, decided then to remove Szczerbiec from a chest and sandwich it between two wooden planks, and to attach to them an explanatory message in a bottle \u2013 so that in the event that the ship was sunk, at least the coronation sword could be salvaged. When the German bombing of Britain began in July 1940, the valuables were transported aboard the Polish ocean liner MS \"Batory\" to Canada and finally deposited at the Polish consulate and then other locations in Ottawa. After the war, one of the custodians of the national treasures, who remained loyal to the London-based Polish government-in-exile, was reluctant to return them to Poland, which had fallen under communist rule and Soviet influence. After lengthy negotiations, the first batch of the most important objects, including Szczerbiec, was ultimately returned in 1959; the rest followed in 1961. Since then, the Polish coronation sword has been on permanent display in the treasure vault of the Wawel Castle.\nHistorical replicas.\nA treasury inventory of the Radziwi\u0142\u0142 family's Nie\u015bwie\u017c Castle (now Nesvizh in Belarus) made in 1740 includes a detailed description of a sword decorated with symbols of the Evangelists and inscriptions identical to those on Szczerbiec. According to the inventory, it was a gift from Crown Prince Jakub Sobieski to Prince Micha\u0142 Radziwi\u0142\u0142, but the original source of the supposed replica was not given. An inventory made in 1738 of the treasure vault of the Sobieski family's \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiew Castle (now Zhovkva in Ukraine) mentions \"an estoc (\"koncerz\") covered with golden plates bearing images of the Four Evangelists; Skanderbek's.\" Based on this record, historian Aleksander Czo\u0142owski hypothesized that a replica of Szczerbiec was forged as early as 1457 and awarded to George Kastrioti Skanderbeg, the national leader of Albania, in recognition of his victory over the Ottoman forces (see Battle of Uj\u00ebbardha). After King John III Sobieski defeated the Ottomans in the Battle of Vienna in 1683, Albanians presumably returned the sword to him. His son, Jakub, possibly passed it on to Micha\u0142 Radziwi\u0142\u0142 as a present.\nThere are doubts, however, whether the swords known to have been at \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiew in 1738 and at Nie\u015bwie\u017c two years later, were in fact the same sword. The Radziwi\u0142\u0142s' castle was plundered by the Russian army in 1812 and the subsequent fate of their replica of Szczerbiec is unknown. This fact cast doubts over the authenticity of Szczerbiec held in the Hermitage. Some experts suspected that the sword possessed by the Russian imperial museum was in fact the Nie\u015bwie\u017c replica, not part of the original royal insignia.\nAnother historically notable replica of Szczerbiec was produced probably in Dresden, Saxony, at the time when the original was in Prussian hands. It is modest and inexact; the handle is carved in bovine bone and the niello is imitated with black paint. Designs on the handle are patterned on those of the genuine Szczerbiec, except that the crosses and letters on the pommel were replaced with the coat of arms of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. The blade was initially shorter than that of the original, actually typical for a stiletto. It was purchased in Dresden by art historian Edward Rastawiecki, who in 1869 donated it to the archeological collection of the Jagiellonian University of Krak\u00f3w. The university lost it during the German occupation in World War II. After the war, the replica found itself in the hands of Tadeusz Janowski who smuggled it to the United States in 1947. At around that time, the short stiletto blade was replaced with a long blade of a 16th-century German sword. To imitate Szczerbiec, a slit was cut in the blade and small heraldic shields were attached to it on both sides. During the communist rule in Poland, the Polish American community of Chicago treated the replica as a symbol of Poland's independence. In 1968, it was demonstrated to U.S. Senator Robert F. Kennedy while he was meeting with Polish Americans during his presidential campaign. Janowski returned the sword to the Jagiellonian University in 2003.\nModern symbolism.\nIn the interwar period, a simplified image of Szczerbiec wrapped three times in a white-and-red ribbon was adopted as a symbol of Polish nationalist organizations led by Roman Dmowski \u2013 the Camp of Great Poland (\"Ob\u00f3z Wielkiej Polski\"), the National Party (\"Stronnictwo Narodowe\"), and the All-Polish Youth (\"M\u0142odzie\u017c Wszechpolska\"). Their members wore it as a badge called \"Mieczyk Chrobrego\", or \"Little Sword of [Boleslaus] the Brave\". The symbol was also sewn onto the left sleeve of the sand shirt which was part of the Camp of Great Poland uniform. Among the politicians who wore the badge before World War II were Roman Dmowski, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Grabski, Wojciech Korfanty, Roman Rybarski, and Wojciech Jaruzelski. It was banned in 1938 during the \"Sanation\" period. During World War II, the badge was used by right-wing anti-Nazi and anti-Soviet military resistance groups, the National Armed Forces (\"Narodowe Si\u0142y Zbrojne\") and the National Military Organization (\"Narodowa Organizacja Wojskowa\"). After the fall of communism in Poland, the \"Mieczyk Chrobrego\" symbol was readopted by new or reactivated nationalist and far-right organizations, including League of Polish Families (\"Liga Polskich Rodzin\"), All-Polish Youth and the Camp of Great Poland. Additionally, \"Szczerbiec\" is the title of a periodical published since 1991 by a minor radical nationalist party, the National Revival of Poland (\"Narodowe Odrodzenie Polski\").\nIn 2005, the Polish Football Association, in an attempt to fight racism among Polish football fans, prepared a blacklist of most common racist and fascist symbols to be banned from Polish football stadiums. The catalog, co-authored by independent anti-fascist organization Never Again (\"Nigdy Wi\u0119cej\"), listed the \"Mieczyk Chrobrego\" as one of the extreme right symbols that are often displayed at the Polish stadiums. The catalog listed other racist and fascist symbols like the Nazi swastika, the Celtic cross, and the Confederate Flag. After a protest by MEP Sylwester Chruszcz of the League of Polish Families, additional consultations were held with historians, academic researchers and other experts and as a result the symbol is still listed in the catalog of extreme-right symbols banned at Polish football stadiums. It was also banned by UEFA during Euro 2008 and 2012.\nThe symbolic use of Szczerbiec became a bone of contention again in 2009. After a monument to the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (\"Ukrayins'ka Povstans'ka Armiya\") on the Chryszczata Mountain in southeastern Poland was vandalized, authorities of the Ukrainian city of Lviv demanded the removal of an image of Szczerbiec from the local Polish military cemetery. The Ukrainians, recalling the legendary use of the original sword in a Polish invasion of Kiev, argued it was a Polish nationalist, militaristic and anti-Ukrainian symbol.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39742", "revid": "22105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39742", "title": "Pilbara Iron", "text": "Mining company\nPilbara Iron manages assets for Hamersley Iron Pty Ltd, a subsidiary of Rio Tinto, and Robe River Iron Associates, an unincorporated joint venture between Rio Tinto (53%) and Japanese steel companies Mitsui Iron Ore Development (33%) and Nippon Steel (14%).\nAll of these companies are involved in the mining of iron ore, predominantly from the Pilbara region of Western Australia.\nAll of these companies are involved in the mining of iron ore, predominantly from the Pilbara region of Western Australia.\nIn 2004, it was announced that Hamersley and Robe River would merge their operations as Pilbara Iron. The concept had been tested by the formation of Pilbara Rail in 2001, which generated more than $16 million in savings. Pilbara Rail was folded into Pilbara Iron in 2005. Each company continues to market products separately and retains ownership and profits from the underlying mines, as well as strategic development of their own mineral resources.\nCurrent mine sites.\nMine sites currently operating:\nAll iron ore mined at the sites is transported on the Hamersley &amp; Robe River railway, one of the world's largest privately owned railways to Dampier and Cape Lambert. From there the ore is shipped across the world, with China and Japan the largest markets as of 2007.\nHistorical events.\nJuly 1962: Hamersley Holdings Pty Ltd is formed to develop deposits in the Hamersley Range.\nSeptember 1962: Thomas Moore Price dies shortly after receiving news of the discovery of promising deposits at what would later be called Mount Tom Price.\nAugust 1963, Hamersley Holdings Pty Ltd, a subsidiary owned by Conzinc-Riotinto of Australia (60%) and Kaiser Steel (40%), signed a 30-year agreement with the Government of Western Australia for the development of iron ore leases held by the company and for the eventual establishment of an integrated iron and steel industry. The $175 million over 30 years program was established in anticipation of supplying iron ore to the Japanese steel industry.\nFebruary 1964: a proposal is announced for Hamersley Iron to export 65 million tons over 15 years starting in 1967 to the Japanese steel industry. Reserves estimated at five billion tons of 50% to 66% by Kaiser Steel. Ten involved Japanese steel works cited in the \"Iron Age\" article.\n1964: Japanese firms sign contract to buy five million tons from the Western Mining Corporation for $69 million with deliveries to start in 1966.\nJanuary 1965: Hamersley Iron signed a contract to sell over a 15-year period starting in 1966 65.5 million tons at a price of $600 million. A 176-mile railway line and a port at King Bay for ore carriers up to 100,000 tons was to be constructed. Mount Goldsworthy Mining Associated, a joint venture of Cyprus Mines Corporation of Los Angeles, Utah Construction Company of San Francisco, Consolidated Gold Fields of London, signed a $164 million contract for 16.5 million tons of Western Australia ore with Japanese buyers. Also a $60 million contract for pellets from Tasmania to Japan was signed at the time. Reported as an 82 million tons, $757 million over 17-year contract by \"International Commerce\".\nJune 1965: Hamersley Iron agreed to sell 16 million tons of iron ore pellets to Japan at one million tons per year and planned to build a pelletizing plant at King Bay.\nAugust 1965: Hamersley agreed to sell to Kobe Steel $16 million worth of low grade iron ore from Mount Tom Price bringing the total in sales contracts to $825 million.\nIn June 1979, Kaiser Steel sold its 28% shareholding in Hamersley Holdings to Conzinc Riotinto for $207.5 million, bringing the Rio Tinto share of the company to 82%.\nFilm \"Red Dog\".\nThe film \"Red Dog\", based on stories about an actual wandering dog of the Pilbara region, was made at Hamersley Iron locations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39744", "revid": "1312107331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39744", "title": "Lullingstone Roman Villa", "text": "Roman villa in Britain\nLullingstone Roman Villa is a villa built during the Roman occupation of Britain, situated in Lullingstone near the village of Eynsford in Kent, south-eastern England. The villa is located in the Darent Valley, along with six others, including those at Crofton, Crayford and Dartford. Constructed in the 1st century, perhaps around AD\u00a080\u201390, the house was repeatedly expanded and occupied until it was destroyed by fire in the 4th or 5th century. The villa was occupied over various periods within the Romano-British period, but after its destruction, it is only thought to have been reoccupied during the medieval period. The occupants were most likely wealthy Romans or native Britons who had adopted Roman customs.\nSome evidence found on site suggests that in around 150, the villa was considerably enlarged and may have been used as the country retreat of the governors of the Roman province of Britannia. Two sculpted marble busts found in the cellar may be those of Pertinax, governor in 185\u2013186, and his father-in-law, Publius Helvius Successus. In the 4th century a room, probably already in religious use, was converted to a Christian chapel or house church, much the earliest known in the British Isles.\nIn the Anglo-Saxon period, the ruins of a Roman temple-mausoleum on the site of the villa were incorporated into a Christian chapel (Lullingstone Chapel) that was extant at the time of the Norman Conquest, one of the earliest known chapels in the country.\nIn addition to the pagan shrine in the villa's chapel and the dining room mosaics, the villa produced significant artistic finds including the Lullingstone Victory Gem and the busts.\nHistory.\nConstruction.\nThe earliest part of the villa was built around AD\u00a082. It was situated in an area near to several other villas, and was close to Watling Street, a Roman road by which travellers could move to and from Londinium, Durobrivae, Durovernum Cantiacorum, and the major Roman port of Rutupiae (i.e., London, Rochester, Canterbury, and Richborough, respectively).\nEnlargement.\nAround 150 AD the villa was expanded and a heated bath block with hypocaust was added, but it was later rebuilt around 290 AD after being abandoned for almost a century. Two marble busts from the 2nd century found in the cellar perhaps depict the owners or residents of the villa, which may have been the designated country retreat of the provincial governors. There is some evidence that the busts are those of Pertinax, governor of Britannia in 185\u2013186 (and later Roman emperor in 193), and his father.\nIn the 3rd century, a larger furnace for the hypocaust as well as an expanded bath block were added, as were a temple-mausoleum and a large granary. In the 4th century, the dining room was equipped with a fine mosaic floor with one illustration of Zeus or Jupiter, disguised as a bull, abducting Europa and a second depicting Bellerophon killing the Chimera.\nDestruction and rediscovery.\nSometime early in the 5th century, a fire destroyed the building, and it was abandoned and forgotten until its excavation in the 20th century.\nThe first discovery of the site was made in 1750, when workers fencing a deer park dug post holes through a mosaic floor. While the discovery and some additional evidence was noted, no further excavation took place.\nIt wasn't until 1939 that the ruins of the villa were rediscovered by E. Greensfield and E. Birchenough when they noticed evidence of Roman walls and mosaic fragments beneath a blown-down tree. In the mid-20th century (1949\u20131961) the site was finally excavated by multiple teams of archaeologists. Until this first excavation, the villa and the rest of the Lullingstone ruins had remained untouched since its destruction. The ruins themselves were preserved under a specially designed cover in the 1960s, when the villa was taken over by English Heritage, who opened the ruins to the public. The building began to leak late in the 20th century and required a major \u00a31.8m renovation and display project in 2006 to 2008 so artefacts from the Lullingstone site could be safely displayed within it.\nIn his excavation reports, Lieutenant-Colonel G. W. Meates covers the initial excavation of the site, including the discovery of the boundaries of the villa, coin and pottery evidence, and various rooms that were discovered. In the two earliest reports, Meates creates a rough timeline of the Lullingstone Villa ranging from the 1st century AD until the Post-Roman periods, including its purposes, room construction, abandonment, and its final destruction. In addition to the timeline and room descriptions, there are also detailed reports of the evidence found, such as pottery, coins, and soil and clay levels which indicate the time periods in which the villa is being observed.\nEras of occupation.\n1st century.\nDuring the original excavations of the site in the 1950s, evidence from various centuries was discovered, creating a timeline for the villa. The earliest evidence comes from the 1st century AD. Many shards of pottery were found on the slope that the excavation site was located on. The shards found are considered to be hand-made with elements of \"Belgic culture\".\n2nd century: the Flavian to Antonine period.\nAt the original excavation, the full extent of the house built and maintained during the Flavian dynasty to the Nerva-Antonine dynasty was unknown. However, it is thought that the Bath Room and the Basement Room may have been built during this era. From geological evidence, such as different layers of clay, it is suggested that the few stairs leading to the basement were built during this period rather than the 4th century, as originally thought.\n3rd century.\nBased on pottery evidence, it is thought that the Lullingstone Roman Villa was abandoned for at least the first half of the 3rd century AD. Coins found at the site provide evidence that the occupation of the villa resumed sometime during the last half of the 3rd century during the reigns of Claudius II and Allectus. It is thought that the pagan shrine and other Christian rooms were constructed during this era after the period of abandonment. In addition to the Christian elements that were added to the villa, the 3rd century was also when some of the villa's main external buildings, including the granary and the temple, were constructed.\n4th century.\nThe 4th century was an eventful era for the villa, with large renovations taking place, and probably the fire. Some of the renovations of the villa include the designing of the mosaic floor in Room 5 and the construction of another room. Excavators were able to date the construction of the mosaic floor in Room 5 using coins depicting Constantine II that were accidentally mixed into the concrete.\nPost-Roman period.\nAt the initial excavation in the 1950s, there was no evidence that suggested occupation of the villa or its site from its destruction until at least medieval times. From English Heritage, there is documentation of some findings including a \"hanging bowl\" and other Anglo-Saxon potsherds. This evidence suggests that the site may have been used as a burial ground in early Anglo-Saxon Britain.\nRooms.\nDining room.\nRooms 12 and 13, previously known as Rooms 9 and 10, include the dining room, or \"triclinium\", which was situated in the centre of the main building. As the largest room in the villa on the western side, it connected all other rooms to the north and south together via a large verandah. The dining room was highly decorated with a pair of large mosaics on the floor dating to the mid-4th century. One depicts the abduction of the princess Europa by the god Jupiter or Zeus who is disguised as a bull, whilst the other depicts Bellerophon slaying the Chimera, whilst surrounded by four sea creatures, including dolphins. In each of the four corners of the Bellerophon mosaic there is a bust of the seasons personified including winter, spring, summer, and autumn. Surrounding these mosaics were smaller images depicting hearts, crosses and swastikas. Even though these artworks are usually only seen as depictions of myth, it is also thought by some scholars that these works were meant to ward off the evil eye. Based on the artwork and the shape of the apse, it is thought that this room was also meant for entertaining. With the measurements of the apse being 6.25 metres by 4.88 metres at its largest points, the dining room was spacious, with potentially enough room to contain a couch. The couch, usually able to seat three people, would have been 1.5 metres to 2 metres in width, and directly facing the mosaic artwork so that it could be viewed in the correct orientation by all visitors.\nBath Wing.\nThought to have been constructed in the Flavian\u2013Antonine period, the Bath Wing was renovated and constantly used throughout the villa's existence. After the abandonment of the villa for almost a century, the Bath Wing was renovated, though the details of renovations are not mentioned. During the initial excavations, it was noted that the Bath Wing contained what G. W. Meates called a \"combustion chamber\". This chamber, filled with chalk, also shows evidence of burned charcoal that may have been used for heating.\nBasement Room.\nDuring the original excavations of the site, it was thought that during its periods of use the Basement Room had multiple purposes, including as a garden room. It should also be noted that the term 'basement' cannot be interpreted to have the same meaning as the modern word. The walls of the room were highly decorated including orange, red, and green panels. Based on the archaeological and artistic evidence, the original height of the room is thought to have been 8 feet. When the villa was abandoned, the Basement Room was especially affected. Much of the walls and stairs were stripped of their materials, and were not replaced until the reoccupation of the villa. During the reoccupation, the walls of the Basement Room were redecorated and other details such as pottery were added. Partially destroyed by the fire, parts of the mosaic and the plaster from the room above fell into the Basement Room providing an abundance of intact evidence for the villa, which remained untouched until the beginning of the Lullingstone excavations in 1949.\nPagan shrine and Christian chapel.\nOne room of the building had been used as both a pagan shrine and, later, as a Christian chapel, one of the earliest in Britain. Along with the Christian chapel, there were three or four other rooms that were also used for Christian purposes including a possible Antechamber and a Vestibule.\nThe original pagan shrine room was dedicated to local water deities, and a wall painting depicting three water nymphs dating from this period can still be seen in a niche in the room.\nJust after the 3rd century, this niche had been covered over, as the whole room had been redecorated with white plaster painted with red bands, and two busts of male figures had been placed in the room. Some scholars have theorised that at this point the inhabitants focused their worship on household deities and ancestor spirits, largely abandoning the worship of the water deities.\nIn the 4th century the room above the pagan shrine was apparently converted to Christian use, with painted plaster on the walls, including a row of figures of standing worshipers (orans), and a characteristic Christian Chi-rho symbol. Some of the paintings are now on display in the British Museum.\nAccording to English Heritage, which maintains the site:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; The evidence of the Christian house-church is a unique discovery for Roman Britain and the wall paintings are of international importance. Not only do they provide some of the earliest evidence for Christianity in Britain, they are almost unique \u2013 the closest parallels come from a house-church in Dura Europus, Syria.\nPerhaps almost as remarkable as the discovery of the house-church is the possibility that pagan worship may have continued in the cult room below. What is not clear is whether this represented the family hedging their bets, trumpeting their apparent acceptance of Christianity, while trying to keep the old gods happy, or whether it represents some members of the family clinging to old beliefs in the face of the adoption of Christianity by others.The overall purpose of the chapel other than worship is not certain, but it is thought that it was used for \"liturgical worship\" such as baptisms. Based on the fact that the Christian artwork was large in size, K. S. Painter suggests that the owners of the villa at this time were not only Christians, but also wealthy.\nGraves.\nA Romano-Celtic temple-mausoleum complex was constructed around 300 AD to hold the bodies of two young people, those of a male and a female, in lead coffins. Although the young woman's coffin was robbed in antiquity, the other remained in situ and undisturbed, and is now on display at the site.\nArt and artefacts.\nThe Victory Gem.\nDiscovered during the initial excavations by G.W. Meates, the Victory Gem is a \"Roman cornelian intaglio\". Cornelian intaglios like this were normally set in rings, and based on its size, it is thought that its ring was large. Measuring 23 by 19 by 5\u00a0mm, it is one of the largest gems ever found in Britain. Considering the potential size of the ring and other remnants of precious metals on the gem, such as gold, Martin Henig suggests that the ring was once owned by a man that held both high status and wealth. The gem depicts personified Victory writing a message of triumph on a shield. It is thought that the gem has Greek characteristics as the artwork depicts elements of the goddesses Nike and Aphrodite.\nBusts.\nThe two marble busts found in the Basement Room are thought to represent Pertinax, governor in 185\u2013186, and his father, Publius Helvius Successus. Some scholars suggest that these two busts provide insight into who occupied the villa in at least the 2nd century. One of the busts is thought to date to the Hadrianic period. Though they are both quite well preserved, the second, and larger of the busts was more damaged when it was found during the initial excavations. According to excavation reports, it is not entirely certain why they were placed in the Basement Room. It was noted, however, that after the period of abandonment, those who reoccupied the villa may have decided to keep them for their own purposes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39745", "revid": "1121468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39745", "title": "Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse (disambiguation)", "text": "The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse are figures in the Book of Revelation in the New Testament of the Bible.\nFour Horsemen of the Apocalypse or Four Horsemen may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39747", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39747", "title": "Stomach", "text": "Digestive organ\nThe stomach is a muscular, hollow organ in the upper gastrointestinal tract of humans and many other animals, including several invertebrates. The Ancient Greek name for the stomach is \"gaster\" which is used as \"gastric\" in medical terms related to the stomach. The stomach has a dilated structure and functions as a vital organ in the digestive system. The stomach is involved in the gastric phase of digestion, following the cephalic phase in which the sight and smell of food and the act of chewing are stimuli. In the stomach a chemical breakdown of food takes place by means of secreted digestive enzymes and gastric acid. It also plays a role in regulating gut microbiota, influencing digestion and overall health.\nThe stomach is located between the esophagus and the small intestine. The pyloric sphincter controls the passage of partially digested food (chyme) from the stomach into the duodenum, the first and shortest part of the small intestine, where peristalsis takes over to move this through the rest of the intestines.\nStructure.\nIn the human digestive system, the stomach lies between the esophagus and the duodenum (the first part of the small intestine). It is in the left upper quadrant of the abdominal cavity. The top of the stomach lies against the diaphragm. Lying behind the stomach is the pancreas. A large double fold of visceral peritoneum called the greater omentum hangs down from the greater curvature of the stomach. Two sphincters keep the contents of the stomach contained; the lower esophageal sphincter (found in the cardiac region), at the junction of the esophagus and stomach, and the pyloric sphincter at the junction of the stomach with the duodenum.\nThe stomach is surrounded by parasympathetic (inhibitor) and sympathetic (stimulant) plexuses (networks of blood vessels and nerves in the anterior gastric, posterior, superior and inferior, celiac and myenteric), which regulate both the secretory activity of the stomach and the motor (motion) activity of its muscles.\nThe stomach is distensible, and can normally expand to hold about one litre of food. The shape of the stomach depends upon the degree of its distension and that of surrounding viscera, e.g. the colon. When empty, the stomach is somewhat J-shaped; when partially distended, it becomes pyriform in shape. In obese persons, it is more horizontal. In a newborn human baby the stomach will only be able to hold about 30 millilitres. The maximum stomach volume in adults is between 2 and 4 litres, although volumes of up to 15 litres have been observed in extreme circumstances.\nSections.\nThe human stomach can be divided into four sections, beginning at the cardia followed by the fundus, the body and the pylorus.\nThe cardia is defined as the region following the \"z-line\" of the gastroesophageal junction, the point at which the epithelium changes from stratified squamous to columnar. Near the cardia is the lower esophageal sphincter.\nAnatomical proximity.\nThe stomach bed refers to the structures upon which the stomach rests in mammals. These include the tail of the pancreas, splenic artery, left kidney, left suprarenal gland, transverse colon and its mesocolon, and the left crus of diaphragm, and the left colic flexure. The term was introduced around 1896 by Philip Polson of the Catholic University School of Medicine, Dublin. However this was brought into disrepute by surgeon anatomist J Massey.\nBlood supply.\nThe lesser curvature of the human stomach is supplied by the right gastric artery inferiorly and the left gastric artery superiorly, which also supplies the cardiac region. The greater curvature is supplied by the right gastroepiploic artery inferiorly and the left gastroepiploic artery superiorly. The fundus of the stomach, and also the upper portion of the greater curvature, is supplied by 5-7 short gastric arteries, which arise from the splenic artery.\nLymphatic drainage.\nThe two sets of gastric lymph nodes drain the stomach's tissue fluid into the lymphatic system through the intestinal lymph trunk, to the cisterna chyli.\nMicroanatomy.\nWall.\nLike the other parts of the gastrointestinal wall, the human stomach wall from inner to outer, consists of a mucosa, submucosa, muscular layer, subserosa and serosa.\nThe inner part of the stomach wall is the gastric mucosa a mucous membrane that forms the lining of the stomach. The membrane consists of an outer layer of columnar epithelium, a lamina propria, and a thin layer of smooth muscle called the muscularis mucosa. Beneath the mucosa lies the submucosa, consisting of fibrous connective tissue. Meissner's plexus is in this layer interior to the oblique muscle layer.\nOutside of the submucosa lies the muscular layer. It consists of three layers of muscular fibres, with fibres lying at angles to each other. These are the inner oblique, middle circular, and outer longitudinal layers. The presence of the inner oblique layer is distinct from other parts of the gastrointestinal tract, which do not possess this layer. The stomach contains the thickest muscular layer consisting of three layers, thus maximum peristalsis occurs here.\nThe \"outer longitudinal layer\" is responsible for moving the semi-digested food towards the pylorus of the stomach through muscular shortening.\nTo the outside of the muscular layer lies a serosa, consisting of layers of connective tissue continuous with the peritoneum.\nSmooth mucosa along the inside of the lesser curvature forms a passageway - the gastric canal that fast-tracks liquids entering the stomach, to the pylorus.\nGlands.\nThe mucosa lining the stomach is lined with gastric pits, which receive gastric juice, secreted by between 2 and 7 gastric glands. Gastric juice is an acidic fluid containing hydrochloric acid and digestive enzymes. The glands contains a number of cells, with the function of the glands changing depending on their position within the stomach.\nWithin the body and fundus of the stomach lie the \"fundic glands\". In general, these glands are lined by column-shaped cells that secrete a protective layer of mucus and bicarbonate. Additional cells present include parietal cells that secrete hydrochloric acid and intrinsic factor, chief cells that secrete pepsinogen (this is a precursor to pepsin- the highly acidic environment converts the pepsinogen to pepsin), and neuroendocrine cells that secrete serotonin.\nGlands differ where the stomach meets the esophagus and near the pylorus. Near the gastroesophageal junction lie \"cardiac glands\", which primarily secrete mucus. They are fewer in number than the other gastric glands and are more shallowly positioned in the mucosa. There are two kinds - either simple tubular glands with short ducts or compound racemose resembling the duodenal Brunner's glands. Near the pylorus lie \"pyloric glands\" located in the antrum of the pylorus. They secrete mucus, as well as gastrin produced by their G cells.\nGene and protein expression.\nAbout 20,000 protein-coding genes are expressed in human cells and nearly 70% of these genes are expressed in the normal stomach. Just over 150 of these genes are more specifically expressed in the stomach compared to other organs, with only some 20 genes being highly specific. The corresponding specific proteins expressed in stomach are mainly involved in creating a suitable environment for handling the digestion of food for uptake of nutrients. Highly stomach-specific proteins include gastrokine-1 expressed in the mucosa; pepsinogen and gastric lipase, expressed in gastric chief cells; and a gastric ATPase and gastric intrinsic factor, expressed in parietal cells.\nDevelopment.\nIn the early part of the development of the human embryo, the ventral part of the embryo abuts the yolk sac. During the third week of development, as the embryo grows, it begins to surround parts of the yolk sac. The enveloped portions form the basis for the adult gastrointestinal tract. The sac is surrounded by a network of vitelline arteries and veins. Over time, these arteries consolidate into the three main arteries that supply the developing gastrointestinal tract: the celiac artery, superior mesenteric artery, and inferior mesenteric artery. The areas supplied by these arteries are used to define the foregut, midgut, and hindgut. The surrounded sac becomes the primitive gut. Sections of this gut begin to differentiate into the organs of the gastrointestinal tract, and the esophagus, and stomach form from the foregut.\nAs the stomach rotates during early development, the dorsal and ventral mesentery rotate with it; this rotation produces a space anterior to the expanding stomach called the greater sac, and a space posterior to the stomach called the lesser sac. After this rotation the dorsal mesentery thins and forms the greater omentum, which is attached to the greater curvature of the stomach. The ventral mesentery forms the lesser omentum, and is attached to the developing liver. In the adult, these connective structures of omentum and mesentery form the peritoneum, and act as an insulating and protective layer while also supplying organs with blood and lymph vessels as well as nerves. Arterial supply to all these structures is from the celiac trunk, and venous drainage is by the portal venous system. Lymph from these organs is drained to the prevertebral celiac nodes at the origin of the celiac artery from the aorta.\nFunction.\nDigestion.\nIn the human digestive system, a bolus (a small rounded mass of chewed up food) enters the stomach through the esophagus via the lower esophageal sphincter. The stomach releases proteases (protein-digesting enzymes such as pepsin), and hydrochloric acid, which kills or inhibits bacteria and provides the acidic pH of 2 for the proteases to work. Food is churned by the stomach through peristaltic muscular contractions of the wall \u2013 reducing the volume of the bolus, before looping around the fundus and the body of stomach as the boluses are converted into chyme (partially digested food). Chyme slowly passes through the pyloric sphincter and into the duodenum of the small intestine, where the extraction of nutrients begins.\nGastric juice in the stomach contains pepsinogen and gastric acid, (hydrochloric acid) which activates this inactive form of enzyme into the active form, pepsin. Pepsin breaks down proteins into polypeptides.\nMechanical digestion.\nWithin a few moments after food enters the stomach, mixing waves begin to occur at intervals of approximately 20 seconds. A mixing wave is a unique type of peristalsis that mixes and softens the food with gastric juices to create chyme. The initial mixing waves are relatively gentle, but these are followed by more intense waves, starting at the body of the stomach and increasing in force as they reach the pylorus. \nThe pylorus, which holds around 30 mL of chyme, acts as a filter, permitting only liquids and small food particles to pass through the mostly, but not fully, closed pyloric sphincter. In a process called gastric emptying, rhythmic mixing waves force about 3 mL of chyme at a time through the pyloric sphincter and into the duodenum. Release of a greater amount of chyme at one time would overwhelm the capacity of the small intestine to handle it. The rest of the chyme is pushed back into the body of the stomach, where it continues mixing. This process is repeated when the next mixing waves force more chyme into the duodenum.\nGastric emptying is regulated by both the stomach and the duodenum. The presence of chyme in the duodenum activates receptors that inhibit gastric secretion. This prevents additional chyme from being released by the stomach before the duodenum is ready to process it.\nChemical digestion.\nThe fundus stores both undigested food and gases that are released during the process of chemical digestion. Food may sit in the fundus of the stomach for a while before being mixed with the chyme. While the food is in the fundus, the digestive activities of salivary amylase continue until the food begins mixing with the acidic chyme. Ultimately, mixing waves incorporate this food with the chyme, the acidity of which inactivates salivary amylase and activates lingual lipase. Lingual lipase then begins breaking down triglycerides into free fatty acids, and mono- and diglycerides.\nThe breakdown of protein begins in the stomach through the actions of hydrochloric acid, and the enzyme pepsin.\nThe stomach can also produce gastric lipase, which can help digesting fat.\nThe contents of the stomach are completely emptied into the duodenum within two to four hours after the meal is eaten. Different types of food take different amounts of time to process. Foods heavy in carbohydrates empty fastest, followed by high-protein foods. Meals with a high triglyceride content remain in the stomach the longest. Since enzymes in the small intestine digest fats slowly, food can stay in the stomach for 6 hours or longer when the duodenum is processing fatty chyme. However, this is still a fraction of the 24 to 72 hours that full digestion typically takes from start to finish.\nAbsorption.\nAlthough the absorption in the human digestive system is mainly a function of the small intestine, some absorption of certain small molecules nevertheless does occur in the stomach through its lining. This includes:\nThe parietal cells of the human stomach are responsible for producing intrinsic factor, which is necessary for the absorption of vitamin B12. B12 is used in cellular metabolism and is necessary for the production of red blood cells, and the functioning of the nervous system.\nControl of secretion and motility.\nChyme from the stomach is slowly released into the duodenum through coordinated peristalsis and opening of the pyloric sphincter. The movement and the flow of chemicals into the stomach are controlled by both the autonomic nervous system and by the various digestive hormones of the digestive system:\nOther than gastrin, these hormones all act to turn off the stomach action. This is in response to food products in the liver and gall bladder, which have not yet been absorbed. The stomach needs to push food into the small intestine only when the intestine is not busy. While the intestine is full and still digesting food, the stomach acts as storage for food.\nOther.\nEpidermal growth factor (EGF) results in cellular proliferation, differentiation, and survival. EGF is a low-molecular-weight polypeptide first purified from the mouse submandibular gland, but since then found in many human tissues including the submandibular gland, and the parotid gland. Salivary EGF, which also seems to be regulated by dietary inorganic iodine, also plays an important physiological role in the maintenance of oro-esophageal and gastric tissue integrity. The biological effects of salivary EGF include healing of oral and gastroesophageal ulcers, inhibition of gastric acid secretion, stimulation of DNA synthesis, and mucosal protection from intraluminal injurious factors such as gastric acid, bile acids, pepsin, and trypsin and from physical, chemical, and bacterial agents.\nThe human stomach has receptors responsive to sodium glutamate and this information is passed to the lateral hypothalamus and limbic system in the brain as a palatability signal through the vagus nerve. The stomach can also sense, independently of tongue and oral taste receptors, glucose, carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. This allows the brain to link nutritional value of foods to their tastes.\nThis syndrome defines the association between thyroid disease and chronic gastritis, which was first described in the 1960s. This term was coined also to indicate the presence of thyroid autoantibodies or autoimmune thyroid disease in patients with pernicious anemia, a late clinical stage of atrophic gastritis. In 1993, a more complete investigation on the stomach and thyroid was published, reporting that the thyroid is, embryogenetically and phylogenetically, derived from a primitive stomach, and that the thyroid cells, such as primitive gastroenteric cells, migrated and specialized in uptake of iodide and in storage and elaboration of iodine compounds during vertebrate evolution. In fact, the stomach and thyroid share iodine-concentrating ability and many morphological and functional similarities, such as cell polarity and apical microvilli, similar organ-specific antigens and associated autoimmune diseases, secretion of glycoproteins (thyroglobulin and mucin) and peptide hormones, the digesting and readsorbing ability, and lastly, similar ability to form iodotyrosines by peroxidase activity, where iodide acts as an electron donor in the presence of H2O2. In the following years, many researchers published reviews about this syndrome.\nClinical significance.\nDiseases.\nA series of radiographs can be used to examine the stomach for various disorders. This will often include the use of a barium swallow. Another method of examination of the stomach, is the use of an endoscope. A gastric emptying study is considered the gold standard to assess the gastric emptying rate.\nA large number of studies have indicated that most cases of peptic ulcers, and gastritis, in humans are caused by \"Helicobacter pylori\" infection, and an association has been seen with the development of stomach cancer.\nA stomach rumble is actually noise from the intestines.\nSurgery.\nIn humans, many bariatric surgery procedures involve the stomach, in order to lose weight. A gastric band may be placed around the cardia area, which can adjust to limit intake. The anatomy of the stomach may be modified, or the stomach may be bypassed entirely.\nSurgical removal of the stomach is called a gastrectomy, and removal of the cardia area is a called a cardiectomy. \"Cardiectomy\" is a term that is also used to describe the removal of the heart. A gastrectomy may be carried out because of gastric cancer or severe perforation of the stomach wall.\nFundoplication is stomach surgery in which the fundus is wrapped around the lower esophagus and stitched into place. It is used to treat gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).\nEtymology.\nThe word \"stomach\" is derived from Greek \"stomachos\" (), ultimately from \"stoma\" () 'mouth'. \"Gastro-\" and \"gastric\" (meaning 'related to the stomach') are both derived from Greek \"gaster\" () 'belly'.\nOther animals.\nAlthough the precise shape and size of the stomach varies widely among different vertebrates, the relative positions of the esophageal and duodenal openings remain relatively constant. As a result, the organ always curves somewhat to the left before curving back to meet the pyloric sphincter. However, lampreys, hagfishes, chimaeras, lungfishes, and some teleost fish have no stomach at all, with the esophagus opening directly into the intestine. These animals all consume diets that require little storage of food, no predigestion with gastric juices, or both.\nThe gastric lining is usually divided into two regions, an anterior portion lined by fundic glands and a posterior portion lined with pyloric glands. Cardiac glands are unique to mammals, and even then are absent in a number of species. The distributions of these glands vary between species, and do not always correspond with the same regions as in humans. Furthermore, in many non-human mammals, a portion of the stomach anterior to the cardiac glands is lined with epithelium essentially identical to that of the esophagus. Ruminants, in particular, have a complex four-chambered stomach. The first three chambers (rumen, reticulum, and omasum) are all lined with esophageal mucosa, while the final chamber functions like a monogastric stomach, which is called the abomasum.\nIn birds and crocodilians, the stomach is divided into two regions. Anteriorly is a narrow tubular region, the proventriculus, lined by fundic glands, and connecting the true stomach to the crop. Beyond lies the powerful muscular gizzard, lined by pyloric glands, and, in some species, containing stones that the animal swallows to help grind up food.\nIn insects, there is also a crop. The insect stomach is called the midgut.\nInformation about the stomach in echinoderms or molluscs can be found under the respective articles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
