{"id": "38568", "revid": "86247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38568", "title": "Konoe", "text": "Konoe (written: \u8fd1\u885b or \u8fd1\u885e) is a Japanese surname. It is sometimes spelled \"Konoye\" based on historical kana usage. Notable people with the surname include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "38569", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38569", "title": "1155", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1155 (MCLV) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38571", "revid": "150564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38571", "title": "Adenine", "text": "Chemical compound in DNA and RNA\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nAdenine (symbol A, or Ade) is a purine nucleotide base that is found in DNA, RNA, and ATP. Usually a white crystalline subtance. The shape of adenine is complementary and pairs to either thymine in DNA or uracil in RNA. In cells adenine, as an independent molecule, is rare. It is almost always covalently bound to become a part of a larger biomolecule.\nAdenine has a central role in cellular respiration. It is part of adenosine triphosphate which provides the energy that drives and supports most activities in living cells, such as protein synthesis, chemical synthesis, muscle contraction, and nerve impulse propagation. In respiration it also participates as part of the cofactors nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, flavin adenine dinucleotide, and Coenzyme A.\nIt is also part of adenosine, adenosine monophosphate, cyclic adenosine monophosphate, adenosine diphosphate, and S-adenosylmethionine.\nStructure.\nAdenine forms several tautomers, compounds that can be rapidly interconverted and are often considered equivalent. However, in isolated conditions, i.e. in an inert gas matrix and in the gas phase, mainly the 9H-adenine tautomer is found.\nBiosynthesis.\nPurine metabolism involves the formation of adenine and guanine. Both adenine and guanine are derived from the nucleotide inosine monophosphate (IMP), which in turn is synthesized from a pre-existing ribose phosphate through a complex pathway using atoms from the amino acids glycine, glutamine, and aspartic acid, as well as the coenzyme tetrahydrofolate.\nPatented August 20, 1968, the current recognized method of industrial-scale production of adenine involves heating formamide under 120 \u00b0C.\nFunction.\nAdenine is one of the two purine nucleobases (the other being guanine) used in forming nucleotides of the nucleic acids. In DNA, adenine binds to thymine via two hydrogen bonds to assist in stabilizing the nucleic acid structures. In RNA, which is used for protein synthesis, adenine binds to uracil.\nAdenine forms adenosine, a nucleoside, when attached to ribose, and deoxyadenosine when attached to deoxyribose. It forms adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a nucleoside triphosphate, when three phosphate groups are added to adenosine. Adenosine triphosphate is used in cellular metabolism as one of the basic methods of transferring chemical energy between chemical reactions. ATP is thus a derivative of adenine, adenosine, cyclic adenosine monophosphate, and adenosine diphosphate.\nHistory.\nIn older literature, adenine was sometimes called Vitamin B4, but is no longer considered a vitamin. Due to it being synthesized by the body and not essential to be obtained by diet, it does not meet the definition of vitamin and is no longer part of the Vitamin B complex. However, two B vitamins, niacin and riboflavin, bind with adenine to form the essential cofactors nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), respectively. Hermann Emil Fischer was one of the early scientists to study adenine.\nIt was named in 1885 by Albrecht Kossel after Greek \"\u1f00\u03b4\u03ae\u03bd\" aden \"gland\", in reference to the pancreas, from which Kossel's sample had been extracted.\nAdenine can be prepared from ammonia and hydrogen cyanide (HCN) in aqueous solution, a process that has implications for the origin of life on Earth.\nOn August 8, 2011, a report, based on NASA studies with meteorites found on Earth, was published suggesting building blocks of DNA and RNA (adenine, guanine and related organic molecules) may have been formed extraterrestrially in outer space. In 2011, physicists reported that adenine has an \"unexpectedly variable range of ionization energies along its reaction pathways\" which suggested that \"understanding experimental data on how adenine survives exposure to UV light is much more complicated than previously thought\"; these findings have implications for spectroscopic measurements of heterocyclic compounds, according to one report.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38572", "revid": "50664898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38572", "title": "1192", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1192 (MCXCII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar, the 1192nd year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 192nd year of the 2nd millennium, the 92nd year of the 12th century, and the 3rd year of the 1190s decade.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38574", "revid": "1907991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38574", "title": "1158", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1158 (MCLVIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38577", "revid": "2642856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38577", "title": "Hebron", "text": "City in the West Bank, Palestine\nHebron (, ) is a city in the southern West Bank, Palestine, and the capital of the Hebron Governorate, which is the largest in the West Bank. It is located south of Jerusalem. The population inside in the city limits is 201,063, while the adjacent metropolitan area within the governorate is home to over 700,000 people. Hebron spans across an area of . It is the third largest city in the country after Gaza and East Jerusalem. The city is often considered one of the Four Holy Cities in Judaism, as well as in Christianity and Islam.\nIt is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the Levant. According to the Bible, Abraham settled in Hebron and bought the Cave of the Patriarchs as burial place for his wife Sarah. Biblical tradition holds that the patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, along with their wives Sarah, Rebecca, and Leah, were buried in the cave. The city is also recognized in the Bible as the place where David was anointed king of Israel. Following the Babylonian captivity, the Edomites settled in Hebron. During the first century BCE, Herod the Great built the wall that still surrounds the Cave of the Patriarchs, which later became a church, and then a mosque. With the exception of a brief Crusader control, successive Muslim dynasties ruled Hebron from the 7th century CE until the Ottoman Empire's dissolution following World War I, when the city became part of British Mandatory Palestine.\nThe 1929 Hebron massacre of nearly 70 Jews and the Arab uprising of 1936\u201339 led the British government to evacuate the Jewish community from Hebron. The 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War saw the entire West Bank, including Hebron, occupied and annexed by Jordan, and since the 1967 Six-Day War, the city has been under Israeli control. Following Israeli occupation, Jewish presence was restored in the city. Since the 1997 Hebron Protocol, most of Hebron has been governed by the Palestinian National Authority. The city is often described as a \"microcosm\" of the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict and the Israeli occupation of the West Bank. The 1997 protocol divided the city into two sectors\u2014H1 Hebron, governed by the Palestinian National Authority, and H2 Hebron, occupied by Israeli authorities. All security arrangements and travel permits for local residents are coordinated between the Palestinian Authority and Israel via the COGAT. The Jewish settlers have their own governing municipal body, the Committee of the Jewish Community of Hebron.\nThe largest city in the southern West Bank, Hebron is a chief commercial and industrial center in the region. It is a busy hub of trade, generating roughly a third of the area's GDP, largely due to the sale of limestone from quarries in its area. Hebron has a local reputation for its grapes, figs, ceramics, plastics, pottery workshops, metalworking and glassblowing industry. The city is home to numerous shopping malls. The Old City of Hebron features narrow, winding streets, flat-roofed stone houses, and old bazaars. It is recognized as a World Heritage Site by the UNESCO. Hebron is also known as a regional educational and medical hub.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Hebron\" appears to trace back to two northwest Semitic languages, which coalesce in the form \"\u1e25br\", having reflexes in Hebrew and Amorite, with a basic sense of 'unite' and connoting a range of meanings from 'colleague' to 'friend'. In the proper name \"Hebron\", the original sense may have been 'alliance'.\nEarly Muslim sources refer to the city as \"\u1e24abra\" () or \"\u1e24abr\u016bn\" (). \"al-Khal\u012bl\" emerged as the Arabic name for the city in the 13th century, derived from the Qur'anic epithet for Abraham, \"Khal\u012bl al-Ra\u1e25m\u0101n\" ('Friend of the Merciful [ie. God]'). Thus, the epithet is a calque of the original Hebrew toponym \"\u1e24e\u1e07r\u014dn\", understood as \"\u1e25a\u1e07\u0113r\" ('friend').\nHistory.\nBronze and Iron Age.\nArchaeological excavations reveal traces of strong fortifications dated to the Early Bronze Age, covering some 24\u201330 dunams centered around Tel Rumeida. The city flourished in the 17th\u201318th centuries BCE before being destroyed by fire, and was resettled in the late Middle Bronze Age. This older Hebron was originally a Canaanite royal city. Abrahamic legend associates the city with the Hittites. It has been conjectured that Hebron might have been the capital of Shuwardata of Gath, an Indo-European contemporary of Jerusalem's regent, Abdi-\u1e2aeba, although the Hebron hills were almost devoid of settlements in the Late Bronze Age.\nAncient Israel.\nThe Abrahamic traditions associated with Hebron are nomadic. This may also reflect a Kenite element, since the nomadic Kenites are said to have long occupied the city, and \"Heber\" is the name for a Kenite clan. In the narrative of the later Hebrew conquest, Hebron was one of two centers under Canaanite control. They were ruled by the three sons of Anak (\"ben\u00ea/yel\u00eed\u00ea h\u0101\u02bf\u0103naq\"). or may reflect some Kenite and Kenizzite migration from the Negev to Hebron, since terms related to the Kenizzites appear to be close to Hurrian. This suggests that behind the Anakim legend lies some early Hurrian population. In Biblical lore they are represented as descendants of the Nephilim. The Book of Genesis mentions that it was formerly called Kiryath-arba, or \"city of four\", possibly referring to the four pairs or couples who were buried there, or four tribes, or four quarters, four hills, or a confederated settlement of four families.\nThe story of Abraham's purchase of the Cave of the Patriarchs from the Hittites constitutes a seminal element in what was to become the Jewish attachment to the land in that it signified the first \"real estate\" of Israel long before the conquest under Joshua. In settling here, Abraham is described as making his first covenant, an alliance with two local Amorite clans who became his \"ba'alei brit\" or \"masters of the covenant\".\nThe Hebron of the Israelites was centered on what is now known as Tel Rumeida, while its ritual center was located at Elonei Mamre. Hebrew Bible narrative also describes the city.\nIt is said to have been wrested from the Canaanites by either Joshua, who is said to have wiped out all of its previous inhabitants, \"destroying everything that drew breath, as the Lord God of Israel had commanded\", or the Tribe of Judah as a whole, or specifically Caleb the Judahite. The town itself, with some contiguous pasture land, is then said to have been granted to the Levites of the clan of Kohath, while the fields of the city, as well as its surrounding villages were assigned to Caleb (), who expels the three giants, Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai, who ruled the city. Later, the biblical narrative has King David called by God to relocate to Hebron and reign from there for some seven years (). It is there that the elders of Israel come to him to make a covenant before Elohim and anoint him king of Israel. It was in Hebron again that Absalom has himself declared king and then raises a revolt against his father David (). It became one of the principal centers of the Tribe of Judah and was classified as one of the six traditional Cities of Refuge.\nAs is shown by the discovery at Lachish, the second most important city in the Kingdom of Judah after Jerusalem, of seals with the inscription \"lmlk Hebron\" (to the king Hebron), Hebron continued to constitute an important local economic center, given its strategic position on the crossroads between the Dead Sea to the east, Jerusalem to the north, the Negev and Egypt to the south, and the Shepelah and the coastal plain to the west. Lying along trading routes, it remained administratively and politically dependent on Jerusalem for this period.\nAfter the destruction of the First Temple, most of the Jewish inhabitants of Hebron were exiled, and according to the conventional view, some researchers found traces of Edomite presence after the 5th\u20134th centuries BCE, as the area became Achaemenid province, and, in the wake of Alexander the Great's conquest, Hebron was throughout the Hellenistic period under the influence of Idumea (as the new area inhabited by the Edomites was called during the Persian, Hellenistic and Roman periods), as is attested by inscriptions for that period bearing names with the Edomite God Q\u014ds. Jews also appear to have lived there after the return from the Babylonian exile (). During the Maccabean revolt, Hebron was burnt and plundered by Judah Maccabee who fought against the Edomites in 167 BCE. The city appears to have long resisted Hasmonean dominance, however, and indeed as late as the First Jewish\u2013Roman War was still considered Idumean.\nRoman rule.\nThe present day city of Hebron was settled in the valley downhill from Tel Rumeida at the latest by Roman times. Herod the Great, king of Judea, built the wall that still surrounds the Cave of the Patriarchs. During the First Jewish\u2013Roman War, Hebron was captured and plundered by Simon Bar Giora, a leader of the Zealots, without bloodshed. The \"little town\" was later laid to waste by Vespasian's officer Sextus Vettulenus Cerialis. Josephus wrote that he \"slew all he found there, young and old, and burnt down the town\". After the suppression of the Bar Kokhba revolt in 135 CE, innumerable Jewish captives were sold into slavery at Hebron's Terebinth slave-market.\nThe city was part of the Byzantine Empire in Palaestina Prima province at the Diocese of the East. The Byzantine emperor Justinian I erected a Christian church over the Cave of Machpelah in the 6th century CE, which was later destroyed by the Sassanid general Shahrbaraz in 614 when Khosrau II's armies besieged and took Jerusalem. Jews were not permitted to reside in Hebron under Byzantine rule. The sanctuary itself however was spared by the Persians, in deference to the Jewish population, who were numerous in the Sassanid army.\nMuslim conquest and Islamic caliphate.\nHebron was one of the last cities of Palestine to fall to the Islamic invasion in the 7th century, possibly the reason why Hebron is not mentioned in any traditions of the Arab conquest. When the Rashidun Caliphate established its rule over Hebron in 638, the Muslims converted the Byzantine church at the site of Abraham's tomb into a mosque. It became an important station on the caravan trading route from Egypt, and also as a way-station for pilgrims making the yearly hajj from Damascus. After the fall of the city, Jerusalem's conqueror, Caliph Omar ibn al-Khattab permitted Jewish people to return and to construct a small synagogue within the Herodian precinct.\nCatholic bishop Arculf, who visited the Holy Land during the Umayyad period, described the city as unfortified and poor. In his writings he also mentioned camel caravans transporting firewood from Hebron to Jerusalem, which implies there was a presence of Arab nomads in the region at that time. Trade greatly expanded, in particular with Bedouins in the Negev (\"al-Naqab\") and the population to the east of the Dead Sea (\"Ba\u1e25r L\u016b\u1e6d\"). According to Anton Kisa, Jews from Hebron (and Tyre) founded the Venetian glass industry in the 9th century.\nHebron was almost absent from Muslim literature before the 10th century. In 985, al-Muqaddasi described Hebron (Habra) as the village of Abraham al-Khalil, with a strong fortress and a stone dome over Abraham's sepulchre. The mosque contained the tombs of Isaac, Jacob, and their wives. Surrounding the area were villages with vineyards producing exceptional grapes and apples. Hebron had a public guest house offering lentils and olive oil to both the poor and the rich. The guest house was established through the bequest of Prophet Muhammad's companions, including Tamim-al Dari, and received generous donations. It was highly regarded as an excellent house of hospitality and charity in the realm of al-Islam. The custom, known as the 'Table of Abraham' (\"sim\u0101t al-khalil\"), was similar to the one established by the Fatimids. In 1047, Nasir-i-Khusraw described Hebron in his Safarnama as having many villages providing revenues for pious purposes. He mentioned a spring flowing from under a stone, with water channeled to a covered tank outside the town. The Sanctuary stood on the town's southern border, enclosed by four walls. Barley was the primary crop, with abundant olives. Visitors were provided with bread, olives, lentils cooked in olive oil, and raisins. Hebron had numerous mills operated by oxen and mules, along with working girls baking bread. The hospitality extended to about three-pound loaves of bread and meals for every arriving person, including up to 500 pilgrims on certain days.\nThe tradition survives to this day in the form of the Takiat Ibrahim soup kitchen, which has been active in providing food for thousands over Ramadan, which coincided with food shortages during the 2024 Gaza war. Geniza documents from this period mention \"the graves of the patriarchs\" and attest to the presence of an organized Jewish community in Hebron. The Jews maintained a synagogue near the tomb and earned their livelihood accommodating Jewish pilgrims and merchants. During the Seljuk period, the community was headed by Saadia b. Abraham b. Nathan, known as the \"\"haver\" of the graves of the patriarchs.\"\nCrusader and Ayyubid period.\nThe Caliphate lasted in the area until 1099, when the Christian Crusader Godfrey de Bouillon took Hebron and renamed it \"Castellion Saint Abraham\". It was designated capital of the southern district of the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem and given, in turn, as the fief of Saint Abraham, to Geldemar Carpinel, the bishop Gerard of Avesnes, Hugh of Rebecques, Walter Mohamet and Baldwin of Saint Abraham. As a Frankish garrison of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, its defense was precarious being 'little more than an island in a Moslem ocean'. The Crusaders converted the mosque and the synagogue into a church. In 1106, an Egyptian campaign thrust into southern Palestine and almost succeeded the following year in wresting Hebron back from the Crusaders under Baldwin I of Jerusalem, who personally led the counter-charge to beat the Muslim forces off. In the year 1113 during the reign of Baldwin II of Jerusalem, according to Ali of Herat (writing in 1173), a certain part over the cave of Abraham had given way, and \"a number of Franks had made their entrance therein\". And they discovered \"(the bodies) of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob\", \"their shrouds having fallen to pieces, lying propped up against a wall...Then the King, after providing new shrouds, caused the place to be closed once more\". Similar information is given in Ibn at Athir's Chronicle under the year 1119; \"In this year was opened the tomb of Abraham, and those of his two sons Isaac and Jacob ...Many people saw the Patriarch. Their limbs had nowise been disturbed, and beside them were placed lamps of gold and of silver.\" The Damascene nobleman and historian Ibn al-Qalanisi in his chronicle also alludes at this time to the discovery of relics purported to be those of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, a discovery that excited eager curiosity among all three communities in Palestine, Muslim, Jewish, and Christian. Towards the end of the period of Crusader rule, in 1166 Maimonides visited Hebron and wrote,On Sunday, 9 Marheshvan (October 17), I left Jerusalem for Hebron to kiss the tombs of my ancestors in the Cave. On that day, I stood in the cave and prayed, praise be to God, (in gratitude) for everything.\nA royal domain, Hebron was handed over to Philip of Milly in 1161 and joined with the Seigneurie of Transjordan. A bishop was appointed to Hebron in 1168 and the new cathedral church of St Abraham was built in the southern part of the Haram. In 1167, the episcopal see of Hebron was created along with that of Kerak and Sebastia (the tomb of John the Baptist). In 1170, Benjamin of Tudela visited Hebron, referred to as in its Frankish name \"St. Abram de Bron\". He mentioned the great church called St. Abram, which was once a Jewish place of worship during the time of Muslim rule. The Gentiles had erected six tombs there, claimed to be those of Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Rebekah, Jacob, and Leah. The custodians collected money from pilgrims by presenting these tombs as the tombs of the Patriarchs. However, if a Jew offered a special reward, they would open an iron gate leading to a series of empty caves, until reaching the third cave where the actual sepulchers of the Patriarchs and Matriarchs were said to be located.\nThe Kurdish Muslim Saladin retook Hebron in 1187 \u2013 again with Jewish assistance according to one late tradition, in exchange for a letter of security allowing them to return to the city and build a synagogue there. The name of the city was changed back to \"Al-Khalil\". A Kurdish quarter still existed in the town during the early period of Ottoman rule. Richard the Lionheart retook the city soon after. Richard of Cornwall, brought from England to settle the dangerous feuding between Templars and Hospitallers, whose rivalry imperiled the treaty guaranteeing regional stability stipulated with the Egyptian Sultan As-Salih Ayyub, managed to impose peace on the area. But soon after his departure, feuding broke out and in 1241 the Templars mounted a damaging raid on what was, by now, Muslim Hebron, in violation of agreements.\nIn 1244, the Khwarazmians destroyed the town, but left the sanctuary untouched.\nMamluk period.\nIn 1260, after Mamluk Sultan Baibars defeated the Mongol army, the minarets were built onto the sanctuary. Six years later, while on pilgrimage to Hebron, Baibars promulgated an edict forbidding Christians and Jews from entering the sanctuary, and the climate became less tolerant of Jews and Christians than it had been under the prior Ayyubid rule. The edict for the exclusion of Christians and Jews was not strictly enforced until the middle of the 14th century and by 1490, not even Muslims were permitted to enter the caverns. The mill at Artas was built in 1307, and the profits from its income were dedicated to the hospital in Hebron. Between 1318 and 1320, the Na'ib of Gaza and much of coastal and interior Palestine ordered the construction of Jawli Mosque to enlarge the prayer space for worshipers at the Ibrahimi Mosque.\nHebron was visited by important rabbis over the next two centuries, among them Nachmanides (1270) and Ishtori HaParchi (1322) who noted the old Jewish cemetery there. Sunni imam Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya (1292\u20131350) was penalized by the religious authorities in Damascus for refusing to recognize Hebron as a Muslim pilgrimage site, a view also held by his teacher Ibn Taymiyyah. The Jewish-Italian traveler, Meshullam of Volterra (1481) found not more than twenty Jewish families living in Hebron. and recounted how the Jewish women of Hebron would disguise themselves with a veil in order to pass as Muslim women and enter the Cave of the Patriarchs without being recognized as Jews. Minute descriptions of Hebron were recorded in Stephen von Gumpenberg's Journal (1449), by Felix Fabri (1483) and by Mejr ed-Din It was in this period, also, that the Mamluk Sultan Qa'it Bay revived the old custom of the Hebron \"table of Abraham\", and exported it as a model for his own \"madrasa\" in Medina. This became an immense charitable establishment near the Haram, distributing daily some 1,200 loaves of bread to travelers of all faiths. The Italian rabbi Obadiah ben Abraham Bartenura wrote around 1490:I was in the Cave of Machpelah, over which the mosque has been built; and the Arabs hold the place in high honour. All the Kings of the Arabs come here to repeat their prayers, but neither a Jew nor an Arab may enter the Cave itself, where the real graves of the Patriarchs are; the Arabs remain above, and let down burning torches into it through a window, for they keep a light always burning there. . Bread and lentil, or some other kind of pulse (seeds of peas or beans), is distributed (by the Muslims) to the poor every day without distinction of faith, and this is done in honour of Abraham.\nEarly Ottoman period.\nThe expansion of the Ottoman Empire along the southern Mediterranean coast under sultan Selim I coincided with the establishment of Inquisition commissions by the Catholic Monarchs in Spain in 1478, which ended centuries of the Iberian \"convivencia\" (coexistence). The ensuing expulsions of the Jews drove many Sephardi Jews into the Ottoman provinces, and a slow influx of Jews to the Holy Land took place, with notable Sephardi kabbalists settling in Hebron. Over the following two centuries, there was a significant migration of Bedouin tribal groups from the Arabian Peninsula into Palestine. Many settled in three separate villages in the W\u0101d\u012b al-Khal\u012bl, and their descendants later formed the majority of Hebron.\nThe Jewish community fluctuated between 8\u201310 families throughout the 16th century, and suffered from severe financial straits in the first half of the century. In 1540, renowned kabbalist Malkiel Ashkenazi bought a courtyard from the small Karaite community, in which he established the Sephardic Abraham Avinu Synagogue. In 1659, Abraham Pereyra of Amsterdam founded the \"Hesed Le'Abraham yeshiva\" in Hebron, which attracted many students. In the early 18th century, the Jewish community suffered from heavy debts, almost quadrupling from 1717 to 1729, and were \"almost crushed\" from the extortion practiced by the Turkish pashas. In 1773 or 1775, a substantial amount of money was extorted from the Jewish community after a false allegation that the son of a local sheikh was murdered and thrown into a cesspit. Emissaries from the community were frequently sent overseas to solicit funds. During the Ottoman period, the dilapidated patriarchs' tombs were restored to a semblance of dignity. Ali Bey, in Muslim disguise, was one of the few Westerners to gain access. In 1807 he reported that the sepulchres were covered with carpets of green silk embroidered in gold and those of the wives were covered in red silk.The sultans of Constantinople furnished these carpets, which were renewed from time to time. Ali Bey counted nine, one over the other, on the sepulchre of Abraham. Hebron also became known for its glass production, based on Bedouin trade networks that brought up minerals from the Dead Sea. The industry is mentioned in travel literature in 19th century written by Western travelers to Palestine. Ulrich Jasper Seetzen noted during his travels in Palestine in 1808\u201309 that 150 persons were employed in the glass industry in Hebron, based on 26 kilns. In 1833, a report on the town in the weekly paper of the London-based Religious Tract Society wrote that Hebron had numerous well-provisioned shops and produced glass lamps which were exported to Egypt. Early 19th-century travelers also noted Hebron's flourishing agriculture. It was a major exporter of \"dibse\", grape sugar, from the famous Dabookeh grapestock characteristic of Hebron.\nAn Arab peasants' revolt broke out in April 1834 when Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt announced he would recruit troops from the local Muslim population. Hebron, headed by its nazir Abd ar-Rahman Amr, declined to supply its quota of conscripts for the army and suffered badly from the Egyptian campaign to crush the uprising. The town was invested and, when its defenses fell on August 4, it was sacked by Ibrahim Pasha's army. An estimated 500 Muslims from Hebron were killed in the attack and some 750 were conscripted. 120 youths were abducted and put at the disposal of Egyptian army officers. Most of the Muslim population managed to flee beforehand to the hills. Many Jews fled to Jerusalem, but during the general pillage of the town at least five were killed.\nWhen the government of Ibrahim Pasha fell in 1841, the local clan leader Abd ar-Rahman Amr once again resumed the reins of power as the Sheik of Hebron. Due to his extortionate demands for cash from the local population, most of the Jewish population fled to Jerusalem. In 1846, the Ottoman Governor-in-chief of Jerusalem (\"serasker\"), K\u0131br\u0131sl\u0131 Mehmed Emin Pasha, waged a campaign to subdue rebellious sheiks in the Hebron area, and while doing so, allowed his troops to sack the town. Though it was widely rumored that he secretly protected Abd ar-Rahman, the latter was deported together with other local leaders (such as Muslih al-'Azza of Bayt Jibrin), but he managed to return to the area in 1848.\nAccording to Hillel Cohen, the attacks on Jews in this particular period are an exception that proves the rule, that one of the easiest place for Jews to live in the world were in the various countries of the Ottoman Empire. In the mid-eighteenth century, rabbi Abraham Gershon of Kitov wrote from Hebron that:\"the gentiles here very much love the Jews. When there is a \"brit milah\" (circumcision ceremony) or any other celebration, their most important men come at night and rejoice with the Jews and clap hands and dance with the Jews, just like the Jews'.\"\nLate Ottoman period.\nBy 1850, the Jewish population consisted of 45\u201360 Sephardic families, some 40 born in the town, and a 30-year-old Ashkenazic community of 50 families, mainly Polish and Russian, the Lubavitch Hasidic movement having established a community in 1823. The ascendency of Ibrahim Pasha led to a decline in the local glass industry. His plan to build a Mediterranean fleet led to severe logging in Hebron's forests, making firewood for the kilns scarce. At the same time, Egypt began importing cheap European glass. The rerouting of the hajj from Damascus through Transjordan reduced traffic to Hebron, and the Suez Canal (1869) precipitated a drop in caravan trade. The consequence was a steady deterioration of the local economy. At the time, the town was divided into four quarters: the Ancient Quarter (\"Harat al-Kadim\") near the Cave of Machpelah; to its south, the Quarter of the Silk Merchant (\"Harat al-Kazaz\"), inhabited by Jews; the Mamluk-era Sheikh's Quarter (\"Harat ash Sheikh\") to the north-west; and further north, the Dense Quarter (\"Harat al-Harbah\").In 1855, the newly appointed Ottoman \"pasha\" (\"governor\") of the \"sanjak\" (\"district\") of Jerusalem, Kamil Pasha, attempted to put down a rebellion in the Hebron region. Kamil and his army marched towards Hebron in July 1855, a scene witnessed by representatives of the English, French and other Western consulates. After crushing all opposition, Kamil appointed Salama Amr, brother and rival of Abd al Rachman, as \"nazir\" of the Hebron region. Relative quiet reigned in the town for the next 4 years. In 1866, Hungarian Jews of the Karlin Hasidic court settled in Hebron. According to Nadav Shragai, Arab-Jewish relations were good, and Alter Rivlin, who spoke Arabic and Syrian-Aramaic, was appointed Jewish representative to the city council. During a severe drought in 1869\u20131871, food in Hebron sold for ten times the normal amount. From 1874, the Hebron district was administered directly from Istanbul as part of the Sanjak of Jerusalem. By 1874, when C.R. Conder visited Hebron under the auspices of the Palestine Exploration Fund, the Jewish community numbered 600 in an overall population of 17,000. The Jews lived in the Quarter of the Corner Gate. In the late 19th century the production of Hebron glass declined due to competition from imported European glassware, although it continued to be popular among those who could not afford luxury goods and was sold by Jewish merchants. Glass ornaments from Hebron were exhibited at the World Fair of 1873 in Vienna.\nA report from the consul of the French Consulate in Jerusalem in 1886 suggests that glass-making remained an important source of income for Hebron, with four factories earning 60,000 francs yearly. While the economy of other cities in Palestine was based on solely on trade, the economy of Hebron was more diverse, including agriculture and livestock herding, along with glassware manufacturing and processing of hides. This was because the most fertile lands were situated within the city limits. Even so, Hebron had an image of being unproductive and an \"asylum for the poor and the spiritual\". While the wealthy merchants of Nablus built fine mansions, housing in Hebron consisted of semi-peasant dwellings.\nHebron was described as 'deeply Bedouin and Islamic', and 'bleakly conservative' in its religious outlook, with a strong tradition of hostility to Jews. It had a reputation for religious zeal in jealously protecting its sites from Jews and Christians, although the Jewish and Christian communities seem to have been an integral part of the local economy. As income from commerce declined and tax revenues diminished significantly, the Ottoman government left Hebron to manage its own affairs for the most part, making it \"one of the most autonomous regions in late Ottoman Palestine.\" The Jewish community was under French protection until 1914. The Jewish presence itself was divided between the traditional Sephardi community, whose members spoke Arabic and adopted Arab dress, and the more recent influx of Ashkenazi Jews. They prayed in different synagogues, sent their children to different schools, lived in different quarters and did not intermarry. The community was largely Orthodox and anti-Zionist.\nBritish Mandate period.\nThe British occupied Hebron on December 8, 1917; governance transited to a mandate in 1920. Most of Hebron was owned by old Islamic charitable endowments (\"waqfs\"), with about 60% of all the land in and around Hebron belonging to the Tam\u012bm al-D\u0101r\u012b waqf. During the 1920s, Abd al-\u1e24ayy al-Kha\u1e6d\u012bb was appointed Mufti of Hebron. Before his appointment, he had been a staunch opponent of Haj Amin, supported the Muslim National Associations and had good contacts with the Zionists. Later, al-Kha\u1e6d\u012bb became one of the few loyal followers of Haj Amin in Hebron. During the late Ottoman period, a new ruling elite had emerged in Palestine. They later formed the core of the growing Arab nationalist movement in the early 20th century. During the Mandate period, delegates from Hebron constituted only 1 percent of the political leadership. The Palestinian Arab decision to boycott the 1923 elections for a Legislative Council was made at the fifth Palestinian Congress, after it was reported by Murshid Shahin (an Arab pro-Zionist activist) that there was intense resistance in Hebron to the elections. Almost no house in Hebron remained undamaged when an earthquake struck Palestine on July 11, 1927.\nThe Cave of the Patriarchs continued to remain officially closed to non-Muslims, and reports that entry to the site had been relaxed in 1928 were denied by the Supreme Muslim Council.\nAt this time following attempts by the Lithuanian government to draft yeshiva students into the army, the Lithuanian Hebron Yeshiva (Knesses Yisroel) relocated to Hebron, after consultations between Rabbi Nosson Tzvi Finkel, Yechezkel Sarna and Moshe Mordechai Epstein. and by 1929 had attracted some 265 students from Europe and the United States. The majority of the Jewish population lived on the outskirts of Hebron along the roads to Be'ersheba and Jerusalem, renting homes owned by Arabs, a number of which were built for the express purpose of housing Jewish tenants, with a few dozen within the city around the synagogues. During the 1929 Hebron massacre, Arab rioters slaughtered some 64 to 67 Jewish men, women and children and wounded 60, and Jewish homes and synagogues were ransacked; 435 Jews survived by virtue of the shelter and assistance offered them by their Arab neighbors, who hid them. Some Hebron Arabs, including Ahmad Rashid al-Hirbawi, president of Hebron chamber of commerce, supported the return of Jews after the massacre. Two years later, 35 families moved back into the ruins of the Jewish quarter, but on the eve of the Palestinian Arab revolt (April 23, 1936) the British Government decided to move the Jewish community out of Hebron as a precautionary measure to secure its safety. The sole exception was the 8th generation Hebronite Ya'akov ben Shalom Ezra, who processed dairy products in the city, blended in well with its social landscape and resided there under the protection of friends. In November 1947, in anticipation of the UN partition vote, the Ezra family closed its shop and left the city. Yossi Ezra has since tried to regain his family's property through the Israeli courts.\nJordanian occupation.\nAt the beginning of the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, Egypt took control of Hebron. Between May and October, Egypt and Jordan tussled for dominance in Hebron and its environs. Both countries appointed military governors in the town, hoping to gain recognition from Hebron officials. The Egyptians managed to persuade the pro-Jordanian mayor to support their rule, at least superficially, but local opinion turned against them when they imposed taxes. Villagers surrounding Hebron resisted and skirmishes broke out in which some were killed. By late 1948, part of the Egyptian forces from Bethlehem to Hebron had been cut off from their lines of supply and Glubb Pasha sent 350 Arab Legionnaires and an armored car unit to Hebron to reinforce them there. When the Armistice was signed, the city thus fell under Jordanian military control. The armistice agreement between Israel with Jordan intended to allow Israeli Jewish pilgrims to visit Hebron, but, as Jews of all nationalities were forbidden by Jordan into the country, this did not occur.\nIn December 1948, the Jericho Conference, held by Jordan, was convened to decide the future of the West Bank. Hebron notables, headed by mayor Muhamad 'Ali al-Ja'bari, voted in favor of becoming part of Jordan and to recognize Abdullah I of Jordan as their king. The subsequent unilateral annexation benefited the Arabs of Hebron, who during the 1950s, played a significant role in the economic development of Jordan.\nAlthough a significant number of people relocated to Jerusalem from Hebron during the Jordanian period, Hebron itself saw a considerable increase in population with 35,000 settling in the town. During this period, signs of the previous Jewish presence in Hebron were removed.\nIsraeli period.\nAfter the Six-Day War in June 1967, Israel occupied Hebron along with the rest of the West Bank, establishing a military government to rule the area. In an attempt to reach a land for peace deal, Yigal Allon proposed that Israel annex 45% of the West Bank and return the remainder to Jordan. According to the Allon Plan, the city of Hebron would lie in Jordanian territory, and in order to determine Israel's own border, Allon suggested building a Jewish settlement adjacent to Hebron. David Ben-Gurion also considered that Hebron was the one sector of the conquered territories that should remain under Jewish control and be open to Jewish settlement. Apart from its symbolic message to the international community that Israel's rights in Hebron were, according to Jews, inalienable, settling Hebron also had theological significance in some quarters. For some, the capture of Hebron by Israel had unleashed a messianic fervor.Survivors and descendants of the prior community are mixed. Some support the project of Jewish redevelopment, others commend living in peace with Hebronite Arabs, while a third group recommend a full pullout. Descendants supporting the latter views have met with Palestinian leaders in Hebron. In 1997 one group of descendants dissociated themselves from the settlers by calling them an obstacle to peace. On May 15, 2006, a member of a group who is a direct descendant of the 1929 refugees urged the government to continue its support of Jewish settlement, and allow the return of eight families evacuated the previous January from homes they set up in emptied shops near the Avraham Avinu neighborhood. Beit HaShalom, established in 2007 under disputed circumstances, was under court orders permitting its forced evacuation. All the Jewish settlers were expelled on December 3, 2008.\nImmediately after the 1967 war, mayor al-Ja'bari had unsuccessfully promoted the creation of an autonomous Palestinian entity in the West Bank, and by 1972, he was advocating for a confederal arrangement with Jordan instead. al-Ja'bari nevertheless consistently fostered a conciliatory policy towards Israel. He was ousted by Fahad Qawasimi in the 1976 mayoral election, which marked a shift in support towards pro-PLO nationalist leaders. Supporters of Jewish settlement within Hebron see their program as the reclamation of an important heritage dating back to Biblical times, which was dispersed or, it is argued, stolen by Arabs after the massacre of 1929. The purpose of settlement is to return to the 'land of our forefathers', and the Hebron model of reclaiming sacred sites in Palestinian territories has pioneered a pattern for settlers in Bethlehem and Nablus. Many reports, foreign and Israeli, are sharply critical of the behavior of Hebronite settlers.\nSheik Farid Khader heads the Ja'bari tribe, consisting of some 35,000 people, which is considered one of the most important tribes in Hebron. For years, members of the Ja'bari tribe were the mayors of Hebron. Khader regularly meets with settlers and Israeli government officials and is a strong opponent of both the concept of Palestinian State and the Palestinian Authority itself. Khader believes that Jews and Arabs must learn to coexist. A violent episode occurred May 2, 1980, when an Al Fatah squad killed five yeshiva students and one other person on their way home from Sabbath prayer at the Tomb of the Patriarchs. The event provided a major motivation for settlers near Hebron to join the Jewish Underground.\nIn the 1980s Hebron, became the center of the Jewish Kach movement, a designated terrorist organization, whose first operations started there, and provided a model for similar behavior in other settlements. On July 26, 1983, Israeli settlers attacked the Islamic University and shot three people dead and injured over thirty others. The 1994 Shamgar Commission of Inquiry concluded that Israeli authorities had consistently failed to investigate or prosecute crimes committed by settlers against Palestinians. Hebron IDF commander Noam Tivon said that his foremost concern is to \"ensure the security of the Jewish settlers\" and that Israeli \"soldiers have acted with the utmost restraint and have not initiated any shooting attacks or violence\".\nOslo Accords.\nHebron was the one city excluded from the interim agreement of September 1995 to restore rule over all Palestinian West Bank cities to the Palestinian Authority. IDF soldiers see their job as being to protect Israeli settlers from Palestinian residents, not to police the Israeli settlers. IDF soldiers are instructed to leave violent Israeli settlers for the police to deal with. Since The Oslo Agreement, violent episodes have been recurrent in the city. The Cave of the Patriarchs massacre took place on February 25, 1994, when Baruch Goldstein, an Israeli physician and resident of Kiryat Arba, opened fire on Muslims at prayer in the Cave of the Patriarchs, killing 29, and wounding 125 before the survivors overcame and killed him. Standing orders for Israeli soldiers on duty in Hebron disallowed them from firing on fellow Jews, even if they were shooting Arabs. This event was condemned by the Israeli Government, and the extreme right-wing Kach party was banned as a result. The Israeli government also tightened restrictions on the movement of Palestinians in H2, closed their vegetable and meat markets, and banned Palestinian cars on Al-Shuhada Street. The park near the Cave of the Patriarchs for recreation and barbecues is off-limits for Arab Hebronites. Following the 1995 Oslo Agreement and subsequent 1997 Hebron Agreement, Palestinian cities were placed under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority, with the exception of Hebron, which was split into two sectors: H1 is controlled by the Palestinian Authority and H2 \u2013 which includes the Old City of Hebron \u2013 remained under the military control of Israel. Around 120,000 Palestinians live in H1, while around 30,000 Palestinians along with around 700 Israelis remain under Israeli military control in H2. As of 2009[ [update]], a total of 86 Jewish families lived in Hebron. The IDF (Israel Defense Forces) may not enter H1 unless under Palestinian escort. Palestinians cannot approach areas where settlers live without special permits from the IDF. The Jewish settlement is widely considered to be illegal by the international community, although the Israeli government disputes this.\nOver the period of the First Intifada and Second Intifada, the Jewish community was subjected to attacks by Palestinian militants, especially during the periods of the intifadas; which saw 3 fatal stabbings and 9 fatal shootings in between the first and second Intifada (0.9% of all fatalities in Israel and the West Bank) and 17 fatal shootings (9 soldiers and 8 settlers) and 2 fatalities from a bombing during the second Intifada, and thousands of rounds fired on it from the hills above the Abu-Sneina and Harat al-Sheikh neighborhoods. On November 15, 2002, 12 Israeli soldiers were killed (Hebron Brigade commander Colonel Dror Weinberg and two other officers, 6 soldiers and 3 members of the security unit of Kiryat Arba) in an ambush. Two Temporary International Presence in Hebron observers were killed by Palestinian gunmen in a shooting attack on the road to Hebron On March 27, 2001, a Palestinian sniper targeted and killed the Jewish baby Shalhevet Pass. The sniper was caught in 2002. Hebron is one of the three West Bank towns from which the majority of suicide bombers originate. In May 2003, three students of the Hebron Polytechnic University carried out three separate suicide attacks. In August 2003, in what both Islamic groups described as a retaliation, a 29-year-old preacher from Hebron, Raed Abdel-Hamed Mesk, broke a unilateral Palestinian ceasefire by killing 23 and injured over 130 in a bus bombing in Jerusalem. In 2007, the Palestinian population in H2 declined due to Israeli security measures such as extended curfews, strict restrictions on movement, the closure of Palestinian businesses and settler harassment. Palestinians are barred from using Al-Shuhada Street, a principal commercial thoroughfare that is locally nicknamed \"Apartheid Street\" as a result.\nIsraeli organization B'Tselem states that there have been \"grave violations\" of Palestinian human rights in Hebron because of the \"presence of the settlers within the city\". The organization cites regular incidents of \"almost daily physical violence and property damage by settlers in the city\", curfews and restrictions of movement that are \"among the harshest in the Occupied Territories\", and violence by Israeli border policemen and the IDF against Palestinians who live in the city's H2 sector. According to Human Rights Watch, Palestinian areas of Hebron are frequently subject to indiscriminate firing by the IDF, leading to many casualties. One former IDF soldier, with experience in policing Hebron, has testified to Breaking the Silence, that on the briefing wall of his unit a sign describing their mission aim was hung that read: \"To disrupt the routine of the inhabitants of the neighbourhood.\" Hebron mayor Mustafa Abdel Nabi invited the Christian Peacemaker Teams to assist the local Palestinian community in opposition to what they describe as Israeli military occupation, collective punishment, settler harassment, home demolitions and land expropriation. In 2017, Temporary International Presence in Hebron (TIPH) issued a confidential report covering their 20 years of work in Hebron. The report, based in part on over 40,000 incidents reported during this period, stated that Israel violated international law in Hebron and has breached the rights of residents as established by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The report claimed that Israel violated Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which prohibits the deportation of civilians from occupied territory. Israeli settlement in Hebron was also cited as a violation.\nGeography.\nHebron is situated on the southern West Bank. Nestled in the Judaean Mountains, it lies above sea level. Hebron is located south of Jerusalem, east of Gaza, northeast of Beersheba and southeast of Tel Aviv, both in Israel and northeast of Amman, Jordan. The city is surrounded by Bani Na'im and Dura to the east, Halhul to the north, Taffuh to the west and Yatta to the south. The Israeli\u2013controlled H2 region is located in the eastern region of the city.\nIt is one of the highest cities in the area and was, until the 19th century, considered the highest city in the Middle East. With the governorate and metropolitan area, it forms about 19% of the West Bank total area. The city is surrounded by several mountains and hills, including the Hebron Hills (\"Jabal al\u2013Khalil\") and Mount Nabi Yunis. The Mount Nabi Yunis, situated north of the city, is the highest point in Palestine, with an altitude of 1,030\u00a0meters (3,380\u00a0ft). While the Hebron Hills is southern part of the wider Judaean Mountains, which spreads throughout Israel and Palestine and have an altitude of 1,026\u00a0m (3,366\u00a0ft). The two larger settlements whose population exceeds 7000 sit on the hills overlooking the Hebron's eastern quarters \u2013 Kirayt Arba and Givat Harsina. Wadi al\u2013Quff near Hebron is one of the largest natural reserves in Palestine. Located towards northeast of the city, it is surrounded by nearby towns and villages of Tarqumia, Halhoul, Beit Kahel and Beit Ola. The natural reserve covers up an area of . Wadi al\u2013Quff Natural reserve is home to some of the rare species of animals and plants.\nHebron is located on fertile mountainous area, making the city agriculturally rich, thus giving it a strategic importance. This is the reason for Hebron, today being a hub for cultivation of fruits and vineyards. The alternative sources of water network is cisterns. There are ten springs and three wells in the city. The water of springs and wells are not currently used. The Hebron River (\"Wadi al\u2013Khalil\"), known as \"Nahal Hebron\" in Hebrew located along the region of Judea and Negev, is one of the water sources for the city. Currently the river is polluted, mainly due to the generation of waste, mostly by the industrial areas, situated on the city's east and south.\nClimate.\nThe climate in Hebron is temperate and the mean year-round temperature ranges between 15 and 16\u00b0 (an average of 7\u00b0 in winter and 21\u00b0 in summer). Annual precipitations average around 502\u00a0mm. Hebron has \"a\" Mediterranean, hot summer climate (Classification: Csa). The city's yearly temperature is 22.74\u00a0\u00b0C (72.93\u00a0\u00b0F) and it is 0.14% higher than Palestine's averages. It typically receives about 15.72 millimeters (0.62 inches) of precipitation and has 39.47 rainy days (10.81% of the time) annually, during January and February.\nUrban development.\nHistorically, the city consisted of four densely populated quarters: the \"suq\" and \"Harat al-Masharqa\" adjacent to the Ibrahimi Mosque, the Silk Merchant Quarter (\"Haret Kheitun\") to the south and the Sheikh Quarter (\"Haret al-Sheikh\") to the north. It is believed the basic urban structure of the city had been established by the Mamluk period, during which time the city also had Jewish, Christian and Kurdish quarters.\nIn the mid 19th-century, Hebron was still divided into four quarters, but the Christian quarter had disappeared. The sections included the ancient quarter surrounding the Cave of Machpelah, the \"Haret Kheitun\" (the Jewish Quarter, \"Haret el-Yahud\"), the \"Haret el-Sheikh\" and the Druze Quarter. As Hebron's population gradually increased, inhabitants preferred to build upwards rather than leave the safety of their neighborhoods. By the 1880s, better security provided by the Ottoman authorities allowed the town to expand and a new commercial center, \"Bab el-Zawiye\", emerged. As development continued, new spacious and taller structures were built to the north-west. In 1918, the town consisted of dense clusters of residential dwellings along the valley, rising onto the slopes above it. By the 1920s, the town was made up of seven quarters: \"el-Sheikh\" and \"Bab el-Zawiye\" to the west, \"el-Kazzazin\", \"el-Akkabi\" and \"el-Haram\" in the center, \"el-Musharika\" to the south and \"el-Kheitun\" in the east. Urban sprawl had spread onto the surrounding hills by 1945. \nThe large population increase under Jordanian rule resulted in about 1,800 new houses being built, most of them along the Hebron-Jerusalem highway, stretching northwards for over at a depth of 600\u00a0ft (200m) either way. Some 500 houses were built elsewhere on surrounding rural land. There was less development to the south-east, where housing units extended along the valley for about 1 mile (1.5\u00a0km). In 1971, with the assistance of the Israeli and Jordanian governments, the Hebron University, an Islamic university, was founded. In an attempt to enhance the view of the Ibrahami Mosque, Jordan demolished whole blocks of ancient houses opposite its entrance, which also resulted in improved access to the historic site. The Jordanians also demolished the old synagogue located in the el-Kazzazin Quarter. In 1976, Israel recovered the site, which had been converted into an animal pen, and by 1989, a settler courtyard had been established there.\nToday, the area along the north\u2013south axis to the east comprises the modern city of Hebron (also called Upper Hebron, \"Khalil Foq\"). It was established towards the end of the Ottoman period, its inhabitants being upper and middle class Hebronites who moved there from the crowded old city, \"Balde al-Qadime\" (also called Lower Hebron, \"Khalil Takht\"). The northern part of Upper Hebron includes some up-scale residential districts and also houses the Hebron University, private hospitals and the only two luxury hotels in the city. The main commercial artery of the city is located here, situated along the Jerusalem Road, and includes modern multi-storey shopping malls. Also in this area are villas and apartment complexes built on the \"krum\", rural lands and vineyards, which used to function as recreation areas during the summer months until the early Jordanian period. The southern part is where the working-class neighborhoods are located, along with large industrial zones and the Hebron Polytechnic University. The main municipal and governmental buildings are located in the center of the city. This area includes high-rise concrete and glass developments and also some distinct Ottoman era one-storey family houses, adorned with arched entrances, decorative motifs and ironwork. Hebron's domestic appliance and textile markets are located here along two parallel roads that lead to the entrance of the old city. Many of these have been relocated from the old commercial center of the city, known as the vegetable market (\"hesbe\"), which was closed down by the Israeli military during the 1990s. The vegetable market is now located in the square of \"Bab el-Zawiye\".\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHebron has, historically, been an Arab city but a small Jewish community has existed since the 16th century, encouraged to settle there by the Ottoman authorities following the expulsion of Jews from Spain. In 1820, it was reported that there were about 1,000 Jews in Hebron. In 1838, the total population was estimated at 10,000, including an estimated 1,500 taxable Muslim households, and to 41 Jewish taxpayers. Taxpayers consisted here of male heads of households who owned even a very small shop or piece of land. 200 Jews and one Christian household were under 'European protections'. In 1842, it was estimated that about 400 Arab and 120 Jewish families lived in Hebron, the Jews having been diminished in number following the destruction of 1834. Its population stood at 16,577 in 1922 of which 16,074 (97%) were Muslim, 430 (2.5%) were Jewish and 73 (0.4%) were Christian.\nThe Jewish community was expelled from the city following the massacre of nearly 70 Jews in 1929. However, since Israel gained control of the West Bank in 1967, Hebron and eastern Jerusalem have been the only cities in the region to receive Jewish settlement.\nHebron had a population of 201,063 Palestinians in 2017, and seven hundred Jewish settlers concentrated on the outskirts of its Old City. Roughly 20% of the city, including 35,000 Palestinians, under Israeli military administration, lives in the region of H2 Hebron. The surrounding area forms the Hebron metropolitan area, with an estimated population of around 782,227 as of 2021[ [update]]. It is third largest metropolitan area in Palestine, after Gaza and Jerusalem.\nHebron is also home to several ethnic minority and foreign diaspora communities. Kurds have been living in the city since Saladin's conquest of Palestine. Along with Jerusalem and Gaza, the city is also home to Palestinians of Kurdish descent. Nearly a third of the population of Hebron, is considered to be of Kurdish background. The Kurdish Quarter, known as \"Harat al-Akrad\", still exists today. Hebron is also home to a small Samaritan community, after Nablus.\nEconomy.\nHebron is a leading commercial and industrial center in the Levantine region. The presence of minerals and resources in surroundings have increased the city's value. It emerged as in important trade hub in the West Bank. Hebron is most productive region in the country after Jerusalem\u2013Bethlehem\u2013Ramallah area. The H1 Area, which is under control of Palestinian Authority have been a large contributor to the city's economy. Despite having tense relations, Israelis and Palestinians have strong trade relations in Hebron. The city is popular for its ceramics and glass industry.\nIt is the source of 60% of stone and marble resources in the West Bank. 33% of the Palestine's GNP is from Hebron, including 60% of the jewelry industry and jewelry production, 28% of the output in the agricultural sector and 75% of the leather and shoe industry. Most agricultural products from Palestinian controlled Hebron are sent to Israel. Trade volume between Israel and the Palestine reaches $30 billion annually and the city trades with China as well. The minimum wage is 50 NIS per day versus an average of 30 NIS per day in other Palestinian areas. From the 1970s to the early 1990s, a third of those who lived in the city worked in the shoe industry. According to the shoe factory owner Tareq Abu Felat, the number reached least 35,000 people and there were more than 1,000 workshops around the city. Statistics from the Chamber of Commerce in Hebron put the figure at 40,000 people employed in 1,200 shoe businesses. However, the 1993 Oslo Accords and 1994 Paris Protocol between Israel and the PLO made it possible to mass import Chinese goods as the Palestinian National Authority, which was created after the Oslo Accords, did not regulate it. They later put import taxes but the Abu Felat, who also is the Palestinian Federation of Leather Industries's chairman, said more is still needed. The Palestinian government decided to impose an additional tax of 35% on products from China from April 2013.\n90% of the shoes in Palestine are now estimated to come from China, which Palestinian industry workers say are of much lower quality but also much cheaper, and the Chinese are more aesthetic. Another factor contributing to the decline of the local industry is Israeli restrictions on Palestinian exports. Today, there are less than 300 workshops in the shoe industry, who only run part-time, and they employ around 3,000\u20134,000 people. More than 50% of the shoes are exported to Israel, where consumers have a better economy. Less than 25% goes to the Palestinian market, with some going to Jordan, Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries.\nThe most advanced printing press in the Middle East is in Hebron. Hebron is major source of import goods to Israel. Mattresses manufactured in Hebron are exported to Israeli markets in Tel Aviv, Beersheba and Haifa. Around 17,000 factories and workshops are located throughout the Area H1. Historically, the traditional glass industry is popular in Hebron. A new industrial city has been built in Tarqumiyah, which houses more than 140 factories. Royal Industrial Trading operates a pipe manufacturing plant in Hebron, which is spread across an area of and employs over 650 people. In 2021, an electronic recycling factory was opened in Idhna and operates to this day. The European Union and the World Bank proposed to construct a regional water treatment plant, which will treat existing sewage stream coming from 80% of the city. The city is a hub for the jewelry industry and houses approximately 70 jewelry factories employing over 1500 workers.\nSuper Nimer company manufactures sanitary ware products and water network from its factory, whose area ranges from to . Opened in 2004, Super Tiger operates a factory spread across an area of . During the COVID-19 pandemic in the State of Palestine, Hebron rapidly transformed into a medical supplies manufacturing hub, with numerous factories installing and commissioning new production lines for the product and was approved by the Ministry of National Economy.\nPolitical status.\nUnder the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine passed by the UN in 1947, Hebron was envisaged to become part of an Arab state. While the Jewish leaders accepted the partition plan, the Arab leadership (the Arab Higher Committee in Palestine and the Arab League) rejected it, opposing any partition. The aftermath of the 1948 war saw the city occupied and later unilaterally annexed by the kingdom of Jordan in a move supported by local Hebron officials. Following the Six-Day War of 1967, Israel occupied Hebron. In 1997, in accordance with the Hebron Agreement, Israel withdrew from 80 percent of Hebron, which was handed over to the Palestinian Authority. Palestinian police would assume responsibilities in Area H1 and Israel would retain control in Area H2.\nAn international unarmed observer force\u2014the Temporary International Presence in Hebron (TIPH) was subsequently established to help the normalization of the situation and to maintain a buffer between the Palestinian Arab population of the city and the Jewish population residing in their enclave in the old city. The TIPH operates with the permission of the Israeli government, meeting regularly with the Israeli army and the Israeli Civil Administration, and is granted free access throughout the city. In 2018, the TIPH came under criticism in Israel due to incidents where an employee was, according to the Israeli police, filmed puncturing the tires of the car of an Israeli settler, and another instance where an observer was deported after slapped a settler boy.\nThe post-1967 settlement in Hebron was driven by theological doctrines from the Mercaz HaRav Kook, which consider the Land of Israel and its people as holy, and believe that the messianic Age of Redemption has arrived. Hebron holds special significance in this narrative, with traditions linking it to Abraham, King David, and the entrance to the Garden of Eden. Settling in Hebron is seen as a right and duty, a favor to the world, and an example of being \"a light unto the nations\" (\"Or la-Goyim\"). This viewpoint has resulted in numerous violent clashes with Palestinians, which some settlers see as contributing to the messianic process.\nOccupation and settlements.\nIn 1968, Rabbi Moshe Levinger and a group of Israelis, disguised as tourists, rented the main hotel in Hebron and refused to leave. The government initially wanted to evacuate the settlers but eventually allowed them to relocate to a nearby military base, which became the settlement of Kiryat Arba. After lobbying efforts, the settlement gained support from some Israeli leaders. Over time, the settlement expanded with the outpost Givat Ha'avot. The operation was planned and financed by the Movement for Greater Israel. In 2011, the Israeli Supreme Court ruled that Jews have no right to properties they possessed in places like Hebron before 1948 and are not entitled to compensation for their losses. Originally named Hesed l'Avraham, Beit Hadassah was constructed in 1893 with donations of Baghdadi Jewish families and was the only modern medical facility in Hebron. In 1909, it was renamed after Hadassah Women's Zionist Organization of America, which took responsibility for the medical staff and provided free medical care to all. In 1979, a group of 15 settler mothers and their 35 children squatted in the Dabouia building in Hebron, exploiting the government's indecision during negotiations with Egypt. Led by Miriam Levinger, they established a bridgehead for Jewish resettlement and created conflict with Arab shopkeepers. A retaliatory attack by a Palestinian group resulted in the death of six yeshiva students. Despite appeals to the Israeli Supreme Court, the settlers remained. The following year, the government legitimized residency in Hebron and expelled the elected mayor. This pattern of settlement followed by hostilities with Palestinians was repeated in Tel Rumeida.\nThe Abraham Avinu Synagogue was the physical and spiritual center of its neighborhood and regarded as one of the most beautiful synagogues in Palestine. It was the center of Jewish worship in Hebron until it was burnt down during the 1929 riots. In 1948 under Jordanian rule, the remaining ruins were razed. The Avraham Avinu quarter was established next to the Vegetable and Wholesale Markets on Al-Shuhada Street in the south of the Old City. The vegetable market was closed by the Israeli military and some of the neighboring houses were occupied by settlers and soldiers. Settlers started to take over the closed Palestinian stores, despite explicit orders of the Israeli Supreme Court that the settlers should vacate these stores and the Palestinians should be allowed to return. Beit Romano was built and owned by Yisrael Avraham Romano of Constantinople and served Sephardi Jews from Turkey. In 1901, a yeshiva was established there with a dozen teachers and up to 60 students. In 1982, Israeli authorities took over a Palestinian education office (Osama Ben Munqez School) and the adjacent bus station. The school was turned into a settlement, and the bus station into a military base against an order of the Israeli Supreme Court. In 1807 the immigrant Sephardic Rabbi Haim Yeshua Hamitzri (Haim the Jewish Egyptian) purchased 5 dunams on the outskirts of the city and in 1811 he signed a contract for a 99-year lease on a further 800 dunams of land, which included 4 plots in Tel Rumeida. The plots were administered by his descendant Haim Bajaio after Jews left Hebron. Settlers' claims to this land are based on these precedents, but are dismissed by the rabbi's heir. In 1984, settlers established a caravan outpost there called Ramat Yeshai. In 1998, the government recognized it as a settlement, and in 2001 the Defence Minister approved the building of the first housing units.\nIn 2012, Israel Defense Forces called for the immediate removal of a new settlement, because it was seen as a provocation. The IDF, in accordance with settler demands, requested the removal of a Palestinian flag on a Hebronite rooftop contiguous to settlements, though no rule forbids the practice. According to Palestinians, the IDF negotiated the removal of the flag in exchange for the release of a resident of Hebron from legal custody. In August 2016, Israel announced its intention to allow settlement building in the military compound of \"Plugat Hamitkanim\" in Hebron, which had been expropriated for military purposes in the 1990s. In late 2019, the Israeli Defense Minister Naftali Bennett instructed the military administration to inform the Palestinian municipality of the government's intention to reconstruct infrastructure in the old Hebron fruit and vegetable market in order to establish a Jewish neighborhood there, which would allow for doubling the city's settler population. The area's original residents, who have protected tenancy rights there, were compelled to evacuate the zone after the Cave of the Patriarchs massacre. The original site was under Jewish ownership prior to 1948. The plan proposes that the empty shops remain Palestinian while the units built over them house Jewish Israelis.\nCulture.\nTourism.\nHebron is home to numerous mosques, synagogues, churches, parks, palaces, castles and forts. The Old City of Hebron was a declared a Palestinian World Heritage Site by UNESCO on July 7, 2017. The move caused controversies and faced opposition from Israeli officials who objected to it being called as Palestinian site, instead of Israeli. It is one of the best preserved sites of the Mamluk era.\nHebron is also home to several sites for Christian worship, with numerous churches located around the city. The Oak of Sibta (Oak of Abraham) is an ancient tree which, in non-Jewish tradition, is said to mark the place where Abraham pitched his tent. The Russian Orthodox Church owns the site and the nearby Abraham's Oak Holy Trinity Monastery, consecrated in 1925. Hebron is one of the few cities to have preserved its Mamluk architecture. Many structures were built during the period, especially Sufi zawiyas.\nOther sites:\nReligious traditions.\nSome Jewish traditions regarding Adam place him in Hebron after his expulsion from Eden. Another has Cain kill Abel there. A third has Adam and Eve buried in the cave of Machpelah. A Jewish-Christian tradition had it that Adam was formed from the red clay of the field of Damascus, near Hebron. A tradition arose in medieval Jewish texts that the Cave of the Patriarchs itself was the very entrance to the Garden of Eden. During the Middle Ages, pilgrims and the inhabitants of Hebron would eat the red earth as a charm against misfortune. Others report that the soil was harvested for export as a precious medicinal spice in Egypt, Arabia, Ethiopia and India and that the earth refilled after every digging. Legend also tells that Noah planted his vineyard on Mount Hebron. In medieval Christian tradition, Hebron was one of the three cities where Elizabeth was said to live, the legend implying that it might have been the birthplace of John the Baptist.\nOne Islamic tradition has it that Muhammad alighted in Hebron during his night journey from Mecca to Jerusalem, and the mosque in the city is said to conserve one of his shoes. Another tradition states that Muhammad arranged for Hebron and its surrounding villages to become part of Tamim al-Dari's domain; this was implemented during Umar's reign as caliph. According to the arrangement, al-Dari and his descendants were only permitted to tax the residents for their land and the \"waqf\" of the Ibrahimi Mosque was entrusted to them. The \"simat al-Khalil\" or \"Table of Abraham\" is attested to in the writings of the 11th century Persian traveler Nasir-i Khusraw. According to the account, this early Islamic food distribution center \u2014 which predates the Ottoman \"imarets\" \u2014 gave all visitors to Hebron a loaf of bread, a bowl of lentils in olive oil, and some raisins.\nAccording to Tamara Neuman, settlement by a community of Jewish religious fundamentalists has brought about three major changes by redesigning a Palestinian area in terms of biblical imagery and origins: remaking over these revamped religious sites to endow them with an innovative centrality to Jewish worship, that, she argues, effectively erases the diasporic thrust of Jewish tradition; and writing out the overlapping aspects of Judaism, Christianity and Islam in such a way that the possibility of accommodation between the three intertwined traditions is eradicated, while the presence of Palestinians themselves is erased by violent methods.\nTwin towns / sister cities.\nHebron is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38579", "revid": "641724", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38579", "title": "Gravity", "text": "Attraction of masses and energy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn physics, gravity (from lat \" gravitas\"\u00a0'weight'), also known as gravitation or a gravitational interaction, is a fundamental interaction, which may be described as the effect of a field that is generated by a gravitational source such as mass.\nThe gravitational attraction between clouds of primordial hydrogen and clumps of dark matter in the early universe caused the hydrogen gas to coalesce, eventually condensing and fusing to form stars. At larger scales this resulted in galaxies and clusters, so gravity is a primary driver for the large-scale structures in the universe. Gravity has an infinite range, although its effects become weaker as objects get farther away.\nGravity is described by the general theory of relativity, proposed by Albert Einstein in 1915, which describes gravity in terms of the curvature of spacetime, caused by the uneven distribution of mass. The most extreme example of this curvature of spacetime is a black hole, from which nothing\u2014not even light\u2014can escape once past the black hole's event horizon. However, for most applications, gravity is sufficiently well approximated by Newton's law of universal gravitation, which describes gravity as an attractive force between any two bodies that is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.\nScientists are looking for a theory that describes gravity in the framework of quantum mechanics (quantum gravity), which would unify gravity and the other known fundamental interactions of physics in a single mathematical framework (a theory of everything).\nOn the surface of a planetary body such as on Earth, this leads to gravitational acceleration of all objects towards the body, modified by the centrifugal effects arising from the rotation of the body. In this context, gravity gives weight to physical objects and is essential to understanding the mechanisms that are responsible for surface water waves, lunar tides and substantially contributes to weather patterns. Gravitational weight also has many important biological functions, helping to guide the growth of plants through the process of gravitropism and influencing the circulation of fluids in multicellular organisms.\nCharacterization.\nGravity is the word used to describe a physical law, a fundamental physical interaction that derives primarily from mass, and the observed consequences of that interaction on objects. Gravity is the law that every object with mass attracts every other object in the universe in proportion to each mass and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The force of gravity, F is written using the gravitational constant, G, as \nformula_1\nfor two masses, m, and \"m\"\u2032 separated by a distance r.\nGravity is considered to be one of four fundamental interactions. The electromagnetic force law is similar to the force law for gravity: both depend upon the square of the inverse distance between objects in typical interactions. The ratio of gravitational attraction of two electrons to their electrical repulsion is 1 to . As a result, gravity can generally be neglected at the level of subatomic particles. Gravity becomes the most significant interaction between objects at the scale of astronomical bodies, and it determines the motion of satellites, planets, stars, galaxies, and even light. Gravity is also fundamental in another sense: the inertial mass that appears in Newton's second law is the same as the gravitational mass. This equivalence principle is a scientific hypothesis that has been tested experimentally to more than one part in a trillion.\nHistory.\nAncient world.\nThe nature and mechanism of gravity were explored by a wide range of ancient scholars. In Ancient Greece, Aristotle believed that each of the classical elements had a natural place in the universe which it tends to move toward - earth at the center of the universe (the center of the Earth, which was known to be spherical); then water, air, fire, and aether in concentric shells from inner to outer. He also thought that the speed of a falling object should increase with its weight, a conclusion that was later shown to be false. While Aristotle's view was widely accepted throughout Ancient Greece, there were other thinkers such as Plutarch who correctly predicted that the attraction of gravity was not unique to the Earth.\nAlthough he did not understand gravity as a force, the ancient Greek philosopher Archimedes discovered the center of gravity of a triangle. He postulated that if two equal weights did not have the same center of gravity, the center of gravity of the two weights together would be in the middle of the line that joins their centers of gravity. Two centuries later, the Roman engineer and architect Vitruvius contended in his \"De architectura\" that gravity is not dependent on a substance's weight but rather on its \"nature\". In the 6th century CE, the Byzantine Alexandrian scholar John Philoponus proposed the theory of impetus, which modifies Aristotle's theory that \"continuation of motion depends on continued action of a force\" by incorporating a causative force that diminishes over time.\nIn 628 CE, the Indian mathematician and astronomer Brahmagupta proposed the idea that gravity is an attractive force that draws objects to the Earth and used the term \"gurutv\u0101kar\u1e63a\u1e47\" to describe it.\nIn the ancient Middle East, gravity was a topic of fierce debate. The Persian intellectual Al-Biruni believed that the force of gravity was not unique to the Earth, and he correctly assumed that other heavenly bodies should exert a gravitational attraction as well. In contrast, Al-Khazini held the same position as Aristotle that all matter in the Universe is attracted to the center of the Earth.\nScientific Revolution.\nIn the mid-16th century, various European scientists experimentally disproved the Aristotelian notion that heavier objects fall at a faster rate. In particular, the Spanish Dominican priest Domingo de Soto wrote in 1551 that bodies in free fall uniformly accelerate. De Soto may have been influenced by earlier experiments conducted by other Dominican priests in Italy, including those by Benedetto Varchi, Francesco Beato, Luca Ghini, and Giovan Bellaso which contradicted Aristotle's teachings on the fall of bodies.\nThe mid-16th century Italian physicist Giambattista Benedetti published papers claiming that, due to specific gravity, objects made of the same material but with different masses would fall at the same speed. With the 1586 Delft tower experiment, the Flemish physicist Simon Stevin observed that two cannonballs of differing sizes and weights fell at the same rate when dropped from a tower.\nIn the late 16th century, Galileo Galilei's careful measurements of balls rolling down inclines allowed him to firmly establish that gravitational acceleration is the same for all objects. Galileo postulated that air resistance is the reason that objects with a low density and high surface area fall more slowly in an atmosphere. In his 1638 work \"Two New Sciences\", Galileo proved that the distance traveled by a falling object is proportional to the square of the time elapsed. His method was a form of graphical numerical integration since concepts of algebra and calculus were unknown at the time. This was later confirmed by Italian scientists Jesuits Grimaldi and Riccioli between 1640 and 1650. They also calculated the magnitude of the Earth's gravity by measuring the oscillations of a pendulum.\nGalileo also broke with incorrect ideas of Aristotelian philosophy by regarding inertia as persistence of motion, not a tendency to come to rest. By considering that the laws of physics appear identical on a moving ship to those on land, Galileo developed the concepts of reference frame and the principle of relativity. These concepts would become central to Newton's mechanics, only to be transformed in Einstein's theory of gravity, the general theory of relativity.\nIn last quarter of the 16th century Tycho Brahe created accurate tools for astrometry, providing careful observations of the planets. His assistant and successor, Johannes Kepler analyzed these data into three empirical laws of planetary motion. These laws were central to the development of a theory of gravity a hundred years later.\nIn his 1609 book Astronomia nova Kepler described gravity as a mutual attraction, claiming that if the Earth and Moon were not held apart by some force they would come together. He recognized that mechanical forces cause action, creating a kind of celestial machine. On the other hand Kepler viewed the force of the Sun on the planets as magnetic and acting tangential to their orbits and he assumed with Aristotle that inertia meant objects tend to come to rest.\nIn 1666, Giovanni Alfonso Borelli avoided the key problems that limited Kepler. By Borelli's time the concept of inertia had its modern meaning as the tendency of objects to remain in uniform motion and he viewed the Sun as just another heavenly body. Borelli developed the idea of mechanical equilibrium, a balance between inertia and gravity. Newton cited Borelli's influence on his theory.\nIn 1657, Robert Hooke published his \"Micrographia\", in which he hypothesized that the Moon must have its own gravity. In a communication to the Royal Society in 1666 and his 1674 Gresham lecture, \"An Attempt to prove the Annual Motion of the Earth\", Hooke took the important step of combining related hypothesis and then forming predictions based on the hypothesis. He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I will explain a system of the world very different from any yet received. It is founded on the following positions. 1. That all the heavenly bodies have not only a gravitation of their parts to their own proper centre, but that they also mutually attract each other within their spheres of action. 2. That all bodies having a simple motion, will continue to move in a straight line, unless continually deflected from it by some extraneous force, causing them to describe a circle, an ellipse, or some other curve. 3. That this attraction is so much the greater as the bodies are nearer. As to the proportion in which those forces diminish by an increase of distance, I own I have not discovered it... \nHooke was an important communicator who helped reformulate the scientific enterprise. He was one of the first professional scientists and worked as the then-new Royal Society's curator of experiments for 40 years. However his valuable insights remained hypotheses and some of these were incorrect. He was unable develop a mathematical theory of gravity and work out the consequences. For this he turned to Newton, writing him a letter in 1679, outlining a model of planetary motion in a void or vacuum due to attractive action at a distance. This letter likely turned Newton's thinking in a new direction leading to his revolutionary work on gravity. When Newton reported his results in 1686, Hooke claimed the inverse square law portion was his \"notion\".\nNewton's theory of gravitation.\nBefore 1684, scientists including Christopher Wren, Robert Hooke and Edmund Halley determined that Kepler's third law, relating to planetary orbital periods, would prove the inverse square law if the orbits were circles. However the orbits were known to be ellipses. At Halley's suggestion, Newton tackled the problem and was able to prove that ellipses also proved the inverse square relation from Kepler's observations. In 1684, Isaac Newton sent a manuscript to Edmond Halley titled \"De motu corporum in gyrum ('On the motion of bodies in an orbit')\", which provided a physical justification for Kepler's laws of planetary motion. Halley was impressed by the manuscript and urged Newton to expand on it, and a few years later Newton published a groundbreaking book called \"Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica\" (\"Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy\").\nThe revolutionary aspect of Newton's theory of gravity was the unification of Earth-bound observations of acceleration with celestial mechanics. In his book, Newton described gravitation as a universal force, and claimed that it operated on objects \"according to the quantity of solid matter which they contain and propagates on all sides to immense distances always at the inverse square of the distances\". This formulation had two important parts. First was equating inertial mass and gravitational mass. Newton's 2nd law defines force via formula_2 for inertial mass, his law of gravitational force uses the same mass. Newton did experiments with pendulums to verify this concept as best he could.\nThe second aspect of Newton's formulation was the inverse square of distance. This aspect was not new: the astronomer Isma\u00ebl Bullialdus proposed it around 1640. Seeking proof, Newton made quantitative analysis around 1665, considering the period and distance of the Moon's orbit and considering the timing of objects falling on Earth. Newton did not publish these results at the time because he could not prove that the Earth's gravity acts as if all its mass were concentrated at its center. That proof took him twenty years.\nNewton's \"Principia\" was well received by the scientific community, and his law of gravitation quickly spread across the European world. More than a century later, in 1821, his theory of gravitation rose to even greater prominence when it was used to predict the existence of Neptune. In that year, the French astronomer Alexis Bouvard used this theory to create a table modeling the orbit of Uranus, which was shown to differ significantly from the planet's actual trajectory. In order to explain this discrepancy, many astronomers speculated that there might be a large object beyond the orbit of Uranus which was disrupting its orbit. In 1846, the astronomers John Couch Adams and Urbain Le Verrier independently used Newton's law to predict Neptune's location in the night sky, and the planet was discovered there within a day.\nNewton's formulation was later condensed into the inverse-square law:formula_3where F is the force, \"m\"1 and \"m\"2 are the masses of the objects interacting, r is the distance between the centers of the masses and \"G\" is the gravitational constant . While \"G\" is also called Newton's constant, Newton did not use this constant or formula, he only discussed proportionality. But this allowed him to come to an astounding conclusion we take for granted today: the gravity of the Earth on the Moon is the same as the gravity of the Earth on an apple:formula_4Using the values known at the time, Newton was able to verify this form of his law. The value of \"G\" was eventually measured by Henry Cavendish in 1797.\nEinstein's general relativity.\nEventually, astronomers noticed an eccentricity in the orbit of the planet Mercury which could not be explained by Newton's theory: the perihelion of the orbit was increasing by about 42.98 arcseconds per century. The most obvious explanation for this discrepancy was an as-yet-undiscovered celestial body, such as a planet orbiting the Sun even closer than Mercury, but all efforts to find such a body turned out to be fruitless. In 1915, Albert Einstein developed a theory of general relativity which was able to accurately model Mercury's orbit.\nEinstein's theory brought two other ideas with independent histories into the physical theories of gravity: the principle of relativity and non-Euclidean geometry.\nThe principle of relativity, introduced by Galileo and used as a foundational principle by Newton, led to a long and fruitless search for a luminiferous aether after Maxwell's equations demonstrated that light propagated at a fixed speed independent of reference frame. In Newton's mechanics, velocities add: a cannon ball shot from a moving ship would travel with a trajectory which included the motion of the ship. Since light speed was fixed, it was assumed to travel in a fixed, absolute medium. Many experiments sought to reveal this medium but failed and in 1905 Einstein's special relativity theory showed the aether was not needed. Special relativity proposed that mechanics be reformulated to use the Lorentz transformation already applicable to light rather than the Galilean transformation adopted by Newton. Special relativity, as in special case, specifically did not cover gravity.\nWhile relativity was associated with mechanics and thus gravity, the idea of altering geometry only joined the story of gravity once mechanics required the Lorentz transformations. Geometry was an ancient science that gradually broke free of Euclidean limitations when Carl Gauss discovered in the 1800s that surfaces in any number of dimensions could be characterized by a metric, a distance measurement along the shortest path between two points that reduces to Euclidean distance at infinitesimal separation. Gauss' student Bernhard Riemann developed this into a complete geometry by 1854. These geometries are locally flat but have global curvature.\nIn 1907, Einstein took his first step by using special relativity to create a new form of the equivalence principle. The equivalence of inertial mass and gravitational mass was a known empirical law. The m in Newton's first law, formula_2, has the same value as the m in Newton's law of gravity on Earth, formula_6. In what he later described as \"the happiest thought of my life\" Einstein realized this meant that in free-fall, an accelerated coordinate system exists with no local gravitational field. Every description of gravity in any other coordinate system must transform to give no field in the free-fall case, a powerful invariance constraint on all theories of gravity.\nEinstein's description of gravity was accepted by the majority of physicists for two reasons. First, by 1910 his special relativity was accepted in German physics and was spreading to other countries. Second, his theory explained experimental results like the perihelion of Mercury and the bending of light around the Sun better than Newton's theory.\nIn 1919, the British astrophysicist Arthur Eddington was able to confirm the predicted deflection of light during that year's solar eclipse. Eddington measured starlight deflections twice those predicted by Newtonian corpuscular theory, in accordance with the predictions of general relativity. Although Eddington's analysis was later disputed, this experiment made Einstein famous almost overnight and caused general relativity to become widely accepted in the scientific community.\nIn 1959, American physicists Robert Pound and Glen Rebka performed an experiment in which they used gamma rays to confirm the prediction of gravitational time dilation. By sending the rays down a 74-foot tower and measuring their frequency at the bottom, the scientists confirmed that light is Doppler shifted as it moves towards a source of gravity. The observed shift also supports the idea that time runs more slowly in the presence of a gravitational field (many more wave crests pass in a given interval). If light moves outward from a strong source of gravity it will be observed with a redshift. The time delay of light passing close to a massive object was first identified by Irwin I. Shapiro in 1964 in interplanetary spacecraft signals.\nIn 1971, scientists discovered the first-ever black hole in the galaxy Cygnus. The black hole was detected because it was emitting bursts of x-rays as it consumed a smaller star, and it came to be known as Cygnus X-1. This discovery confirmed yet another prediction of general relativity, because Einstein's equations implied that light could not escape from a sufficiently large and compact object.\nFrame dragging, the idea that a rotating massive object should twist spacetime around it, was confirmed by Gravity Probe B results in 2011. In 2015, the LIGO observatory detected faint gravitational waves, the existence of which had been predicted by general relativity. Scientists believe that the waves emanated from a black hole merger that occurred 1.5 billion light-years away.\nOn Earth.\nEvery planetary body (including the Earth) is surrounded by its own gravitational field, which can be conceptualized with Newtonian physics as exerting an attractive force on all objects. Assuming a spherically symmetrical planet, the strength of this field at any given point above the surface is proportional to the planetary body's mass and inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the center of the body.\nThe strength of the gravitational field is numerically equal to the acceleration of objects under its influence. The rate of acceleration of falling objects near the Earth's surface varies very slightly depending on latitude, surface features such as mountains and ridges, and perhaps unusually high or low sub-surface densities. For purposes of weights and measures, a standard gravity value is defined by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, under the International System of Units (SI).\nThe force of gravity experienced by objects on Earth's surface is the vector sum of two forces: (a) The gravitational attraction in accordance with Newton's universal law of gravitation, and (b) the centrifugal force, which results from the choice of an earthbound, rotating frame of reference. The force of gravity is weakest at the equator because of the centrifugal force caused by the Earth's rotation and because points on the equator are farthest from the center of the Earth. The force of gravity varies with latitude, and the resultant acceleration increases from about 9.780\u00a0m/s2 at the Equator to about 9.832\u00a0m/s2 at the poles.\nGravity wave.\nWaves on oceans, lakes, and other bodies of water occur when the gravitational equilibrium at the surface of the water is disturbed by for example wind. Similar effects occur in the atmosphere where equilibrium is disturbed by thermal weather fronts or mountain ranges.\nOrbits.\nPlanets orbit the Sun in an ellipse as a consequence of the law of gravity. Similarly the Moon and artificial satellites orbit the Earth. Conceptually two objects in orbit are both falling off of the curve they would travel in if the force of gravity were not pulling them together. Since the force of gravity is universal, all planets attract each other with the most massive and closest pair have the most mutual affect. This means orbits are more complex than simple ellipses.\nAstrophysics.\nStars and black holes.\nDuring star formation, gravitational attraction in a cloud of hydrogen gas competes with thermal gas pressure. As the gas density increases, the temperature rises, then the gas radiates energy, allowing additional gravitational condensation. If the mass of gas in the region is low, the process continues until a brown dwarf or gas-giant planet is produced. If more mass is available, the additional gravitational energy allows the central region to reach pressures sufficient for nuclear fusion, forming a star. In a star, again the gravitational attraction competes, with thermal and radiation pressure in hydrostatic equilibrium until the star's atomic fuel runs out. The next phase depends upon the total mass of the star. Very low mass stars slowly cool as white dwarf stars with a small core balancing gravitational attraction with electron degeneracy pressure. Stars with masses similar to the Sun go through a red giant phase before becoming white dwarf stars. Higher mass stars have complex core structures that burn helium and high atomic number elements ultimately producing an iron core. As their fuel runs out, these stars become unstable producing a supernova. The result can be a neutron star where gravitational attraction balances neutron degeneracy pressure or, for even higher masses, a black hole where gravity operates alone with such intensity that even light cannot escape.\nGravitational radiation.\nGeneral relativity predicts that energy can be transported out of a system through gravitational radiation also known as gravitational waves. The first indirect evidence for gravitational radiation was through measurements of the Hulse\u2013Taylor binary in 1973. This system consists of a pulsar and neutron star in orbit around one another. Its orbital period has decreased since its initial discovery due to a loss of energy, which is consistent for the amount of energy loss due to gravitational radiation. This research was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1993.\nThe first direct evidence for gravitational radiation was measured on 14 September 2015 by the LIGO detectors. The gravitational waves emitted during the collision of two black holes 1.3 billion light years from Earth were measured. This observation confirms the theoretical predictions of Einstein and others that such waves exist. It also opens the way for practical observation and understanding of the nature of gravity and events in the Universe including the Big Bang. Neutron star and black hole formation also create detectable amounts of gravitational radiation. This research was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2017.\nDark matter.\nAt the cosmological scale, gravity is a dominant player. About 5/6 of the total mass in the universe consists of dark matter which interacts through gravity but not through electromagnetic interactions. The gravitation of clumps of dark matter known as dark matter halos attract hydrogen gas leading to stars and galaxies.\nGravitational lensing.\nGravity acts on light and matter equally, meaning that a sufficiently massive object could warp light around it and create a gravitational lens. This phenomenon was first confirmed by observation in 1979 using the 2.1 meter telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona, which saw two mirror images of the same quasar whose light had been bent around the galaxy YGKOW G1.\nMany subsequent observations of gravitational lensing provide additional evidence for substantial amounts of dark matter around galaxies. Gravitational lenses do not focus like eyeglass lenses, but rather lead to annular shapes called Einstein rings.\nSpeed of gravity.\nIn October 2017, the LIGO and Virgo interferometer detectors received gravitational wave signals 2 seconds before gamma ray satellites and optical telescopes seeing signals from the same direction, from a source about 130 million light-years away. This confirmed that the speed of gravitational waves was the same as the speed of light.\nAnomalies and discrepancies.\nThere are some observations that are not adequately accounted for, which may point to the need for better theories of gravity or perhaps be explained in other ways.\nModels.\nThe physical models of gravity, like all physical models, are expressed mathematically. Physicists use several different models, depending on the problem to be solved or for the purpose of gaining physical intuition.\nNewtonian action-at-a-distance.\nNewton's inverse square law models gravity as a force F between two objects proportional to their mass, m:\nformula_7\nThis gravitational force causes the objects to accelerate towards each other unless balanced by other forces. The force is \"nonlocal\": it depends on the mass of an object at a distance. Scientists from Newton onwards recognized that this action at a distance does not explain the root cause of the force, but nevertheless the model explains a vast number of physical effects including cannon ball trajectories, tidal motion and planetary orbits. However, combining the concept of relativity with gravity is enormously complex using this Newtonian model.\nGravitational field.\nA second equivalent approach to model gravity uses fields. In physics, a field represents a physical phenomenon using a mathematical entity associated with each point in a space. Different field theories use different entities and concepts of space. For classical field theories of gravity, the entities can be vectors associated with points in a 3-dimensional space. Each vector gives the force experienced by an insignificantly small test mass at that point in space. The force vector at each point can be computed as the direction of the highest rate of change in the gravitational potential, a single number at each point in space. The three-dimensional map of the potential or of the gravitational field provides a visual representation of the effect of the gravitational effect of all surrounding objects. Field models are local: the field values on a sphere completely determine the effects of gravity with the sphere.\nFields are also used in general relativity, but rather than vectors over Euclidean space, the entities are tensors over spacetime. The Einstein field equations relate the 10 independent values in the tensors to the distribution of mass and energy in space.\nAction principles.\nA third completely different way to derive a model of gravity is based on action principles. This formulation represents the effects of gravity on a system in a mathematically abstract way. The state of the system, for example the position and velocity of every particle, is expressed as a single mathematical entity. Each state has an associated energy property called the Lagrangian; the physically allowed changes to the state of the system minimize the value of this property. The path of the state is not a path in physical space, but rather in a high-dimensional state space: each point along the path corresponds to a different position and or velocity collectively for all particles in the system. This formulation does not express the forces or fields of the individual particles. Modern theories of physics rely on these action principles. The Einstein field equation for gravitation can be derived from the Einstein\u2013Hilbert action.\nGeneral relativity.\nIn modern physics, general relativity is considered the most successful theory of gravitation. Physicists continue to work to find solutions to the Einstein field equations that form the basis of general relativity and continue to test the theory, finding excellent agreement in all cases.\nConstraints.\nAny theory of gravity must conform to the requirements of special relativity and experimental observations. Newton's theory of gravity assumes action at a distance and therefore cannot be reconciled with special relativity. The simplest generalization of Newton's approach would be a scalar field theory with the gravitational potential represented by a single number in a 4-dimensional spacetime. However, this type of theory fails to predict gravitational redshift or the deviation of light by matter and gives values for the precession of Mercury which are incorrect. A vector field theory predicts negative energy gravitational waves so it also fails. Furthermore, no theory without curvature in spacetime can be consistent with special relativity. The simplest theory consistent with special relativity and the well-studied observations is general relativity.\nGeneral characteristics.\nUnlike Newton's formula with one parameter, \"G\", force in general relativity is terms of 10 numbers formed in to a metric tensor.In general relativity the effects of gravitation are described in different ways in different frames of reference. In a free-falling or co-moving coordinate system, an object travels in a straight line. In other coordinate systems, the object accelerates and thus is seen to move under a force. The path in spacetime (not 3D space) taken by a free-falling object is called a geodesic and the length of that path as measured by time in the objects frame is the shortest (or rarely the longest) one. Consequently the effect of gravity can be described as curving spacetime. In a weak stationary gravitational field, general relativity reduces to Newton's equations. The corrections introduced by general relativity on Earth are on the order of 1 part in a billion.\nEinstein field equations.\nThe Einstein field equations are a system of 10 partial differential equations which describe how matter affects the curvature of spacetime. The system may be expressed in the form\nformula_8\nwhere G\u03bc\u03bd is the Einstein tensor, g\u03bc\u03bd is the metric tensor, T\u03bc\u03bd is the stress\u2013energy tensor, \u039b is the cosmological constant, formula_9 is the Newtonian constant of gravitation and formula_10 is the speed of light. The constant formula_11 is referred to as the Einstein gravitational constant.\nSolutions.\nThe non-linear second-order Einstein field equations are extremely complex and have been solved in only a few special cases. These cases however have been transformational in our understanding of the cosmos. Several solutions are the basis for understanding black holes and for our modern model of the evolution of the universe since the Big Bang.\nTests of general relativity.\nTesting the predictions of general relativity has historically been difficult, because they are almost identical to the predictions of Newtonian gravity for small energies and masses. A wide range of experiments provided support of general relativity. Today, Einstein's theory of relativity is used for all gravitational calculations where absolute precision is desired, although Newton's inverse-square law is accurate enough for virtually all ordinary calculations.\nGravity and quantum mechanics.\nDespite its success in predicting the effects of gravity at large scales, general relativity is ultimately incompatible with quantum mechanics. This is because general relativity describes gravity as a smooth, continuous distortion of spacetime, while quantum mechanics holds that all forces arise from the exchange of discrete particles known as quanta. This contradiction is especially vexing to physicists because the other three fundamental forces (strong force, weak force and electromagnetism) were reconciled with a quantum framework decades ago. As a result, researchers have begun to search for a theory that could unite both gravity and quantum mechanics under a more general framework.\nOne path is to describe gravity in the framework of quantum field theory (QFT), which has been successful to accurately describe the other fundamental interactions. The electromagnetic force arises from an exchange of virtual photons, where the QFT description of gravity is that there is an exchange of virtual gravitons. This description reproduces general relativity in the classical limit. However, this approach fails at short distances of the order of the Planck length, where a more complete theory of quantum gravity (or a new approach to quantum mechanics) is required.\nAlternative theories.\nGeneral relativity has withstood many tests over a large range of mass and size scales. When applied to interpret astronomical observations, cosmological models based on general relativity introduce two components to the universe, dark matter and dark energy, the nature of which is currently an unsolved problem in physics. The many successful, high precision predictions of the standard model of cosmology has led astrophysicists to conclude it and thus general relativity will be the basis for future progress. However, dark matter is not supported by the Standard Model of particle physics, physical models for dark energy do not match cosmological data, and some cosmological observations are inconsistent. These issues have led to the study of alternative theories of gravity.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38581", "revid": "12406635", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38581", "title": "Poltava", "text": "City and administrative center of Poltava Oblast, Ukraine\nPoltava (, ; , ) is a city located on the Vorskla River in Central Ukraine. It serves as the administrative center of Poltava Oblast as well as Poltava Raion within the oblast. It also hosts the administration of Poltava urban hromada, one of the hromadas of Ukraine. Poltava has a population of (2022 estimate)\nHistory.\nIt is still unknown when Poltava was founded, although the town was not attested before 1174. However, municipal authorities chose to celebrate the city's 1100th anniversary in 1999. As part of the 800th anniversary of Poltava celebrations, in 1974, the Urozhai Stadium was reopened after a six year of renovations. The settlement is indeed an old one, as archeologists unearthed an ancient Paleolithic dwelling, as well as Scythian remains, within the city limits.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe present name of the city is traditionally connected to the settlement Ltava, which is mentioned in the \"Hypatian Chronicle\" in 1174. According to the chronicle, on Saint Peter's Day (12 July) of 1182, Igor Sviatoslavich, chasing hordes of the Cuman khans Konchak and Kobiak, crossed the Vorskla River near \"Ltava\" and moved towards Pereiaslav), where Igor's army was victorious over the Cumans. During the Mongol invasion of Rus' in 1238\u201339, many cities of the middle Dnipro region were destroyed, possibly including Ltava.\nIn the mid-14th century the region was part of the Duchy of Kyiv, which was a vassal of the Algirdas' Grand Duchy of Lithuania. According to the Russian historian Aleksandr Shennikov, the region around modern Poltava was a Cuman Duchy belonging to Mansur, who was a son of Mamai. Shennikov also claims that the Mansur Duchy joined the Grand Duchy of Lithuania as an associated state rather than a vassal state, and that the city of Poltava already existed at that time. In 1399, Mansur's army assisted the Grand Ducal Lithuanian Army in the battle of the Vorskla River. According to legend, after the battle, the Cossack Mamay helped Vytautas to escape death.\nThe city is mentioned for the first time under the name of Poltava no later than 1430. Supposedly, in 1430 the Lithuanian duke Vytautas gave the city, along with Glinsk (today a village near the city of Romny) and Glinitsa, to Murza Olexa (Loxada Mansurxanovich), who moved to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania from the Golden Horde. In 1430 Murza Olexa was baptized as Alexander Glinsky, who was a progenitor of the Glinsky family. According to Shenninkov, Alexander Glinsky must have been baptized in 1390 by Cyprian, Metropolitan of Kyiv, who had just regained his title of Metropolitan of Kyiv and all Russia (rather than the Metropolitan of Russia Minor and Lithuania). On 6 March 1390 Cyprian permanently moved to Muscovy.\nIn 1482, Poltava was razed by the Crimean Khan Mengli I Giray.\nEarly modern period.\nIn 1537 Ografena Vasylivna Glinska (Baibuza) passed Poltava to her son-in-law Mykhailo Ivanovych Hrybunov-Baibuza.\nAfter the Union of Lublin in 1569, the territory around Poltava became part of the Crown of Poland. In 1630 Poltava was passed to a Polish magnate, Bartholomew Obalkowski. In 1641 it changed ownership again, to Alexander Koniecpolski. In 1646 Poltava became part of Wi\u015bniowiecki Ordynatsia (a large Wi\u015bniowiecki estate in Left-bank Ukraine centered in Lubny), governed by the Ruthenian-Polish magnate Jeremi Wi\u015bniowiecki (1612\u201351). \nIn 1648, the city became the base of a distinguished regiment of Ukrainian Cossacks, and served as a Cossack stronghold during the Khmelnytsky Uprising. In 1650, to commemorate a victory of the Cossack Host over the Polish army at the Poltavka River, the Metropolitan of Kyiv, Sylvester Kossov, ordered the establishment of the Holy Cross Exaltation Monastery in Poltava. The project was financed by a number of prominent local residents, including Martyn Pushkar, Ivan Iskra, Ivan Kramar and many others.\nDuring the 1654 Pereyaslav Council, the Poltava city delegates pledged their allegiance to the Czar of Muscovy, after which stolnik Andrei Spasitelev arrived in Poltava and recorded 1,335 residents who had pledged their allegiance. In 1658 Poltava became a center of anti-government revolt led by Martyn Pushkar, who contested the legitimacy of Ivan Vyhovsky's election to the post of Hetman of Zaporizhian Host. The uprising was extinguished with the help of Crimean Tatars. \nOn the issue boyar Vasily Borisovich Sheremetev wrote to Alexei Mikhailovich on 8 June 1658: \"... the \"Cherkas\" [Cossack] city of Poltava is ravaged and burned to the ground and only if the Great Sovereign orders to rebuild on the Tatar Sokma (pathway) of and protect many his sovereign cities from Tatar visits. And if the Great Sovereign allows to place a voivode in the city and rebuilt the city until the fall that in Poltava \"Cherkasy\" [Cossacks] and residents built their houses and stock-piled their food\". With the signing of the 1667 truce of Andrusovo, the city was finally subjected to the Tsardom of Muscovy, while remaining part of the Cossack Hetmanate.\nThe city suffered from the Great Turkish War when in 1695 Petro Ivanenko led an anti-Muscovite uprising with the help of Crimean Tatars, who ravaged the local monastery. The same year the Poltava Regiment actively participated in the Azov campaigns which resulted in the taking of the Turkish fortress of Kyzy-Kermen (today the city of Beryslav, Kherson Oblast). \nOn 8 July (New Style) or 27 June (Old Style) 1709 the Battle of Poltava took place near the city during the Great Northern War. The battle ended in a decisive victory of Peter I of Russia over the Swedish forces. As a result, the Swedish Empire lost its status as a European great power and the Russian Empire began an era of supremacy in eastern Europe. In 1710 there was a plague in the city and its surrounding area. In the mid-18th century the Kolomak Woods near Poltava became a base of haidamaks (Cossack paramilitary bands).\nBy 1770, Poltava had several brick factories, a regimental doctor, and a pharmacy; that same year the city conducted four fairs. In 1775 it became a city of Novorossiysk Governorate, guarded by the 8th Company of the Dnieper Pike Regiment headquartered in Kobeliaky. In 1775 Poltava's Holy Cross Exaltation Monastery became the seat of bishops of the newly created Eparchy (Diocese) of Slaviansk and Kherson. This large new diocese included the lands of the Novorossiya Governorate and the Azov Governorate north of the Black Sea.\nSince much of that area had only recently been seized from the Ottoman Empire by Russia, and a large number of Orthodox Greek settlers had been invited to settle in the region, the imperial government selected a renowned Greek scholar, Eugenios Voulgaris, to preside over the new diocese. After his retirement in 1779, he was replaced by another Greek theologian, Nikephoros Theotokis.\nIn 1779 the city established the Poltava county school, which became its first secular educational institution. In 1787 Catherine the Great stopped in Poltava on the way from Crimea, escorted by Grigori Potemkin, Alexander Suvorov and Mikhail Kutuzov. In Poltava, on 7 June 1787, before another Russo-Turkish War, Potemkin received his title \"Prince of Taurida\", while Suvorov received a snuffbox with monogram. In 1802 the city became the seat of the newly established Poltava Governorate. The city's population in 1802 consisted of some 8,000 residents. That same year Poltava opened a government-funded hospital of 20 beds.\n19th century.\nOn 2 February 1808, the Poltava Male Gymnasium was established. On 20 June 1808 some 54 families of craftsmen were invited to the city from German principalities and settled in the newly established German Sloboda neighborhood with about 50 clay-made houses. In 1810 there were 8,328 people living in Poltava; that same year, the city's first theater was built. In August 1812, on orders of Little Russia Governor General Lobanov-Rostovsky, the famed Ukrainian writer and statesman Ivan Kotlyarevsky formed the 5th Poltava Cavalry Cossack Regiment.\nBy 1860, Poltava had around 30,000 inhabitants, a district school, a gymnasium, an Institute for Noble Maidens, a spiritual academy, a cadet corps, a library and a number of schools. In 1870, Poltava railway station was opened, leading to rapid economic growth in the region. However, by 1914 the Population of Poltava (around 60,000) was mostly working in small enterprises. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries Poltava became an important cultural centre, where many representatives of Ukrainian national revival were active.\n20th century.\nDuring the events of 1917\u20131920, Poltava was under the rule of a number of governments, including the Central Rada, Hetmanate, Ukrainian People's Republic, White Movement and Bolsheviks. From 1918 to 1919 there was Occupation of Poltava by the Bolsheviks. After becoming a part of Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Poltava experienced accelerated industrial growth, and its population increased to 130,000 by 1939.\nIn World War II, the Nazi \"Wehrmacht\" occupied Poltava from 18 September 1941 until 23 September 1943, when it was retaken during the Chernigov-Poltava Strategic Offensive of the Battle of the Dnieper. During the Nazi occupation the Jewish population (9.9% of the total population in 1939) was imprisoned in a ghetto before being murdered during mass executions perpetrated by an Einsatzgruppe and buried in mass graves in the area. \nBy the summer of 1944, the United States Army Air Forces conducted a number of shuttle bombing raids against Nazi Germany under the name of Operation Frantic. Poltava Air Base, as well as Myrhorod Air Base, were used as eastern locations for landing B-17 Flying Fortress heavy bombers involved in those operations.\nThe post-war restoration of Poltava continued in the 1950s and 1960s. The city became an important centre of military education in the Soviet Union, where missile and communications officers were prepared, and was also home to a Soviet Air Force division of heavy bombers.\nUntil 18 July 2020, Poltava was designated as a city of oblast significance and did not belong to Poltava Raion even though it was the center of the raion. As part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Poltava Oblast to four, the city was merged into Poltava Raion.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEthnic groups.\nDistribution of the population by ethnicity according to the 2001 census:\nLanguage.\nDistribution of the population by native language according to the 2001 census:\nAccording to a survey conducted by the International Republican Institute in April-May 2023, 75\u00a0% of the city's population spoke Ukrainian at home, and 12\u00a0% spoke Russian.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nPoltava has a warm-summer humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfb\"), with four distinct seasons, it is one of the coldest cities in Ukraine. The annual precipitation is fairly evenly distributed, with the highest concentration in summer, and which falls as snow in winter.\nGovernment and subdivisions.\nPoltava is the administrative center of the Poltava Oblast (province) as well as of the Poltava Raion housed within the city. However, Poltava is a city of oblast subordinance, thus being subject directly to the oblast authorities rather to the raion administration housed in the city itself.\nPoltava's government consists of the 50-member Poltava City Council () which is headed by the Secretary (currently Oleksandr Kozub). The city's current mayor is Oleksandr Mamay, who was sworn in on 4 November 2010 after being elected with more than 61 percent of the vote. In 2015 he was re-elected as a candidate of Conscience of Ukraine with 62.9% in a second round of Mayoral election.\nThe territory of Poltava is divided into 3 urban districts:\nThe village of Rozsoshentsi, Shcherbani, Tereshky, Kopyly and Suprunivka are officially considered to be outside the city, but constitute part of the Poltava agglomeration.\nCulture.\nThe centre of the old city is a semicircular Neoclassical square with the Tuscan column of cast iron (1805\u201311), commemorating the centenary of the Battle of Poltava and featuring 18 Swedish cannons captured in that battle. As Peter the Great celebrated his victory in the Saviour church, this 17th-century wooden shrine was carefully preserved to this day. The five-domed city cathedral, dedicated to the Exaltation of the Cross, is a superb monument of Cossack Baroque, built between 1699 and 1709. As a whole, the cathedral presents a unity which even the Neoclassical belltower has failed to mar. Another frothy Baroque church, dedicated to the Dormition of the Theotokos, was destroyed in 1934 and rebuilt in the 1990s.\nA minor planet 2983 Poltava discovered in 1981 by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Stepanovich Chernykh is named after the city.\nSports.\nThe most popular sport is football (soccer). Two professional football teams are based in the city: Vorskla Poltava and SC Poltava, there was also FC Poltava dissolved in 2018.\nThere are 3 stadiums in Poltava: Butovsky Vorskla Stadium (main city stadium), Dynamo Stadium are situated in the city centre and Lokomotiv Stadium which is situated in Podil district.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nTransportation.\nPoltava's transportation infrastructure consists of two major train stations: Poltava-Pivdenna and Poltava-Kyivska, with railway links to Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Kremenchuk. Poltava-Kyiv line is electrified and is used by the Poltava Express. The electrification of the Poltava-Kharkiv line was completed in August 2008.\nThe Avtovokzal serves as the city's intercity bus station. Buses for local municipal routes depart from \"AC-2\" (autostation No. 2 \u2013 along Shevchenko Street) and \"AC-3\" (Zinkivska Street). Local municipal routes are parked along the Taras Shevchenko Street. Marshrutka minibuses serve areas where regular bus access is unavailable; however, they are privately owned and cost more per ride. In addition, a 10-route trolleybus network of runs throughout the city. On the routes of the city go more than 50 units of trolleybuses.\nPoltava is also served by an International Airport, situated outside the city limits near the village of Ivashky. The international highway M03, linking Poltava with Kyiv and Kharkiv, passes through the southern outskirts of the city. There is also a regional highway P-17 crossing Poltava and linking it with Kremenchuk and Sumy.\nEducation.\nPoltava has always been one of the most important science and education centres in Ukraine. Major universities and institutions of higher education include the following:\nAstronomy\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nPoltava is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38585", "revid": "39152912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38585", "title": "Charles XIV John", "text": "King of Sweden and Norway from 1818 to 1844\nCharles XIV John (; 26 January 1763 \u2013 8 March 1844) was King of Sweden and Norway from 1818 until his death in 1844 and the first monarch of the Bernadotte dynasty. In Norway, he is known as Charles III John (); before he became royalty in Sweden, his name was Jean-Baptiste Jules Bernadotte. During the Napoleonic Wars, he participated in several battles as a Marshal of France.\nBorn in Pau in the region of southern France known as B\u00e9arn, Bernadotte joined the French Royal Army in 1780. Following the outbreak of the French Revolution, he demonstrated great military talent, rising rapidly through the ranks and becoming a brigadier general by 1794. He served with distinction in Italy and Germany, and was briefly Minister of War. His relationship with Napoleon was turbulent; nevertheless, Napoleon named him a Marshal of the Empire on the proclamation of the French Empire. Bernadotte played a significant role in the French victory at Austerlitz, and was made Prince of Pontecorvo as a reward. His marriage to D\u00e9sir\u00e9e Clary, whose sister was married to Joseph Bonaparte, made Bernadotte a member of the extended Imperial family.\nIn 1810, Bernadotte was unexpectedly elected the heir-presumptive (Crown Prince) to the childless King Charles XIII of Sweden, thanks to the advocacy of Baron Carl Otto M\u00f6rner, a Swedish courtier and obscure member of the Riksdag of the Estates. He assumed the name Charles (Carl) after his adoptive father and John (Johan), which is a Swedish version of Jean. He was subsequently named regent and generalissimo of the Swedish Armed Forces, soon after his arrival becoming \"de facto\" head of state for most of his time as Crown Prince. In 1812, following the sudden unprovoked French invasion of Swedish Pomerania, Crown Prince Charles John was instrumental in the creation of the Sixth Coalition by allying with Alexander I of Russia and using Swedish diplomacy to bring warring Russia and Britain together in alliance. He then played a major role in the writing of the Trachenberg Plan, the war-winning Allied campaign plan, and commanded the Allied Army of the North that defeated two concerted French attempts to capture Berlin and made the decisive attack on the last day of the catastrophic French defeat at Leipzig.\nFollowing the conclusion of the Leipzig campaign and after liberating Bremen and L\u00fcbeck from the French in late November 1813, Charles John invaded Denmark, aiming to knock Napoleon's last major ally out of the war to secure the Coalition's northern flank in preparation for the invasion of France in 1814 and to secure Norway for Sweden, as stipulated in the several treaties that created the Sixth Coalition. After a brief campaign that saw the defeat of the Danish Army, King Frederick VI of Denmark was forced to sign the Treaty of Kiel on 15 January 1814 that ceded Norway to Sweden, that in turn led to the Swedish\u2013Norwegian War of 1814, where Norway was defeated in nineteen days. This put Norway into a union with Sweden, which lasted for almost a century before its peaceful 1905 dissolution. The Swedish\u2013Norwegian war is viewed as Sweden's last direct conflict and war.\nUpon the death of Charles XIII in 1818, Charles John ascended to the throne. He presided over a period of peace and prosperity, and reigned until his death in 1844.\nEarly life and family.\nJean Bernadotte was born on 26 January 1763 in Pau, the capital of the province of B\u00e9arn in the southwestern part of the Kingdom of France. He was the son of Jean Henri Bernadotte (1711\u20131780), prosecutor at Pau, and his wife (married at Boeil, 20 February 1754) Jeanne de Saint-Jean (1728\u20131809), niece of the lay abbot of Sireix. The family name was originally du Poey (or de Pouey), but was changed to Bernadotte\u00a0\u2013 a surname of an ancestress at the beginning of the 17th century. He was the youngest of five siblings, two of whom died in childhood. Soon after his birth, Baptiste was added to his name to distinguish him from his elder brother Jean \u00c9vangeliste. Bernadotte himself added Jules to his first names as a tribute to the French Empire under Napoleon I.\nAt the age of 14, he was apprenticed to a local attorney. Aged 17, his father's death dissuaded him from following in his career.\nEarly military career.\nBernadotte joined the army as a private in the R\u00e9giment Royal\u2013La Marine on 3 September 1780, and first served in the newly conquered territory of Corsica. Subsequently, the R\u00e9giment stationed in Besan\u00e7on, Grenoble, Vienne, Marseille and \u00cele de R\u00e9. He reached the rank of sergeant in August 1785 and was nicknamed \"Sergeant Belle-Jambe\", for his smart appearance. In early 1790, he was promoted to adjutant-major, the highest rank for non-commissioned officers in the Ancien R\u00e9gime.\nRevolutionary Wars.\nFollowing the outbreak of the French Revolution, his eminent military qualities brought him speedy promotion. Bernadotte's promotions came both from the esteem of his commanders as well as from his men; having been elected to the rank of lieutenant colonel and colonel by his men, though he refused both nominations in favor of traditional advancement.\nIt was during this period of rapid advancement that the military qualities he became known for, daring assaults and gasconades, came to the fore. Of the latter, Bernadotte was gifted in his ability to inspire his men to prodigious feats of valor. He has been compared by historians to fellow Gascon, D'Artagnan. One of his biographers asserts that Dumas used Bernadotte as the model for his D'Artagnan. As Colonel and commander of the 71st Demi-Brigade, Bernadotte rallied his men, who were retreating in disorder before an Austrian attack, by tearing off his epaulettes, throwing them to the ground before his men, and shouting, \u201cIf you dishonor yourselves by flight, I refuse to remain your colonel!\u201d Soldiers left the ranks, gathered his epaulettes, pressed them into his hands, formed ranks and reformed the line, and counter-attacked.\nBy 1794, he was promoted to brigadier, attached to the Army of Sambre-et-Meuse. After Jourdan's victory at Fleurus (26 June 1794), where he distinguished himself with a decisive attack and seizure of key terrain that led to the Austrian retreat, he became a divisional general.\nBernadotte played key roles throughout the next 18 months during the three French invasions into Germany; often employed in the place of honor during offensives, leading the vanguard, and in retreat as a defensive specialist commanding the rearguard.\nAt the Battle of Theiningen (1796), where the Austrians outnumbered the French three to one, Bernadotte's rear-guard successfully repulsed numerous attacks while inflicting heavy losses on the enemy, preventing the Archduke Charles from cutting off the retreat of the French army over the Rhine after its defeat by the Austrians at the Battle of W\u00fcrzburg.\nAt the beginning of 1797, he was ordered by the Directory to march with 20,000 men as reinforcements to Napoleon Bonaparte's army in Italy. His successful crossing of the Alps through the storm in midwinter was highly praised but coldly received by the Army of Italy. Upon receiving insult from Dominique Martin Dupuy, the commander of Milan, Bernadotte was to arrest him for insubordination. Dupuy was a close friend of Louis-Alexandre Berthier, and this started a long-lasting feud between Bernadotte and Berthier, who would become Napoleon's chief of staff.\nHe had his first interview with Napoleon in Mantua and was appointed the commander of the 4th division. During the invasion of Friuli and Istria, Bernadotte distinguished himself greatly at the passage of the Tagliamento where he led the vanguard, and at the capture of the fortress of Gradisca (19 March 1797). After the 18th Fructidor, Napoleon ordered his generals to collect from their respective divisions' addresses in favor of the coup d'\u00e9tat of that day; but Bernadotte sent an address to the Directory different from that which Napoleon wished for and without conveying it through Napoleon's hands.\nAfter the Treaty of Campo Formio, Napoleon gave Bernadotte a friendly visit at his headquarters at Udine, but immediately after deprived him of half his division of the army of the Rhine, and commanded him to march the other half back to France. Paul Barras, one of five directors, was cautious that Napoleon would overturn the Republic, so he appointed Bernadotte commander-in-chief of the Army of Italy in order to offset Napoleon's power. Bernadotte was pleased with this appointment but Napoleon lobbied Talleyrand-P\u00e9rigord, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, to appoint him to the embassy of Vienna instead. Bernadotte was very dissatisfied; he finally accepted the post in Vienna, but had to quit owing to the disturbances caused by his hoisting the tricolour over the embassy.\nAfter returning from Vienna, he resided in Paris. He married D\u00e9sir\u00e9e Clary in August 1798, the daughter of a Marseilles merchant, and once engaged to Napoleon, and Joseph Bonaparte's sister-in-law. In November of the same year, he was made commander of the army of observation on the upper Rhine. Although solicited to do so by Barras and Joseph Bonaparte, he did not take part in the coup d'\u00e9tat of the 30th Prairial. From 2 July to 14 September, he was Minister of War, in which capacity he displayed great ability. His popularity and contacts with radical Jacobins aroused antipathy of him in the government. On the morning of 13 September, he found his resignation announced in \"Le Moniteur Universel\" before he was aware that he had tendered it. This was a trick; played upon him by Siey\u00e8s and Roger Ducos, the directors allied to Napoleon.\nThough Bernadotte declined to help Napoleon Bonaparte stage his \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" of November 1799, Napoleon was resolved to win over the \"Obstacle Man\" and showered him with honors. Napoleon acknowledged Bernadotte's administrative ability and influence by naming him a Councillor of State in February 1800. In April 1800, despite his republican sympathies, Bernadotte was offered, and freely accepted, from April 1800 to 18 August 1801, the post of Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the West in the rebellious Vend\u00e9e, where he successfully restored its tranquility. This was seen as an appointment of trust, as while Napoleon embarked on his summer Italian Campaign, where he ultimately prevailed at the Battle of Marengo, he left Bernadotte not far from Paris with an army. In his farewell note to Bernadotte on his way to Italy, Napoleon wrote: \"I am going to fling myself once more into the hazards of war. We do not know how it may turn out. If I fall, you will find yourself with 40,000 men at the gates of Paris. In your hands will be the fate of the Republic.\" As Bernadotte was brother-in-law to Joseph and close friends with his other brothers and sisters, Napoleon is thought to have been considering the welfare of his family in the possible event of his death on the battlefield, as well as the future of the country, by leaving his erstwhile rival in a position to seize the reins of government as, of his former rivals, only Bernadotte had the political and military skill and popularity to maintain the Republic.\nIn 1802, Napoleon Bonaparte proposed that Bernadotte head to New France to serve as governor of Louisiana, which was to be transferred back to French control following the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso. In accepting the position, Bernadotte requested additional soldiers, settlers, and funding to support the colony, but Napoleon refused. In response, Bernadotte declined the posting and instead was named plenipotentiary ambassador to the United States. His posting was cancelled after the Sale of Louisiana.\nMarshal of the French Empire.\nOn the introduction of the First French Empire, Bernadotte became one of the eighteen Marshals of the Empire, and from June 1804 to September 1805 served as governor of the recently occupied Hanover. In this capacity, as well as during his later command of the army of northern Germany, he built a reputation for independence, incorruptibility, moderation, and administrative ability. Bernadotte's rule was popular, and despite the exactions taken from the populace as part of Napoleon's policy of making occupations pay for themselves, Hanover's economy prospered. Bernadotte extended his protection and made private contributions to Gottingen University, befriending many of the professors and other men of learning whom he often had over for dinner and employed to tutor himself and his wife.\nDuring the campaign of 1805, Bernadotte, with his army corps from Hanover, formed into the I Corps, commanded the Left Wing of the Grande Arm\u00e9e overseeing Auguste de Marmont's II Corps and having the majority of the Bavarian Army attached to his command; some 65,000 men or 1/4th of the Army. Bernadotte was also tasked with assuring France's newest ally, the Elector of Bavaria, Maximillian IV Joseph, that the Austrians would be driven from his country.\nBernadotte, with Davout's III Corps attached to his command, and the Bavarians, gained a victory over the Austrians, driving them out of Munich on 12 October, taking some 3000 prisoners and 19 guns and installing Maximillian Joseph back onto his throne. I Corps then co-operated in the great movement which resulted in the shutting off of Mack in the Battle of Ulm. Bernadotte's troops then captured Salzburg on 30 October. In the Battle of Austerlitz (2 December 1805) he was posted with his corps in the center between Soult and Lannes, and contributed to defeating the attempt of the right wing of the allies to outflank the French army. As a reward for his services at Austerlitz, he became the 1st Sovereign Prince of Pontecorvo (5 June 1806), a district in southern Italy formerly subject to the Pope.\nDuring the 1806 campaign against Prussia, Bernadotte was reproached by Napoleon for not participating with his army corps in the battles of Jena and Auerst\u00e4dt (14 October 1806). Napoleon, on the night of 13 October, thinking he had faced the whole Prussian Army at Jena, sent orders to Davout, through Marshal Berthier, Davout relayed the order to Bernadotte at 0400 on 14 October with the order stating: \"If the Prince of Ponte Corvo [Bernadotte] is with you, you may both march together, but the Emperor hopes that \"he will be in the position which had been indicated at Dornburg\".\" This was in accordance with Bernadotte's last set of written orders from 12 October, which ordered him and Davout to get across the Prussian line of retreat. In pursuance of these orders, Bernadotte, separately from Davout, left Naumburg at dawn on the morning of the 14th for Dornburg and marched toward Apolda, which he reached by 16:00. Hampered by the very poor state of the roads, and a steep defile within which Dornburg is situated and the narrow bridge which passes over the Saale, that could pass but one artillery piece at a time according to General Dupont, he could not engage in the Battle of Jena, though he effectively compelled the Prussians to retreat from both battlefields by posting his troops on the heights of Apolda.\nThe defile was such an obstacle that Bernadotte's 3rd Infantry division, commanded by Jean-Baptiste Drouet, Comte d'Erlon, was still in the midst of crossing the bridge well after nightfall, making it unlikely that Bernadotte could have intervened at Auerst\u00e4dt in any event. He later was accused of deliberately refusing to support Davout, who had unexpectedly encountered the Prussian main army at Auerst\u00e4dt, out of jealousy, and Napoleon, if reminiscences from St. Helena may be believed, once intended to put Bernadotte before a court-martial. In fact, he did what he had been ordered to do, and more fundamental responsibility for his absence rests upon the ambiguous and indirect orders issued by Berthier and Napoleon's unawareness of the Prussian position. Documentary evidence supports Bernadotte's assertion that he was ordered to Dornberg, as no orders from Napoleon to Bernadotte to march with Davout were ever found in French Imperial Archives, while Berthier's order of 14 October was confirmed.\nAfter the Battle of Jena, Bernadotte crushed the Prussian Reserve Army, all fresh troops fortified behind a marsh and the River Saale, under Duke Eugen of W\u00fcrttemberg at Halle (17 October 1806), though Imperial Headquarters did not much appreciate this victory. When visiting Halle after the battle, and commenting on the degree of difficulty of storming a fortified position accessible only by a single bridge, Napoleon enigmatically commented, \"Bernadotte stops at nothing. Someday the Gascon will get caught.\" Subsequently, Bernadotte pursued, conjointly with Soult and Murat (known as the \"Pursuit of the Three Marshals\"), Prussian general Bl\u00fccher's Corps to L\u00fcbeck, where his troops stormed the Prussian defenses, taking the city and forcing Bl\u00fccher's capitulation at Ratekau (7 November 1806). When the French forced their way into L\u00fcbeck, the city became the target of large-scale looting and rampage by the French soldiers. Bernadotte, struggling desperately to prevent his men from sacking the city, was given six horses from the Council of L\u00fcbeck as a token of their appreciation. He also treated with courtesy 1600 Swedish prisoners, under the command of Colonel Count Gustaf M\u00f6rner, and allowed them to return to their home country. The impressed Swedes went home with a tale of Bernadotte's fairness in maintaining order within the city. Count M\u00f6rner would later play a prominent role in the election of Bernadotte as Crown Prince of Sweden.\nThereafter, he marched to Poland in command of the French Left Wing, composed of his I Corps and Ney's VI Corps. Left unsupported by Ney's unexpected movement toward K\u00f6nigsberg, the Russians under Levin August von Bennigsen passed over to the offensive and attempted to destroy Bernadotte's and Ney's isolated Corps. Napoleon, having received word of the Russian offensive, gave word to Bernadotte to retreat West to draw the Russians toward him so that Napoleon could then cut off and surround the Russians. Bernadotte moved West as ordered, pursued by Bennigsen, where he defeated the numerically superior Russian vanguard at Mohrungen (25 January 1807).\nDuring the battle, Bernadotte's personal wagon was captured by the Russians, and he was accused, by the Cossacks who looted his baggage, of having extorted a large quantity of silver plate from minor German states. This claim is unsubstantiated and contrary to his reputation. He was known throughout the army for his probity and honesty in the conduct of his affairs on campaign, and he refrained from the looting and brigandage that many of his fellow marshals engaged in. As a consequence, his table fare was considered poor by his brother marshals, and while others dined on fine service and employed chefs, he habitually used his own money to pay for food for his troops, and to give money awards to those who merited recognition. He held his troops to the same high standard; he punished looting and rape severely, and was known to intervene with his sword drawn against those engaged in pillaging, as was the case following the capture of L\u00fcbeck.\nDue to the capture of a courier carrying the Emperor's latest orders, Bernadotte was not informed of a change of strategy to move East toward the rest of the French Army. As a consequence, Bernadotte's I Corps was too far away to take part in the Battle of Eylau (7 to 8 February 1807). Napoleon rebuked him for his absence, but it became acknowledged that it was not due to Bernadotte but Berthier's carelessness in dispatching the orderly. The Russians resumed the offensive that summer and Bernadotte was attacked by, and defeated, a strong Prussian Corps at Spanden, preserving the French bridgehead over the Pas\u0142\u0119ka, where he was nearly killed when a spent ball struck him in the neck. Due to this near-fatal wound, Bernadotte was invalided to the rear and missed the remainder of the Polish Campaign.\nAfter the Peace of Tilsit, on 14 July 1807, he became governor of the Hanseatic towns, where he once again proved his administrative and diplomatic abilities and was well-liked. He was to direct the expedition against Sweden, via the Danish islands, but the plan came to naught because of the want of transports and the defection of the Spanish contingent, which went back to Spain to fight against Napoleon at the start of the Peninsular War. Pursuant to the projected invasion of Sweden, and by virtue of Denmark becoming an ally of France in 1808, Bernadotte found himself de facto head of a French occupation of Denmark. He maintained strict discipline of his troops, and his good treatment of the Danes made him popular with the populace and the Danish Royal Family. Upon his departure from Denmark, he was one of the few Frenchmen of the period to be awarded the Order of the Elephant.\nDuring Bernadotte's time as governor of the Hanseatic cities, the Abdications of Bayonne occurred, an event that triggered the Peninsular War, which would play such a large role in Napoleon's defeat. For a time, Napoleon considered the notion of placing Bernadotte on the Spanish throne, going so far as to hint at it in a letter to him. Bernadotte informed Napoleon that he did not want the Spanish Crown. Joseph Bonaparte, Bernadotte's friend and brother-in-law, was chosen instead. It was not the first or last time Napoleon considered placing Bernadotte on a foreign throne. Indeed, Napoleon, on several occasions, both during his days as First Consul and as Emperor, considered naming Bernadotte (Napoleon also considered Murat) as his successor by adoption. Despite their rivalry, Napoleon thought Bernadotte alone had the popularity, administrative, and military skill to safeguard the Empire he had built. The birth of the King of Rome put an end to Napoleon's need for an heir. Ironically, Bernadotte eventually wore a crown, not through the auspices of Napoleon, but as an enemy of France.\nRecalled to Germany to assist in the new war between France and Austria, he received the command of the 9th Corps, which was mainly composed of Saxons. Further difficulties with Berthier, and a saddling with ill-prepared Saxons, combined with an illness, compelled Bernadotte to beg for release from service. Bernadotte wrote to Napoleon that \"I see my efforts perpetually paralyzed by a hidden force over which I can not prevail.\" Napoleon disregarded these appeals, and Bernadotte proceeded with the campaign, commanding mostly foreign troops with few French troops under his command.\nAt the Battle of Wagram (5 July 1809), he entered battle with his Saxon corps, to which the division of Dupas was attached and which formed his reserve. Resting on the French Left, Bernadotte's corps was battered during the night but resisted the full fury of the Austrian attack, facing superior numbers. At a critical moment, the officer ordered Dupas forward to his support; the latter replied that he had orders from the emperor to remain where he was. Having been badly mauled and fully exposed ahead of the main French line, IX Corps withdrew from the village of Aderklaa against Napoleon's orders. On the second day of battle, 6 July 1809, IX Corps, having been mauled the night before, wherein Bernadotte struggled to rally his demoralized Saxons, was attacked by two Austrian corps, as part of Archduke Charles's effort to break the French line. This time Bernadotte's depleted forces\u00a0\u2013 he had only 6,000 infantry left\u00a0\u2013 broke and fled (Bernadotte's Corps was not the only one to break that day; Mass\u00e9na's troops were also routed by the attack). The routed Saxons retreated in disorder toward Raasdorf as Bernadotte attempted to rally his men, where he encountered Napoleon. IX Corps rallied and continued to play a role in the battle. Rumors that Napoleon relieved Bernadotte of command on the spot at Raasdorf have long been the stuff of legend, but are not verified. After the battle, Bernadotte complained to Napoleon for having, in violation of all military rules, ordered Dupas to act independently of his command, and for having thereby caused great loss of life to the Saxons, and tendered his resignation. Napoleon accepted after he became aware of an order of the day issued by Bernadotte, which gave the Saxons credit for their courage in terms inconsistent with the emperor's official bulletin. Accounts of Bernadotte's role at Wagram are contradictory. While it is true that IX Corps broke on 6 July, as did other French formations, they later rallied and played a part in the victory. Moreover, Bernadotte fought with exceptional personal courage, at the head of his troops, and narrowly avoided death when attacked by Austrian cavalry. It is likely that IX Corps' poor performance would have been forgotten, and Bernadotte would have retained his command had he never published the controversial Order of the Day. His praise for the Saxons, as well as his mild and courteous treatment of them while under his command, was never forgotten by the Saxon officers and this would later have disastrous consequences for the French when a whole Saxon division defected to Bernadotte's Army of the North during a key moment of the Battle of Leipzig.\nWith Bernadotte having returned to Paris, the Walcheren Campaign (July 1809) caused the French ministry, in the absence of the emperor, to entrust him with the defense of Antwerp with both regular French and Dutch troops, along with the National Guard. Bernadotte took command of a chaotic situation in which troops from all over the Empire and its vassal states, as well as raw conscripts, were sent to Holland under divided command. He reorganized and trained his forces, named by the Emperor the Army of Antwerp, by instilling discipline in old soldiers who had been too long at the depots and by teaching raw conscripts their trade. Everywhere he instilled a fighting spirit, making an army out of a mob, and thus he rapidly brought the defenses of Antwerp to a high order of readiness. With Antwerp bristling with cannon and numerous defenders, and with the Army of Antwerp whipped into fighting shape, the British, vexed by poor leadership and with half the army immobilized with fever thanks to the insalubrious islands upon which they were quartered, realized that it was no longer possible to close the Scheldt, or take Antwerp, and they withdrew their forces. In a proclamation issued to his troops at Antwerp, he made an implied charge against Napoleon of having neglected to prepare the proper means of defense for the Belgian coast. A displeased Napoleon relieved Bernadotte of command of his ad hoc army and ordered his return to Paris, then to Catalonia to take command of the Army there. Refusing to comply with the order, he was summoned to Vienna, and after an interview with Napoleon at Sch\u00f6nbrunn, accepted the general government of the Roman departments.\nOffer of the Swedish throne.\nIn 1810, Bernadotte was about to enter his new post as governor of Rome when he was unexpectedly elected the heir-presumptive to King Charles XIII of Sweden. The problem of Charles's successor had been acute almost from the time he had ascended the throne a year earlier. He was 61 years old and in poor health. He was also childless; Queen Charlotte had given birth to two children who had died in infancy, and there was no prospect of her bearing another child. Soon after his coronation, the king had adopted a Danish prince, Charles August, who had died just a few months after his arrival. Despite the fact that Napoleon favored his ally Danish King Frederick VI, Danish Prince Frederick Christian initially had the most support to become the Swedish Crown Prince.\nThe political situation, both internal and external, in Sweden made selecting a foreign king an attractive option. Sweden wanted to strengthen its relationship with Napoleon for military reasons and sought to select a king who could attract Napoleon's support. The Swedish court initially sounded out the emperor for his preferences on candidates for crown prince, whereupon Napoleon made it clear he preferred his adopted stepson Eug\u00e8ne de Beauharnais, or one of his nephews or brothers. The Swedish envoys did not accept Eug\u00e8ne as a candidate. Baron Lagerbielke, the Swedish envoy in Paris, reported to Stockholm that Eug\u00e8ne was \"gentle and good,\" \"but he does not seem to be a man of strong character; and, although he had had great opportunities, he does not appear to have developed any distinguishing talents.\" Also, Eug\u00e8ne, serving as viceroy in Italy, did not wish to convert to Lutheranism, a prerequisite for accepting the Swedish offer. Moreover, none of Napoleon's brothers were interested in going to Sweden, and his nephews were too young, as the Swedes did not want the hazards of minority rule in the event that King Charles died prematurely. The matter was decided by an obscure Swedish courtier, Baron Karl Otto M\u00f6rner (nephew of Count Gustav M\u00f6rner, the commander of the Swedish force captured by Bernadotte at L\u00fcbeck), who, entirely on his own initiative, offered the succession to the Swedish crown to Bernadotte. Bernadotte communicated M\u00f6rner's offer to Napoleon, who at first treated the situation as an absurdity, but later came around to the idea and, while adopting a public attitude of indifference, quietly lent support to Bernadotte's candidacy both financially and diplomatically.\nAlthough the Swedish government, amazed at M\u00f6rner's effrontery, at once placed him under arrest on his return to Sweden, the candidature of Bernadotte gradually gained favour and on 21 August 1810 he was elected by the Riksdag of the Estates in \u00d6rebro to be the new crown prince, and was subsequently made Generalissimus of the Swedish Armed Forces by the King. Several factors benefitted Bernadotte's election. Being foreign was, although problematic, also to his favour due to geopolitical factors and the internal situation at the time. One benefit was his presumed close ties to French Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte, with whom he would have access to military backing, as the intention at the time was to reacquire Finland. The current King, Charles XIII, viewed Napoleon in a more positive way than Gustav IV Adolf had, who had held him in very ill regard. Another point in favour was that a large part of the Swedish Army, anticipating conflict with Russia, favoured electing a soldier. Also, Bernadotte was personally popular, owing to the kindness he had shown to the Swedish prisoners in L\u00fcbeck and his reputation as the well-liked governor of the Hanseatic Cities from 1807 to 1809, as many Swedish merchants had operated under his auspices. Finally, Bernadotte had no qualms about converting to Lutheranism, recalling the conversion of Henry IV for the benefit of France with whom he felt a kinship as both hailed from Pau, or converting his son Oscar (though his wife D\u00e9sir\u00e9e never did renounce Catholicism).\nBefore freeing Bernadotte from his allegiance to France, Napoleon asked him to agree never to take up arms against France. Bernadotte refused to make any such agreement, upon the ground that his obligations to Sweden would not allow it; Napoleon exclaimed, \"Go, and let our destinies be accomplished,\" and signed the act of emancipation unconditionally. Many were also optimistic that Sweden would recover Finland under Charles John. The Swedish crown prince even unsuccessfully sought Napoleon's support to assist Sweden in conquering Norway.\nCrown Prince and Regent.\nOn 2 November 1810 Bernadotte made his solemn entry into Stockholm, and on 5 November he received the homage of the Riksdag of the Estates, and he was adopted by King Charles XIII under the name of \"Charles John\" (Karl Johan). At the same time, he converted from Roman Catholicism to the Lutheranism of the Swedish court.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u201cI have beheld war near at hand, and I know all its evils: for it is not conquest which can console a country for the blood of her children, spilt on a foreign land. I have seen the mighty Emperor of the French, so often crowned with the laurel of victory, surrounded by his invincible armies, sigh after the olive-branches of peace. Yes, Gentlemen, peace is the only glorious aim of a sage and enlightened government: it is not the extent of a state which constitutes its strength and independence; it is its laws, its commerce, its industry, and above all, its national spirit.\u201d\nCharles John, address to the Estates, 5 November 1810.\nThe new Crown Prince was very soon the most popular and most powerful man in Sweden and quickly impressed his adoptive father. Following his first meeting with his new heir, Charles XIII (who had initially opposed Bernadotte's candidacy) remarked to his aide-de-camp count Charles de Suremain, \"My dear Suremain, I have gambled heavily, and I believe that after all I have won.\" He also made himself well-liked by Queen Charlotte, who regarded him as a \"gentleman in every sense of the word\", and established a net of contact within the Swedish aristocracy, befriending in particular the Brahe family through his favorite Magnus Brahe and countess Aurora Wilhelmina Brahe, whose cousin Mariana Koskull became his lover.\nThe infirmity of the old King and the dissensions in the Privy Council of Sweden placed the government, and especially the control of foreign policy, entirely in his hands. Amongst the first of Charles John's acts as Crown Prince was to address the dire state of the Swedish economy. The Swedish economy was in shambles after years of mismanagement under the reign of Gustav III and was further aggravated during the reign of his son, Gustav IV Adolf. The economic turmoil had been caused, in part, by the debts accrued from Gustav III's Russian War, in part to the failure of several of Gustav IV Adolf's well intentioned economic reforms (Gustav IV Adolf was rather more successful in his agrarian reforms) and the costs of the more recent wars against France and Russia. Under Gustav IV Adolf, genuine attempts at economic reform, including paying down the national debt by some 700,000 Riksdalers in the first years of his active reign, and revitalizing the currency, met with limited success.\nSuch measures were undermined by his other policies. Gustav IV Adolf's personal dislike of the Riksdag, which had the power to raise taxes, led to his refusal to call them into session after 1800, crippling his attempts to raise state revenues. Gustav IV Adolf's foreign policy plunged Sweden into disastrous (and expensive) wars against France and Russia. The cost of years of war, several poor harvests between 1798 and 1809, the ineptitude of his ministers in carrying out fiscal reforms, and the loss of Finland's tax base had ballooned Sweden's national debt. The impending demands of Napoleon to adhere to the Continental System forecasted even greater difficulties. Charles John immediately began making reforms and used his sizable fortune, honestly accrued during his time as French Marshal, to pay off much of the debt and stabilize the economy through grants and a \u00a3300,000 sterling loan to the state at 5 percent interest. Charles John also purchased back from the French private estates that had been confiscated during the occupation of Swedish Pomerania from 1808 to 1810 and returned them to their original Swedish and German owners.\nThe keynote of his foreign and domestic policy was the maintenance of Swedish independence of action, often in the face of French demands, and the acquisition of Norway as compensation for the loss of Finland. Many Swedes expected him to reconquer Finland, which had been ceded to Russia. The Crown Prince was aware of the difficulties due to the desperate state of the state's finances and the reluctance of the Finnish people to return to Sweden. Even if Finland was regained, he thought, it would put Sweden into a new cycle of conflicts with a powerful neighbor because there was no guarantee Russia would accept the loss as final. Therefore, he made up his mind to make a united Scandinavian peninsula, which was easier to defend, by taking Norway (intentionally without the ancient and remote provinces of Greenland, Iceland and the Faroe Islands) from Denmark and uniting her to Sweden. He tried to divert public opinion from Finland to Norway, by arguing that to create a compact peninsula, with sea for its natural boundary, was to inaugurate an era of peace, and that waging war with Russia would lead to ruinous consequences.\nSoon after Charles John's arrival in Sweden, Napoleon compelled him to accede to the Continental System and to declare war against the United Kingdom; otherwise, Sweden would face the determination of France, Denmark, and Russia. This demand would mean a hard blow to the national economy and the Swedish population. Sweden reluctantly declared war against the UK, which was treated by both countries as merely nominal, although Swedish imports of British goods decreased from \u00a34,871 million in 1810 to \u00a3523 million in the following year.\nIn January 1812, French troops suddenly invaded Swedish Pomerania and the island of R\u00fcgen. Officially, the French claimed that Sweden had repeatedly violated the Continental System and that the occupation of Stralsund and Swedish Pomerania was closing an entrep\u00f4t for illegal British goods. Napoleon, before marching to Moscow, also had to secure his rear and dared not allow a Swedish continental foothold behind him as he did not trust Charles John. Charles John believed that Napoleon scheduled the occupation to occur on the Crown Prince's birthday and ordered Charles John's old rival, Marshal Davout, to execute the operation as a personal insult, adding another dimension of personal enmity to the incident. As a result, the initially amicable relationship that Charles John had with Napoleon, following his election as Crown Prince, soon changed because of the invasion. The invasion was a clear violation of international law as well as an act of war and public opinion in Sweden was outraged. Moreover, it antagonized the pro-French faction at the Swedish court. Thereafter, the Crown Prince declared the neutrality of Sweden and opened negotiations with the UK and Russia.\nIn 1812, he allied Sweden with its traditional enemy, Russia, through the Treaty of Saint Petersburg, and sought to make peace with the United Kingdom, with whom Sweden was technically at war. Charles John's personal diplomacy served as the bridge between Russia and the UK, as on 18 July 1812, the Treaty of \u00d6rebro formally ended the wars between Britain and Sweden and Britain and Russia, and formed an alliance between Russia, Britain, and Sweden, creating the Sixth Coalition. The treaty stipulated that Sweden would land an army of no less than 25,000 on the continent for the express purpose of fighting France, as well as liberating Swedish Pomerania, and in exchange, Russia and the UK would diplomatically and militarily support the cession of Norway from the doggedly French-allied Denmark to Sweden. Throughout summer and fall 1812, Bernadotte sought to add more allies to the Coalition, and negotiated a treaty with the Spanish Supreme Central Junta against his own brother-in-law, who was currently the French-backed King of Spain. Although Napoleon had forced Frederick William III to break off relations with Sweden, Charles John corresponded with the King of Prussia, encouraging him to renounce the forced alliance with France and join the Coalition. Following the Convention of Tauroggen, which broke the Prussian/French Alliance, Frederick Wilhelm signed the Treaty of Kalisz with Russia, and then a separate peace treaty with Sweden, on the basis of Prussian recognition of the Norwegian cession to Sweden, in exchange for Swedish Pomerania, thus formally joining the Coalition in spring 1813.\nAfter the defeats at L\u00fctzen (2 May 1813) and Bautzen (21 May 1813), it was the Swedish Crown Prince who put fresh fighting spirit into the Allies; and at the conference of Trachenberg he drew up the Trachenberg Plan, the general plan for the campaign which began after the expiration of the Truce of Pl\u00e4switz.\nCharles John, as the Commander-in-Chief of the Northern Army, successfully defended the approaches to Berlin and was victorious in battle against Oudinot in August and against Ney in September at the Battles of Gro\u00dfbeeren and Dennewitz. Bernadotte's Army of the North would continue to guard Berlin and keep watch on Davout's forces in Hamburg while the Allies, in accordance with the plan conceived at Trachenberg, maneuvered toward Napoleon's army at Leipzig. With the other Allied armies engaged in battle on 17 October, Bernadotte's army finally crossed the Elbe and joined in the Battle of Leipzig on 19 October. His fresh troops, reinforced by 30,000 Prussians, joined the fray against the already battered French lines, where Swedish forces entered battle in numbers for the first time in the campaign. At a critical moment, entire Saxon regiments went over to his army in response to a proclamation released a week prior in which Bernadotte invited the Saxons to join their old commander in defeating Napoleon. The Army of the North committed the \"coup de gr\u00e2ce\" on the already depleted French, and Bernadotte was the first of the Allied sovereigns to enter Leipzig.\nAfter the Battle of Leipzig, he went his own way, determined at all hazards to cripple Denmark and to secure Norway, defeating the Danes in a relatively quick campaign. His efforts culminated in the favourable Treaty of Kiel, which transferred Norway to Swedish control.\nThe Norwegians rejected Swedish control. They declared independence, adopted a liberal constitution and elected Danish crown prince Christian Frederick to the throne. The ensuing war was swiftly won by Sweden under Charles John's generalship. The military operations in 1814 were to be Sweden's last war to this day. Charles John could have named his terms to Norway, but in a key concession accepted the Constitution of Norway and its own political autonomy. This paved the way for Norway to enter a personal union with Sweden later that year.\nDuring the period of the Allied invasion of France in the winter and spring of 1814, when it was unclear who would rule France after the war, the Russian Tsar Alexander I, with support from French liberals like Benjamin Constant and Madame de Sta\u00ebl, advocated placing Charles John on the French throne in place of Napoleon. He would rule France as a Constitutional Monarch and leave Oscar as Regent in Sweden and Norway. Ultimately the British and Austrians vetoed the idea, and the Allies agreed that if Napoleon were to be deposed, the only acceptable alternative was the restoration of the House of Bourbon.\nKing of Sweden and Norway.\nCharles John had been regent and \"de facto\" head of state upon his arrival, and took an increasing role in government from 1812 onward, with Charles XIII reduced to a mute witness in government councils following a stroke.\nUpon Charles's death on 5 February 1818, Charles John ascended the throne. He was initially popular in both countries. The democratic process and forces steadily matured under the King's restrained executive power.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Separated as we are from the rest of Europe, our policy, as well as our interest, will make us carefully abstain from mixing in any discussion foreign to the two people of Scandinavia; but my duty and your dignity will always be the rule of our conduct, and both one and the other prescribe to us never to permit interference in our internal affairs.\"\nSpeech of the King on the day of taking the oaths of allegiance and homage, 19 May 1818.\nThe foreign policy pursued by Charles John in the post-Napoleonic era was characterized by maintaining balance among the Great Powers and avoiding involvement in conflicts outside the Scandinavian peninsula. It made a sharp contrast with Sweden's previous hegemonic expansionism, which resulted in uninterrupted wars with neighboring countries for centuries, and he successfully kept his kingdoms at peace from 1814 until his death. He was especially concerned about the conflict between the UK and Russia. In 1834, when relations between the two countries were strained over the Near East Crisis, he sent memoranda to the British and Russian governments and proclaimed neutrality in advance. It is pointed out as the origin of Swedish neutrality.\nHis domestic policy particularly focused on the promotion of the economy and investment in social overhead capital, and the long peace since 1814 led to an increased prosperity for the country. During his long reign of 26 years (34 years if one counts his time as regent from 1810 to 1818), the population of the Kingdom was so increased that the inhabitants of Sweden alone became equal in number to those of Sweden and Finland before the latter province was torn from the former, the national debt was paid off, a civil and a penal code were proposed for promulgation, education was promoted, agriculture, commerce, and manufactures prospered, and the means of internal communication were increased.\nOn the other hand, radical in his youth, his views had veered steadily to the right over the years, and by the time he ascended the throne, he was an ultra-conservative. His autocratic methods, particularly his censorship of the press, were very unpopular, especially after 1823. His dynasty faced little danger, as the Swedes and the Norwegians alike were proud of a monarch with a good European reputation.\nHe also faced challenges in Norway. The Norwegian constitution gave the Norwegian parliament, the Storting, more power than any legislature in Europe. While Charles John had the power of an absolute veto in Sweden, he only had a suspensive veto in Norway. He demanded that the Storting give him the power of absolute veto, but was forced to back down. Charles John's difficult relationship with Norway was also demonstrated by the Storting's unwillingness to grant funds for the construction of a Royal Palace in the Norwegian capital Oslo. Construction began in 1825, but the Storting halted funding after the costly foundation was laid and demanded that the appointed architect, Hans Linstow, build a simpler palace. This was seen by many as a protest against unnecessary spending and the king's authority. The palace itself was not completed until 1849, long after the death of Charles John, and was inaugurated by Oscar I. The main street in Oslo, \"Slottsgaten\", would later be named after Charles John as Karl Johans gate.\nHis popularity decreased for a time in the 1830s, culminating in the Rabulist riots after the L\u00e8se-majest\u00e9 conviction of the journalist Magnus Jacob Crusenstolpe, and some calls for his abdication. Charles John survived the abdication controversy and he went on to have his silver jubilee, which was celebrated with great enthusiasm on 18 February 1843. He reigned as King of Sweden and Norway from 5 February 1818 until his death on 8 March 1844.\nDeath.\nOn 26 January 1844, his 81st birthday, Charles John was found unconscious in his chambers having suffered a stroke. While he regained consciousness, he never fully recovered and died on the afternoon of 8 March. On his deathbed, he was heard to say:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHis remains were interred after a state funeral in Stockholm's Riddarholmen Church. He was succeeded by his only son, Oscar I.\nHonours.\nNational.\nHe became Lord and Master of all Swedish orders of chivalry upon his accession to the throne.\nFictional portrayals.\nLouis-\u00c9mile Vanderburch and Ferdinand Langl\u00e9's 1833 play (\"The Bedfellow\") depicts Bernadotte as King of Sweden; an old grenadier claims that, as a young man, Bernadotte received a tattoo of a scandalous republican motto: either (\"Death to kings\"), or (\"Death to tyrants\"), or (\"Death to the king\"). The tattoo is finally revealed to read (\"Long live the Republic\") and a Phrygian cap: a highly ironic image and text for the skin of a king. This play was so popular that the idea that King Charles XIV John had a tattoo reading \"Death to kings\" is often repeated as fact, although there is no basis to it. For reasons of discretion, he publicly proclaimed himself in 1797 \"a Republican both by principle and conviction\" who would \u201cto the moment of my death, oppose all Royalists and enemies to the Directory\".\nD\u00e9sir\u00e9e Clary's relationships with Bonaparte and Bernadotte were the subject of the novel \"D\u00e9sir\u00e9e\" by Annemarie Selinko. The novel was filmed as \"D\u00e9sir\u00e9e\" in 1954, with Marlon Brando as Napoleon, Jean Simmons as D\u00e9sir\u00e9e, and Michael Rennie as Bernadotte.\nBernadotte is a primary supporting character in the historical fiction novel by \"New York Times\" Bestselling author Allison Pataki \"A Queen's Fortune: A Novel of D\u00e9sir\u00e9e, Napoleon, and the Dynasty that outlasted the Empire,\" that tells the life story of his wife (and Queen of Sweden and Norway) D\u00e9sir\u00e9e Clary.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nAttribution"}
{"id": "38586", "revid": "50814710", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38586", "title": "Esperanto symbols", "text": "Symbols of the Esperanto language\nEsperanto symbols, primarily the Esperanto flag, have seen much consistency over the time of Esperanto's existence (namely in the consistent usage of the colour green), though a few variations in exact flag patterning and symbology exist.\nThe main flag of Esperanto, featuring the ('Green Star'), was adopted in 1905 for use as a symbol of mutual recognition among Esperantists, and is used by most Esperantists. As an alternative to the flag, the \"jubilea simbolo\" ('jubilee symbol') was proposed in 1987.\nHistory.\n\"Verda Stelo\".\nSince the earliest days of Esperanto, the colour green has been used as a symbol of mutual recognition, and it appears prominently in all Esperanto symbols. In a letter to \"The British Esperantist\" in 1911, L. L. Zamenhof, the creator of Esperanto, wrote: \"It seems to me, that my attention was drawn to the color green by Mr. Richard H. Geoghegan and from that time I began to publish all of my works with green covers . . . Looking at one of my pamphlets that I had entirely by chance printed with a green cover, he pointed out that this was the color of his homeland, Ireland; at that time it came to me, that we could certainly look at that color as a symbol of HOPE. About the five-pointed star, it seems to me, that at first Mr. de Beaufront had it imprinted on his grammar [of Esperanto]. I liked that and I adopted it as a symbol. Afterward by association of ideas, the star appeared with a green color.\"\nThe \"Verda Stelo\" was first proposed in an 1892 article in La Esperantisto for use as a symbol of mutual recognition among Esperantists. The flag was created by the Esperanto Club of Boulogne-sur-Mer, initially for their own use, but was adopted as the flag of the worldwide Esperanto movement by a decision of the first World Esperanto Congress, which took place in 1905 in that town.\nOther proposed flags and symbols.\nIn 1905, delegates to the first conference of Esperantists at Boulogne-sur-Mer, unanimously approved a version differing from the modern only by the superimposition of an \"E\" over the green star. Other variants include that for Christian Esperantists, with a white Christian cross superimposed upon the green star, and that for Leftists, with the color of the field changed from green to red.\nSome Esperanto speakers consider the traditional flag too nationalistic for an international language, so many organizations no longer recommend its use and, instead, use the jubilea simbolo (\"jubilee symbol\", two green \"E\"s facing each other\u2014or alternatively a Latin-alphabet \"E\" facing a Cyrillic-alphabet \"\u042d\", the first letter of \"\u042d\u0441\u043f\u0435\u0440\u0430\u043d\u0442\u043e\", the Russian name for Esperanto\u2014on a white field). This symbol was created in 1987 by a Brazilian Esperantist to mark the centenary of the creation of Esperanto.\nDesign of the \"Verda Stelo\".\nThe Esperanto flag is composed of a green background with a white square (canton) in the upper lefthand corner, which in turn contains a green star. The green field symbolizes hope, the white symbolizes peace and neutrality, and the five-pointed star represents the five continents (Europe, America, Asia, Oceania, Africa). \nBy recommendation of the board of the Universal Esperanto Association, the flag should have the following proportions: The ratio of the width of the flag to the height of the flag to a side of the white square should be 3 to 2 to 1. The ratio of a side of the white square to the radius of a circle enclosing the star should be 10 to 3.5.\nIn popular culture.\nMost Esperantists continue to hold the \"verda stelo\" dear as a symbol of international or supranational solidarity (with the \"jubilea simbolo\" jokingly called \"la melono\" ('the melon') by some), though many also regard the preference of one symbol over another as a purely personal choice. At most Esperanto congresses, the flag, the star, and the \"jubilea simbolo\" can all be seen in use on displays or being worn as badges. Sometimes, Esperanto travelers will display the flag, wear a badge with one of the above symbols, or even wear green clothes, to make themselves known to other Esperanto speakers.\nOn December 15, 2009, the \"Verda Stelo\" flew on the Google home search page \"Google\" logo to mark L. L. Zamenhof's 150th birthday. The flag flew on a flagstaff consisting of the \"L\" in the search-company's name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38587", "revid": "17216044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38587", "title": "Charles IX", "text": "Charles IX may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "38588", "revid": "24248858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38588", "title": "1599", "text": "Calendar year\n1599 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38589", "revid": "50578871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38589", "title": "1591", "text": "Calendar year\n1591 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38590", "revid": "18745235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38590", "title": "1590", "text": "Calendar year\n1590 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDeaths.\nProbable.\nBernard Palissy, French potter (b. 1510)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38591", "revid": "38308688", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38591", "title": "1589", "text": "Calendar year\n1589 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38592", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38592", "title": "1587", "text": "Calendar year\n1587 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38593", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38593", "title": "1586", "text": "Calendar year\n1586 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n\"To Be Added...\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38594", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38594", "title": "1584", "text": "Calendar year\n1584 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38595", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38595", "title": "1583", "text": "Calendar year\n1583 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38596", "revid": "46791144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38596", "title": "1581", "text": "Calendar year\n1581 (MDLXXXI) was a common year starting on Sunday in the Julian calendar, and a common year starting on Thursday (link will display full calendar) in the Proleptic Gregorian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38597", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38597", "title": "1580", "text": "Calendar year\n1580 (MDLXXX) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38598", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38598", "title": "1579", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1579 (MDLXXIX) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar, and a common year starting on Monday of the Proleptic Gregorian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38599", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38599", "title": "1578", "text": "Calendar year\n1578 (MDLXXVIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday in the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38600", "revid": "294180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38600", "title": "1577", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1577 (MDLXXVII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38601", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38601", "title": "1576", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1576 (MDLXXVI) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38602", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38602", "title": "World war 1", "text": ""}
{"id": "38603", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38603", "title": "1575", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1575 (MDLXXV) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38604", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38604", "title": "1570", "text": "Calendar year\n1570 (MDLXX) was a common year starting on Sunday in the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38605", "revid": "50620422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38605", "title": "1569", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1569 (MDLXIX) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38606", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38606", "title": "1567", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1567 (MDLXVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38607", "revid": "49885762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38607", "title": "1645", "text": "Calendar year\n1645 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38608", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38608", "title": "1647", "text": "Calendar year\n1647 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38610", "revid": "1308808610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38610", "title": "1653", "text": "Calendar year\n1653 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38611", "revid": "43646904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38611", "title": "\u00c6sir", "text": "Gods in Germanic paganism\n\u00c6sir (Old Norse; singular: ) or \u0113se (Old English; singular: ) are gods in Germanic paganism. In Old Nordic religion and mythology, the precise meaning of the term \"\" is debated, as it can refer either to the gods in general or specifically to one of the main families of gods, in contrast to the Vanir, with whom the \u00c6sir waged war, ultimately leading to a joining of the families. The term can further be applied to local gods that were believed to live in specific features in the landscape \u2013 such as fells. The Old English medical text Wi\u00f0 f\u00e6rstice refers to the \u0112se, along with elves, as harmful beings that could cause a stabbing pain, although exactly how they were conceived of by the author of the text is unclear.\n and its cognate forms feature in many Germanic names, such as Oswald and , and in some place-names in Norway and Sweden. The \u00c6sir further likely give their name to the A-rune, attested in the Elder Futhark, Anglo-Saxon Futhorc and Younger Futhark.\nTerminology.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English term \"\u00c6sir\" is derived from the plural Old Norse term , the singular of which is . In Old English, the term used is the cognate (pl. ). In continental West Germanic languages, the word is only attested in personal and place names such as Ansila, Ansgeir and Anshram. The cognate term was recorded as a Latinised form of an original Gothic word by Jordanes, in the 6th century CE work Getica, as a name for euhemerised semi-divine early Gothic rulers. The Old High German is reconstructed as *', plural *'.\nThe corresponding feminine form in Old Norse is (pl.:), formed by the addition of the suffix, denoting a female form. A cognate word for \"female \" is not attested outside Old Norse, and a corresponding West Germanic word would have been separately derived with the feminine suffixes -\"in\u012b\" or -\"inj\u014d\".\nThe Proto-Germanic form is typically reconstructed as . This form of the word is attested in Proto-Germanic during the Roman Imperial Age as a component of the name of the goddess (potentially translating to \"Battle-goddess\") and probably also in an inscription from around 200 CE on a buckle from Vimose that reads \"a(n)sau w\u012bja\" (\"I dedicate this to the \u00c6sir\"). The word is in turn is typically derived from Proto-Indo-European *\"h\u2082ems-u-\", making the terms closely related to , (\"god\" or \"lord\") and (\"to give birth\" or \"to beget\"). An alternative is that the terms for \"\u00c6sir\" are related to (\"beam\" or \"post\"), the ancestor of (\"the main beam of a house\"). In this case, the name would likely have originated due to the equation of gods and carved posts in Germanic religion.\nSnorri Sturluson and Saxo Grammaticus proposed that the term \"\u00c6sir\" instead derives from \" (\"Asians\"), and the idea that the gods originated in Asia, later migrating into Northern Europe. This is however not supported by modern scholars and attributed to medieval scholarship on the matter and an attempt to connect the Scandinavian peoples with Classical antiquity and Christianity rather than a reflection of actual Germanic mythology.\nDerived terms.\n is further found in Old Norse compound nouns such as (\"\u00c6sir's bridge\"), (\"home\" or \"enclosure of the \u00c6sir\"), (\"strength of the \u00c6sir\") and the names for Thor (\"\u00c6sir-Thor\") and (\"\u00c6sir-lord\"). The only modern word that is derived from terms for , other than learned borrowings from medieval languages is , meaning \"thunderstorm\", which is derived from earlier (\"the driving of the \u00e1ss\"), which would derive from the reconstructed Old East Norse:. This is likely in reference to the belief in thunderstorms originating from Thor's riding across the skies.\nTerms for \u00c6sir form parts of Germanic names in multiple Germanic languages. Examples of this include , , (Modern English: Oswald) and their corresponding Old Norse equivalents, , and . Other examples include and . Some Proto-Norse personal names feature such as , and .\nOld Norse sources.\nMeaning of the term \"\u00c6sir\".\nDistinctions between \"\u00e1ss\", \"go\u00f0\" and \"vanr\".\nIt has been proposed that in Old Norse poetry, the term \" was typically chosen over \" for metrical reasons, fitting better with the required alliteration or rhyme, rather than so as to create a semantic distinction between the two terms. Following from this, it has been argued that the term \" acts as a synonym to \" and is inclusive of Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r and his descendants, typically referred to as the Vanir. Examples of this are seen in the \u00feulur, where Nj\u00f6\u00f0r and Freyr are listed in the (\"Poetic equivalents for \u00e1ss\") and Freyja in that for the .\nThe main tales that present the \u00c6sir and Vanir as distinct family groups are those concerning the \u00c6sir-Vanir war, which are contained within V\u00f6lusp\u00e1, Ynglinga saga and Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l. This conflict between the gods occurred long in the past and in Ynglinga saga ends with the exchange of H\u0153nir and M\u00edmir as hostages from the \u00c6sir with Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r, Freyr and Kvasir from the Vanir. Sk\u00e1ldskaparmal alternatively says that at the end of the war, the two groups mixed their spit in a vat and created Kvasir from it. The inclusion of gods typically referred to as Vanir as \u00c6sir is that the Vanir may have been seen as fully integrated into the \u00c6sir after the resolution of this war between the two groups.\nProposed origins of a distinction with Vanir.\nDespite the inclusion of at least some of the Vanir within the \u00c6sir, some scholars have argued that some differences between the two groups remain, such as the Vanir appearing to have mainly been connected with cultivation and fertility and the \u00c6sir with power and war. Conversely, it has been argued that this division of domains is not reflected in the sources, with the Vanir being instead more associated with kingship and the \u00c6sir with creation.\nOne idea is that the Vanir (and the fertility cult associated with them) may be more archaic than that of the more warlike \u00c6sir, such that the mythical war may mirror a half-remembered religious conflict. This argument was first suggested in Wilhelm Mannhardt's \"Antike Vald-und Feldkulten\".\nOn a similar note, Marija Gimbutas argues that the \u00c6sir and the Vanir represent the displacement of an indigenous group by a tribe of warlike Indo-European invaders as part of her Kurgan hypothesis. Another historical theory is that the inter-pantheon interaction may be an apotheosisation of the conflict between the Roman Kingdom and the Sabines. Given the difference between their roles and emphases, some scholars have speculated that the interactions between the \u00c6sir and the Vanir reflect the types of interaction that were occurring between social classes (or clans) within Norse society at the time.\nFinally, the noted comparative religion scholar Mircea Eliade speculated that this conflict is actually a later version of an Indo-European myth concerning the conflict between and eventual integration of a pantheon of sky/warrior/ruler gods and a pantheon of earth/economics/fertility gods, with no strict historical antecedents.\nSpecific beings referred to as \u00c6sir.\nSnorri Sturluson's Prose Edda contains two lists of \u00c6sir, one in Gylfaginning and one in the \u00feulur. Though these sources largely agree, they are not identical. Gylfaginning lists the male \u00c6sir as Odin, Thor, Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r, Freyr, T\u00fdr, Heimdallr, Bragi, V\u00ed\u00f0arr, V\u00e1li, Ullr, Forseti and Loki and the \u00e1synjur as Frigg, S\u00e1ga, Eir, Gefjon, Fulla, Freyja, Sj\u00f6fn, Lofn, V\u00e1r, V\u00f6r, Syn, Hl\u00edn, Snotra, Gn\u00e1, S\u00f3l, Bil The \u00feulur add to this the \u00e1synjur Ska\u00f0i, Sigyn, Hnoss, Ger\u00f0r, J\u00f6r\u00f0, I\u00f0unn, Ilmr, Nj\u00f6run, Nanna, Rindr, \u00der\u00fa\u00f0r, R\u00e1n. Some scholars have noted, however, that the Prose Edda does not reflect a worldview held by all heathen Nordic, or more widely Germanic, people throughout time and space. Terry Gunnell further challenges the idea that all North-Germanic people conceived of the gods as Snorri portrays them - living as a pantheon of \u00c6sir and Vanir in \u00c1sgar\u00f0 together and all being ruled by \u00d3\u00f0inn who is the ancestor of many of them. He proposes that this view of \u00d3\u00f0inn as the leader of a distinct family of gods, the \u00c6sir, would likely not have been held by the majority of heathens, instead resulting from the material that Snorri presents coming from the elite warrior class, with whom \u00d3\u00f0inn was closely associated.\nBeyond this, a runic inscription on the 9th century CE Engstad whalebone pin has been interpreted as referencing an (\"yard-\u00e1ss\" or \"\u00e1ss of the settled space\"). In this context, it has been proposed that the term would refer to a local god or being of that specific farmstead rather than of the whole world more generally. Similarly, the Old Norse term (\"land-\u00e1ss\") is used in a poem attributed to Egill Skallagr\u00edmsson to refer to one of a list of gods which he wishes to turn against King Eir\u00edkr. This god is often interpreted as being Thor, though it is also possible that it refers to a local land spirit, possibly the (\"land-elf\") referred to in the next stanza of the poem. \u00c6sir closely associated with specific fells or hills are also found in the Old Norse record such as (\"the \u00e1ss of Sv\u00ednfell\"), referred in an insult in Nj\u00e1ls saga, and Bar\u00f0r Sn\u00e6fells\u00e1ss (\"\u00e1ss of Sn\u00e6fell\"), a man who got his name, according to his eponymous saga, because he of the worship he received by those living around Sn\u00e6fell and the help he in turn gave them when they were in need.\nIn the context of ritual speech, an unnamed \u00e1ss is the (\"almighty \u00e1ss\") mentioned along with Frey and Nj\u00f6r\u00f0 in a formula said by individuals swearing an oath on a ring. This has been variously identified by scholars as Thor, Ullr and Odin, although the possibility remains that it is a result of Christian work that was written as a foreshadowing of the establishment of Christianity, as an example of the \"noble pagan\" motif.\nThe term is further used in translations of works into Old Norse such as in D\u00edal\u00f3gar Gregors p\u00e1fa, in which the phrase (\"\u00e1ss of the sun\") is used to refer to Apollo, in the phrase (\"god of the sea\") and in (\"god of dreams\"). Morkinskinna further describes copper images of \u00e6sir, V\u00f6lsungs and Gj\u00fakings at the hippodrome in Constantinople. This has been interpreted as translating Greek gods and heroes into a Germanic context, however, other proposals include that this should be seen as stemming from a euhemeristic angle, with the \u00c6sir being descended from Trojans, as they are depicted by Snorri in the Prose Edda and Ynglinga Saga.\nRelation with j\u00f6tnar.\nIt has been proposed that most narratives in Old Nordic mythology portray existence as broadly divided into \"this world\", inhabited by the \u00c6sir and men, and \"the otherworld\" inhabited by beings such as j\u00f6tnar. These narratives often centre on the journey of an \u00e1ss to the otherworld, either to obtain something important from there, or to resolve an issue that has arisen in \u00c1sgar\u00f0 through social exchange with the otherworld. The j\u00f6tnar also are presented as a constant threat to the \u00c6sir, leading them into confrontation with Thor who stops the j\u00f6tnar overrunning \u00c1sgar\u00f0 and Mi\u00f0gar\u00f0.\nDespite this general juxtaposition between the \u00c6sir and the j\u00f6tnar, they were not conceived of as necessarily \"biologically\" distinct from one another, with many of the \u00c6sir being descended from j\u00f6tnar such as Odin, Thor, and Loki. Many \u00c6sir also marry and have children with g\u00fdgjar (j\u00f6tunn women) such as Odin, who marries J\u00f6r\u00f0 and fathers Thor with her, and Freyr who weds Ger\u00f0, founding the Yngling family. In descriptions of weddings celebrated by the \u00c6sir, the g\u00fdgjar spouses appear to be fully integrated into the \u00c6sir.\nFurthermore, the \u00c6sir are depicted as having strong positive relations with some j\u00f6tnar such as \u00c6gir, who hosts them for a feast where they all drink together in the poem Lokasenna. Other j\u00f6tnar are seen by the \u00c6sir as sources of knowledge, such as Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir, with whom Odin has a wisdom contest in Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nism\u00e1l, and to whom Freyja travels in the poem Hyndlulj\u00f3\u00f0 to find out the lineage of Ottar.\nOld English sources.\nWi\u00f0 f\u00e6rstice.\nThe Wi\u00f0 f\u00e6rstice text from the late 10th or early 11th century L\u0101cnunga is an Old English remedy against harm caused by several beings including \u0113se and \u00e6lfe (often translated as \"elves\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014Old English text\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\u2014Hall Translation\nThe collocation of \u0113se and elves Wi\u00f0 f\u00e6rstice is paralleled in Old Norse writings as the alliterative phrase \"\u00e6sir and \u00e1lfar\".\nIt is not clear whether this formula dates back to the ancestral community speaking the ancestor of Old Norse and Old English and thus had always existed in both languages, or was the result of a later loaning due to the close cultural contact.\nIt has been proposed that just like in early Old Norse-speaking communities, those speaking Old English early on would also have placed \u0113se and \u00e6lfe in contrast with monstrous beings such as eotenas and wyrmas, although it is unclear exactly how the beings were conceived of in English-speaking communities by the time that Wi\u00f0 f\u00e6rstice was written.\nThe A-rune (\u16ab, \u16a9 or \u16ac).\nThe Proto-Germanic name of the A rune, written in Elder Futhark as \u16ab and Anglo-Saxon Futhorc as \u16a9, is typically reconstructed as , an \u00e1ss (or heathen god). This identification is principally based on the Icelandic rune poem which reads as records the name of the Younger Futhark form of the rune, \u16ac, as , referring to Odin:\nSome scholars have translated the name of the rune in the Old English rune poem as (\"god\"), with the word commonly accepted as being a cognate of , however others interpret it as meaning \"mouth\" that would have come to Old English from Proto-Germanic or result from influence from either (\"river mouth\") or (\"mouth\"). The Old Swedish and Old Norwegian rune poems both refer to the name as meaning \"river mouth\" rather than \"god\".\nModern worship.\n\u00c1satr\u00fa, meaning \"faith in the \u00c6sir\", is a new religious movement also known as Heathenry that aims to reconstruct and practise a modern form of Germanic paganism. As of 2007, \u00c1satr\u00fa is a religion officially recognized by the governments of Denmark, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden. In the United Kingdom, the organisation Asatru UK is registered as a community interest company for religious activities.\nMost adherents do not emphasise worship of the \u00c6sir in particular and may also refer to their practice as \"forn sed / sidr / si\u00f0ur\" meaning old customs. The Icelandic \"\u00c1satr\u00faarf\u00e9lagi\u00f0\" describes \"\u00c1satr\u00fa\" as \"Nordic pantheism\" involving \"belief in the Icelandic/Nordic folklore\" including all the \"spirits and entities\" besides \"gods and other beings\" this entails.\nPlace-names.\nPlace-names containing the word or cognate terms have been proposed for the following:\nSweden:\nNorway\nNo such locations have yet been found in England that are widely accepted by scholars.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38613", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38613", "title": "1656", "text": "Calendar year\n1656 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38614", "revid": "43507737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38614", "title": "1658", "text": "Calendar year\n1658 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38615", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38615", "title": "The Myth of Sisyphus", "text": "1942 essay by Albert Camus\nThe Myth of Sisyphus () is a 1942 philosophical work by Albert Camus. Influenced by philosophers such as S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard, Arthur Schopenhauer, and Friedrich Nietzsche, Camus introduces his philosophy of the absurd. The absurd lies in the juxtaposition between the fundamental human need to attribute meaning to life and the \"unreasonable silence\" of the universe in response. Camus claims that the realization of the absurd does not justify suicide, and instead requires \"revolt\". He then outlines several approaches to the absurd life. In the final chapter, Camus compares the absurdity of man's life with the situation of Sisyphus, a figure of Greek mythology who was condemned to repeat forever the same meaningless task of pushing a boulder up a mountain, only to see it roll down again just as it nears the top. The essay concludes, \"The struggle itself towards the heights is enough to fill a man's heart. One must imagine Sisyphus happy.\"\nThe work can be seen in relation to other absurdist works by Camus: the novel \"The Stranger\" (1942), the plays \"The Misunderstanding\" (1942) and \"Caligula\" (1944), and especially the essay \"The Rebel\" (1951).\nHistory.\nCamus began the work in 1940, during the Fall of France, when millions of refugees fled from advancing German armies. While the essay rarely refers to this event, Robert Zaretsky argues that the event prompted his ideas of the absurd. He claims that both a banal event and something as intense as a German invasion will prompt someone to ask \"why?\" The essay was published in French in 1942.\nThe English translation by Justin O'Brien was first published in 1955. Included in the translated version is a preface written by Camus while in Paris in 1955. Here Camus states that \"even if one does not believe in God, suicide is not legitimate\".\nPhilosophical context.\nCamus wrote \"The Myth of Sisyphus\" against the backdrop of early twentieth-century European philosophy, particularly existentialism and phenomenology. Although often grouped with existentialist thinkers, Camus consistently rejected the existentialist label, insisting that his philosophy of the absurd was distinct from both Kierkegaard\u2019s leap of faith and Heidegger\u2019s ontology of Being. Instead, Camus argued that the confrontation between humanity\u2019s \u201cappetite for meaning\u201d and the universe\u2019s \u201cunreasonable silence\u201d constituted the absurd, which must be lived with clarity rather than resolved by appeal to transcendence.\nScholars note that Camus diverged sharply from Soren Kierkegaard and Lev Shestov, who posited that faith provided the only way beyond despair. Camus considered such responses forms of \u201cphilosophical suicide,\u201d since they abandon reason in favor of religious or metaphysical hope. Similarly, he critiqued Husserlian phenomenology and Hegelian rationalism for elevating reason into abstract systems that obscure the absurd rather than confront it directly. \nCommentators have also situated Camus in dialogue with Friedrich Nietzsche. While Nietzsche\u2019s notion of eternal recurrence and affirmation of life informed Camus\u2019s emphasis on revolt and freedom, Camus rejected Nietzsche\u2019s metaphysical implications and instead grounded his thought in the lived experience of the absurd.\nIn later interpretations, philosophers such as Thomas Nagel and Ronald Aronson have highlighted how Camus\u2019s concept of the absurd continues to shape debates in existential ethics, modern humanism, and the philosophy of meaning.\nSummary.\nThe essay is dedicated to Pascal Pia and is organized in four chapters and one appendix.\nChapter 1: An Absurd Reasoning.\nCamus undertakes the task of answering what he considers to be the only question of philosophy that matters: Does the realization of the meaninglessness and absurdity of life necessarily require suicide?\nHe begins by describing the following absurd condition: we build our life on the hope for tomorrow, yet tomorrow brings us closer to death and is the ultimate enemy; people live their lives as if they were not aware of the certainty of death. Once stripped of its common romanticism, the world is a foreign, strange and inhuman place; true knowledge is impossible and rationality and science cannot explain the world: their stories ultimately end in meaningless abstractions, in metaphors. This is the absurd condition and \"from the moment absurdity is recognized, it becomes a passion, the most harrowing of all.\"\nIt is not the world that is absurd, nor human thought: the absurd arises when the human need to understand meets the unreasonableness of the world, when the \"appetite for the absolute and for unity\" meets \"the impossibility of reducing this world to a rational and reasonable principle.\"\nHe then characterizes several philosophies that describe and attempt to deal with this feeling of the absurd, by Martin Heidegger, Karl Jaspers, Lev Shestov, S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard, and Edmund Husserl. All of these, he claims, commit \"philosophical suicide\" by reaching conclusions that contradict the original absurd position, either by abandoning reason and turning to God, as in the case of Kierkegaard and Shestov, or by elevating reason and ultimately arriving at ubiquitous Platonic forms and an abstract god, as in the case of Husserl.\nFor Camus, who sets out to take the absurd seriously and follow it to its final conclusions, these \"leaps\" cannot convince. Taking the absurd seriously means acknowledging the contradiction between the desire of human reason and the unreasonable world. Suicide, then, also must be rejected: without man, the absurd cannot exist. The contradiction must be lived; reason and its limits must be acknowledged, without false hope. However, the absurd can never be permanently accepted: it requires constant confrontation, constant revolt.\nWhile the question of human freedom in the metaphysical sense loses interest to the absurd man, he gains freedom in a very concrete sense: no longer bound by hope for a better future or eternity, without a need to pursue life's purpose or to create meaning, \"he enjoys a freedom with regard to common rules\".\nTo embrace the absurd implies embracing all that the unreasonable world has to offer. Without meaning in life, there is no scale of values. \"What counts is not the best living but the most living.\"\nThus, Camus arrives at three consequences from fully acknowledging the absurd: revolt, freedom, and passion.\nChapter 2: The Absurd Man.\nHow should the absurd man live? Clearly, no ethical rules apply, as they are all based on higher powers or on justification. \"...integrity has no need of rules... 'Everything is permitted,'... is not an outburst of relief or of joy, but rather a bitter acknowledgement of a fact.\"\nCamus then goes on to present examples of the absurd life. He begins with Don Juan, the serial seducer who lives the passionate life to the fullest. \"There is no noble love but that which recognizes itself to be both short-lived and exceptional.\"\nThe next example is the actor, who depicts ephemeral lives for ephemeral fame. \"He demonstrates to what degree appearing creates being. In those three hours, he travels the whole course of the dead-end path that the man in the audience takes a lifetime to cover.\"\nCamus's third example of the absurd man is the conqueror, the warrior who forgoes all promises of eternity to affect and engage fully in human history. He chooses action over contemplation, aware of the fact that nothing can last and no victory is final.\nChapter 3: Absurd Creation.\nHere Camus explores the absurd creator or artist. Since explanation is impossible, absurd art is restricted to a description of the myriad experiences in the world. \"If the world were clear, art would not exist.\" Absurd creation, of course, also must refrain from judging and from alluding to even the slightest shadow of hope.\nHe then analyzes the work of Fyodor Dostoevsky in this light, especially \"The Diary of a Writer\", \"The Possessed\" and \"The Brothers Karamazov\". All these works start from the absurd position, and the first two explore the theme of philosophical suicide. However, both \"The Diary\" and his last novel, \"The Brothers Karamazov\", ultimately find a path to hope and faith and thus fail as truly absurd creations.\nChapter 4: The Myth of Sisyphus.\nIn the last chapter, Camus outlines the legend of Sisyphus who defied the gods and put Death in chains so that no human needed to die. When Death was eventually liberated and it came time for Sisyphus himself to die, he concocted a deceit which let him escape from the underworld. After finally capturing Sisyphus, the gods decided that his punishment would last for all eternity. He would have to push a rock up a mountain; upon reaching the top, the rock would roll down again, leaving Sisyphus to start over. Camus sees Sisyphus as the absurd hero who lives life to the fullest, hates death, and is condemned to a meaningless task.\nCamus presents Sisyphus's ceaseless and pointless toil as a metaphor for modern lives spent working at futile jobs in factories and offices. \"The workman of today works every day in his life at the same tasks, and this fate is no less absurd. But it is tragic only at the rare moments when it becomes conscious.\"\nCamus is interested in Sisyphus's thoughts when marching down the mountain, to start anew. After the stone falls back down the mountain Camus states that \"It is during that return, that pause, that Sisyphus interests me. A face that toils so close to stones is already stone itself! I see that man going back down with a heavy yet measured step toward the torment of which he will never know the end.\" This is the truly tragic moment when the hero becomes conscious of his wretched condition. He does not have hope, but \"there is no fate that cannot be surmounted by scorn.\" Acknowledging the truth will conquer it; Sisyphus, just like the absurd man, continues pushing. Camus claims that when Sisyphus acknowledges the futility of his task and the certainty of his fate, he is freed to realize the absurdity of his situation and to reach a state of contented acceptance. With a nod to the similarly cursed Greek hero Oedipus, Camus concludes that \"all is well,\" continuing \"one must imagine Sisyphus happy.\"\nAppendix.\nThe essay contains an appendix titled \"Hope and the Absurd in the work of Franz Kafka\". While Camus acknowledges that Kafka's work represents an exquisite description of the absurd condition, he claims that Kafka fails as an absurd writer because his work retains a glimmer of hope.\nEnding.\n\"I leave Sisyphus at the foot of the mountain! One always finds one's burden again. But Sisyphus teaches the higher fidelity that negates the gods and raises rocks. He too concludes that all is well. This universe henceforth without a master seems to him neither sterile nor futile. Each atom of that stone, each mineral flake of that night filled mountain, in itself forms a world. The struggle itself toward the heights is enough to fill a man's heart. One must imagine Sisyphus happy.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38617", "revid": "1767052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38617", "title": "1659", "text": "Calendar year\n1659 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38618", "revid": "26557985", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38618", "title": "1660", "text": "Calendar year\n1660 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38620", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38620", "title": "1663", "text": "Calendar year\n1663 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38621", "revid": "332483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38621", "title": "Private IP address", "text": ""}
{"id": "38622", "revid": "46791144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38622", "title": "1664", "text": "Calendar year\n1664 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDeaths.\nKatherine Philips\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38623", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38623", "title": "1667", "text": "Calendar year\n1667 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38624", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38624", "title": "1668", "text": "Calendar year\n1668 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38625", "revid": "27089876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38625", "title": "1669", "text": "Calendar year\n1669 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38627", "revid": "23316696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38627", "title": "1715", "text": "Calendar year\n1715 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nFor dates within Great Britain and the British Empire, as well as in the Russian Empire, the \"old style\" Julian calendar was used in 1715, and can be converted to the \"new style\" Gregorian calendar (adopted in the British Empire in 1752 and in Russia in 1923) by adding 11 days.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38629", "revid": "23316696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38629", "title": "1717", "text": "Calendar year\n1717 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38630", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38630", "title": "1718", "text": "Calendar year\n1718 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38631", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38631", "title": "1719", "text": "Calendar year\n1719 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "38632", "revid": "24248858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38632", "title": "1713", "text": "Calendar year\n1713 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "38633", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38633", "title": "1712", "text": "Calendar year\n1712 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. In the Swedish calendar it began as a leap year starting on Monday and remained so until Thursday, February 29. By adding a second leap day, Friday, February 30, Sweden reverted to the Julian calendar and the rest of the year (from Saturday, March 1) was in sync with the Julian calendar. Sweden finally made the switch from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar in 1753. This year had 367 days.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38634", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38634", "title": "1708", "text": "Calendar year\n1708 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. In the Swedish calendar it was a leap year starting on Wednesday, one day ahead of the Julian and ten days behind the Gregorian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38635", "revid": "45417033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38635", "title": "1709", "text": "Calendar year\n1709 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. In the Swedish calendar it was a common year starting on Friday, one day ahead of the Julian and ten days behind the Gregorian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nBirths.\n \n \n \n \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38636", "revid": "1264145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38636", "title": "1706", "text": "Calendar year\n1706 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. In the Swedish calendar it was a common year starting on Monday, one day ahead of the Julian and ten days behind the Gregorian calendar.\nBirths.\n \n \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38638", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38638", "title": "1705", "text": "Calendar year\n1705 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. In the Swedish calendar it was a common year starting on Sunday, one day ahead of the Julian and ten days behind the Gregorian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDeaths.\n \n \n \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38639", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38639", "title": "1702", "text": "Calendar year\n1702 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. In the Swedish calendar it was a common year starting on Wednesday, one day ahead of the Julian and ten days behind the Gregorian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38640", "revid": "12971673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38640", "title": "1704", "text": "Calendar year\n1704 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. In the Swedish calendar it was a leap year starting on Friday, one day ahead of the Julian and ten days behind the Gregorian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nBirths.\n \n \n \n \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38641", "revid": "40625145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38641", "title": "1701", "text": "Calendar year\n1701 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. In the Swedish calendar it was a common year starting on Tuesday, one day ahead of the Julian and ten days behind the Gregorian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38642", "revid": "17087306", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38642", "title": "1700", "text": "Calendar year\n1700 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. As of March 1 (O.S. February 19), where the Julian calendar acknowledged a leap day and the Gregorian calendar did not, the Julian calendar fell one day further behind, bringing the difference to 11 days until February 28 (O.S. February 17), 1800.\nIn Sweden, the year started in the Julian calendar and remained so until February 28. Then, by skipping the leap day, the Swedish calendar was introduced, letting Wednesday, February 28, be followed by Thursday, March 1, giving the entire year the same pattern as a common year starting on Monday, similar to the calendars of 2001, 2007, and 2018. This calendar, being ten days behind the Gregorian and one day ahead of the Julian, lasts until 1712.\nDeaths.\n \n \n \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38643", "revid": "1319711651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38643", "title": "1698", "text": "Calendar year\nCalendar year\n1698 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38644", "revid": "1264145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38644", "title": "1699", "text": "Calendar year\n1699 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38645", "revid": "21203279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38645", "title": "1696", "text": "Calendar year\n1696 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38646", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38646", "title": "1694", "text": "Calendar year\n1694 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38647", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38647", "title": "1693", "text": "Calendar year\n1693 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "38648", "revid": "20536586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38648", "title": "1692", "text": "Calendar year\n \n1692 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nOctober\u2013December.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "38649", "revid": "44290549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38649", "title": "1686", "text": "Calendar year\n1686 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38650", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38650", "title": "1684", "text": "Calendar year\n1684 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38651", "revid": "1278942119", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38651", "title": "1683", "text": "Calendar year\n1683 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38652", "revid": "24248858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38652", "title": "1682", "text": "Calendar year\n1682 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nDeaths.\n\"date unknown\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38653", "revid": "1290225097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38653", "title": "1681", "text": "Calendar year\n1681 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38654", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38654", "title": "1678", "text": "Calendar year\n1678 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38655", "revid": "1315557889", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38655", "title": "1679", "text": "Calendar year\n1679 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38656", "revid": "8493753", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38656", "title": "1676", "text": "Calendar year\n1676 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38657", "revid": "2952402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38657", "title": "1675", "text": "Calendar year\n1675 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38658", "revid": "1319601261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38658", "title": "1674", "text": "Ago Calendar year\n1674 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38659", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38659", "title": "1673", "text": "Calendar year\n1673 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38660", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38660", "title": "1672", "text": "Calendar year\n1672 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38661", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38661", "title": "1563", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1563 (MDLXIII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38662", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38662", "title": "1562", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1562 (MDLXII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38663", "revid": "415293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38663", "title": "North Catalonia", "text": ""}
{"id": "38664", "revid": "589223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38664", "title": "1558", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1558 (MDLVIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nOngoing.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38665", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38665", "title": "1559", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1559 (MDLIX) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38666", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38666", "title": "1556", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1556 (MDLVI) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38667", "revid": "1319232196", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38667", "title": "1553", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1553 (MDLIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38668", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38668", "title": "1552", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1552 (MDLII) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38670", "revid": "1299698391", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38670", "title": "1551", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1551 (MDLI) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38671", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38671", "title": "1547", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1547 (MDXLVII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38672", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38672", "title": "1548", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1548 (MDXLVIII) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38673", "revid": "39934507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38673", "title": "Winter Olympics", "text": ""}
{"id": "38674", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38674", "title": "1549", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1549 (MDXLIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. In the Kingdom of England, it was known as \"The Year of the Many-Headed Monster\", because of the unusually high number of rebellions which occurred in the country.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38675", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38675", "title": "1545", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1545 (MDXLV) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38676", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38676", "title": "1544", "text": "Calendar year\n1544 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38677", "revid": "446342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38677", "title": "1541", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1541 (MDXLI) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38678", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38678", "title": "2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "Multi-sport event in Salt Lake City, Utah, US\nThe 2002 Winter Olympics, officially the XIX Olympic Winter Games and commonly known as Salt Lake 2002, were an international winter multi-sport event that was held from February 8 to 24, 2002, in and around Salt Lake City, Utah, United States.\nSalt Lake City was selected as the host city in June 1995 at the 104th IOC Session. They were the eighth Olympics to be hosted by the United States, and the most recent to be held in the country until 2028, when Los Angeles will host the 34th Summer Olympics. The 2002 Winter Olympics and Paralympics were both organized by the Salt Lake Organizing Committee (SLOC), the first time that both events were organized by a single committee, and inspiring other Olympic and Paralympic Games to be organized by such since then. These were the first Olympic Games under the International Olympic Committee (IOC) presidency of Jacques Rogge.\nThe Games featured 2,399 athletes from 78 nations, participating in 78 events in 15 disciplines. Norway topped the medal table, with 13 gold and 25 medals overall, while Germany finished with the most total medals, winning 36 (with 12 of them gold). The hosting United States was third by gold medals and second by overall medals, with 10 and 34 respectively. Australia notably became the first Southern Hemisphere country to ever win gold medals at the Winter Olympics.\nThe Games finished with a budgetary surplus of US$40 million; the surplus was used to fund the formation of the Utah Athletic Foundation\u2014which has continued to maintain the facilities built for these Olympics. The venues have continued to be used for national and international winter sports events after the Olympics. In 2023, the IOC's Future Host Commission invited Salt Lake City to participate in targeted dialogue with the IOC as preferred host of the 2034 Winter Olympics; the Games were officially awarded to Salt Lake City\u2013Utah in July 2024. \nHost city selection.\nSalt Lake City was chosen over Qu\u00e9bec City, Canada; Sion, Switzerland; and \u00d6stersund, Sweden, on June 16, 1995, at the 104th IOC Session in Budapest, Hungary. Salt Lake City had previously come in second during the bids for the 1998 Winter Olympics, awarded to Nagano, Japan, and had offered to be the provisional host of the 1976 Winter Olympics when the original host, Denver, Colorado, withdrew. The 1976 Winter Olympics were ultimately awarded to Innsbruck, Austria.\nThere was a scandal involving allegations of bribery used to win the rights to the Games. Prior to its successful bid, Salt Lake City had attempted four times to secure the games, failing each time. In 1998, members of the International Olympic Committee (IOC) were accused of taking gifts from the Salt Lake Organizing Committee (SLOC) during the bidding process. The allegations resulted in the expulsion of several IOC members and the adoption of new IOC rules. Although nothing strictly illegal had been done, it was felt that the acceptance of the gifts was morally dubious. In addition, legal charges were brought against the leaders of Salt Lake's bid committee by the United States Department of Justice. Investigations were also launched into prior bidding process by other cities, finding that members of the IOC received bribes during the bidding process for both the 1998 Winter Olympics and 2000 Summer Olympics. In response to the scandal, Mitt Romney was hired as the new president and CEO of the Salt Lake Organizing Committee in February 1999.\nDevelopment and preparation.\nTorch relay.\nThe torch relay ceremonially began on November 19, 2001, with the traditional kindling of an Olympic flame in Olympia, Greece. On December 3, Greek skier Thanassis Tsailas lit the first torch from the cauldron, and transferred its flame to a ceremonial lantern for transport to Atlanta, where it arrived on December 4 to officially launch the U.S. leg of the relay. The route of the relay covered , passed through 300 communities and 46 U.S. states, and was carried by 12,012 torchbearers.\nThe torch was modeled after an icicle, with a slight curve to represent speed and fluidity. The torch measures long, wide at the top, at the bottom, and was designed by Axiom Design of Salt Lake City. It was created with three sections, each with its own meaning and representation.\nBudget.\nIn February 1999, in response to the bid scandal and a financial shortfall for the Games, Mitt Romney, then CEO of the private equity firm Bain Capital (and future U.S. presidential candidate, U.S. Senator, and Governor of Massachusetts), was hired as the new president and CEO of the Salt Lake Organizing Committee. Romney, Kem C. Gardner, a Utah commercial real estate developer, and Don Stirling, the Olympics' local marketing chief, raised \"millions of dollars from Mormon families with pioneer roots: the Eccles family, whose forebears were important industrialists and bankers\" to help rescue the Games, according to a later report. An additional US$410\u00a0million was received from the federal government. U.S. federal subsidies amounted to $1.3\u00a0billion (for infrastructure improvements only), compared to $45\u00a0billion of federal funding received by the organizing committee of the 2014 Winter Olympics from the Russian government. The Games were financially successful, raising more money with fewer sponsors than any prior Olympic Games, which left SLOC with a surplus of $40\u00a0million. The surplus was used to create the Utah Athletic Foundation, which maintains and operates many of the remaining Olympic venues.\n\"The Oxford Olympics Study\" established the outturn cost of the Salt Lake City 2002 Winter Olympics at US$2.5\u00a0billion in 2015-dollars and cost overrun at 24% in real terms. This includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) \"operational costs\" incurred by the organizing committee to stage the Games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) \"direct capital costs\" incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the Olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the Games. Indirect capital costs are \"not\" included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the Games but not directly related to staging the Games. The cost and cost overrun for Salt Lake City 2002 compares with costs of US$2.5\u00a0billion and a cost overrun of 13% for Vancouver 2010, and costs of US$51\u00a0billion and a cost overrun of 289% for Sochi 2014, the latter being the most costly Olympics to date. The average cost for Winter Games since 1960 is US$3.1\u00a0billion, average cost overrun is 142%.\nSecurity.\nThe 2002 Winter Games were the first Olympic Games to take place since the September 11 attacks, which meant a higher level of security than ever before provided for the Games. As a result, the Office of Homeland Security (OHS) designated the Olympics a National Special Security Event (NSSE). Aerial surveillance and radar control was provided by the U.S. Marines of Marine Air Control Squadron 2, Detachment C, from Cherry Point, North Carolina. The FBI and NSA arranged with Qwest Communications to use intercept equipment for a period of less than six months around the time of the 2002 Winter Olympics.\nWhen he spoke during the opening ceremonies, Jacques Rogge, presiding over his first Olympics as the IOC president, told the athletes of the United States:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Your nation is overcoming a horrific tragedy, a tragedy that has affected the whole world. We stand united with you in the promotion of our common ideals and hope for world peace.\nVenues.\nWork on venues for the 2002 Winter Olympics began as early as 1989, following the passing of a state referendum that authorized the use of taxpayer money to publicly fund the construction of new facilities for a Winter Olympics bid in 1998 or 2002. Their construction was overseen by the Salt Lake Olympic Bid Committee and the Utah Sports Authority\u2014a body created under the referendum.\nNew facilities built for the Games included the Utah Olympic Oval in Kearns, Utah Olympic Park in Summit County, The Ice Sheet at Ogden, and Soldier Hollow at the Wasatch Mountain State Park\u2014the furthest competition venue from Salt Lake City. The E Center in West Valley City and the Peaks Ice Arena in Provo were also built with support from the SLOC, and co-hosted hockey.\nDelta Center hosted figure skating and short track speed skating; it was renamed \"Salt Lake Ice Center\" for the duration of the Games due to IOC sponsorship rules. Rice-Eccles Stadium at the University of Utah hosted the opening and closing ceremonies. The Olympic Village was built at historic Fort Douglas, whose land had been acquired by the University of Utah to construct new residences. The SLOC provided funding to the project in exchange for its use during the Olympics.\nMain Street in Park City was converted into a pedestrian plaza during the Games, with festivities such as concerts, firework shows, and sponsor presences. Medal presentations took place in downtown Salt Lake City; the stage for the ceremony featured the Hoberman Arch, an arch-shaped metal \"curtain\" designed by Chuck Hoberman.\nTransport.\nThe largest public transport project completed for the Games was the TRAX light rail system, which first began operations ahead of the Games in 1999.\nTo help reduce vehicle traffic to Soldier Hollow, and to provide a tourist attraction for attendees, Heber Valley Railroad offered service to Wasatch Mountain State Park on steam locomotives during the Games. After arriving, passengers then embarked to Soldier Hollow on horse-drawn sleighs.\nThe Games.\nOpening ceremony.\nThe opening ceremony of the 2002 Winter Olympics was held at Rice\u2013Eccles Stadium at the University of Utah on February 8, 2002. The facility was renovated and expanded for the Games. The Games were officially opened by President George W. Bush, who was standing among the US athletes (previous heads of state opened the Games from an official box), while the Olympic cauldron was lit by members of the gold medal-winning U.S. men's ice hockey team from the 1980 Winter Olympics in Lake Placid, New York (as made famous by the \"Miracle on Ice\").\nIn an acknowledgment of the September 11 attacks, the ceremony opened with the entrance of a damaged American flag recovered from the wreckage of the World Trade Center, carried by an honor guard of police officers from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the New York City Police Department, and firefighters from the New York City Fire Department, joined by athletes nominated by fellow members of the U.S. team. The flag was presented during the playing of the U.S. national anthem \"The Star-Spangled Banner\", as performed by the Tabernacle Choir.\nThe Olympic cauldron was designed to look like an icicle and was made of glass, allowing the fire to be seen burning within, reflecting the Games' slogan \"Light the Fire Within\" and an overarching \"fire and ice\" theme. The actual glass cauldron stands atop a twisting glass and steel support, is high, and the flame within burns at . Together with its support, the cauldron stands tall and was made of 738 individual pieces of glass. Small jets send water down the glass sides of the cauldron to keep the glass and metal cooled (so they would not crack or melt) and give the effect of melting ice. The cauldron was designed by WET Design of Los Angeles, its frame built by roller coaster manufacturer Arrow Dynamics of Clearfield, Utah, and its glass pieces created by Western Glass of Ogden, Utah. The cauldron's cost was $2\u00a0million, and it was unveiled to the public when originally installed at Rice\u2013Eccles Stadium on January 8, 2002.\nProduction for the opening and closing ceremonies was designed by Seven Nielsen, and music for both ceremonies was directed by Mark Watters.\nSports.\nConfirmed in 1997, this edition's sports program featured seven sports divided into 15 disciplines, totaling 78 events, an increase of 10 events over the 1998 Winter Olympics. Skeleton made its return to the Winter Olympic program for the first time since 1948, while a women's doubles event was contested for the first time in bobsleigh. A fourth distance was introduced in short track speed skating for men and women, and the pursuit events were added to biathlon and cross-country skiing. The sprint event was also added to the Nordic combined program.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of medal events contested in each separate discipline.\"\nParticipating National Olympic Committees.\nA total of 78 teams qualified at least one athlete to compete in the Games. Five NOCs made their Winter Olympic debut in Salt Lake, including Cameroon, Hong Kong, Nepal, Tajikistan, and Thailand. Costa Rica and Lebanon returned to the Winter games after a 10-year absence, and Fiji, Mexico and San Marino returned after 8 years. Four countries, Luxembourg, North Korea, Portugal and Uruguay which were at the 1998 Games, did not participate in 2002.\nNumber of athletes by National Olympic Committee.\n2,399 athletes from 78 NOCs\nCalendar.\nIn the following calendar for the 2002 Winter Olympic Games, each blue box represents an event competition, such as a qualification round, on that day. The yellow boxes represent days during which medal-awarding finals for a sport are held. The number in each box represents the number of finals that were contested on that day.\n\"All dates are in Mountain Standard Time (UTC\u22127)\"\nMedal table.\nAt the 2002 Winter Games in Salt Lake City, the \"medal plaza\" was popularized as a way for the public to see presentations that would have otherwise taken place at far-flung, low-capacity or high-altitude venues and to have an evening program that often included musical performances.\nRecords.\nSeveral medal records were set and/or tied, including:\nAll of the above records were broken at the Vancouver Olympics in 2010.\nClosing ceremonies.\nThe closing ceremony of the 2002 Winter Olympics was held on February 24, 2002, at Rice\u2013Eccles Stadium. It was narrated by Utah natives Donny and Marie Osmond (who voiced animatronic dinosaur skeletons designed by Michael Curry), and featured performances by a number of musicians and bands, including Bon Jovi, Christina Aguilera, Donny and Marie Osmond, Earth, Wind &amp; Fire, Harry Connick Jr., Kiss, Moby, and Willie Nelson. It also featured appearances by figure skaters such as Kurt Browning, Dorothy Hamill, and Ilia Kulick, as well as dancer Savion Glover.\nDeparting from Juan Antonio Samaranch's tradition of declaring each Olympics the \"best ever\", IOC president Jacques Rogge began a tradition of assigning each Games their own identity in his comments, describing the 2002 Winter Olympics as having been \"flawless\".\nItalian singers Irene Grandi and Elisa performed during the cultural presentation by Turin, host city of the 2006 Winter Olympics, while Josh Groban and Charlotte Church performed a duet of \"The Prayer\" as the Olympic cauldron was extinguished.\n2002 Cultural Olympiad.\nThe 2002 Cultural Olympiad, which ran from January to March 2002, was an arts festival that accompanied the 2002 Winter Olympics. It included specially commissioned works, such as Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater's work \"Here...Now\" inspired by the life of Olympian Florence Griffith Joyner, accompanied by music by Wynton Marsalis. An art exhibition was held at Springville Museum of Art that celebrated 150 years of Utah's art history. The programme also featured many other performances, including dance, theatre, singing, and literature, as well as the glass art of Dale Chihuly.\nMarketing.\nThe overall branding of the 2002 Winter Olympics was based on a concept entitled \"Land of Contrast \u2014 Fire and Ice\", which featured a palette of warm and cool colors to contrast the warmer, rugged, red-rock areas of Southern Utah from the colder, mountainous regions of Northern Utah.\nThe emblem for the 2002 Winter Olympics was unveiled in August 1997, consisting of a stylized snowflake with segments colored in blue, orange, and yellow. The emblem was designed to resemble an Olympic cauldron and flame, as well as a sun rising from behind mountains. The orange center section of the flame was intended to reflect traditional Navajo weaving. The official event pictograms were inspired by branding irons, and the line thickness and 30-degree angles mirrored those of the emblem.\nMascots.\nThe designs of the mascots of the 2002 Winter Olympics were unveiled on May 19, 1999, during an event marking 1,000 days until the opening ceremony. The mascots represent three animals native to the western United States \u2014 a snowshoe hare, coyote, and American black bear respectively, with each mascot symbolizing a character from the legends of local Native Americans, and wearing a charm around their neck with an original Anasazi or Fremont-style petroglyph. For the first time in Olympic history, the names of the mascots were determined by a public vote, using name suggestions submitted by local students; on September 25, the names of the mascots were officially announced as Powder, Copper, and Coal respectively.\nMedia coverage.\nInternational Sports Broadcasting (ISB) served as the host broadcaster for the 2002 Winter Olympics; the Salt Palace convention center served as the International Broadcast Centre and press center for the Games. The IOC estimated that the 2002 Winter Olympics were viewed by over two\u00a0billion people worldwide, with 13\u00a0billion viewer-hours watched.\nIn the United States, the 2002 Winter Olympics were broadcast by NBC-owned networks. They were the first Winter Olympics under a multi-year rights agreement between NBC and the IOC, under which it would hold exclusive rights to all Olympic Games from 1996 through 2008. The contract had excluded the 1998 Winter Olympics, as CBS Sports had an existing deal to exclusively televise the Winter Olympics from 1992 through 1998.\nNBC partnered with HDNet to produce an eight-hour block of daily coverage in high definition, which was carried by HDNet and on the digital signals of participating NBC affiliates. Despite being held in a time zone only one hour ahead of Pacific Time, NBC still tape delayed much of its coverage for the west coast, although Salt Lake City's local NBC affiliate KSL-TV was given permission to air the live, east coast broadcasts to ensure their availability in the Games' host city.\nCoverage of the Games by the Seven Network in Australia featured \"The Ice Dream\", a miniseries presented by comedy duo Roy and HG as a follow-up to \"The Dream\"\u2014their series for the 2000 Summer Olympics. The series featured a running gag of the duo proposing an Australian bid to hold the 2010 Winter Olympics in the resort town of Smiggin Holes, New South Wales.\nLegacy.\nSki industry and winter sport.\nThe 2002 Winter Olympics brought a huge amount of success to the Utah skiing industry. Since hosting the Winter Games, Utah has seen a 42% increase in skier and snowboarder visits as of 2010[ [update]]\u201311. This increase resulted in direct expenditures from skiers and snowboarders growing 67% from $704\u00a0million in 2002\u20132003 to $1.2\u00a0billion in 2010\u20132011.\nFourteen venues were constructed or expanded in preparation for the Winter Games. One of the venues constructed for the Games was the Utah Olympic Park, which has proven to be one of the most successful venues to date because it has been maintained in top competition form. Owing to the routine maintenance of the park, Utah has been able to host a large number of winter competitions since 2002, including more than 60 World Cup events (e.g. the FIS Freestyle Skiing World Cup), as well as seven world championships, and various other sporting events. Hosting these high-profile competitions has resulted in approximately $1\u00a0billion being injected into the local economy. During 2013\u20132014, Utah held 16 various winter sport events, bringing $27.3\u00a0million to the economy of Utah. After holding the Olympics, Utah became home to two National Governing Bodies of Sport. The U.S. Ski and Snowboard Association is headquartered in Park City, Utah and the U.S. Olympic speed skating team is based out of the Utah Olympic Oval.\nUniversity of Utah expansion.\nThe University of Utah was one of the hosts of the 2002 Winter Olympics; the planning committee approached the University of Utah and asked them to build several student dormitories which would serve as athletes' accommodation during the Games. It was agreed that the university would pay approximately $98\u00a0million out of the total required amount of $110\u00a0million to complete the construction. As a result, students of the university have benefited as almost 3,500 of them would be housed here after the Games. This was a great economic benefit to the university since the amount of money used to complete such dormitories could take long to be afforded. The university was also asked to expand Rice Eccles Stadium to accommodate 50,000 people up from 32,000. The university would then be refunded almost $59\u00a0million and be given an extra $40\u00a0million for its maintenance.\nThe 2002 Olympic Games also benefited the university economically since the Salt Lake 2002 Olympic Cauldron Park was elevated by the renovations that took place. Ice rinks were very scarce in Utah, but they became plentiful and offered several entertainment and training opportunities for hockey players and figure skaters due to the Olympic Games. The Cauldron Park located at the University of Utah which was built with $6.5\u00a0million in profits and had the following features: a visitors' center which had a theater that showed a thrilling movie about the Olympic Games of 2002 and a \"park\" which had a dazzling pool and a V-shaped stone wall with the names of all the medalists of the 2002 Olympic Games. Besides, the park had 17 plates that hung on the stadium's fence celebrating the highlights of each day of the Olympics. All these features acted as tourist attraction that boosted the economic development of the university. In addition, it is indicated that the approximate value of media exposure through print during the Games was equated to $22.9\u00a0million. Mainly, this was a huge economic benefit to the university as more and more people got to know about the educational establishment, and this also boosted enrollment and future development.\nImmigration.\nHolger Preuss in his book \"The Economics of Staging the Olympics: A Comparison of the Games 1972\u20132008\" argues that \"The export of the 'Olympic Games' service results in an inflow of funds to the host city, causing additional production which, in its turn, leads to employment and income effects.\" According to the study \"2002 Olympic Winter Games, Economic, Demographic and Fiscal Impacts\", the estimated creation of new job years of employment was 35,424, and additional earnings of $1,544,203,000. It was noted that the increase of Olympic related job started in 1996 and continued until 2003. These effects can be estimated on the ground of historical relationship between job and corresponding population growth. A lot of people migrated into the future place of the Olympic Games for expanding and favorable employment opportunities that the Olympics ensured. Although residents occupied many of the higher paying jobs created by the Games, many of the vacated jobs were filled by immigrants who relocated for the better employment opportunities.\nBasically, the immigration rate was even larger because the employees immigrated with their families. The additional people paid diverse taxes and fees from their income, creating additional revenue on the state and local levels.\nEmployment.\nOlympic related jobs in Utah started in 1996 with slight job opportunities of less than 100. However, from the job measurement conducted from 1996 to 2002, steady attainment of job opportunities established and a maximum level was noted in 2001 where there were 12,500 job opportunities attained yearly, and approximately 25,070 jobs created in 2002. Therefore, from 1996 to 2002 the sum of employment equated to 35,000 jobs which lasted a year. February 2002 is when the highest employment opportunities were created compared to other years. There were around 25,070 job opportunities created compared to 35,000 created from 1996 to 2001.\nIt is difficult to quantify the impact of the 2002 Olympics on the unemployment rates in Utah, due mostly to the effect of the early 2000s recession. In 1996, the unemployment rate in Utah was approximately 3.4%, while the U.S. national average was 5.4% and by the end of 2001, the unemployment rate in Utah was around 4.8%, while the national average had risen to 5.7%. There was a high percentage of visitors to the Games, which raised the number of tourists whose consumption and demand prompted the establishment of job opportunities to meet the demands.\n2034 Winter Olympics.\nIn 2017, an exploratory committee was formed to consider a Salt Lake City bid for a future Winter Olympics. In December 2018, the United States Olympic Committee (USOC, now the United States Olympic &amp; Paralympic Committee [USOPC]) named Salt Lake City as its preferred candidate to bid for a future Winter Olympics, citing that its experience and existing venues could be leveraged. In February 2022, amid the 2022 Winter Olympics and the 20th anniversary of the Games in Salt Lake City, the USOPC stated that it was \"already in dialogue with the IOC, not yet for a specific year but as part of their evolving process\", and acknowledged that there was \"very high excitement and support from the local population.\"\nIn November 2023, the IOC's Future Host Commission recommended that Salt Lake City\u2013Utah be invited to engage in \"targeted dialogue\" with the IOC Executive Board, as preferred host for the 2034 Winter Olympics; the Future Host Commission cited the bid's reliance on private funding, as well as plans to reuse much of the infrastructure that was originally built for the 2002 Games.\nOn July 24, 2024, during the 142nd IOC Session in Paris just before the 2024 Summer Olympics in that city, Salt Lake City\u2013Utah was selected to host the 2034 Winter Olympics and Paralympics. IOC President Thomas Bach said: \"Salt Lake City and Utah are long-time friends of the Olympic Movement, and we are confident that they will organize exceptional Olympic and Paralympic Games, just as they did years ago. The legacy of 2002 is tangibly and passionately alive in Utah. The legacy of 2034 starts today.\" With the 2034 Winter Olympics, Salt Lake City will become the fourth city to host multiple Winter Games after Innsbruck (1964 and 1976), Lake Placid (1932 and 1980), and Cortina d'Ampezzo (1956 and 2026).\nConcerns and controversies.\nDisqualifications for doping.\nThe 2002 Winter Olympics were the first Winter Olympics held after the formation of the World Anti-Doping Agency, resulting in the first instances of athletes being disqualified for failing drug testing. Athletes in cross-country skiing were disqualified for various reasons, including doping by two Russians and one Spaniard, leading Russia to file protests and threaten to withdraw from the competition.\nPairs figure skating judging controversy.\nA major scandal emerged during the pairs figure skating competition; the Canadian pair of Jamie Sal\u00e9 and David Pelletier narrowly lost to the Russian pair of Elena Berezhnaya and Anton Sikharulidze, despite the Canadians being deemed the favorites to win after their free skate program. The French judge Marie-Reine Le Gougne alleged that the head of the French Federation of Ice Sports, Didier Gailhaguet, had pressured her to judge the competition in favor of Russia regardless of performance. Amid criticisms of the incident by both Canadian and American media outlets, and suspicions that this was part of a vote swapping scheme with Russia to benefit the French ice dance team, the International Skating Union (ISU) voted to suspend Le Gougne for failing to immediately inform officials of Gailhaguet's actions. They also recommended to the IOC that the gold medal be jointly awarded to both pairs. An IOC panel voted in favor of the motion, resulting in both Sal\u00e9 and Pelletier, as well as Berezhnaya and Sikharulidze, being jointly awarded gold medals.\nDisqualification of Kim Dong-Sung.\nIn the final race A, with one lap remaining and currently in second place, Apolo Ohno of the United States attempted to make a pass on the leader Kim Dong-Sung of South Korea, who then drifted to the inside and as a result, Ohno raised his arms to imply he was blocked. Kim finished first ahead of Ohno, but the Australian referee James Hewish disqualified Kim for what appeared to be impeding, awarding the gold medal to Ohno.\nThe South Korean team immediately protested the decision of the chief official of the race, but their protests were denied by the International Skating Union (ISU). The South Korean team then appealed to the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS). The IOC refused to see the case, stating, \"This is a matter for the ISU to decide on. At this time, the IOC has received no proposal and taken no action\".\nThe disqualification of Kim upset South Korean supporters, many of whom directed their anger at Ohno and the IOC. A large number of e-mails protesting the race results crashed the IOC's email server, and thousands of accusatory letters, many of which contained death threats, were sent to Ohno and the IOC. South Korean media accused Ohno of simulating foul, using the Konglish word \"Hollywood action\". The controversy continued at the 2002 FIFA World Cup, held jointly in South Korea and Japan several months after the Olympics. When the South Korean soccer team scored a goal during the group stage match against the U.S. team, South Korean players Ahn Jung-Hwan and Lee Chun-Soo made an exaggerated move imitating the move Ohno had made during the speed skating event to imply the other athlete had drifted into his lane.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38679", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38679", "title": "1538", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1538 (MDXXXVIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38680", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38680", "title": "1539", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1539 (MDXXXIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38681", "revid": "1294859330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38681", "title": "1533", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1533 (MDXXXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38682", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38682", "title": "1532", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1532 (MDXXXII) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38683", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38683", "title": "1530", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1530 (MDXXX) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar, the 1530th year of the Common Era (CE) and \"Anno Domini\" (AD) designations, the 530th year of the 2nd millennium, the 30th year of the 16th century, and the 1st year of the 1530s decade.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38684", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38684", "title": "1529", "text": "Calendar year\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nYear 1529 (MDXXIX) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38685", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38685", "title": "1527", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1527 (MDXXVII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38686", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38686", "title": "1526", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1526 (MDXXVI) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38687", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38687", "title": "1525", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1525 (MDXXV) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38688", "revid": "1286419232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38688", "title": "1524", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1524 (MDXXIV) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nOctober\u2013December.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38689", "revid": "50872192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38689", "title": "Visitor pattern", "text": "Software design pattern\nA visitor pattern is a software design pattern that separates the algorithm from the object structure. Because of this separation, new operations can be added to existing object structures without modifying the structures. It is one way to follow the open/closed principle in object-oriented programming and software engineering. \nIn essence, the visitor allows adding new virtual functions to a family of classes, without modifying the classes. Instead, a visitor class is created that implements all of the appropriate specializations of the virtual function. The visitor takes the instance reference as input, and implements the goal through double dispatch.\nProgramming languages with sum types and pattern matching obviate many of the benefits of the visitor pattern, as the visitor class is able to both easily branch on the type of the object and generate a compiler error if a new object type is defined which the visitor does not yet handle.\nOverview.\nThe Visitor\ndesign pattern is one of the twenty-three \"Gang of Four design patterns\".\nProblems, the Visitor design pattern can solve.\nWhen new operations are needed frequently and the object structure consists of many unrelated classes,\nit's inflexible to add new subclasses each time a new operation is required\nbecause \"[..] distributing all these operations across the various node classes leads to a system that's hard to understand, maintain, and change.\"\nSolution, the Visitor design pattern describes.\nThis makes it possible to create new operations independently from the classes of an object structure\nby adding new visitor objects.\nSee also the UML class and sequence diagram below.\nDefinition.\nThe Gang of Four defines the Visitor as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Represent[ing] an operation to be performed on elements of an object structure. Visitor lets you define a new operation without changing the classes of the elements on which it operates.\nThe nature of the Visitor makes it an ideal pattern to plug into public APIs, thus allowing its clients to perform operations on a class using a \"visiting\" class without having to modify the source.\nAdvantages.\nMoving operations into visitor classes is beneficial when\nA drawback to this pattern, however, is that it makes extensions to the class hierarchy more difficult, as new classes typically require a new codice_1 method to be added to each visitor.\nApplication.\nConsider the design of a 2D computer-aided design (CAD) system. At its core, there are several types to represent basic geometric shapes like circles, lines, and arcs. The entities are ordered into layers, and at the top of the type hierarchy is the drawing, which is simply a list of layers, plus some added properties.\nA fundamental operation on this type hierarchy is saving a drawing to the system's native file format. At first glance, it may seem acceptable to add local save methods to all types in the hierarchy. But it is also useful to be able to save drawings to other file formats. Adding ever more methods for saving into many different file formats soon clutters the relatively pure original geometric data structure.\nA naive way to solve this would be to maintain separate functions for each file format. Such a save function would take a drawing as input, traverse it, and encode into that specific file format. As this is done for each added different format, duplication between the functions accumulates. For example, saving a circle shape in a raster format requires very similar code no matter what specific raster form is used, and is different from other primitive shapes. The case for other primitive shapes like lines and polygons is similar. Thus, the code becomes a large outer loop traversing through the objects, with a large decision tree inside the loop querying the type of the object. Another problem with this approach is that it is very easy to miss a shape in one or more savers, or a new primitive shape is introduced, but the save routine is implemented only for one file type and not others, leading to code extension and maintenance problems. As the versions of the same file grows it becomes more complicated to maintain it.\nInstead, the visitor pattern can be applied. It encodes the logical operation (i.e. save(image_tree)) on the whole hierarchy into one class (i.e. Saver) that implements the common methods for traversing the tree and describes virtual helper methods (i.e. save_circle, save_square, etc.) to be implemented for format specific behaviors. In the case of the CAD example, such format specific behaviors would be implemented by a subclass of Visitor (i.e. SaverPNG). As such, all duplication of type checks and traversal steps is removed. Additionally, the compiler now complains if a shape is omitted since it is now expected by the common base traversal/save function.\nIteration loops.\nThe visitor pattern may be used for iteration over container-like data structures just like Iterator pattern but with limited functionality.288 For example, iteration over a directory structure could be implemented by a function class instead of more conventional loop pattern. This would allow deriving various useful information from directories content by implementing a visitor functionality for every item while reusing the iteration code. It's widely employed in Smalltalk systems and can be found in C++ as well.289 A drawback of this approach, however, is that you can't break out of the loop easily or iterate concurrently (in parallel i.e. traversing two containers at the same time by a single variable).289 The latter would require writing additional functionality for a visitor to support these features.289\nStructure.\nUML class and sequence diagram.\nIn the UML class diagram above, the codice_2 class doesn't implement a new operation directly.\nInstead, codice_2 implements a \"dispatching operation\" codice_4 that \"dispatches\" (delegates) a request to the \"accepted visitor object\" (codice_5). The codice_6 class implements the operation (codice_7).\n&lt;br&gt;\ncodice_8 then implements codice_4 by dispatching to codice_10. The codice_6 class implements the operation (codice_12).\nThe UML sequence diagram\nshows the run-time interactions: The codice_13 object traverses the elements of an object structure (codice_14) and calls codice_4 on each element.\n&lt;br&gt;\nFirst, the codice_13 calls codice_4 on\ncodice_2, which calls codice_19 on the accepted codice_20 object.\nThe element itself (codice_21) is passed to the codice_20 so that \nit can \"visit\" codice_2 (call codice_24).\n&lt;br&gt;\nThereafter, the codice_13 calls codice_4 on\ncodice_8, which calls codice_28 on the codice_20 that \"visits\" codice_8 (calls codice_31).\nDetails.\nThe visitor pattern requires a programming language that supports single dispatch, as common object-oriented languages (such as C++, Java, Smalltalk, Objective-C, Swift, JavaScript, Python and C#) do. Under this condition, consider two objects, each of some class type; one is termed the \"element\", and the other is \"visitor\".\nObjects.\nVisitor.\nThe \"visitor\" declares a codice_1 method, which takes the element as an argument, for each class of element. \"Concrete visitors\" are derived from the visitor class and implement these codice_1 methods, each of which implements part of the algorithm operating on the object structure. The state of the algorithm is maintained locally by the concrete visitor class.\nElement.\nThe \"element\" declares an codice_34 method to accept a visitor, taking the visitor as an argument. \"Concrete elements\", derived from the element class, implement the codice_34 method. In its simplest form, this is no more than a call to the visitor's codice_1 method. Composite elements, which maintain a list of child objects, typically iterate over these, calling each child's codice_34 method.\nClient.\nThe \"client\" creates the object structure, directly or indirectly, and instantiates the concrete visitors. When an operation is to be performed which is implemented using the Visitor pattern, it calls the codice_34 method of the top-level element(s).\nMethods.\nAccept.\nWhen the codice_34 method is called in the program, its implementation is chosen based on both the dynamic type of the element and the static type of the visitor. When the associated codice_1 method is called, its implementation is chosen based on both the dynamic type of the visitor and the static type of the element, as known from within the implementation of the codice_34 method, which is the same as the dynamic type of the element. (As a bonus, if the visitor can't handle an argument of the given element's type, then the compiler will catch the error.)\nVisit.\nThus, the implementation of the codice_1 method is chosen based on both the dynamic type of the element and the dynamic type of the visitor. This effectively implements double dispatch. For languages whose object systems support multiple dispatch, not only single dispatch, such as Common Lisp or C# via the Dynamic Language Runtime (DLR), implementation of the visitor pattern is greatly simplified (a.k.a. Dynamic Visitor) by allowing use of simple function overloading to cover all the cases being visited. A dynamic visitor, provided it operates on public data only, conforms to the open/closed principle (since it does not modify extant structures) and to the single responsibility principle (since it implements the Visitor pattern in a separate component).\nIn this way, one algorithm can be written to traverse a graph of elements, and many different kinds of operations can be performed during that traversal by supplying different kinds of visitors to interact with the elements based on the dynamic types of both the elements and the visitors.\nExamples.\nC#.\nThis example declares a separate codice_43 class that takes care of the printing. If the introduction of a new concrete visitor is desired, a new class will be created to implement the Visitor interface, and new implementations for the Visit methods will be provided. The existing classes (Literal and Addition) will remain unchanged.\nnamespace Wikipedia.Examples;\nusing System;\ninterface IVisitor\n void Visit(Literal literal); \n void Visit(Addition addition);\nclass ExpressionPrintingVisitor : IVisitor\n public void Visit(Literal literal)\n Console.WriteLine(literal.Value);\n public void Visit(Addition addition)\n double leftValue = addition.Left.GetValue();\n double rightValue = addition.Right.GetValue();\n double sum = addition.GetValue();\n Console.WriteLine($\"{leftValue} + {rightValue} = {sum}\");\nabstract class Expression\n public abstract void Accept(IVisitor visitor);\n public abstract double GetValue();\nclass Literal : Expression\n public Literal(double value)\n this.Value = value;\n public override void Accept(IVisitor visitor)\n visitor.Visit(this);\n \n public override double GetValue()\n return Value;\nclass Addition : Expression\n public Addition(Expression left, Expression right)\n Left = left;\n Right = right;\n public override void Accept(Visitor visitor)\n Left.Accept(visitor);\n Right.Accept(visitor);\n visitor.Visit(this);\n \n public override double GetValue()\n return Left.GetValue() + Right.GetValue();\npublic static class Program\n public static void Main(string[] args)\n // Emulate 1 + 2 + 3\n Addition e = new(\n new Addition(\n new Literal(1),\n new Literal(2)\n new Literal(3)\n ExpressionPrintingVisitor printingVisitor = new();\n e.Accept(printingVisitor);\n Console.ReadKey();\nSmalltalk.\nIn this case, it is the object's responsibility to know how to print itself on a stream. The visitor here is then the object, not the stream.\n\"There's no syntax for creating a class. Classes are created by sending messages to other classes.\"\nWriteStream subclass: #ExpressionPrinter\n instanceVariableNames: \"\n classVariableNames: \"\n package: 'Wikipedia'.\nExpressionPrinter\u00bbwrite: anObject\n \"Delegates the action to the object. The object doesn't need to be of any special\n class; it only needs to be able to understand the message #putOn:\"\n anObject putOn: self.\n ^ anObject.\nObject subclass: #Expression\n instanceVariableNames: \"\n classVariableNames: \"\n package: 'Wikipedia'.\nExpression subclass: #Literal\n instanceVariableNames: 'value'\n classVariableNames: \"\n package: 'Wikipedia'.\nLiteral class\u00bbwith: aValue\n \"Class method for building an instance of the Literal class\"\n ^ self new\n value: aValue;\n yourself.\nLiteral\u00bbvalue: aValue\n \"Setter for value\"\n value := aValue.\nLiteral\u00bbputOn: aStream\n \"A Literal object knows how to print itself\"\n aStream nextPutAll: value asString.\nExpression subclass: #Addition\n instanceVariableNames: 'left right'\n classVariableNames: \"\n package: 'Wikipedia'.\nAddition class\u00bbleft: a right: b\n \"Class method for building an instance of the Addition class\"\n ^ self new\n left: a;\n right: b;\n yourself.\nAddition\u00bbleft: anExpression\n \"Setter for left\"\n left := anExpression.\nAddition\u00bbright: anExpression\n \"Setter for right\"\n right := anExpression.\nAddition\u00bbputOn: aStream\n \"An Addition object knows how to print itself\"\n aStream nextPut: $(.\n left putOn: aStream.\n aStream nextPut: $+.\n right putOn: aStream.\n aStream nextPut: $).\nObject subclass: #Program\n instanceVariableNames: \"\n classVariableNames: \"\n package: 'Wikipedia'.\nProgram\u00bbmain\n | expression stream |\n expression := Addition\n left: (Addition\n left: (Literal with: 1)\n right: (Literal with: 2))\n right: (Literal with: 3).\n stream := ExpressionPrinter on: (String new: 100).\n stream write: expression.\n Transcript show: stream contents.\n Transcript flush.\nGo.\nGo does not support method overloading, so the visit methods need different names. A typical visitor interface might be\ntype Visitor interface {\n visitWheel(wheel Wheel) string\n visitEngine(engine Engine) string\n visitBody(body Body) string\n visitCar(car Car) string\nJava.\nThe following example is in the language Java, and shows how the contents of a tree of nodes (in this case describing the components of a car) can be printed. Instead of creating codice_44 methods for each node subclass (codice_45, codice_46, codice_47, and codice_48), one visitor class (codice_49) performs the required printing action. Because different node subclasses require slightly different actions to print properly, codice_49 dispatches actions based on the class of the argument passed to its codice_1 method. codice_52, which is analogous to a save operation for a different file format, does likewise.\nSources.\npackage org.wikipedia.examples;\nimport java.util.List;\ninterface CarElement {\n void accept(CarElementVisitor visitor);\ninterface CarElementVisitor {\n void visit(Body body);\n void visit(Car car);\n void visit(Engine engine);\n void visit(Wheel wheel);\nclass Wheel implements CarElement {\n private final String name;\n public Wheel(final String name) {\n this.name = name;\n public String getName() {\n return name;\n @Override\n public void accept(CarElementVisitor visitor) {\n * accept(CarElementVisitor) in Wheel implements\n * accept(CarElementVisitor) in CarElement, so the call\n * to accept is bound at run time. This can be considered\n * the *first* dispatch. However, the decision to call\n * visit(Wheel) (as opposed to visit(Engine) etc.) can be\n * made during compile time since 'this' is known at compile\n * time to be a Wheel. Moreover, each implementation of\n * CarElementVisitor implements the visit(Wheel), which is\n * another decision that is made at run time. This can be\n * considered the *second* dispatch.\n visitor.visit(this);\nclass Body implements CarElement {\n @Override\n public void accept(CarElementVisitor visitor) {\n visitor.visit(this);\nclass Engine implements CarElement {\n @Override\n public void accept(CarElementVisitor visitor) {\n visitor.visit(this);\nclass Car implements CarElement {\n private final List&lt;CarElement&gt; elements;\n public Car() {\n this.elements = List.of(\n new Wheel(\"front left\"), \n new Wheel(\"front right\"),\n new Wheel(\"back left\"), \n new Wheel(\"back right\"),\n new Body(), \n new Engine()\n @Override\n public void accept(CarElementVisitor visitor) {\n for (CarElement element : elements) {\n element.accept(visitor);\n visitor.visit(this);\nclass CarElementDoVisitor implements CarElementVisitor {\n @Override\n public void visit(Body body) {\n System.out.println(\"Moving my body\");\n @Override\n public void visit(Car car) {\n System.out.println(\"Starting my car\");\n @Override\n public void visit(Wheel wheel) {\n System.out.printf(\"Kicking my %s wheel%n\", wheel.getName());\n @Override\n public void visit(Engine engine) {\n System.out.println(\"Starting my engine\");\nclass CarElementPrintVisitor implements CarElementVisitor {\n @Override\n public void visit(Body body) {\n System.out.println(\"Visiting body\");\n @Override\n public void visit(Car car) {\n System.out.println(\"Visiting car\");\n @Override\n public void visit(Engine engine) {\n System.out.println(\"Visiting engine\");\n @Override\n public void visit(Wheel wheel) {\n System.out.println(\"Visiting %s wheel%n\", wheel.getName());\npublic class VisitorDemo {\n public static void main(String[] args) {\n Car car = new Car();\n car.accept(new CarElementPrintVisitor());\n car.accept(new CarElementDoVisitor());\nCommon Lisp.\nSources.\n ((elements :initarg :elements)))\n ((name :initarg :name :initform \"&lt;unnamed-car-part&gt;\")))\n (print-object (slot-value p 'name) stream))\n (with-slots (elements) a\n (dolist (e elements)\n (funcall function e other-object))))\n (format t \"don't know how ~s and ~s should interact~%\" object other-object))\n (format t \"kicking wheel ~s ~s times~%\" object other-object))\n (format t \"kicking wheel ~s symbolically using symbol ~s~%\" object other-object))\n (format t \"starting engine ~s ~s times~%\" object other-object))\n (format t \"starting engine ~s symbolically using symbol ~s~%\" object other-object))\n(let ((a (make-instance 'auto\n :elements `(,(make-instance 'wheel :name \"front-left-wheel\")\n ,(make-instance 'wheel :name \"front-right-wheel\")\n ,(make-instance 'wheel :name \"rear-left-wheel\")\n ,(make-instance 'wheel :name \"rear-right-wheel\")\n ,(make-instance 'body :name \"body\")\n ,(make-instance 'engine :name \"engine\")))))\n ;; traverse to print elements\n ;; stream *standard-output* plays the role of other-object here\n (traverse #'print a *standard-output*)\n (terpri) ;; print newline\n ;; traverse with arbitrary context from other object\n (traverse #'do-something a 42)\n ;; traverse with arbitrary context from other object\n (traverse #'do-something a 'abc))\nNotes.\nThe codice_53 parameter is superfluous in codice_54. The reason is that it is possible to use an anonymous function that calls the desired target method with a lexically captured object:\n(defmethod traverse (function (a auto)) ;; other-object removed\n (with-slots (elements) a\n (dolist (e elements)\n (funcall function e)))) ;; from here too\n ;; alternative way to print-traverse\n (traverse (lambda (o) (print o *standard-output*)) a)\n ;; alternative way to do-something with\n ;; elements of a and integer 42\n (traverse (lambda (o) (do-something o 42)) a)\nNow, the multiple dispatch occurs in the call issued from the body of the anonymous function, and so codice_54 is just a mapping function that distributes a function application over the elements of an object. Thus all traces of the Visitor Pattern disappear, except for the mapping function, in which there is no evidence of two objects being involved. All knowledge of there being two objects and a dispatch on their types is in the lambda function.\nPython.\nPython does not support method overloading in the classical sense (polymorphic behavior according to type of passed parameters), so the \"visit\" methods for the different model types need to have different names.\nSources.\nVisitor pattern example.\nfrom abc import ABCMeta, abstractmethod\nfrom typing import NoReturn\nNOT_IMPLEMENTED: str = \"You should implement this.\"\nclass CarElement(metaclass = ABCMeta):\n @abstractmethod\n def accept(self, visitor: CarElementVisitor) -&gt; NoReturn:\n raise NotImplementedError(NOT_IMPLEMENTED)\nclass Body(CarElement):\n def accept(self, visitor: CarElementVisitor) -&gt; None:\n visitor.visit_body(self)\nclass Engine(CarElement):\n def accept(self, visitor: CarElementVisitor) -&gt; None:\n visitor.visit_engine(self)\nclass Wheel(CarElement):\n def __init__(self, name: str) -&gt; None:\n self.name = name\n def accept(self, visitor: CarElementVisitor) -&gt; None:\n visitor.visit_wheel(self)\nclass Car(CarElement):\n def __init__(self) -&gt; None:\n self.elements: list[CarElement] = [\n Wheel(\"front left\"), \n Wheel(\"front right\"),\n Wheel(\"back left\"), \n Wheel(\"back right\"),\n Body(), \n Engine()\n def accept(self, visitor):\n for element in self.elements:\n element.accept(visitor)\n visitor.visit_car(self)\nclass CarElementVisitor(metaclass = ABCMeta):\n @abstractmethod\n def visit_body(self, element: CarElement) -&gt; NoReturn:\n raise NotImplementedError(NOT_IMPLEMENTED)\n @abstractmethod\n def visit_engine(self, element: CarElement) -&gt; NoReturn:\n raise NotImplementedError(NOT_IMPLEMENTED)\n @abstractmethod\n def visit_wheel(self, element: CarElement) -&gt; NoReturn:\n raise NotImplementedError(NOT_IMPLEMENTED)\n @abstractmethod\n def visit_car(self, element: CarElement) -&gt; NoReturn:\n raise NotImplementedError(NOT_IMPLEMENTED)\nclass CarElementDoVisitor(CarElementVisitor):\n def visit_body(self, body: Body) -&gt; None:\n print(\"Moving my body.\")\n def visit_car(self, car: Car) -&gt; None:\n print(\"Starting my car.\")\n def visit_wheel(self, wheel: Wheel) -&gt; None:\n print(f\"Kicking my {wheel.name} wheel.\")\n def visit_engine(self, engine: Engine) -&gt; None:\n print(\"Starting my engine.\")\nclass CarElementPrintVisitor(CarElementVisitor):\n def visit_body(self, body: Body) -&gt; None:\n print(\"Visiting body.\")\n def visit_car(self, car: Car) -&gt; None:\n print(\"Visiting car.\")\n def visit_wheel(self, wheel: Wheel) -&gt; None:\n print(f\"Visiting {wheel.name} wheel.\")\n def visit_engine(self, engine: Engine) -&gt; None:\n print(\"Visiting engine.\")\nif __name__ == \"__main__\":\n car: Car = Car()\n car.accept(CarElementPrintVisitor())\n car.accept(CarElementDoVisitor())\nOutput.\nVisiting front left wheel.\nVisiting front right wheel.\nVisiting back left wheel.\nVisiting back right wheel.\nVisiting body.\nVisiting engine.\nVisiting car.\nKicking my front left wheel.\nKicking my front right wheel.\nKicking my back left wheel.\nKicking my back right wheel.\nMoving my body.\nStarting my engine.\nStarting my car.\nAbstraction.\nUsing Python 3 or above allows to make a general implementation of the accept method:\nclass Visitable:\n def accept(self, visitor: Visitor) -&gt; Any:\n lookup: str = f\"visit_{self.__qualname__.replace(\".\", \"_\")}\"\n return getattr(visitor, lookup)(self)\nOne could extend this to iterate over the class's method resolution order if they would like to fall back on already-implemented classes. They could also use the subclass hook feature to define the lookup in advance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38690", "revid": "50331844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38690", "title": "1518", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1518 (MDXVIII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. Within much of Christian Europe, New Year's Day was celebrated on January 1, the rule in the Roman Empire since 45 BC, and in 1518, the year ran from January 1, 1518 to December 31, 1518. In England (until 1752) and Scandinavia, the year ran from the Feast of the Annunciation (March 25, 1518) to March 24, 1519; and in France (until 1565) from Easter Sunday (April 4, 1518) to April 23, 1519. For instance, the will of Leonardo da Vinci, drafted in Amboise on 23 April 1519, shows the legend \"Given on the 23rd of April 1518, before Easter\".* See Wikisource \"\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38691", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38691", "title": "1517", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1517 (MDXVII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38692", "revid": "1316732486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38692", "title": "1516", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1516 (MDXVI) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar, there is also a leap year starting on Saturday of the Gregorian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38693", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38693", "title": "1515", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1515 (MDXV) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38694", "revid": "50468286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38694", "title": "1514", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1514 (MDXIV) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38695", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38695", "title": "1513", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1513 (MDXIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38696", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38696", "title": "1511", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1511 (MDXI) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38697", "revid": "1310092670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38697", "title": "1510", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1510 (MDX) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38698", "revid": "23368140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38698", "title": "1507", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1507 (MDVII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38699", "revid": "1310092280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38699", "title": "1508", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1508 (MDVIII) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38700", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38700", "title": "1509", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1509 (MDIX) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38701", "revid": "23316696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38701", "title": "1505", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1505 (MDV) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38702", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38702", "title": "1504", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1504 (MDIV) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38704", "revid": "37982794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38704", "title": "Beato Angelico", "text": ""}
{"id": "38705", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38705", "title": "1502", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1502 (MDII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38706", "revid": "1309218771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38706", "title": "1501", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1501 (MDI) was a common year starting on Friday in the Julian calendar. It was the first year of the 16th century.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38707", "revid": "431183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38707", "title": "Perpignan", "text": " \nPerpignan (, , ; ; ) is the prefecture of the Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es-Orientales department in Southern France, in the heart of the plain of Roussillon, at the foot of the Pyrenees a few kilometres from the Mediterranean Sea and the scrublands of the Corbi\u00e8res massif. It is the centre of the Perpignan M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e M\u00e9tropole metropolitan area.\nIn 2021, Perpignan had a population of 119,656 in the commune proper, and the agglomeration had a total population of 205,183, making it the last major French city before the Spanish border. Perpignan is sometimes seen as the \"entrance\" to the Iberian Peninsula.\nPerpignan was the capital of the former province and County of Roussillon (\"Rossell\u00f3\" in Catalan) and continental capital of the Kingdom of Majorca in the 13th and 14th centuries. It has preserved an extensive old centre with its \"bodegas\" in the historic centre, coloured houses in a series of picturesque streets and alleys stretching between the banks of the T\u00eat and its tributary, the Basse.\nThe city is also known for its International Festival of Photojournalism, the medieval Trobades festival and its centuries-old garnet industry.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nPerpignan is located in the center of the Roussillon plain, 13\u00a0km west of the Mediterranean coast. It is the southernmost city of metropolitan France.\nHydrography.\nPerpignan is crossed by the largest river in Roussillon, the T\u00eat, and by one of its tributaries, the Basse. Floods have occurred, as in 1892 when the rising of the T\u00eat in Perpignan destroyed 39 houses, leaving more than 60 families homeless.\nClimate.\nPerpignan has a typical hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Csa\"), similar to much of the Mediterranean coastline of France. One might expect rain to be rare in the city, but the annual precipitation levels are similar to the national average. However, the city is known for its patchy rains, with weeks or even months of rain falling in a matter of hours, followed by several weeks without a drop of water. Perpignan experiences very hot summers and fairly mild winters. Temperatures can reach 40\u00a0\u00b0C (104\u00a0\u00b0F), while there has been little snow for decades. Most precipitation occurs in the cold season, with summers being extremely dry. A fresh north-westerly wind often blows, the Tramontana (French: Tramontane, pronounced [t\u0281am\u0254\u0303tan]), keeping the sky clear much of the time and resulting in high annual sunshine. But the presence of this wind makes winters colder than would be expected from the geographical position of the city.\nTransport.\nThe A9 motorway connects Perpignan with Barcelona and Montpellier.\nPerpignan is served by the Gare de Perpignan railway station, which offers connections to Paris, Barcelona, Toulouse, and several regional destinations. Salvador Dal\u00ed proclaimed the station to be the \"Cosmic Centre of the Universe\" after experiencing a vision there in 1963.\nThe nearest airport is Perpignan\u2013Rivesaltes Airport. However, the airport only provides flights to limited European destinations. The nearest major international airports are Montpellier - M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e Airport, located north east, Josep Tarradellas Barcelona\u2013El Prat Airport, located south and Toulouse\u2013Blagnac Airport, located north west of Perpignan.\nToponymy.\nThe name of Perpignan appears in 927 as \"Perpinianum\", followed in 959 by \"Villa Perpiniano\", \"Pirpinianum\" in the 11th century, and \"Perpiniani\" in 1176. \"Perpeny\u00e0\", which appears in the 13th century, was the most common form until the 15th century, and was still used in the 17th century. It probably derives from the Roman name \"Perpennius\".\nThe city is sometimes nicknamed \"Perpi\" for short.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n&lt;poem&gt;* County of Roussillon 927\u20131172\nThough settlement in the area goes back to Roman times, the medieval town of Perpignan seems to have been founded around the beginning of the 10th century. Shortly afterwards, Perpignan became the capital of the counts of Roussillon. Historically, it was part of the region known as Septimania. In 1172 Count Girard II bequeathed his lands to the Counts of Barcelona. Perpignan acquired the institutions of a partly self-governing commune in 1197. French feudal rights over Roussillon were given up by Louis IX in the Treaty of Corbeil.\nWhen James I the Conqueror, king of Aragon and count of Barcelona, founded the Kingdom of Majorca in 1276, Perpignan became the capital of the mainland territories of the new state. The subsequent decades are considered the city's historical golden age. It prospered as a centre of cloth manufacture, leatherwork, goldsmithery, and other luxury crafts. King Philippe III of France died there in 1285, as he was returning from his unsuccessful crusade against the Aragonese Crown.\nIn 1344 Peter IV of Aragon annexed the Kingdom of Majorca and Perpignan once more became part of the Principality of Catalonia. A few years later it lost approximately half of its population to the Black Death. It was attacked and occupied by Louis XI in 1463; a violent uprising against French rule in 1473 was harshly put down after a long siege, but in 1493 Charles VIII, wishing to conciliate Castile in order to free himself to invade Italy, restored it to Ferdinand II of Aragon.\nAgain besieged and captured by the French during the Thirty Years' War in September 1642, Perpignan was formally ceded by Spain 17 years later in the Treaty of the Pyrenees, and thereafter remained a French possession.\nIn June 2020, Louis Aliot of the National Rally was elected mayor of Perpignan. This was the first time since 1995 that the far-right party had won a city of more than 100,000 people.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe H\u00f4tel de Ville (City Hall) dates back to 1318.\nInternational relations.\nPerpignan is twinned with:\nEducation.\nMore than 10,000 students between the ages of 2 and 12 attend 61 preschools and primary schools in the city. Perpignan also has 26 high schools.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCulture.\nSince 2004, the free three-day \"Guitares au Palais\" has been held each year in the last weekend of August in the Palace of the Kings of Majorca. The festival has a broad mainstream focus with pop-related music as well as traditional acoustic guitar music and alternative music. The festival has attracted international guests like Caetano Veloso (2007), \"Rumberos Catalans\", Pedro Soler, Bernardo Sandoval, Peter Finger, and Aaron and Bryce Dessner (2008).\nEach September, Perpignan hosts the internationally renowned Visa pour l'Image festival of photojournalism. Free exhibitions are mounted in the Couvent des Minimes, Chapelle des Dominicaines and other buildings in the old town.\nIn 2008, Perpignan became Capital of Catalan Culture. Many street name signs in the city are in both French and Catalan.\nSport.\nLike the rest of the south of France, Perpignan is a rugby stronghold. Their rugby union side, USA Perpignan, are regular competitors in the European Rugby Champions Cup and have been champions of the French Top 14 seven times (most recently in 2009). They play at the Stade Aim\u00e9 Giral.\nTheir rugby league team Catalans Dragons plays in the British Super League. The Dragons' games in Perpignan against the Northern English-based sides are usually very popular with British rugby fans, with thousands descending on the city on the day of the game, including many holidaying fans travelling up from the Spanish Costa Brava to join those who came directly from the UK. The club was founded in 2000 as a merger of XIII Catalan with the nearby team AS Saint Est\u00e8ve to form Union Treiziste Catalane in 2000 who changed their name to Catalans Dragons upon transfer from the French to British rugby league system. The Dragons became the first non-English team to win the Challenge Cup when they defeated Warrington Wolves in the 2018 final. They are based at Stade Gilbert Brutus. AS Saint Est\u00e8ve's youth teams still operates as Saint-Est\u00e8ve XIII Mavericks in the National Division 2, while a new Elite One Championship club was formed in 2000 under the name Saint-Est\u00e8ve XIII Catalan which is in effect Catalans Dragons reserves; both play at the Stade Municipal in the suburb of Saint-Est\u00e8ve.\nThe local association football team is Canet Roussillon FC.\nThere is also an Australian rules football club, Perpignan Tigers, and American football club Grizzlys Catalans.\nThe Roussillon Grand Prix was a Grand Prix motor racing event that was held between 1946 and 1949 in the streets of Perpignan.\nEconomy.\nTraditional commerce was in wine, olive oil, corks (the cork oak \"Quercus suber\" grows in Perpignan's mild climate), wool, leather, and iron. In May 1907 it was a seat of agitation by southern producers for government enforcement of wine quality following a collapse in prices. JOB rolling papers are currently manufactured in Perpignan.\nSites of interest.\nConstruction work on Perpignan Cathedral began in 1324 and finished in 1509.\nThe 13th century Palace of the Kings of Majorca sits on the high citadel, surrounded by ramparts, reinforced for Louis XI and Charles V, which were updated in the 17th century by Louis XIV's military engineer Vauban.\nThe walls surrounding the town, which had likewise been designed by Vauban, were razed in 1904 to accommodate urban development. The main city gate, the Castillet is a small fortress built in the 14th century, which has been preserved. It was also used as a prison until the end of the 19th century.\nThe H\u00f4tel Pams is a lavishly decorated mansion designed for Jules Pams that illustrates the artistic tastes of the wealthy bourgeois at the turn of the 20th century.\nLes Halles de Vauban are a new addition to the banks of the city's canal. Opened in November 2017, the indoor markets are privately owned and cost \u20ac1.5 million. Split into two locations, vendors offer fresh fruit and vegetables, bread, flowers, cheese, and other items. There is a bar and central eating court with a range of tapas, burgers, omelettes and food from around the world.\nNotable people linked to Perpignan.\nFollowing a visit in 1963, the Catalan surrealist artist Salvador Dal\u00ed declared the city's railway station the centre of the Universe, claiming that he always had his best ideas sitting in its waiting room. Dal\u00ed's painting \"La Gare de Perpignan\" commemorates his vision of \"cosmogonic ecstasy\" there on 19 September 1963. He followed that up some years later by declaring that the Iberian Peninsula rotated precisely at Perpignan station 132 million years ago \u2013 an event the artist invoked in his 1983 painting \"Topological Abduction of Europe \u2013 Homage to Ren\u00e9 Thom\". Above the station is a monument in Dali's honour, and across the surface of one of the main platforms is painted, in large letters, \u00abperpignan centre du monde\u00bb (French for \"perpignan centre of the world\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38708", "revid": "1314215010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38708", "title": "1250", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1250 (MCCL) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\u09b8\u09c0\u09ae\u09be\u09a8\u09be \u0989\u09aa\u099c\u09c7\u09b2\u09be \u09ae\u09b9\u09be\u09a6\u09c7\u09ac\u09aa\u09c1\u09b0 \u09ed\u09eb\u09e6 \u099f\u09be\u0995\u09be\u09af\u09bc \u09aa\u09cd\u09af\u09be\u0995\u09c7\u099c\u099f\u09be \u099a\u09be\u09b0\u099f\u09be \u09b2\u09c1\u0999\u09cd\u0997\u09bf \u098f\u0995\u099f\u09be \u0997\u09be\u09ae\u099b\u09be\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38709", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38709", "title": "1251", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1251 (MCCLI) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38710", "revid": "8965090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38710", "title": "Stockholm, Wisconsin", "text": "Stockholm is a village in Pepin County, Wisconsin, United States, founded in 1854 by immigrants from Karlskoga, Sweden, who named it after their country's capital. The population was 78 at the 2020 census. The village is located within the Town of Stockholm.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 66 people, 36 households, and 21 families residing in the village. The population density was . There were 88 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the village was 100.0% White.\nThere were 36 households, of which 11.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.8% were married couples living together, 5.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41.7% were non-families. 38.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.83 and the average family size was 2.33.\nThe median age in the village was 59.3 years. 9.1% of residents were under the age of 18; 0% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 16.6% were from 25 to 44; 45.5% were from 45 to 64; and 28.8% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the village was 53.0% male and 47.0% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 97 people, 48 households, and 30 families residing in the village. The population density was . There were 89 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the village was 100.00% white.\nThere were 48 households, out of which 16.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.3% were married couples living together, 4.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.5% were non-families. 31.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.02 and the average family size was 2.53.\nIn the village, the population was spread out, with 15.5% under the age of 18, 6.2% from 18 to 24, 14.4% from 25 to 44, 42.3% from 45 to 64, and 21.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 52 years. For every 100 females, there were 120.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 121.6 males.\nThe median income for a household in the village was $41,250, and the median income for a family was $46,250. Males had a median income of $26,250 versus $26,667 for females. The per-capita income for the village was $55,006, and 8.6% of the population is below the poverty line.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38711", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38711", "title": "Texas Revolution", "text": "1835\u20131836 rebellion\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Events leading to the American Civil War\nThe Texas Revolution (October 2, 1835 \u2013 April 21, 1836) was a rebellion by Anglo-American immigrants as well as Hispanic Texans (known as Texians and Tejanos respectively) against the centralist government of Mexico in the Mexican state of Coahuila y Tejas. Although the uprising was part of a larger revolt against the Centralist Republic of Mexico that included other provinces opposed to the regime of President Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna, the Mexican government believed the United States had instigated the Texas insurrection with the goal of annexation. The Mexican Congress passed the Tornel Decree, declaring that any foreigners fighting against Mexican troops \"will be deemed pirates and dealt with as such, being citizens of no nation presently at war with the Republic and fighting under no recognized flag\". Only the province of Texas succeeded in breaking with Mexico, establishing the Republic of Texas. It was eventually annexed by the United States about a decade later.\nCauses.\nThe revolution began in October 1835, after a decade of political and cultural clashes between the Mexican government and the large and growing population of Anglo-American settlers in Texas. The Mexican government had become increasingly centralized and the rights of its citizens had become further curtailed in turn, particularly regarding immigration from the United States, and the holding of slaves as property. Mexico had officially abolished slavery in Texas in 1829, and the desire of Texians to maintain the institution of chattel slavery in Texas was a major cause of secession. Although slavery is not mentioned explicitly in the Declaration of Independence of Texas, the ownership of a certain type of property was of great importance to many of the settlers. Texians and Tejanos disagreed on whether the ultimate goal was independence or a return to the Mexican Constitution of 1824. While delegates at the Consultation (provisional government) debated the war's motives, Texians and a flood of volunteers from the United States defeated the small garrisons of Mexican soldiers by mid-December 1835. The Consultation declined to declare independence and installed an interim government, whose infighting led to political paralysis and a dearth of effective governance in Texas. An ill-conceived proposal to invade Matamoros siphoned much-needed volunteers and provisions from the fledgling Texian Army. In March 1836, a second political convention declared independence and appointed leadership for the new Republic of Texas.\nDetermined to avenge Mexico's honor, Santa Anna vowed to personally retake Texas. His Army of Operations entered Texas in mid-February 1836 and found the Texians completely unprepared. Mexican General Jos\u00e9 de Urrea led a contingent of troops on the Goliad Campaign up the Texas coast, defeating all Texian troops in his path and executing most of those who surrendered. Santa Anna led a larger force to San Antonio de B\u00e9xar (or B\u00e9xar), where his troops defeated the Texian garrison in the Battle of the Alamo, killing almost all of the defenders.\nA newly created Texian army under the command of Sam Houston was constantly on the move, while terrified civilians fled with the army, in a melee known as the Runaway Scrape. On March 31, Houston paused his men at Groce's Landing on the Brazos River, and for the next two weeks, the Texians received rigorous military training. Becoming complacent and underestimating the strength of his foes, Santa Anna further subdivided his troops. On April 21, Houston's army staged a surprise assault on Santa Anna and his vanguard force at the Battle of San Jacinto. The Mexican troops were quickly routed, and vengeful Texians executed many who tried to surrender. Santa Anna was taken hostage; in exchange for his life, he ordered the Mexican army to retreat south of the Rio Grande. The Texans forced Santa Anna to sign the Treaty of Velasco, which gave Texas its independence. However, Mexico refused to recognize the Republic of Texas, and intermittent conflicts between the two countries continued into the 1840s. The annexation of Texas as the 28th state of the United States in 1845 led directly to the Mexican\u2013American War.\nBackground.\nAfter a failed attempt by France to colonize Texas in the late 17th century, Spain developed a plan to settle the region. On its southern edge, along the Medina and Nueces Rivers, Spanish Texas was bordered by the province of Coahuila. On the east, Texas bordered Louisiana. Following the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, the United States also claimed the land west of the Sabine River, all the way to the Rio Grande. From 1812 to 1813 anti-Spanish republicans and U.S. filibusters rebelled against the Spanish Empire in what is known today as the Guti\u00e9rrez\u2013Magee Expedition during the Mexican War of Independence. They won battles in the beginning and captured many Texas cities from the Spanish that led to a declaration of independence of the state of Texas as part of the Mexican Republic on April 17, 1813. The new Texas government and army met their doom in the Battle of Medina in August 1813, 20 miles south of San Antonio, where 1,300 of the 1,400 rebel army were killed in battle or executed shortly afterwards by royalist soldiers. It was the deadliest single battle in Texas history. 300 republican government officials in San Antonio were captured and executed by the Spanish royalists shortly after the battle. Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna, future President of Mexico, fought in this battle as a royalist and followed his superiors' orders to take no prisoners. Another interesting note is two founding fathers of the Republic of Texas and future signers of the Texas Declaration of Independence in 1836, Jos\u00e9 Antonio Navarro and Jos\u00e9 Francisco Ruiz, took part in the Guti\u00e9rrez\u2013Magee Expedition. Although the United States officially renounced that claim as part of the Transcontinental Treaty with Spain in 1819, many Americans continued to believe that Texas should belong to their nation, and over the next decade the United States made several offers to purchase the region.\nFollowing the Mexican War of Independence, Texas became part of Mexico. Under the Constitution of 1824, which defined the country as a federal republic, the provinces of Texas and Coahuila were combined to become the state Coahuila y Tejas. Texas was granted only a single seat in the state legislature, which met in Saltillo, hundreds of miles away. After months of grumbling by \"Tejanos\" (Mexican-born residents of Texas) outraged at the loss of their political autonomy, state officials agreed to make Texas a department of the new state, with a \"de facto\" capital in San Antonio de B\u00e9xar.\nTexas was very sparsely settled, with fewer than 3,500 non-Native residents, and only about 200 soldiers, which made it extremely vulnerable to attacks by native tribes and American filibusters. In the hopes that an influx of settlers could control the Indigenous resistance, the bankrupt Mexican government liberalized immigration policies for the region. Finally able to settle legally in Texas, Anglos from the United States soon vastly outnumbered the \"Tejanos\". Most of the immigrants came from the Southern United States, and included slave owners. Most brought with them significant prejudices against other races, attitudes often applied to the \"Tejanos\". Mexico's official religion was Roman Catholicism, yet the majority of the immigrants were Protestants who distrusted Catholics.\nMexican authorities became increasingly concerned about the stability of the region. The colonies teetered at the brink of revolt in 1829, after Mexico abolished slavery. In response, President Anastasio Bustamante implemented the Laws of April 6, 1830, which, among other things, prohibited further immigration to Texas from the United States, increased taxes, and reiterated the ban on slavery. Settlers simply circumvented or ignored the laws. By 1834, an estimated 30,000 Anglos lived in Coahuila y Tejas, compared to only 7,800\u00a0Mexican-born residents. By the end of 1835, almost 5,000 enslaved Africans and African Americans lived in Texas, making up 13 percent of the non-Indian population.\nIn 1832, Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna led a revolt to overthrow Bustamante. Texians, or English-speaking settlers, also took up arms. By mid-August, all Mexican troops had been expelled from east Texas. Buoyed by their success, Texians held two political conventions to persuade Mexican authorities to weaken the Laws of April 6, 1830. Bustamante was replaced by the liberal federalist Valentin Gomez Farias, who would attempt to reach a compromise with the Texans. In November 1833, the Mexican government attempted to address some of their concerns, repealing some sections of the law and granting the colonists further concessions, including increased representation in the state legislature. Stephen F. Austin, who had brought the first American settlers to Texas, wrote to a friend that \"Every evil complained of has been remedied.\" Mexican authorities were quietly watchful, concerned that the colonists were maneuvering towards secession.\nSanta Anna overthrew Gomez Farias in April 1834, and soon revealed himself to be a centralist, inaugurating the Centralist Republic of Mexico. In 1835, the 1824 Constitution was overturned; state legislatures were dismissed, militias disbanded. Federalists throughout Mexico were appalled. Citizens in the states of Oaxaca and Zacatecas took up arms. After Santa Anna's troops subdued the rebellion in Zacatecas in May, he gave his troops two days to pillage the city; over 2,000 noncombatants were killed. The governor of Coahuila y Tejas, Agust\u00edn Viesca, refused to dissolve the legislature, instead ordering that the session reconvene in B\u00e9xar, further from the influence of the Mexican army. Although prominent \"Tejano\" Juan Segu\u00edn raised a militia company to assist the governor, the B\u00e9xar \"ayuntamiento\" (city council) ordered him not to interfere, and Viesca was arrested before he reached Texas.\nPublic opinion in Texas was divided. Editorials in the United States began advocating complete independence for Texas. After several men staged a minor revolt against customs duties in Anahuac in June, local leaders began calling for a public meeting to determine whether a majority of settlers favored independence, a return to federalism, or the status quo. Although some leaders worried that Mexican officials would see this type of gathering as a step towards revolution, by the end of August most communities had agreed to send delegates to the Consultation, scheduled for October 15.\nAs early as April 1835, military commanders in Texas began requesting reinforcements, fearing the citizens would revolt. Mexico was ill-prepared for a large civil war, but continued unrest in Texas posed a significant danger to the power of Santa Anna and of Mexico. If the people of Coahuila also took up arms, Mexico faced losing a large portion of its territory. Without the northeastern province to act as a buffer, it was likely that United States influence would spread, and the Mexican territories of Nuevo Mexico and Alta California would be at risk of future American encroachment. Santa Anna had no wish to tangle with the United States, and he knew that the unrest needed to be subdued before the United States could be convinced to become involved. In early September, Santa Anna ordered his brother-in-law, General Mart\u00edn Perfecto de Cos, to lead 500 soldiers to Texas to quell any potential rebellion. Cos and his men landed at the port of Copano on September 20. Austin called on all municipalities to raise militias to defend themselves.\nTexian offensive: October\u2013December 1835.\nGonzales.\nIn the early 1830s, the army loaned the citizens of Gonzales a small cannon for protection against Indian raids. After a Mexican soldier bludgeoned a Gonzales resident on September 10, 1835, tensions rose even further, and Mexican authorities felt it unwise to leave the settlers with a weapon. Colonel Domingo de Ugartechea, commander of all Mexican military forces in Texas, sent a small detachment of troops to retrieve the cannon. After settlers escorted the group from town without the cannon, Ugartechea sent 100 dragoons with Lieutenant Francisco de Casta\u00f1eda to demand compliance, with orders to avoid force if possible.\nMany of the settlers believed Mexican authorities were manufacturing an excuse to attack the town and eliminate the militia. Texians stalled Casta\u00f1eda's attempts to negotiate the cannon's return for several days as they waited for reinforcements from other colonies. In the early hours of October 2, approximately 140 Texian volunteers attacked Casta\u00f1eda's force. After a brief skirmish, Casta\u00f1eda requested a meeting with Texian leader John Henry Moore. Casta\u00f1eda revealed that he shared their federalist leanings, but that he was honor-bound to follow orders. As Moore returned to camp, the Texians raised a homemade white banner with an image of the cannon painted in black in the center, over the words \"Come and Take It\". Realizing that he was outnumbered and outgunned, Casta\u00f1eda led his troops back to B\u00e9xar. In this first battle of the revolution, two Mexican soldiers were killed, and one Texian was injured when he fell off his horse. Although the event was, as characterized by historian William C. Davis, \"an inconsequential skirmish in which one side did not try to fight\", Texians soon declared it a victory over Mexican troops. News of the skirmish spread throughout the United States, encouraging many adventurers to come to Texas to join the fight.\nVolunteers continued to arrive in Gonzales. On October 11, the troops unanimously elected Austin, who had no official military experience, the leader of the group he had dubbed the Army of the People. From the beginning, the volunteer army proved to have little discipline. Austin's first official order was to remind his men that they were expected to obey their commanding officers. Buoyed by their victory, the Texians were determined to drive the Mexican army out of Texas, and they began preparing to march to B\u00e9xar.\nGulf Coast campaign.\nAfter learning that Texian troops had attacked Casta\u00f1eda at Gonzales, Cos made haste for B\u00e9xar. Unaware of his departure, on October 6, Texians in Matagorda marched on Presidio La Bah\u00eda in Goliad to kidnap him and steal the $50,000 that was rumored to accompany him. On October 10, approximately 125 volunteers, including 30 \"Tejanos\", stormed the presidio. The Mexican garrison surrendered after a thirty-minute battle. One or two Texians were wounded and three Mexican soldiers were killed with seven more wounded.\nThe Texians established themselves in the presidio, under the command of Captain Philip Dimmitt, who immediately sent all the local \"Tejano\" volunteers to join Austin on the march to B\u00e9xar. At the end of the month, Dimmitt sent a group of men under Ira Westover to engage the Mexican garrison at Fort Lipantitl\u00e1n, near San Patricio. Late on November 3, the Texians took the undermanned fort without firing a shot. After dismantling the fort, they prepared to return to Goliad. The remainder of the Mexican garrison, which had been out on patrol, approached. The Mexican troops were accompanied by 15\u201320 loyal centralists from San Patricio, including all members of the \"ayuntamiento\". After a thirty-minute skirmish, the Mexican soldiers and Texian centralists retreated. With their departure, the Texian army controlled the Gulf Coast, forcing Mexican commanders to send all communication with the Mexican interior overland. The slower land journey left Cos unable to quickly request or receive reinforcements or supplies.\nOn their return to Goliad, Westover's group encountered Governor Viesca. After being freed by sympathetic soldiers, Viesca had immediately traveled to Texas to recreate the state government. Dimmitt welcomed Viesca but refused to recognize his authority as governor. This caused an uproar in the garrison, as many supported the governor. Dimmitt declared martial law and soon alienated most of the local residents. Over the next few months, the area between Goliad and Refugio descended into civil war. Goliad native Carlos de la Garza led a guerrilla warfare campaign against the Texian troops. According to historian Paul Lack, the Texian \"antiguerilla tactics did too little to crush out opposition but quite enough to sway the uncommitted toward the centralists.\"\nSiege of B\u00e9xar.\nWhile Dimmitt supervised the forces along the Gulf Coast, Austin led his men towards B\u00e9xar to engage Cos and his troops. Confident that they would quickly rout the Mexican troops, many Consultation delegates chose to join the military. Unable to reach a quorum, the Consultation was postponed until November 1. On October 16, the Texians paused from B\u00e9xar. Austin sent a messenger to Cos giving the requirements the Texians would need to lay down their arms and \"avoid the sad consequences of the Civil War which unfortunately threatens Texas\". Cos replied that Mexico would not \"yield to the dictates of foreigners\".\nThe approximately 650 Mexican troops quickly built barricades throughout the town. Within days the Texian army, about 450 strong, initiated a siege of B\u00e9xar, and gradually moved their camp nearer B\u00e9xar. On October 27, an advance party led by James Bowie and James Fannin chose Mission Concepci\u00f3n as the next campsite and sent for the rest of the Texian army. On learning that the Texians were temporarily divided, Ugartechea led troops to engage Bowie and Fannin's men. The Mexican cavalry was unable to fight effectively in the wooded, riverbottom terrain, and the weapons of the Mexican infantry had a much shorter range than those of the Texians. After three Mexican infantry attacks were repulsed, Ugartechea called for a retreat. One Texian soldier had died, and between 14 and 76 Mexican soldiers were killed. Although Texas Tech University professor emeritus Alwyn Barr noted that the battle of Concepci\u00f3n \"should have taught\u00a0... lessons on Mexican courage and the value of a good defensive position\", Texas history expert Stephen Hardin believes that \"the relative ease of the victory at Concepci\u00f3n instilled in the Texians a reliance on their long rifles and a contempt for their enemies\".\nAs the weather turned colder and rations grew smaller, groups of Texians began to leave, most without permission. Morale was boosted on November 18, when the first group of volunteers from the United States, the New Orleans Greys, joined the Texian army. Unlike the majority of the Texian volunteers, the Greys looked like soldiers, with uniforms, well-maintained rifles, adequate ammunition, and some semblance of discipline.\nAfter Austin resigned his command to become a commissioner to the United States, soldiers elected Edward Burleson as their new commander. On November 26, Burleson received word that a Mexican pack train of mules and horses, accompanied by 50\u2013100\u00a0Mexican soldiers, was within of B\u00e9xar. After a near mutiny, Burleson sent Bowie and William H. Jack with cavalry and infantry to intercept the supplies. In the subsequent skirmish, the Mexican forces were forced to retreat to B\u00e9xar, leaving their cargo behind. To the disappointment of the Texians, the saddlebags contained only fodder for the horses; for this reason the battle was later known as the Grass Fight. Although the victory briefly uplifted the Texian troops, morale continued to fall as the weather turned colder and the men grew bored. After several proposals to take B\u00e9xar by force were voted down by the Texian troops, on December 4 Burleson proposed that the army lift the siege and retreat to Goliad until spring. In a last effort to avoid a retreat, Colonel Ben Milam personally recruited units to participate in an attack. The following morning, Milam and Colonel Frank W. Johnson led several hundred Texians into the city. Over the next four days, Texians fought their way from house to house towards the fortified plazas near the center of town.\nCos received 650 reinforcements on December 8, but to his dismay most of them were raw recruits, including many convicts still in chains. Instead of being helpful, the reinforcements were mainly a drain on the dwindling food supplies. Seeing few other options, on December 9, Cos and the bulk of his men withdrew into the Alamo Mission on the outskirts of B\u00e9xar. Cos presented a plan for a counterattack; cavalry officers believed that they would be surrounded by Texians and refused their orders. Possibly 175 soldiers from four of the cavalry companies left the mission and rode south; Mexican officers later claimed the men misunderstood their orders and were not deserting. The following morning, Cos surrendered. Under the terms of the surrender, Cos and his men would leave Texas and no longer fight against supporters of the Constitution of 1824. With his departure, there was no longer an organized garrison of Mexican troops in Texas, and many of the Texians believed that the war was over. Burleson resigned his leadership of the army on December 15 and returned to his home. Many of the men did likewise, and Johnson assumed command of the 400 soldiers who remained.\nAccording to Barr the large number of American volunteers in B\u00e9xar \"contributed to the Mexican view that Texian opposition stemmed from outside influences\". In reality, of the 1,300 men who volunteered to fight for the Texian army in October and November 1835, only 150\u2013200 arrived from the United States after October 2. The rest were residents of Texas with an average immigration date of 1830. Volunteers came from every municipality, including those that were partially occupied by Mexican forces. However, as residents returned to their homes following Cos's surrender, the Texian army composition changed dramatically. Of the volunteers serving from January through March 1836, 78 percent had arrived from the United States after October 2, 1835.\nRegrouping: November 1835\u00a0\u2013 February 1836.\nTexas Consultation and the Matamoros Expedition.\nThe Consultation finally convened on November 3 in San Felipe with 58 of the 98 elected delegates. After days of bitter debate, the delegates voted to create a provisional government based on the principles of the Constitution of 1824. Although they did not declare independence, the delegates insisted they would not rejoin Mexico until federalism had been reinstated. The new government would consist of a governor and a General Council, with one representative from each municipality. Under the assumption that these two branches would cooperate, there was no system of checks and balances.\nOn November 13, delegates voted to create a regular army and named Sam Houston its commander-in-chief. In an effort to attract volunteers from the United States, soldiers would be granted land bounties. This provision was significant, as all public land was owned by the state or the federal government, indicating that the delegates expected Texas to eventually declare independence. Houston was given no authority over the volunteer army led by Austin, which predated the Consultation. Houston was also appointed to the Select Committee on Indian Affairs. Three men, including Austin, were asked to go to the United States to gather money, volunteers, and supplies. The delegates elected Henry Smith as governor. On November 14, the Consultation adjourned, leaving Smith and the Council in charge.\nThe new Texas government had no funds, so the military was granted the authority to impress supplies. This policy soon resulted in an almost universal hatred of the council, as food and supplies became scarce, especially in the areas around Goliad and B\u00e9xar, where Texian troops were stationed. Few of the volunteers agreed to join Houston's regular army. The \"Telegraph and Texas Register\" noted that \"some are not willing, under the present government, to do any duty ... That our government is bad, all acknowledge, and no one will deny.\"\nLeaders in Texas continued to debate whether the army was fighting for independence or a return to federalism. On December 22, Texian soldiers stationed at La Bah\u00eda issued the Goliad Declaration of Independence. Unwilling to decide the matter themselves, the Council called for another election, for delegates to the Convention of 1836. The Council specifically noted that all free white males could vote, as well as Mexicans who did not support centralism. Smith tried to veto the latter requirement, as he believed even \"Tejanos\" with federalist leanings should be denied suffrage.\nLeading federalists in Mexico, including former governor Viesca, Lorenzo de Zavala, and Jos\u00e9 Antonio Mex\u00eda, were advocating a plan to attack centralist troops in Matamoros. Council members were taken with the idea of a Matamoros Expedition. They hoped it would inspire other federalist states to revolt and keep the bored Texian troops from deserting the army. Most importantly, it would move the war zone outside Texas. The Council officially approved the plan on December 25, and on December 30 Johnson and his aide Dr. James Grant took the bulk of the army and almost all of the supplies to Goliad to prepare for the expedition. Historian Stuart Reid posits that Grant was secretly in the employ of the British government, and that his plan to capture Matamoros, and thus tie Texas more tightly to Mexico, may have been an unofficial plan of his to advance the interests of his employers in the region.\nPetty bickering between Smith and the Council members increased dramatically, and on January 9, 1836, Smith threatened to dismiss the Council unless they agreed to revoke their approval of the Matamoros Expedition. Two days later the Council voted to impeach Smith and named James W. Robinson the Acting Governor. It was unclear whether either side actually had the authority to dismiss the other. By this point, Texas was essentially in anarchy.\nUnder orders from Smith, Houston successfully dissuaded all but 70 men from continuing to follow Johnson. With his own authority in question following Smith's impeachment, Houston washed his hands of the army and journeyed to Nacogdoches to negotiate a treaty with Cherokee leaders. Houston vowed that Texas would recognize Cherokee claims to land in East Texas as long as the Indians refrained from attacking settlements or assisting the Mexican army. In his absence, Fannin, as the highest-ranking officer active in the regular army, led the men who did not want to go to Matamoros to Goliad.\nThe council had neglected to provide specific instructions on how to structure the February vote for convention delegates, leaving it up to each municipality to determine how to balance the desires of the established residents against those of the volunteers newly arrived from the United States. Chaos ensued; in Nacogdoches, the election judge turned back a company of 40 volunteers from Kentucky who had arrived that week. The soldiers drew their weapons; Colonel Sidney Sherman announced that he \"had come to Texas to fight for it and had as soon commence in the town of Nacogdoches as elsewhere\". Eventually, the troops were allowed to vote. With rumors that Santa Anna was preparing a large army to advance into Texas, rhetoric degenerated into framing the conflict as a race war between Anglos defending their property against, in the words of David G. Burnet, a \"mongrel race of degenerate Spaniards and Indians more depraved than they\".\nMexican Army of Operations.\nNews of the armed uprising at Gonzales reached Santa Anna on October 23. Aside from the ruling elite and members of the army, few in Mexico knew or cared about the revolt. Those with knowledge of the events blamed the Anglos for their unwillingness to conform to the laws and culture of their new country. Anglo immigrants had forced a war on Mexico, and Mexican honor insisted that the usurpers be defeated. Santa Anna transferred his presidential duties to Miguel Barrag\u00e1n in order to personally lead troops to put an end to the Texian revolt. Santa Anna and his soldiers believed that the Texians would be quickly cowed. The Mexican Secretary of War, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Tornel, wrote: \"The superiority of the Mexican soldier over the mountaineers of Kentucky and the hunters of Missouri is well known. Veterans seasoned by 20\u00a0years of wars can't be intimidated by the presence of an army ignorant of the art of war, incapable of discipline, and renowned for insubordination.\"\nAt this time, there were only 2,500 soldiers in the Mexican interior. This was not enough to crush a rebellion and provide security\u00a0\u2013 from attacks by both Indians and federalists\u00a0\u2013 throughout the rest of the country. According to author Will Fowler, Santa Anna financed the Texas expedition with three loans; one from the city of San Luis Potos\u00ed, and the other two loans from individuals Cayetano Rubio and Juan N. Errazo. Santa Anna had guaranteed at least a portion of the repayments with his own financial holdings. He began to assemble a new army, which he dubbed the Army of Operations in Texas. A majority of the troops had been conscripted or were convicts who chose service in the military over jail. The Mexican officers knew that the Brown Bess muskets they carried lacked the range of the Texian weapons, but Santa Anna was convinced that his superior planning would nonetheless result in an easy victory. Corruption was rampant, and supplies were not plentiful. Almost from the beginning, rations were short, and there were no medical supplies or doctors. Few troops were issued heavy coats or blankets for the winter.\nIn late December, at Santa Anna's behest, the Mexican Congress passed the Tornel Decree, declaring that any foreigners fighting against Mexican troops \"will be deemed pirates and dealt with as such, being citizens of no nation presently at war with the Republic and fighting under no recognized flag.\" In the early nineteenth century, captured pirates were executed immediately. The resolution thus gave the Mexican army permission to take no prisoners in the war against the Texians. This information was not widely distributed, and it is unlikely that most of the American recruits serving in the Texian army were aware that there would be no prisoners-of-war.\nBy December 1835, 6,019\u00a0soldiers had begun their march towards Texas. Progress was slow. There were not enough mules to transport all of the supplies, and many of the teamsters, all civilians, quit when their pay was delayed. The large number of \"soldaderas\"\u00a0\u2013 women and children who followed the army\u00a0\u2013 reduced the already scarce supplies. In Saltillo, Cos and his men from B\u00e9xar joined Santa Anna's forces. Santa Anna regarded Cos's promise not to take up arms in Texas as meaningless because it had been given to rebels.\nFrom Saltillo, the army had three choices: advance along the coast on the Atascocita Road from Matamoros to Goliad, or march on B\u00e9xar from the south, along the Laredo road, or from the west, along the Camino Real. Santa Anna ordered General Jos\u00e9 de Urrea to lead 550 troops to Goliad. Although several of Santa Anna's officers argued that the entire army should advance along the coast, where supplies could be gained via sea, Santa Anna instead focused on B\u00e9xar, the political center of Texas and the site of Cos's defeat. His brother-in-law's surrender was seen as a blow to the honor of his family and to Mexico; Santa Anna was determined to restore both. Santa Anna may also have thought B\u00e9xar would be easier to defeat, as his spies had informed him that most of the Texian army was along the coast, preparing for the Matamoros Expedition. Santa Anna led the bulk of his men up the Camino Real to approach B\u00e9xar from the west, confounding the Texians, who had expected any advancing troops to approach from the south. On February 17, they crossed the Nueces River, officially entering Texas.\nTemperatures reached record lows, and by February 13 an estimated of snow had fallen. A large number of the new recruits were from the tropical climate of the Yucat\u00e1n and had been unable to acclimate to the harsh winter conditions. Some of them died of hypothermia, and others contracted dysentery. Soldiers who fell behind were sometimes killed by Comanche raiding parties. Nevertheless, the army continued to march towards B\u00e9xar. As they progressed, settlers in their path in South Texas evacuated northward. The Mexican army ransacked and occasionally burned the vacant homes. Santa Anna and his commanders received timely intelligence on Texian troop locations, strengths, and plans, from a network of \"Tejano\" spies organized by de la Garza.\nSanta Anna's offensive: February\u2013March 1836.\nAlamo.\nFewer than 100 Texian soldiers remained at the Alamo Mission in B\u00e9xar, under the command of Colonel James C. Neill. Unable to spare the number of men necessary to mount a successful defense of the sprawling facility, in January Houston sent Bowie with 30 men to remove the artillery and destroy the complex. In a letter to Governor Smith, Bowie argued that \"the salvation of Texas depends in great measure on keeping B\u00e9xar out of the hands of the enemy. It serves as the frontier picquet guard, and if it were in the possession of Santa Anna, there is no stronghold from which to repel him in his march towards the Sabine.\" The letter to Smith ended, \"Colonel Neill and myself have come to the solemn resolution that we will rather die in these ditches than give it up to the enemy.\" Few reinforcements were authorized; cavalry officer William B. Travis arrived in B\u00e9xar with 30\u00a0men on February 3, and five days later a small group of volunteers arrived, including the famous frontiersman Davy Crockett. On February 11, Neill left to recruit additional reinforcements and gather supplies. In his absence, Travis and Bowie shared command.\nWhen scouts brought word on February 23 that the Mexican advance guard was in sight, the unprepared Texians gathered what food they could find in town and fell back to the Alamo. By late afternoon, B\u00e9xar was occupied by about 1,500 Mexican troops, who quickly raised a blood-red flag signifying no quarter. For the next 13 days, the Mexican army besieged the Alamo. Several small skirmishes gave the defenders much-needed optimism, but had little real impact. Bowie fell ill on February 24, leaving Travis in sole command of the Texian forces. The same day, Travis sent messengers with a letter To the People of Texas &amp; All Americans in the World, begging for reinforcements and vowing \"victory or death\"; this letter was reprinted throughout the United States and much of Europe. Texian and American volunteers began to gather in Gonzales, waiting for Fannin to arrive and lead them to reinforce the Alamo. After days of indecision, on February 26 Fannin prepared to march his 300 troops to the Alamo; they turned back the next day. Fewer than 100 Texian reinforcements reached the fort.\nApproximately 1,000 Mexican reinforcements arrived on March 3. The following day, a local woman, likely Bowie's relative Juana Navarro Alsbury, was rebuffed by Santa Anna when she attempted to negotiate a surrender for the Alamo defenders. This visit increased Santa Anna's impatience, and he scheduled an assault for early on March 6. Many of his officers were against the plan; they preferred to wait until the artillery had further damaged the Alamo's walls and the defenders were forced to surrender. Santa Anna was convinced that a decisive victory would improve morale and sound a strong message to those still agitating in the interior and elsewhere in Texas.\nIn the early hours of March 6, the Mexican army attacked the fort. Troops from B\u00e9xar were excused from the front lines, so that they would not be forced to fight their families and friends. In the initial moments of the assault the Mexican troops were at a disadvantage. Although their column formation allowed only the front rows of soldiers to fire safely, inexperienced recruits in the back also discharged their weapons; many Mexican soldiers were unintentionally killed by their own comrades. As Mexican soldiers swarmed over the walls, at least 80 Texians fled the Alamo and were cut down by Mexican cavalry. Within an hour, almost all of the Texian defenders, estimated at 182\u2013257 men, were killed. Between four and seven Texians, possibly including Crockett, surrendered. Although General Manuel Fern\u00e1ndez Castrill\u00f3n attempted to intercede on their behalf, Santa Anna insisted that the prisoners be executed immediately.\nMost Alamo historians agree that 400\u2013600\u00a0Mexicans were killed or wounded. This would represent about one-third of the Mexican soldiers involved in the final assault, which historian Timothy Todish remarks is \"a tremendous casualty rate by any standards\". The battle was militarily insignificant but had an enormous political impact. Travis had succeeded in buying time for the Convention of 1836, scheduled for March 1, to meet. If Santa Anna had not paused in B\u00e9xar for two weeks, he would have reached San Felipe by March 2 and very likely would have captured the delegates or caused them to flee.\nThe survivors, primarily women and children, were questioned by Santa Anna and then released. Susanna Dickinson was sent with Travis's slave Joe to Gonzales, where she lived, to spread the news of the Texian defeat. Santa Anna assumed that knowledge of the disparity in troop numbers and the fate of the Texian soldiers at the Alamo would quell the resistance, and that Texian soldiers would quickly leave the territory.\nGoliad Campaign.\nUrrea reached Matamoros on January 31. A committed federalist himself, he soon convinced other federalists in the area that the Texians' ultimate goal was secession and their attempt to spark a federalist revolt in Matamoros was just a method of diverting attention from themselves. Mexican double agents continued to assure Johnson and Grant that they would be able to take Matamoros easily. While Johnson waited in San Patricio with a small group of men, Grant and between 26 and 53 others roamed the area between the Nueces River and Matamoros. Although they were ostensibly searching for more horses, it is likely Grant was also attempting to contact his sources in Matamoros to further coordinate an attack.\nJust after midnight on February 27, Urrea's men surprised Johnson's forces. Six Texians, including Johnson, escaped; the remainder were captured or killed. After learning of Grant's whereabouts from local spies, Mexican dragoons ambushed the Texians at Agua Dulce Creek on March 2. Twelve Texians were killed, including Grant, four were captured, and six escaped. Although Urrea's orders were to execute those captured, he instead sent them to Matamoros as prisoners.\nOn March 11, Fannin sent Captain Amon B. King to help evacuate settlers from the mission in Refugio. King and his men instead spent a day searching local ranches for centralist sympathizers. They returned to the mission on March 12 and were soon besieged by Urrea's advance guard and de la Garza's Victoriana Guardes. That same day, Fannin received orders from Houston to destroy Presidio La Bah\u00eda (by then renamed Fort Defiance) and march to Victoria. Unwilling to leave any of his men behind, Fannin sent William Ward with 120 men to help King's company. Ward's men drove off the troops besieging the church, but rather than return to Goliad, they delayed a day to conduct further raids on local ranches.\nUrrea arrived with almost 1,000 troops on March 14. At the battle of Refugio, an engagement markedly similar to the battle of Concepci\u00f3n, the Texians repulsed several attacks and inflicted heavy casualties, relying on the greater accuracy and range of their rifles. By the end of the day, the Texians were hungry, thirsty, tired, and almost out of ammunition. Ward ordered a retreat, and under cover of darkness and rain the Texian soldiers slipped through Mexican lines, leaving several severely wounded men behind. Over the next several days, Urrea's men, with the help of local centralist supporters, rounded up many of the Texians who had escaped. Most were executed, although Urrea pardoned a few after their wives begged for their lives, and Mexican Colonel Juan Jos\u00e9 Holzinger insisted that all of the non-Americans be spared.\nBy the end of the day on March 16, the bulk of Urrea's forces began marching to Goliad to corner Fannin. Still waiting for word from King and Ward, Fannin continued to delay his evacuation from Goliad. As they prepared to leave on March 18, Urrea's advance guard arrived. For the rest of the day, the two cavalries skirmished aimlessly, succeeding only in exhausting the Texian oxen, which had remained hitched to their wagons with no food or water throughout the day.\nThe Texians began their retreat on March 19. The pace was unhurried, and after travelling only , the group stopped for an hour to rest and allow the oxen to graze. Urrea's troops caught up to the Texians later that afternoon, while Fannin and his force of about 300 men were crossing a prairie. Having learned from the fighting at Refugio, Urrea was determined that the Texians would not reach the cover of timber approximately ahead, along Coleto Creek. As Mexican forces surrounded them, the Texians formed a tight hollow square for defense. They repulsed three charges during this battle of Coleto, resulting in about nine Texians killed and 51 wounded, including Fannin. Urrea lost 50 men, with another 140 wounded. Texians had little food, no water, and declining supplies of ammunition, but voted to not try to break for the timber, as they would have had to leave the wounded behind.\nThe following morning, March 20, Urrea paraded his men and his newly arrived artillery. Seeing the hopelessness of their situation, the Texians with Fannin surrendered. Mexican records show that the Texians surrendered at discretion; Texian accounts claim that Urrea promised the Texians would be treated as prisoners-of-war and granted passage to the United States. Two days later, a group of Urrea's men surrounded Ward and the last of his group less than from Victoria. Over Ward's vehement objections, his men voted to surrender, later recalling they were told they would be sent back to the United States.\nOn Palm Sunday, March 27, Fannin, Ward, Westover, and their men were marched out of the presidio and shot. Mexican cavalry were stationed nearby to chase down any who tried to escape. Approximately 342 Texians died, and 27 either escaped or were spared by Mexican troops. Several weeks after the Goliad massacre, the Mexican Congress granted an official reprieve to any Texas prisoners who had incurred capital punishment.\nTexas Convention of 1836.\nThe Convention of 1836 in Washington-on-the-Brazos on March 1 attracted 45 delegates, representing 21 municipalities. Within an hour of the convention's opening, George C. Childress submitted a proposed Texas Declaration of Independence, which passed overwhelmingly on March 2. On March 6, hours after the Alamo had fallen, Travis's final dispatch arrived. His distress was evident; delegate Robert Potter immediately moved that the convention be adjourned and all delegates join the army. Houston convinced the delegates to remain, and then left to take charge of the army. With the backing of the convention, Houston was now commander-in-chief of all regular, volunteer, and militia forces in Texas.\nOver the next ten days, delegates prepared a constitution for the Republic of Texas. Parts of the document were copied verbatim from the United States Constitution; other articles were paraphrased. The new nation's government was structured similarly to that of the United States, with a bicameral legislature, a chief executive, and a supreme court. In a sharp departure from its model, the new constitution expressly permitted impressment of goods and forced housing for soldiers. It also explicitly legalized slavery and recognized the people's right to revolt against government authority. After adopting the constitution on March 17, delegates elected interim officers to govern the country and then adjourned. David G. Burnet, who had not been a delegate, was elected president. The following day, Burnet announced the government was leaving for Harrisburg.\nRetreat: March\u2013May 1836.\nTexian retreat: The Runaway Scrape.\nOn March 11, Santa Anna sent one column of troops to join Urrea, with instructions to move to Brazoria once Fannin's men had been neutralized. A second set of 700 troops under General Antonio Gaona would advance along the Camino Real to Mina, and then on to Nacogdoches. General Joaqu\u00edn Ram\u00edrez y Sesma would take an additional 700 men to San Felipe. The Mexican columns were thus moving northeast on roughly parallel paths, separated by .\nThe same day that Mexican troops departed B\u00e9xar, Houston arrived in Gonzales and informed the 374 volunteers (some without weapons) gathered there that Texas was now an independent republic. Just after 11 p.m. on March 13, Susanna Dickinson and Joe brought news that the Alamo garrison had been defeated and the Mexican army was marching towards Texian settlements. A hastily convened council of war voted to evacuate the area and retreat. The evacuation commenced at midnight and happened so quickly that many Texian scouts were unaware the army had moved on. Everything that could not be carried was burned, and the army's only two cannon were thrown into the Guadalupe River. When Ram\u00edrez y Sesma reached Gonzales the morning of March 14, he found the buildings still smoldering.\nMost citizens fled on foot, many carrying their small children. A cavalry company led by Segu\u00edn and Salvador Flores were assigned as rear guard to evacuate the more isolated ranches and protect the civilians from attacks by Mexican troops or Indians. The further the army retreated, the more civilians joined the flight. For both armies and the civilians, the pace was slow; torrential rains had flooded the rivers and turned the roads into mud pits.\nAs news of the Alamo's fall spread, volunteer ranks swelled, reaching about 1,400 men on March 19. Houston learned of Fannin's defeat on March 20 and realized his army was the last hope for an independent Texas. Concerned that his ill-trained and ill-disciplined force would only be good for one battle and aware that his men could easily be outflanked by Urrea's forces, Houston continued to avoid engagement, to the immense displeasure of his troops. By March 28, the Texian army had retreated across the Navidad and Colorado Rivers. Many troops deserted; those who remained grumbled that their commander was a coward.\nOn March 31, Houston paused his men at Groce's Landing, roughly north of San Felipe. Two companies that refused to retreat further than San Felipe were assigned to guard the crossings on the Brazos River. For the next two weeks, the Texians rested, recovered from illness, and, for the first time, began practicing military drills. While there, two cannons, known as the Twin Sisters, arrived from Cincinnati, Ohio. Interim Secretary of War Thomas Rusk joined the camp, with orders from Burnet to replace Houston if he refused to fight. Houston quickly persuaded Rusk that his plans were sound. Secretary of State Samuel P. Carson advised Houston to continue retreating all the way to the Sabine River, where more volunteers would likely flock from the United States and allow the army to counterattack. Unhappy with everyone involved, Burnet wrote to Houston: \"The enemy are laughing you to scorn. You must fight them. You must retreat no further. The country expects you to fight. The salvation of the country depends on your doing so.\" Complaints within the camp became so strong that Houston posted notices that anyone attempting to usurp his position would be court-martialed and shot.\nSanta Anna and a smaller force had remained in B\u00e9xar. After receiving word that the acting president, Miguel Barrag\u00e1n, had died, Santa Anna seriously considered returning to Mexico City to solidify his position. Fear that Urrea's victories would position him as a political rival convinced Santa Anna to remain in Texas to personally oversee the final phase of the campaign. He left on March 29 to join Ram\u00edrez y Sesma, leaving only a small force to hold B\u00e9xar. At dawn on April 7, their combined force marched into San Felipe and captured a Texian soldier, who informed Santa Anna that the Texians planned to retreat further if the Mexican army crossed the Brazos River. Unable to cross the Brazos due to the small company of Texians barricaded at the river crossing, on April 14 a frustrated Santa Anna led a force of about 700 troops to capture the interim Texas government. Government officials fled mere hours before Mexican troops arrived in Harrisburg, and Santa Anna sent Colonel Juan Almonte with 50 cavalry to intercept them in New Washington. Almonte arrived just as Burnet shoved off in a rowboat, bound for Galveston Island. Although the boat was still within range of their weapons, Almonte ordered his men to hold their fire so as not to endanger Burnet's family.\nAt this point, Santa Anna believed the rebellion was in its final death throes. The Texian government had been forced off the mainland, with no way to communicate with its army, which had shown no interest in fighting. He determined to block the Texian army's retreat and put a decisive end to the war. Almonte's scouts incorrectly reported that Houston's army was going to Lynchburg Crossing, on Buffalo Bayou, in preparation for joining the government in Galveston, so Santa Anna ordered Harrisburg burned and pressed on towards Lynchburg.\nThe Texian army had resumed their march eastward. On April 16, they came to a crossroads; one road led north towards Nacogdoches, the other went to Harrisburg. Without orders from Houston and with no discussion amongst themselves, the troops in the lead took the road to Harrisburg. They arrived on April 18, not long after the Mexican army's departure. That same day, Deaf Smith and Henry Karnes captured a Mexican courier carrying intelligence on the locations and future plans of all of the Mexican troops in Texas. Realizing that Santa Anna had only a small force and was not far away, Houston gave a rousing speech to his men, exhorting them to \"Remember the Alamo\" and \"Remember Goliad\". His army then raced towards Lynchburg. Out of concern that his men might not differentiate between Mexican soldiers and the \"Tejanos\" in Segu\u00edn's company, Houston originally ordered Segu\u00edn and his men to remain in Harrisburg to guard those who were too ill to travel quickly. After loud protests from Segu\u00edn and Antonio Menchaca, the order was rescinded, provided the \"Tejanos\" wear a piece of cardboard in their hats to identify them as Texian soldiers.\nSan Jacinto.\nThe area along Buffalo Bayou had many thick oak groves, separated by marshes. This type of terrain was familiar to the Texians and quite alien to the Mexican soldiers. Houston's army, comprising 900 men, reached Lynch's Ferry mid-morning on April 20; Santa Anna's 700-man force arrived a few hours later. The Texians made camp in a wooded area along the bank of Buffalo Bayou; while the location provided good cover and helped hide their full strength, it also left the Texians no room for retreat. Over the protests of several of his officers, Santa Anna chose to make camp in a vulnerable location, a plain near the San Jacinto River, bordered by woods on one side, marsh and lake on another. The two camps were approximately apart, separated by a grassy area with a slight rise in the middle. Colonel Pedro Delgado later wrote that \"the camping ground of His Excellency's selection was in all respects, against military rules. Any youngster would have done better.\"\nOver the next several hours, two brief skirmishes occurred. Texians won the first, forcing a small group of dragoons and the Mexican artillery to withdraw. Mexican dragoons then forced the Texian cavalry to withdraw. In the melee, Rusk, on foot to reload his rifle, was almost captured by Mexican soldiers, but was rescued by newly arrived Texian volunteer Mirabeau B. Lamar. Over Houston's objections, many infantrymen rushed onto the field. As the Texian cavalry fell back, Lamar remained behind to rescue another Texian who had been thrown from his horse; Mexican officers \"reportedly applauded\" his bravery. Houston was irate that the infantry had disobeyed his orders and given Santa Anna a better estimate of their strength; the men were equally upset that Houston had not allowed a full battle.\nThroughout the night, Mexican troops worked to fortify their camp, creating breastworks out of everything they could find, including saddles and brush. At 9 a.m. on April 21, Cos arrived with 540 reinforcements, bringing the Mexican force to 1,200 men, which outnumbered the Texians. Cos's men were raw recruits rather than experienced soldiers, and they had marched steadily for more than 24 hours, with no rest and no food. As the morning wore on with no Texian attack, Mexican officers lowered their guard. By afternoon, Santa Anna had given permission for Cos's men to sleep; his own tired troops also took advantage of the time to rest, eat, and bathe.\nNot long after the Mexican reinforcements arrived, Houston ordered Smith to destroy Vince's Bridge, away, to slow down any further Mexican reinforcements. At 4 p.m. the Texians began creeping quietly through the tall grass, pulling the cannon behind them. The Texian cannon fired at 4:30, beginning the battle of San Jacinto. After a single volley, Texians broke ranks and swarmed over the Mexican breastworks to engage in hand-to-hand combat. Mexican soldiers were taken completely by surprise. Santa Anna, Castrill\u00f3n, and Almonte yelled often conflicting orders, attempting to organize their men into some form of defense. Within 18 minutes, Mexican soldiers abandoned their campsite and fled for their lives. The killing lasted for hours.\nMany Mexican soldiers retreated through the marsh to Peggy Lake. Texian riflemen stationed themselves on the banks and shot at anything that moved. Many Texian officers, including Houston and Rusk, attempted to stop the slaughter, but they were unable to gain control of the men. Texians continued to chant \"Remember the Alamo! Remember Goliad!\" while frightened Mexican infantry yelled \"Me no Alamo!\" and begged for mercy to no avail. In what historian Davis called \"one of the most one-sided victories in history\", 650 Mexican soldiers were killed and 300 captured. Eleven Texians died, with 30 others, including Houston, wounded.\nAlthough Santa Anna's troops had been thoroughly vanquished, they did not represent the bulk of the Mexican army in Texas. An additional 4,000 troops remained under the commands of Urrea and General Vicente Filisola. Texians had won the battle due to mistakes made by Santa Anna, and Houston was well aware that his troops would have little hope of repeating their victory against Urrea or Filisola. As darkness fell, a large group of prisoners were led into camp. Houston initially mistook the group for Mexican reinforcements and shouted out that all was lost.\nMexican retreat and surrender.\nSanta Anna had successfully escaped towards Vince's Bridge. Finding the bridge destroyed, he hid in the marsh and was captured the following day. He was brought before Houston, who had been shot in the ankle and badly wounded. Texian soldiers gathered around, calling for the Mexican general's immediate execution. Bargaining for his life, Santa Anna suggested that he order the remaining Mexican troops to stay away. In a letter to Filisola, who was now the senior Mexican official in Texas, Santa Anna wrote that \"yesterday evening [we] had an unfortunate encounter\" and ordered his troops to retreat to B\u00e9xar and await further instructions.\nUrrea urged Filisola to continue the campaign. He was confident that he could successfully challenge the Texian troops. According to Hardin, \"Santa Anna had presented Mexico with one military disaster; Filisola did not wish to risk another.\" Spring rains ruined the ammunition and rendered the roads almost impassable, with troops sinking to their knees in mud. Mexican troops were soon out of food, and began to fall ill from dysentery and other diseases. Their supply lines had completely broken down, leaving no hope of further reinforcements. Filisola later wrote that \"Had the enemy met us under these cruel circumstances, on the only road that was left, no alternative remained but to die or surrender at discretion\".\nFor several weeks after San Jacinto, Santa Anna continued to negotiate with Houston, Rusk, and then Burnet. Santa Anna suggested two treaties, a public version of promises made between the two countries, and a private version that included Santa Anna's personal agreements. The Treaties of Velasco required that all Mexican troops retreat south of the Rio Grande and that all private property\u00a0\u2013 including slaves\u00a0\u2013 be respected and restored. Prisoners-of-war would be released unharmed, and Santa Anna would be given passage to Veracruz immediately. He secretly promised to persuade the Mexican Congress to acknowledge the Republic of Texas and to recognize the Rio Grande as the border between the two countries.\nWhen Urrea began marching south in mid-May, many families from San Patricio who had supported the Mexican army went with him. When Texian troops arrived in early June, they found only 20 families remaining. The area around San Patricio and Refugio suffered a \"noticeable depopulation\" in the Republic of Texas years. Although the treaty had specified that Urrea and Filisola would return any slaves their armies had sheltered, Urrea refused to comply. Many former slaves followed the army to Mexico, where they could be free. By late May the Mexican troops had crossed the Nueces. Filisola fully expected that the defeat was temporary and that a second campaign would be launched to retake Texas.\nAftermath.\nMilitary.\nWhen Mexican authorities received word of Santa Anna's defeat at San Jacinto, flags across the country were lowered to half staff and draped in mourning. Denouncing any agreements signed by Santa Anna, a prisoner of war, the Mexican authorities refused to recognize the Republic of Texas. Filisola was derided for leading the retreat and quickly replaced by Urrea. Within months, Urrea gathered 6,000 troops in Matamoros, poised to reconquer Texas. However, the renewed Mexican invasion of Texas never materialized as Urrea's army was redirected to address continued federalist rebellions in other state regions in Mexico.\nMost in Texas assumed the Mexican army would return quickly. So many American volunteers flocked to the Texian army in the months after the victory at San Jacinto that the Texian government was unable to maintain an accurate list of enlistments. Out of caution, B\u00e9xar remained under martial law throughout 1836. Rusk ordered that all \"Tejanos\" in the area between the Guadalupe and Nueces Rivers migrate either to east Texas or to Mexico. Some residents who refused to comply were forcibly removed. New Anglo settlers moved in and used threats and legal maneuvering to take over the land once settled by \"Tejanos\". Over the next several years, hundreds of \"Tejano\" families resettled in Mexico.\nFor years, Mexican authorities used the reconquering of Texas as an excuse for implementing new taxes and making the army the budgetary priority of the impoverished nation. Only sporadic skirmishes resulted. Larger expeditions were postponed as military funding was consistently diverted to other rebellions, out of fear that those regions would ally with Texas and further fragment the country. The northern Mexican states, the focus of the Matamoros Expedition, briefly launched an independent Republic of the Rio Grande in 1839. The same year, the Mexican Congress considered a law to declare it treasonous to speak positively of Texas. In June 1843, leaders of the two nations declared an armistice.\nRepublic of Texas.\nOn June 1, 1836, Santa Anna boarded a ship to travel back to Mexico. For the next two days, crowds of Texian soldiers, many of whom had arrived that week from the United States, gathered to demand his execution. Lamar, by now promoted to Secretary of War, gave a speech insisting that \"Mobs must not intimidate the government. We want no French Revolution in Texas!\", but on June 4 soldiers seized Santa Anna and put him under military arrest. According to Lack, \"the shock of having its foreign policy overturned by popular rebellion had weakened the interim government irrevocably\". A group of soldiers staged an unsuccessful coup in mid-July. In response, Burnet called for elections to ratify the constitution and elect a Congress, the sixth set of leaders for Texas in a 12-month period. Voters overwhelmingly chose Houston the first president, ratified the constitution drawn up by the Convention of 1836, and approved a resolution to request annexation to the United States. Houston issued an executive order sending Santa Anna to Washington, D.C., and from there he was soon sent home.\nDuring his absence, Santa Anna had been deposed. Upon his arrival, the Mexican press wasted no time in attacking him for his cruelty towards those prisoners executed at Goliad. In May 1837, Santa Anna requested an inquiry into the event. The judge determined the inquiry was only for fact-finding and took no action; press attacks in both Mexico and the United States continued. Santa Anna was disgraced until the following year, when he became a hero of the Pastry War.\nThe first Texas Legislature declined to ratify the treaty Houston had signed with the Cherokee, declaring he had no authority to make any promises. Although the Texian interim governments had vowed to eventually compensate citizens for goods that were impressed during the war efforts, for the most part livestock and horses were not returned. Veterans were guaranteed land bounties; in 1879, surviving Texian veterans who served more than three months from October 1, 1835, through January 1, 1837, were guaranteed an additional in public lands. Over of land were granted; some of this was in Greer County, which was later determined to be part of Oklahoma.\nRepublic of Texas policies changed the status of many living in the region. The constitution forbade free blacks from living in Texas permanently. Individual slaves could only be freed by congressional order, and the newly emancipated person would then be forced to leave Texas. Women also lost significant legal rights under the new constitution, which substituted English common law practices for the traditional Spanish law system. Under common law, the idea of community property was eliminated, and women no longer had the ability to act for themselves legally \u2013 to sign contracts, own property, or sue. Some of these rights were restored in 1845, when Texas added them to the new state constitution. During the Republic of Texas years, \"Tejanos\" likewise faced much discrimination.\nForeign relations.\nMexican authorities blamed the loss of Texas on United States intervention. Although the United States remained officially neutral, 40 percent of the men who enlisted in the Texian army from October 1 through April 21 arrived from the United States after hostilities began. More than 200 of the volunteers were members of the United States Army; none were punished when they returned to their posts. American individuals also provided supplies and money to the cause of Texian independence.&lt; For the next decade, Mexican politicians frequently denounced the United States for the involvement of its citizens.\nThe United States agreed to recognize the Republic of Texas in March 1837 but declined to annex the territory. The fledgling republic now attempted to persuade European nations to agree to recognition. In late 1839 France recognized the Republic of Texas after being convinced it would make a fine trading partner.\nFor several decades, official British policy was to maintain strong ties with Mexico in the hopes that the country could stop the United States from expanding further. When the Texas Revolution erupted, Great Britain had declined to become involved, officially expressing confidence that Mexico could handle its own affairs. In 1840, after years in which the Republic of Texas was neither annexed by the United States nor reabsorbed into Mexico, Britain signed a treaty to recognize the nation and act as a mediator to help Texas gain recognition from Mexico.\nThe United States voted to annex Texas as the 28th state in March 1845. Two months later, Mexico agreed to recognize the Republic of Texas as long as there was no annexation to the United States. On July 4, 1845, Texians voted for annexation. This prompted the Mexican\u2013American War, in which Mexico lost almost 55 percent of its territory to the United States and formally relinquished its claim on Texas.\nLegacy.\nAlthough no new fighting techniques were introduced during the Texas Revolution, casualty figures were quite unusual for the time. Generally, in 19th-century warfare, the number of wounded outnumbered those killed by a factor of two or three. From October 1835 through April 1836, approximately 1,000 Mexican and 700 Texian soldiers died, while the wounded numbered 500 Mexican and 100 Texian. The deviation from the norm was due to Santa Anna's decision to label Texian rebels as traitors and to the Texian desire for revenge.\nDuring the revolution, Texian soldiers gained a reputation for courage and militance.{sfn|Lack|1992|p=132}} Lack points out that fewer than five percent of the Texian population enrolled in the army during the war, a fairly low rate of participation{sfn|Lack|1992|p=132}} Texian soldiers recognized that the Mexican cavalry was far superior to their own. Over the next decade, the Texas Rangers borrowed Mexican cavalry tactics and adopted the Spanish saddle and spurs, the lasso, and the bandana.\nThe Texas Veterans Association, composed solely of revolutionary veterans living in Texas, was active from 1873 through 1901 and played a key role in convincing the legislature to create a monument to honor the San Jacinto veterans. In the late 19th century, the Texas Legislature purchased the San Jacinto battlesite, which is now home to the San Jacinto Monument, the tallest stone column monument in the world. In the early 20th century, the Texas Legislature purchased the Alamo Mission, now an official state shrine. In front of the church, in the center of Alamo Plaza, stands a cenotaph designed by Pompeo Coppini which commemorates the defenders who died during the battle. More than 2.5\u00a0million people visit the Alamo every year.\nThe Texas Revolution has been the subject of poetry and of many books, plays and films. Most English-language treatments reflect the perspectives of the Anglos and are centered primarily on the battle of the Alamo. From the first novel depicting events of the revolution, 1838's \"Mexico versus Texas\", through the mid-20th century, most works contained themes of anticlericalism and racism, depicting the battle as a fight for freedom between good (Anglo Texian) and evil (Mexican). In both English- and Spanish-language literature, the Alamo is often compared to the battle of Thermopylae. The 1950s Disney miniseries \"Davy Crockett\", which took considerable license with its source material, inspired worldwide interest in the battle. Within several years, John Wayne directed and starred in one of the best-known and perhaps least historically accurate film versions, \"The Alamo\" (1960). Notably, this version made the first attempt to leave behind racial stereotypes; it was still banned in Mexico. In the late 1970s, works about the Alamo began to explore \"Tejano\" perspectives, which had been all but extinguished even from textbooks about the revolution, and to explore the revolution's links to slavery.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38713", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38713", "title": "Balkan peninsula", "text": ""}
{"id": "38714", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38714", "title": "World", "text": "Totality of existing entities\nThe world is the totality of entities, the whole of reality, or everything that exists. The nature of the world has been conceptualized differently in different fields. Some conceptions see the world as unique, while others talk of a \"plurality of worlds\". Some treat the world as one simple object, while others analyze the world as a complex made up of parts.\nIn scientific cosmology, the world or universe is commonly defined as \"the totality of all space and time; all that is, has been, and will be\". Theories of modality talk of possible worlds as complete and consistent ways how things could have been. Phenomenology, starting from the horizon of co-given objects present in the periphery of every experience, defines the world as the biggest horizon, or the \"horizon of all horizons\". In philosophy of mind, the world is contrasted with the mind as that which is represented by the mind. \nTheology conceptualizes the world in relation to God, for example, as God's creation, as identical to God, or as the two being interdependent. In religions, there is a tendency to downgrade the material or sensory world in favor of a spiritual world to be sought through religious practice. A comprehensive representation of the world and our place in it, as is found in religions, is known as a worldview. Cosmogony is the field that studies the origin or creation of the world, while eschatology refers to the science or doctrine of the last things or of the end of the world.\nIn various contexts, the term \"world\" takes a more restricted meaning associated, for example, with the Earth and all life on it, with humanity as a whole, or with an international or intercontinental scope. In this sense, world history refers to the history of humanity as a whole, and world politics is the discipline of political science studying issues that transcend nations and continents. Other examples include terms such as \"world religion\", \"world language\", \"world government\", \"world war\", \"world population\", \"world economy\", or \"world championship\".\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"world\" comes from the Old English . The Old English is a reflex of the Common Germanic \"*\", a compound of 'man' and 'age', thus literally meaning roughly 'age of man'; this word led to Old Frisian , Old Saxon , Old Dutch , Old High German , and Old Norse .\nThe corresponding word in Latin is , literally 'clean, elegant', itself a loan translation of Greek \"cosmos\" 'orderly arrangement'. While the Germanic word thus reflects a mythological notion of a \"domain of Man\" (compare Midgard), presumably as opposed to the divine sphere on the one hand and the chthonic sphere of the underworld on the other, the Greco-Latin term expresses a notion of creation as an act of establishing order out of chaos.\nConceptions.\nDifferent fields often work with quite different conceptions of the essential features associated with the term \"world\". Some conceptions see the world as unique: there can be no more than one world. Others talk of a \"plurality of worlds\". Some see worlds as complex things composed of many substances as their parts while others hold that worlds are simple in the sense that there is only one substance: the world as a whole. Some characterize worlds in terms of objective spacetime while others define them relative to the horizon present in each experience. These different characterizations are not always exclusive: it may be possible to combine some without leading to a contradiction. Most of them agree that worlds are unified totalities.\nMonism and pluralism.\nMonism is a thesis about oneness: that only one thing exists in a certain sense. The denial of monism is pluralism, the thesis that, in a certain sense, more than one thing exists. There are many forms of monism and pluralism, but in relation to the world as a whole, two are of special interest: existence monism/pluralism and priority monism/pluralism. Existence monism states that the world is the only concrete object there is. This means that all the concrete \"objects\" we encounter in our daily lives, including apples, cars and ourselves, are not truly objects in a strict sense. Instead, they are just dependent aspects of the world-object. Such a world-object is simple in the sense that it does not have any genuine parts. For this reason, it has also been referred to as \"blobject\" since it lacks an internal structure like a blob. Priority monism allows that there are other concrete objects besides the world. But it holds that these objects do not have the most fundamental form of existence, that they somehow depend on the existence of the world. The corresponding forms of pluralism state that the world is complex in the sense that it is made up of concrete, independent objects.\nScientific cosmology.\nScientific cosmology can be defined as the science of the universe as a whole. In it, the terms \"universe\" and \"cosmos\" are usually used as synonyms for the term \"world\". One common definition of the world/universe found in this field is as \"[t]he totality of all space and time; all that is, has been, and will be\". Some definitions emphasize that there are two other aspects to the universe besides spacetime: forms of energy or matter, like stars and particles, and laws of nature. World-conceptions in this field differ both concerning their notion of spacetime and of the contents of spacetime. The theory of relativity plays a central role in modern cosmology and its conception of space and time. A difference from its predecessors is that it conceives space and time not as distinct dimensions but as a single four-dimensional manifold called spacetime. This can be seen in special relativity in relation to the Minkowski metric, which includes both spatial and temporal components in its definition of distance. General relativity goes one step further by integrating the concept of mass into the concept of spacetime as its curvature. Quantum cosmology uses a classical notion of spacetime and conceives the whole world as one big wave function expressing the probability of finding particles in a given location.\nTheories of modality.\nThe world-concept plays a role in many modern theories of modality, sometimes in the form of possible worlds. A possible world is a complete and consistent way how things could have been. The actual world is a possible world since the way things are is a way things could have been. There are many other ways things could have been besides how they actually are. For example, Hillary Clinton did not win the 2016 US election, but she could have won them. So there is a possible world in which she did. There is a vast number of possible worlds, one corresponding to each such difference, no matter how small or big, as long as no outright contradictions are introduced this way.\nPossible worlds are often conceived as abstract objects, for example, in terms of non-obtaining states of affairs or as maximally consistent sets of propositions. On such a view, they can even be seen as belonging to the actual world. Another way to conceive possible worlds, made famous by David Lewis, is as concrete entities. On this conception, there is no important difference between the actual world and possible worlds: both are conceived as concrete, inclusive and spatiotemporally connected. The only difference is that the actual world is the world \"we\" live in, while other possible worlds are not inhabited by us but by our \"counterparts\". Everything within a world is spatiotemporally connected to everything else but the different worlds do not share a common spacetime: They are spatiotemporally isolated from each other. This is what makes them separate worlds.\nIt has been suggested that, besides possible worlds, there are also impossible worlds. Possible worlds are \"ways things could have been\", so impossible worlds are \"ways things could not have been\". Such worlds involve a contradiction, like a world in which Hillary Clinton both won and lost the 2016 US election. Both possible and impossible worlds have in common the idea that they are totalities of their constituents.\nPhenomenology.\nWithin phenomenology, worlds are defined in terms of \"horizons\" of experiences. When we perceive an object, like a house, we do not just experience this object at the center of our attention but also various other objects surrounding it, given in the periphery. The term \"horizon\" refers to these co-given objects, which are usually experienced only in a vague, indeterminate manner. The perception of a house involves various horizons, corresponding to the neighborhood, the city, the country, the Earth, etc. In this context, the world is the biggest horizon or the \"horizon of all horizons\". It is common among phenomenologists to understand the world not just as a spatiotemporal collection of objects but as additionally incorporating various other relations between these objects. These relations include, for example, indication-relations that help us anticipate one object given the appearances of another object and means-end-relations or functional involvements relevant for practical concerns.\nPhilosophy of mind.\nIn philosophy of mind, the term \"world\" is commonly used in contrast to the term \"mind\" as that which is represented by the mind. This is sometimes expressed by stating that there is a gap between mind and world and that this gap needs to be overcome for representation to be successful. One problem in philosophy of mind is to explain how the mind is able to bridge this gap and to enter into genuine mind-world-relations, for example, in the form of perception, knowledge or action. This is necessary for the world to be able to rationally constrain the activity of the mind. According to a realist position, the world is something distinct and independent from the mind. Idealists conceive of the world as partially or fully determined by the mind. Immanuel Kant's transcendental idealism, for example, posits that the spatiotemporal structure of the world is imposed by the mind on reality but lacks independent existence otherwise. A more radical idealist conception of the world can be found in Berkeley's subjective idealism, which holds that the world as a whole, including all everyday objects like tables, cats, trees and ourselves, \"consists of nothing but minds and ideas\".\nTheology.\nDifferent theological positions hold different conceptions of the world based on its relation to God. Classical theism states that God is wholly distinct from the world. But the world depends for its existence on God, both because God created the world and because He maintains or conserves it. This is sometimes understood in analogy to how humans create and conserve ideas in their imagination, with the difference being that the divine mind is vastly more powerful. On such a view, God has absolute, ultimate reality in contrast to the lower ontological status ascribed to the world. God's involvement in the world is often understood along the lines of a personal, benevolent God who looks after and guides His creation. Deists agree with theists that God created the world but deny any subsequent, personal involvement in it. Pantheists reject the separation between God and world. Instead, they claim that the two are identical. This means that there is nothing to the world that does not belong to God and that there is nothing to God beyond what is found in the world. Panentheism constitutes a middle ground between theism and pantheism. Against theism, it holds that God and the world are interrelated and depend on each other. Against pantheism, it holds that there is no outright identity between the two.\nHistory of philosophy.\nIn philosophy, the term \"world\" has several possible meanings. In some contexts, it refers to everything that makes up reality or the physical universe. In others, it can mean have a specific ontological sense (see world disclosure). While clarifying the concept of world has arguably always been among the basic tasks of Western philosophy, this theme appears to have been raised explicitly only at the start of the twentieth century,\nPlato.\nPlato is well known for his theory of forms, which posits the existence of two different worlds: the sensible world and the intelligible world. The sensible world is the world we live in, filled with changing physical things we can see, touch and interact with. The intelligible world is the world of invisible, eternal, changeless forms like goodness, beauty, unity and sameness. Plato ascribes a lower ontological status to the sensible world, which only imitates the world of forms. This is due to the fact that physical things exist only to the extent that they participate in the forms that characterize them, while the forms themselves have an independent manner of existence. In this sense, the sensible world is a mere replication of the perfect exemplars found in the world of forms: it never lives up to the original. In the allegory of the cave, Plato compares the physical things we are familiar with to mere shadows of the real things. But not knowing the difference, the prisoners in the cave mistake the shadows for the real things.\nWittgenstein.\nTwo definitions that were both put forward in the 1920s, however, suggest the range of available opinion. \"The world is everything that is the case\", wrote Ludwig Wittgenstein in his influential \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\", first published in 1921.\nHeidegger.\nMartin Heidegger, meanwhile, argued that \"the surrounding world is different for each of us, and notwithstanding that we move about in a common world\".\nEugen Fink.\n\"World\" is one of the key terms in Eugen Fink's philosophy. He thinks that there is a misguided tendency in western philosophy to understand the world as one enormously big thing containing all the small everyday things we are familiar with. He sees this view as a form of forgetfulness of the world and tries to oppose it by what he calls the \"cosmological difference\": the difference between the world and the inner-worldly things it contains. On his view, the world is the totality of the inner-worldly things that transcends them. It is itself groundless but it provides a ground for things. It therefore cannot be identified with a mere container. Instead, the world gives appearance to inner-worldly things, it provides them with a place, a beginning and an end. One difficulty in investigating the world is that we never encounter it since it is not just one more thing that appears to us. This is why Fink uses the notion of play or playing to elucidate the nature of the world. He sees play as a symbol of the world that is both part of it and that represents it. Play usually comes with a form of imaginary play-world involving various things relevant to the play. But just like the play is more than the imaginary realities appearing in it so the world is more than the actual things appearing in it.\nGoodman.\nThe concept of worlds plays a central role in Nelson Goodman's late philosophy. He argues that we need to posit different worlds in order to account for the fact that there are different incompatible truths found in reality. Two truths are incompatible if they ascribe incompatible properties to the same thing. This happens, for example, when we assert both that the earth moves and that the earth is at rest. These incompatible truths correspond to two different ways of describing the world: heliocentrism and geocentrism. Goodman terms such descriptions \"world versions\". He holds a correspondence theory of truth: a world version is true if it corresponds to a world. Incompatible true world versions correspond to different worlds. It is common for theories of modality to posit the existence of a plurality of possible worlds. But Goodman's theory is different since it posits a plurality not of possible but of actual worlds. Such a position is in danger of involving a contradiction: there cannot be a plurality of actual worlds if worlds are defined as maximally inclusive wholes. This danger may be avoided by interpreting Goodman's world-concept not as maximally inclusive wholes in the absolute sense but in relation to its corresponding world-version: a world contains all and only the entities that its world-version describes.\nReligion.\nMythological cosmologies depict the world as centered on an \"axis mundi\" and delimited by a boundary such as a world ocean, a world serpent or similar.\nHinduism.\nHinduism constitutes a family of religious-philosophical views. These views present perspectives on the nature and role of the world. Samkhya philosophy, for example, is a metaphysical dualism that understands reality as comprising 2 parts: purusha and prakriti. The term \"purusha\" stands for the individual conscious self that each of \"us\" possesses. Prakriti, on the other hand, is the 1 world inhabited by all these selves. Samkhya understands this world as a world of matter governed by the law of cause and effect. The term \"matter\" is understood in a sense in this tradition including physical and mental aspects. This is reflected in the doctrine of tattvas, according to which prakriti is made up of 23 principles or elements of reality. These principles include physical elements, like water or earth, and mental aspects, like intelligence or sense-impressions. The relation between purusha and prakriti is conceived as 1 of observation: purusha is the conscious self aware of the world of prakriti and does not causally interact with it.\nA conception of the world is present in Advaita Vedanta, the monist school among the Vedanta schools. Unlike the realist position defended in Samkhya philosophy, Advaita Vedanta sees the world of multiplicity as an illusion, referred to as Maya. This illusion includes impression of existing as separate experiencing selfs called Jivas. Instead, Advaita Vedanta teaches that on the most fundamental level of reality, referred to as Brahman, there exists no plurality or difference. All there is is 1 all-encompassing self: Atman. Ignorance is seen as the source of this illusion, which results in bondage to the world of mere appearances. Liberation is possible in the course of overcoming this illusion by acquiring the knowledge of Brahman, according to Advaita Vedanta.\nChristianity.\nContemptus mundi is the name given to the belief that the world, in all its vanity, is nothing more than a futile attempt to hide from God by stifling our desire for the good and the holy. This view has been characterised as a \"pastoral of fear\" by historian Jean Delumeau. \"The world, the flesh, and the devil\" is a traditional division of the sources of temptation.\n is a Latin phrase meaning \"Catholic world\", per the expression \"Urbi et Orbi\", and refers to that area of Christendom under papal supremacy.\nIslam.\nIn Islam, the term \"dunya\" is used for the world. Its meaning is derived from the root word \"dana\", a term for \"near\". It is associated with the temporal, sensory world and earthly concerns, i.e. with \"this world\" in contrast to the \"spiritual world\". Religious teachings warn of a tendency to seek happiness in \"this world\" and advise a more ascetic lifestyle concerned with the afterlife. Other strands in Islam recommend a balanced approach.\nMandaeism.\nIn Mandaean cosmology, the world or earthly realm is known as Tibil. It is separated from the World of Light () above and the World of Darkness () below by aether ().\nRelated terms and problems.\nWorldviews.\nA worldview is a comprehensive representation of the world and our place in it. As a representation, it is a subjective perspective of the world and thereby different from the world it represents. All higher animals need to represent their environment in some way in order to navigate it. But it has been argued that only humans possess a representation encompassing enough to merit the term \"worldview\". Philosophers of worldviews commonly hold that the understanding of any object depends on a worldview constituting the background on which this understanding can take place. This may affect not just our intellectual understanding of the object in question but the experience of it in general. It is therefore impossible to assess one's worldview from a neutral perspective since this assessment already presupposes the worldview as its background. Some hold that each worldview is based on a single hypothesis that promises to solve all the problems of our existence we may encounter. On this interpretation, the term is closely associated to the worldviews given by different religions. Worldviews offer orientation not just in theoretical matters but also in practical matters. For this reason, they usually include answers to the question of the meaning of life and other evaluative components about what matters and how we should act. A worldview can be unique to one individual but worldviews are usually shared by many people within a certain culture or religion.\nParadox of many worlds.\nThe idea that there exist many different worlds is found in various fields. For example, theories of modality talk about a plurality of possible worlds and the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics carries this reference even in its name. Talk of different worlds is also common in everyday language, for example, with reference to the world of music, the world of business, the world of football, the world of experience or the Asian world. But at the same time, worlds are usually defined as all-inclusive totalities. This seems to contradict the very idea of a plurality of worlds since if a world is total and all-inclusive then it cannot have anything outside itself. Understood this way, a world can neither have other worlds besides itself or be part of something bigger. One way to resolve this paradox while holding onto the notion of a plurality of worlds is to restrict the sense in which worlds are totalities. On this view, worlds are not totalities in an absolute sense. This might be even understood in the sense that, strictly speaking, there are no worlds at all. Another approach understands worlds in a schematic sense: as context-dependent expressions that stand for the current domain of discourse. So in the expression \"Around the World in Eighty Days\", the term \"world\" refers to the earth while in the colonial expression \"the New World\" it refers to the landmass of North and South America.\nCosmogony.\nCosmogony is the field that studies the origin or creation of the world. This includes both scientific cosmogony and creation myths found in various religions. The dominant theory in scientific cosmogony is the Big Bang theory, according to which both space, time and matter have their origin in one initial singularity occurring about 13.8 billion years ago. This singularity was followed by an expansion that allowed the universe to sufficiently cool down for the formation of subatomic particles and later atoms. These initial elements formed giant clouds, which would then coalesce into stars and galaxies. Non-scientific creation myths are found in many cultures and are often enacted in rituals expressing their symbolic meaning. They can be categorized concerning their contents. Types often found include creation from nothing, from chaos or from a cosmic egg.\nEschatology.\nEschatology refers to the science or doctrine of the last things or of the end of the world. It is traditionally associated with religion, specifically with the Abrahamic religions.\nIn this form, it may include teachings both of the end of each individual human life and of the end of the world as a whole. But it has been applied to other fields as well, for example, in the form of physical eschatology, which includes scientifically based speculations about the far future of the universe. According to some models, there will be a Big Crunch in which the whole universe collapses back into a singularity, possibly resulting in a second Big Bang afterward. But current astronomical evidence seems to suggest that our universe will continue to expand indefinitely.\nWorld history.\nWorld history studies the world from a historical perspective. Unlike other approaches to history, it employs a global viewpoint. It deals less with individual nations and civilizations, which it usually approaches at a high level of abstraction. Instead, it concentrates on wider regions and zones of interaction, often interested in how people, goods and ideas move from one region to another. It includes comparisons of different societies and civilizations as well as considering wide-ranging developments with a long-term global impact like the process of industrialization. Contemporary world history is dominated by three main research paradigms determining the periodization into different epochs. One is based on productive relations between humans and nature. The two most important changes in history in this respect were the introduction of agriculture and husbandry concerning the production of food, which started around 10,000 to 8,000\u00a0BCE and is sometimes termed the Neolithic Revolution, and the Industrial Revolution, which started around 1760 CE and involved the transition from manual to industrial manufacturing. Another paradigm, focusing on culture and religion instead, is based on Karl Jaspers' theories about the Axial Age, a time in which various new forms of religious and philosophical thoughts appeared in several separate parts of the world around the time between 800 and 200\u00a0BCE. A third periodization is based on the relations between civilizations and societies. According to this paradigm, history can be divided into three periods in relation to the dominant region in the world: Middle Eastern dominance before 500\u00a0BCE, Eurasian cultural balance until 1500\u00a0CE and Western dominance since 1500\u00a0CE. Big History employs an even wider framework than world history by putting human history into the context of the history of the universe as a whole. It starts with the Big Bang and traces the formation of galaxies, the Solar System, the Earth, its geological eras, the evolution of life and humans until the present day.\nWorld politics.\nWorld politics, also referred to as global politics or international relations, is the discipline of political science studying issues of interest to the world that transcend nations and continents. It aims to explain complex patterns found in the social world that are often related to the pursuit of power, order and justice, usually in the context of globalization. It focuses not just on the relations between nation-states but also considers other transnational actors, like multinational corporations, terrorist groups, or non-governmental organizations. For example, it tries to explain events such as the September 11 attacks, the 2003 invasion of Iraq or the 2008 financial crisis.\nVarious theories have been proposed in order to deal with the complexity involved in formulating such explanations. These theories are sometimes divided into realism, liberalism and constructivism. Realists see nation-states as the main actors in world politics. They constitute an anarchical international system without any overarching power to control their behavior. They are seen as sovereign agents that, determined by human nature, act according to their national self-interest. Military force may play an important role in the ensuing struggle for power between states, but diplomacy and cooperation are also key mechanisms for nations to achieve their goals. Liberalists acknowledge the importance of states but they also emphasize the role of transnational actors, like the United Nations or the World Trade Organization. They see humans as perfectible and stress the role of democracy in this process. The emergent order in world politics, on this perspective, is more complex than a mere balance of power since more different agents and interests are involved in its production. Constructivism ascribes more importance to the agency of individual humans than realism and liberalism. It understands the social world as a construction of the people living in it. This leads to an emphasis on the possibility of change. If the international system is an anarchy of nation-states, as the realists hold, then this is only so because we made it this way and may change since this is not prefigured by human nature, according to the constructivists.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38715", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38715", "title": "Sigismund, Archduke of Austria", "text": "Ruler of Austria from 1439 to 1496\nSigismund (26 October 1427 \u2013 4 March 1496), a member of the House of Habsburg, was Duke of Austria from 1439 (elevated to Archduke in 1477) until his death. As a scion of the Habsburg Leopoldian line, he ruled over Further Austria and the County of Tyrol from 1446 until his resignation in 1490.\nBiography.\nSigismund (or \"Siegmund\", sometimes also spelled \"Sigmund\") was born at the Tyrolean court in Innsbruck; his parents were the Further Austrian duke Frederick IV of Austria and his second wife Anna of Brunswick, a daughter of the Welf duke Frederick I of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg. A minor upon his father's death in 1439, the Inner Austrian duke Frederick V, Sigismund's first cousin, acted as regent until 1446. Frederick, elected King of the Romans (as \"Frederick IV\") in February 1440, exploited all opportunities to extend his influence over the Further Austrian lands. He also interfered in the Old Z\u00fcrich War in order to regain the former Habsburg territories lost to the Swiss Confederacy, while the Tyrolean nobles urged him to cede the rule to Sigismund.\nThe mines of Tyrol remained an important source of revenue for Frederick and not until 1446, upon the end of his regency, Sigismund could accede to rulership over the Further Austrian (\"Vorder\u00f6sterreich\") possessions, which also included the Swabian territories of the Sundgau in southern Alsace, the Breisgau, and numerous smaller estates. His cousin had planned to marry him off to the French princess Radegonde, a daughter of King Charles VII the Victorious, however, she died in 1445. Sigismund, represented by Ludwig von Landsee, married Princess Eleanor of Scotland, the daughter of the Stuart king James I, on 8 September 1449, in an Augustinian church near Chinon.\nSigismund was able to acquire large parts of the former County of Bregenz (in present-day Vorarlberg) in 1451 and further estates in the Gro\u00dfwalsertal and Kleinwalsertal. Nevertheless, he had to cope with claims raised by Frederick's brother, Archduke Albert VI of Austria, and temporarily had to cede the rule over several Further Austrian territories to him. For much of his reign, he was engaged in disputes with Nicholas of Cusa, then Prince-bishop of Brixen and raised to Cardinal in 1449, for the control of the Tyrolean Eisack, Puster and Inn valleys. Sigismund sided with Nicholas' opponent Gregory of Heimburg and in 1460, when he marched against the bishop's residence at Bruneck Castle, he was excommunicated by Pope Pius II. Nicholas fled to Todi in the Papal States, but fell ill and died in 1464, before the archduke surrendered in order to receive the papal pardon.\nIn 1469, Sigismund sold several of his Swabian lands on the Rhine river, including the Alsace landgraviate, the County of Pfirt (\"Ferrette\"), the Breisgau and further cities, to the Burgundian Duke Charles the Bold. Sources are unclear, whether he sold them due to his debts he had accumulated owing to his luxurious lifestyle, or just \"rented\" them because he wanted to have them protected better against the expansion of the Swiss Confederacy. In turn, he extended his Vorarlberg possessions, purchasing the County of Sonnenberg in 1474 and, together with the Swiss (with whom he had concluded a peace treaty in Konstanz) and the Alsatian cities, he sided against Duke Charles of Burgundy in the Battle of H\u00e9ricourt.\nIn 1477, his cousin Frederick, crowned Holy Roman Emperor in 1452, elevated him to Archduke. Three years later, Princess Eleanor died, and in 1484, Sigismund married the 16-year-old Catherine of Saxony, daughter of the Wettin duke Albert III of Saxony. He had no offspring from either marriage.\nIn the later years of the 1470s and early 1480s Sigismund issued a decree that instituted a radical coinage reformation that eventually led up to the creation of the world's first really large and heavy silver coin in nearly a millennium, the guldengroschen, which the Habsburgs in Bohemia developed later into the thaler. This coin was the ancestor of many of the major European coin denominations to come later and also of the US dollar. Using new mining methods and technology, the largely quiescent silver mines in Tirol were brought back into production and soon numerous surrounding states were re-opening old mines and minting similar coins. This production of large coinage exploded as silver from Spain's colonies in the Americas flooded the European economy. It is from these reforms in part that Sigismund acquired the nickname of \"der M\u00fcnzreiche\", or \"rich in coin\".\nSigismund was easily swayed by the bad advice of his council and in March 1487 entered into a pointless war with the Republic of Venice, sometimes called the War of Rovereto. Tyrolean forces quickly seized silver mines in the Valsugana valley owned by Venice, and in April 1487 Sigismund outraged Venice further when he imprisoned 130 Venetian merchants traveling to the fair at Bozen (modern Bolzano) and confiscated their goods. Tyrol stormed the Pass of Calliano and later besieged the castle at Rovereto using a massive bombard, one of the earliest times such a large piece had been used in warfare. The war continued through summer but ended with no decisive victory for either side. One notable casualty of the conflict was the condottiero Roberto Sanseverino d'Aragona.\nBy 1490 the opposition of Tyrolean nobles compelled Sigismund to hand over the rulership to Frederick's son Archduke Maximilian, who later succeeded his father as Holy Roman Emperor. Whether Sigismund voluntarily handed over power to Maximilian or was strongly coerced by the latter is not clear. With Sigismund's death in 1496, the Tyrolean branch of the Habsburg Leopoldian line became extinct, leaving Archduke Maximilian as sole heir to all the dynasty's possessions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38717", "revid": "30211467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38717", "title": "Sigismund, Duke of Bavaria", "text": "Sigismund of Bavaria (26 July 1439 \u2013 1 February 1501) was a member of the Wittelsbach dynasty. He ruled as Duke of Bavaria-Munich from 1460 to 1467, and then as Duke of Bavaria-Dachau until his death.\nBiography.\nSigismund was the third son of Albert III of Bavaria with Princess Anna of Brunswick-Grubenhagen-Einbeck, his second wife.\nSigismund was Duke of Bavaria-Munich from 1460 to 1467, until 1463 together with his brother John IV. In 1467, he resigned in favor of his younger brother Albert IV and then kept only the new duchy of Bavaria-Dachau as his domain until his death.\nIn 1468, the foundation stone of the Frauenkirche in Munich was laid by Sigismund. He also ordered to enlarge Blutenburg Castle, to construct its chapel, and to build the church St. Wolfgang in Pipping nearby in 1488. The redesign of the ducal court Alter Hof was initiated by Sigismund as well who lived there for a time towards the end of the 15th Century and was generally a patron of the revival of Gothic arts in Bavaria.\nSigismund died on February 1, 1501, at Blutenburg Castle, Bavaria and was buried at the Frauenkirche in Munich.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38719", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38719", "title": "Karlskoga Municipality", "text": "Karlskoga Municipality () is a municipality in \u00d6rebro County in central Sweden. Its seat is located in the city of Karlskoga. Other localities include Val\u00e5sen och Labbsand, Kortfors, Linneb\u00e4ck and Villingsberg.\nKarlskoga was formed as rural municipality when the first Swedish local government acts came into force in 1863. In 1925 the southern part was detached, forming Degerfors Municipality. In 1940 the whole municipality, including its non-urban areas, got the title of a city. These titles were abolished in 1971.\nDemographics.\nThis is a demographic table based on Karlskoga Municipality's electoral districts in the 2022 Swedish general election sourced from SVT's election platform, in turn taken from SCB official statistics.\nIn total there were 30,389 residents, including 23,534 Swedish citizens of voting age. 49.1% voted for the left coalition and 49.6% for the right coalition. Indicators are in percentage points except population totals and income.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nKarlskoga is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38721", "revid": "45523345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38721", "title": "Bofors", "text": "Swedish (and later British) arms manufacturer\nAB Bofors ( , , )[] is a former Swedish arms manufacturer which today is part of the British arms manufacturer BAE Systems. The name has been associated with the iron industry and artillery manufacturing for more than 350 years.\nHistory.\nLocated in Karlskoga neighborhood of Bofors, Sweden, the company originates from the hammer mill \"Boofors\", which was founded as a royal state-owned company in 1646 when P. L. Hosman was permitted to erect a forge at the site.\"\" Sigrid Ekehielm, also known as Bo\u00e5s-Beata, who lived from the 1640s to 1700, at one point owned it.\nThe Bofors Works was acquired by Johan Eberhard Geijer (1733\u20131796) in 1762. It was then acquired by the latter's brother, Emanuel af Geijerstam.\n The modern corporate structure was created in 1873 with the foundation of Aktiebolaget (AB) Bofors-Gullsp\u00e5ng.\nA leading Swedish steel producer by the early 1870s, when steel began to be used for gun manufacture in Sweden, Bofors initially sold cast and forged steel produced by the Siemens-Martin process to Finsp\u00e5ng gun works, but soon started to expand into weapons manufacture. The company's first cannon workshop was opened in 1884. Bofors' most famous owner was Alfred Nobel, who owned the company from 1894 until his death in December 1896.\" Nobel played a key role in reshaping the former iron and steel producer to a modern cannon manufacturer and chemical industry participant. The powder manufacturer AB Bofors Nobelkrut, later an explosives and general organic-chemical producer, was created in 1898 as a wholly owned subsidiary.By 1911, AB Bofors-Gullsp\u00e5ng had outcompeted, bought and closed down its Finsp\u00e5ng Swedish competitor in cannon manufacture. The company's name was shortened to AB Bofors in 1919. \nWhen the Treaty of Versailles severely limited Germany from developing new artillery and banned its exports, German military companies started to offshore their R&amp;D abroad, and Krupp, prohibited to develop guns under 17 cm in caliber, started to co-operate with Bofors already in 1919 in order to secretly engage in arms design and manufacture:\nWhen, after the end of the war, it became a certainty that, for Krupp, gun production would come to a complete standstill, Krupp concluded an agreement with Aktiebolaget Bofors, a Swedish firm, which made available to Bofors information on Krupp's experiences relative to the production of steel in certain fields, and especially of steel for the manufacture of guns, also a license agreement on the basis of which Bofors was authorized to duplicate some types of Krupp's artillery designs, insofar as they were not classed as secret by the Reich. Krupp combined with this the intention of benefiting by the experience gathered at that end. Bofors pledged itself at Krupp's request to permit Krupp employees admission to its works at all times and to supply them with all desired information.\nBofors was also able to take over pre-war Dutch and Danish contracts of Krupp in September 1919. Under a 1921 agreement the company agreed not to export any Krupp-derived materiel to the victors of WWI: the UK, US, France, Italy and Japan. The Swedish government fully endorsed all that activity. Also, since 1920 Krupp held 31.8% of Bofors stock through its Swedish subsidiary AB Boforsintressenter despite a 1916 law prohibiting foreigners from having over 20% stock of a Swedish business. As a result of such a collaboration, Bofors prospered, and by the early 1930s it employed ~2800 people (not counting the supply subsidiaries).\nAfter Adolf Hitler's rise to power, the German rearmament became public and increased in scale so there was no more need in using front companies abroad, hence German armaments firms returned their R&amp;D to the home turf. The Swedish parliament also banned foreign ownership of military industries in 1935, so Krupp had to liquidate Boforsintressenter and sell off its Bofors shares to Swedish entrepreneur Axel Wenner-Gren, who long had good connections with Krupp.\nKarlskoga grew around the Bofors Works, which employed almost 10,000 people by 1970. The arms industry created numerous job opportunities in the 1900s, contributing to the population boom of the city.\nThroughout its history, the works has been linked to several influential Swedish families such as Robsahm, Liljestr\u00f6m, Flygge, and Ekehjelm.\"\nPresent ownership.\nIn 1999, Saab AB purchased the Celsius Group, the then parent company of Bofors. In September 2000, United Defense Industries (UDI) of the United States acquired Bofors Weapons Systems (the heavy weapons division), while Saab retained the missile interests.\nThe British company BAE Systems acquired UDI and its Bofors subsidiary in 2005, and \"BAE Systems Bofors\" is now a business unit of the Swedish subdivision BAE Systems AB, while the Swedish unit Saab Bofors Dynamics is part of Saab AB.\nProducts.\nThe name Bofors is strongly associated with the Bofors 40 mm L/60 gun used by both sides during World War II. This automatic cannon is often simply called the \"Bofors gun\" and saw service on both land and sea. It became so widely known that anti-aircraft guns in general were often referred to as Bofors guns. Another well-known gun made by the company was the Bofors 37 mm Anti-Tank Gun L/45, a standard anti-tank weapon used by a variety of armies from the mid 1930s throughout World War II. It was built under licence in a variety of nations such as Finland, The Netherlands and Poland and used in a variety of tanks and armored vehicles, such as the Vickers 6-ton, M39 Pantserwagen and 7TP, among others.\nScandal in India.\nIn 1986, the Government of India and Bofors signed a US$285 million contract for the supply of 410 155 mm field howitzers. In 1987, Swedish Radio alleged that Bofors paid illegal commissions of \u20b9 million () to top Indian politicians, members of senior Congress party and key defence officials to seal the deal. The scandal contributed to the defeat of Rajiv Gandhi's government in the elections three years later.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38722", "revid": "50307497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38722", "title": "Psychiatric hospital", "text": "Hospital specializing in the treatment of serious mental disorders\nA psychiatric hospital, also known as a mental health hospital, a behavioral health hospital, or an asylum is a specialized medical facility that focuses on the treatment of severe mental disorders. These institutions cater to patients with conditions such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and eating disorders, among others.\nOverview.\nPsychiatric hospitals vary considerably in size and classification. Some specialize in short-term or outpatient therapy for low-risk patients, while others provide long-term care for individuals requiring routine assistance or a controlled environment due to their psychiatric condition. Patients may choose voluntary commitment, but those deemed to pose a significant danger to themselves or others may be subject to involuntary commitment and treatment. \nIn general hospitals, psychiatric wards or units serve a similar purpose. Modern psychiatric hospitals have evolved from the older concept of lunatic asylums, shifting focus from mere containment and restraint to evidence-based treatments that aim to help patients function in society. Drug administration, as well as structured and one-to-one therapy (such as occupational therapy and psychotherapy) play a role in trajectories. They are the focus of most studies on forms of treatment that exist in psychiatric wards. However, because psychiatric wards are social living spaces, inpatient relationships in psychiatric wards also play a role in survival and recovery trajectories.\nWith successive waves of reform, and the introduction of effective evidence-based treatments, most modern psychiatric hospitals emphasize treatment, usually including a combination of psychiatric medications and psychotherapy, that assist patients in functioning in the outside world. Many countries have prohibited the use of physical restraints on patients, which includes tying psychiatric patients to their beds for days or even months at a time, though this practice still is periodically employed in the United States, India, Japan, and other countries.\nHistory.\nModern psychiatric hospitals evolved from, and eventually replaced, the older lunatic asylum. Their development also entails the rise of organized institutional psychiatry.\nHospitals known as bimaristans were built in the Middle East in the early ninth century; the first was built in Baghdad under the leadership of Harun al-Rashid. While not devoted solely to patients with psychiatric disorders, early psychiatric hospitals often contained wards for patients exhibiting mania or other psychological distress.\nBecause of cultural taboos against refusing to care for one's family members, mentally ill patients would be surrendered to a \"bimaristan\" only if the patient demonstrated violence, incurable chronic illness, or some other extremely debilitating ailment. Psychological wards were typically enclosed by iron bars owing to the aggression of some of the patients.\nIn Western Europe, the first idea and set up for a proper mental hospital entered through Spain. A member of the Mercedarian Order named Juan Gilaberto Jofr\u00e9 traveled frequently to Islamic countries and observed several institutions that confined the insane. He proposed the founding of an institution exclusive for \"sick people who had to be treated by doctors\", something very modern for the time. The foundation was carried out in 1409 thanks to several wealthy men from Valencia who contributed funds for its completion. It was considered the first institution in the world at that time specialized in the treatment of mental illnesses.\nLater on, physicians, including Philippe Pinel at Bic\u00eatre Hospital in France and William Tuke at York Retreat in England, began to advocate for the viewing of mental illness as a disorder that required compassionate treatment that would aid in the rehabilitation of the victim. In the Western world, the arrival of institutionalisation as a solution to the problem of madness was very much an advent of the nineteenth century. The first public mental asylums were established in Britain; the passing of the County Asylums Act 1808 empowered magistrates to build rate-supported asylums in every county to house the many 'pauper lunatics'. Nine counties first applied, the first public asylum opening in 1812 in Nottinghamshire. In 1828, the newly appointed Commissioners in Lunacy were empowered to license and supervise private asylums. The Lunacy Act 1845 made the construction of asylums in every county compulsory with regular inspections on behalf of the Home Secretary, and required asylums to have written regulations and a resident physician.\nAt the beginning of the 19th century there were a few thousand people housed in a variety of disparate institutions throughout England, but by 1900 that figure had grown to about 100,000. This growth coincided with the growth of alienism, later known as psychiatry, as a medical specialism. The treatment of inmates in early lunatic asylums was sometimes very brutal and focused on containment and restraint.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, psychiatric institutions ceased using terms such as \"madness\", \"lunacy\" or \"insanity\", which assumed a unitary psychosis, and began instead splitting into numerous mental diseases, including catatonia, melancholia, and dementia praecox, which is now known as schizophrenia.\nIn 1961, sociologist Erving Goffman described a theory of the \"total institution\" and the process by which it takes efforts to maintain predictable and regular behavior on the part of both \"guard\" and \"captor\", suggesting that many of the features of such institutions serve the ritual function of ensuring that both classes of people know their function and social role, in other words of \"institutionalizing\" them. Asylums as a key text in the development of deinstitutionalization.\nWith successive waves of reform and the introduction of effective evidence-based treatments, modern psychiatric hospitals provide a primary emphasis on treatment; and further, they attempt\u2014where possible\u2014to help patients control their own lives in the outside world with the use of a combination of psychiatric drugs and psychotherapy. These treatments can be involuntary. Involuntary treatments are among the many psychiatric practices which are questioned by the mental patient liberation movement.\nIn America history in the 1980s after the \"12,225,000 Acre Bill\" it was emphasized that care would be given in asylums instead of housing the individuals in jails, poorhouses, or having them live on the streets. Due to the decrease over the years of psychiatric hospitals available depending on the state the availability of space and beds for new patients has drastically decreased.\nTypes.\nThere are several different types of modern psychiatric hospitals, but all of them house people with mental illnesses of varying severity. In the United Kingdom, both crisis admissions and medium-term care are usually provided on acute admissions wards. Juvenile or youth wards in psychiatric hospitals or psychiatric wards are set aside for children or youth with mental illness. Long-term care facilities have the goal of treatment and rehabilitation within a short time-frame (two or three years). Another institution for the mentally ill is a community-based halfway house.\nCrisis stabilization.\nIn the United States, there are high acuity and low acuity crisis facilities (or Crisis Stabilization Units). High acuity crisis stabilization units serve individuals who are actively suicidal, violent, or intoxicated. Low acuity crisis facilities include peer respites, social detoxes, and other programs to serve individuals who are not actively suicidal/violent.\nOpen units.\nOpen psychiatric units are not as secure as crisis stabilization units. They are not used for acutely suicidal people; instead, the focus in these units is to make life as normal as possible for patients while continuing treatment to the point where they can be discharged. However, patients are usually still not allowed to hold their own medications in their rooms because of the risk of an impulsive overdose. While some open units are physically unlocked, other open units still use locked entrances and exits, depending on the type of patients admitted.\nMedium term.\nAnother type of psychiatric hospital is medium term, which provides care lasting several weeks. Most drugs used for psychiatric purposes take several weeks to take effect, and the main purpose of these hospitals is to monitor the patient for the first few weeks of therapy to ensure the treatment is effective.\nJuvenile wards.\nJuvenile wards are sections of psychiatric hospitals or psychiatric wards set aside for children with mental illness. However, there are a number of institutions specializing only in the treatment of juveniles, particularly when dealing with drug abuse, self-harm, eating disorders, anxiety, depression or other mental illnesses.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], the statistics of mental illness among inmates in jails and juvenile wards range from 15% to 20%. Because of this, many juvenile wards and prisons have opened an inpatient mental health unit within their facility.\nLong-term care facilities.\nIn the United Kingdom, long-term care facilities are now being replaced with smaller secure units, some within hospitals. Modern buildings, modern security, and being locally situated to help with reintegration into society once medication has stabilized the condition are often features of such units. Examples of this include the Three Bridges Unit at St Bernard's Hospital in West London and the John Munroe Hospital in Staffordshire. These units have the goal of treatment and rehabilitation to allow for transition back into society within a short time-frame, usually lasting two or three years. Not all patients' treatment meets this criterion, however, leading larger hospitals to retain this role.\nThese hospitals provide stabilization and rehabilitation for those who are actively experiencing uncontrolled symptoms of mental disorders such as depression, bipolar disorders, eating disorders, and so on.\nIn the United States long-term care facilities are used for individuals with severe and continuous mental health struggles. These hospitals provide a different form of care compared to other psychiatric hospitals; this type is designed to provide comprehensive care over an extended period of time, higher level of support and care, as well as heavy monitoring of patients.\u00a0Within these facilities the care can be better adapted to best fit each individual patient, this allows for a more patient centered focus on the form of care they are receiving.\nHalfway houses.\nOne type of institution for the mentally ill is a community-based halfway house. These facilities provide assisted living for an extended period of time for patients with mental illnesses, and they often aid in the transition to self-sufficiency. These institutions are considered to be one of the most important parts of a mental health system by many psychiatrists, although some localities lack sufficient funding.\nPolitical imprisonment.\nIn some countries, the mental institution may be used for the incarceration of political prisoners as a form of punishment. One notable historical example was the use of punitive psychiatry in the Soviet Union and other dictatorships. \nSecure units.\nIn the United Kingdom, criminal courts or the Home Secretary can, under various sections of the Mental Health Act, order the detention of offenders in a psychiatric hospital, but the term \"criminally insane\" is no longer legally or medically recognized. Secure psychiatric units exist in all regions of the UK for this purpose; in addition, there are a few specialist hospitals which offer treatment with high levels of security. These facilities are divided into three main categories: High, Medium and Low Secure. Although the phrase \"Maximum Secure\" is often used in the media, there is no such classification. \"Local Secure\" is a common misnomer for Low Secure units, as patients are often detained there by local criminal courts for psychiatric assessment before sentencing.\nRun by the National Health Service, these facilities which provide psychiatric assessments can also provide treatment and accommodation in a safe hospital environment which prevents absconding. Thus there is far less risk of patients harming themselves or others. In Dublin, the Central Mental Hospital performs a similar function.\nCommunity hospital utilization.\nCommunity hospitals across the United States regularly discharge mental health patients, who are then typically referred to out-patient treatment and therapy. A study of community hospital discharge data from 2003 to 2011, however, found that mental health hospitalizations had increased for both children and adults. Compared to other hospital utilization, mental health discharges for children were the lowest while the most rapidly increasing hospitalizations were for adults under 64. Some units have been opened to provide therapeutically enhanced Treatment, a subcategory to the three main hospital unit types.\nIn the UK, high security hospitals exist, including Ashworth Hospital in Merseyside, Broadmoor Hospital in Crowthorne, Rampton Secure Hospital in Retford, and the State Hospital in Carstairs, Scotland. In Northern Ireland, the Isle of Man, and the Channel Islands, medium and low secure units exist but high secure units on the UK mainland are used for patients who qualify for the treatment under the Out of Area (Off-Island Placements) Referrals provision of the Mental Health Act 1983. Among the three unit types, medium secure facilities are the most prevalent in the UK. As of 2009, there were 27 women-only units in England. Irish units include those at prisons in Portlaise, Castelrea, and Cork.\nCriticism.\nPsychiatrist Thomas Szasz in Hungary has argued that psychiatric hospitals are like prisons unlike other kinds of hospitals, and that psychiatrists who coerce people (into treatment or involuntary commitment) function as judges and jailers, not physicians. Historian Michel Foucault is widely known for his comprehensive critique of the use and abuse of the mental hospital system in \"Madness and Civilization\". He argued that Tuke and Pinel's asylum was a symbolic recreation of the condition of a child under a bourgeois family. It was a microcosm symbolizing the massive structures of bourgeois society and its values: relations of Family\u2013Children (paternal authority), Fault\u2013Punishment (immediate justice), Madness\u2013Disorder (social and moral order).\nErving Goffman coined the term \"total institution\" for mental hospitals and similar places which took over and confined a person's whole life. Goffman placed psychiatric hospitals in the same category as concentration camps, prisons, military organizations, orphanages, and monasteries. In his book \"Asylums\" Goffman describes how the institutionalisation process socialises people into the role of a good patient, someone \"dull, harmless and inconspicuous\"; in turn, it reinforces notions of chronicity in severe mental illness. The Rosenhan experiment of 1973 demonstrated the difficulty of distinguishing sane patients from insane patients.\nFranco Basaglia, a leading psychiatrist who inspired and planned the psychiatric reform in Italy, also defined the mental hospital as an oppressive, locked, and total institution in which prison-like, punitive rules are applied, in order to gradually eliminate its own contents. Patients, doctors and nurses are all subjected (at different levels) to the same process of institutionalism. American psychiatrist Loren Mosher noticed that the psychiatric institution itself gave him master classes in the art of the \"total institution\": labeling, unnecessary dependency, the induction and perpetuation of powerlessness, the degradation ceremony, authoritarianism, and the primacy of institutional needs over the patients, whom it was ostensibly there to serve.\nThe anti-psychiatry movement coming to the fore in the 1960s has opposed many of the practices, conditions, or existence of mental hospitals; due to the extreme conditions in them. The psychiatric consumer/survivor movement has often objected to or campaigned against conditions in mental hospitals or their use, voluntarily or involuntarily. The mental patient liberation movement emphatically opposes involuntary treatment but it generally does not object to any psychiatric treatments that are consensual, provided that both parties can withdraw consent at any time.\nWhile there is a lot of criticism to the set up and the form of care psychiatric hospitals provide, there is the more prominent issue of stigmatization from other individuals and the communities surrounding these hospitals. There has been an increase in the stigmatization towards individuals who receive professional mental health care in psychiatric hospitals. Stigmatization has a major impact on not only the patients in these hospitals but also the clients of so-called alternative settings. Having this stigma can cause future patients and individuals who need this care to be more hesitant to get the care due to the fear of future judgement and being a victim of this stigmatization.\nSome other criticism that can occur is by peers. This can have a direct impact on the patients. This alone can cause them not to feel as they can share or seek help from a professional mental health provider.\nUndercover journalism.\nAlongside the 1973 academic investigation by Rosenhan and other similar experiments, several journalists have been willingly admitted to hospitals in order to conduct undercover journalism. These include:\nCriteria.\nWhen looking at the criteria for individuals who may need to be admitted into a psychiatric hospitals there are six things that are looked at to indicate the need for the hospital. These include mental status, self-care ability, responsible parties available, patients' effect on environment, danger potential and the treatment prognosis.\u00a0The need for inpatient care can change depending on the individual and the presenting issues that need to be addressed. Some other criteria can be if the individual is an immediate threat to themselves or others, this can be presented in something called a suicidal ideation. Some of the disorders or signs of someone who is in need of a psychiatric hospital are: major depressive disorder, suicidal ideation, schizophrenia, eating disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, and many others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38725", "revid": "458237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38725", "title": "Cross of Gold speech", "text": "1896 speech by William Jennings Bryan\nThe Cross of Gold speech was delivered by William Jennings Bryan, a former United States Representative from Nebraska, at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago on July 9, 1896. In his address, Bryan supported \"free silver\" (i.e. bimetallism), which he believed would bring the nation prosperity. He decried the gold standard, concluding the speech, \"you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold\". Bryan's address helped catapult him to the Democratic Party's presidential nomination and is considered one of the greatest political speeches in American history.\nFor twenty years, Americans had been bitterly divided over the nation's monetary standard. The gold standard, which the United States had effectively been on since 1873, limited the money supply but eased trade with other nations, such as the United Kingdom, whose currency was also based on gold. Many Americans, however, believed that bimetallism (making both gold and silver legal tender) was necessary for the nation's economic health. The financial Panic of 1893 intensified the debates, and when President Grover Cleveland (a Democrat) continued to support the gold standard against the will of much of his party, activists became determined to take over the Democratic Party organization and nominate a silver-supporting candidate in 1896. \nBryan had been a dark horse candidate with little support in the convention. His speech, delivered at the close of the debate on the party platform, electrified the convention and is generally credited with earning him the nomination for president. However, he lost the general election to William McKinley, and the United States formally adopted the gold standard in 1900.\nBackground.\nMonetary standards and the United States.\nIn January 1791, at the request of Congress, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton issued a report on the currency. At the time, there was no mint in the United States; foreign coins were used. Hamilton proposed a monetary system based on bimetallism, in which the new currency would be equal to a given amount of gold, or a larger amount of silver; at the time a given weight of gold was worth about 15 times as much as the same amount of silver. Although Hamilton understood that adjustment might be needed from time to time as precious metal prices fluctuated, he believed that if the nation's unit of value were defined only by one of the two precious metals used for coins, the other would descend to the status of mere merchandise, unusable as a store of value. He also proposed the establishment of a mint, at which citizens could present gold or silver, and receive it back, struck into money. On April 2, 1792, Congress passed the Mint Act of 1792. This legislation defined a unit of value for the new nation, to be known as a dollar. The new unit of currency was defined to be equal to of gold, or alternatively, of silver, establishing a ratio of value between gold and silver of 15:1. The legislation also established the Mint of the United States.\nIn the early 19th century, the economic disruption caused by the Napoleonic Wars caused United States gold coins to be worth more as bullion than as money, and they vanished from circulation. Governmental response to this shortage was hampered by the fact that officials did not clearly understand what had happened. In 1830, Treasury Secretary Samuel D. Ingham proposed adjusting the ratio between gold and silver in US currency to 15.8:1, which had for some time been the ratio in Europe. It was not until 1834 that Congress acted, changing the gold/silver ratio to 16.002:1. This was close enough to the market value to make it uneconomic to export either US gold or silver coins. When silver prices rose relative to gold as a reaction to the California Gold Rush, silver coinage was worth more than face value, and rapidly flowed overseas for melting. Despite vocal opposition led by Tennessee Representative (and future president) Andrew Johnson, the precious metal content of smaller silver coins was reduced in 1853. Silver was now undervalued at the Mint; accordingly little was presented for striking into money.\nThe Coinage Act of 1873 eliminated the standard silver dollar. It also repealed the statutory provisions allowing silver bullion to be presented to the Mint and returned in the form of circulating money. In passing the Coinage Act, Congress eliminated bimetallism. During the economic chaos of the Panic of 1873, the price of silver dropped significantly, but the Mint would accept none for striking into legal tender. Silver producers complained, and many Americans came to believe that only through bimetallism could the nation achieve and maintain prosperity. They called for the return to pre-1873 laws, which would require the Mint to take all the silver offered it and return it, struck into silver dollars. This would inflate the money supply, and, adherents argued, increase the nation's prosperity. Critics contended that the inflation which would follow the introduction of such a policy would harm workers, whose wages would not rise as fast as prices would, and the operation of Gresham's law would drive gold from circulation, effectively placing the United States on a silver standard.\nEarly attempts toward free silver.\nTo advocates of what became known as free silver, the 1873 act became known as the \"Crime of '73\". Pro-silver forces, with congressional leaders such as Missouri Representative Richard P. Bland, sought the passage of bills to allow depositors of silver bullion to receive it back in the form of coin. Such bills, sponsored by Bland, passed the House of Representatives in 1876 and 1877, but both times failed in the Senate. A third attempt in early 1878 again passed the House, and eventually both houses after being amended in the Senate. The bill, as modified by amendments sponsored by Iowa Senator William B. Allison, did not reverse the 1873 provisions, but required the Treasury to purchase a minimum of $2 million of silver bullion per month; the profit, or seignorage from monetizing the silver was to be used to purchase more silver bullion. The silver would be struck into dollar coins to be circulated, or else stored and used as backing for silver certificates. The Bland\u2013Allison Act was vetoed by President Rutherford B. Hayes, but was enacted by Congress over his veto on February 28, 1878.\nImplementation of the Bland\u2013Allison Act did not end calls for free silver. The 1880s saw a steep decline in the prices of grain and other agricultural commodities. Silver advocates argued that this dropoff, which caused the price of grain to fall below its cost of production, was caused by the failure of the government to adequately increase the money supply, which had remained steady on a per capita basis. Advocates of the gold standard attributed the decline to advances in production and transportation. The late 19th century saw divergent views in economics as the \"laissez-faire\" orthodoxy was questioned by younger economists, and both sides found ample support for their views from theorists.\nIn 1890, the Sherman Silver Purchase Act greatly increased government purchases of silver. The government pledged to stand behind the silver dollars and treasury notes issued under the act by redeeming them in gold. Pursuant to this promise, government gold reserves dwindled over the following three years. Although the economic Panic of 1893 had a number of causes, President Grover Cleveland believed the inflation caused by Sherman's act to be a major factor, and called a special session of Congress to repeal it. Congress did so, but the debates showed bitter divides in both major parties between silver and gold factions. Cleveland tried to replenish the Treasury through issuance of bonds which could only be purchased with gold, with little effect but to increase the public debt, as the gold continued to be withdrawn in redemption for paper and silver currency. Many in the public saw the bonds as benefiting bankers, not the nation. The bankers did not want loans repaid in an inflated currency\u2014the gold standard was deflationary, and as creditors, they preferred to be paid in such a currency, whereas debtors preferred to repay in inflated currency.\nThe effects of the depression which began in 1893, and which continued through 1896, ruined many Americans. Contemporary estimates were an unemployment rate as high as 25%. The task of relieving the jobless fell to churches and other charities, as well as to labor unions. Farmers went bankrupt; their farms were sold to pay their debts. Some of the impoverished died of disease or starvation; others killed themselves.\nBryan seeks the nomination.\nAmong those who spoke against the repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act was Nebraska Representative William Jennings Bryan. Known as an orator even then (\"the Boy Orator of the Platte\"), Bryan had not always favored free silver out of conviction, stating in 1892 that he was for it because the people of Nebraska were for it. By 1893, his views on silver had evolved, and on the floor of the House of Representatives, he delivered a riveting three-hour address against repeal of the Silver Purchase Act. In his conclusion, Bryan reached back in history:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When a crisis like the present arose and the national bank of his day sought to control the politics of the nation, God raised up an Andrew Jackson, who had the courage to grapple with that great enemy, and by overthrowing it, he made himself the idol of the people and reinstated the Democratic party in public confidence. What will the decision be today? The Democratic party has won the greatest success in its history. Standing upon this victory-crowned summit, will it turn its face to the rising or the setting sun? Will it choose blessings or cursings\u2014life or death\u2014which? Which?\nDespite the repeal of the act, economic conditions failed to improve. The year 1894 saw considerable labor unrest. President Cleveland sent federal troops to Illinois to end the Pullman Strike\u2014workers at the Pullman Palace Car Company, which made railroad cars, had struck after wages were cut. Railway employees had refused to handle Pullman cars in sympathy with the strikers; this action threatened to paralyze the nation's rail lines. The President's move was opposed by the Democratic Governor of Illinois, John Altgeld. Angered by Cleveland's actions in the labor dispute, and by his uncompromising stand against silver, Altgeld began to organize Democrats against Cleveland's renomination in 1896. Although Altgeld and his adherents urged voters to distinguish between Cleveland and his party, the Democrats lost 113 seats in the House in the 1894 midterm elections, the greatest loss by a majority party in congressional history. The Republicans gained control of the House, as well as the Senate, which until 1913 was elected by the state legislatures rather than by the popular vote. Among those defeated for Senate was Bryan in Nebraska.\nBryan had long planned to run for president. Although he would only be 36 years old in 1896\u2014one year above the constitutional minimum\u2014he believed the silver question could carry him not only to the nomination, but to the presidency. He traveled widely, speaking to audiences across the nation. His speeches impressed many; even some of his opponents later conceded that Bryan was the most compelling speaker they had ever heard. Bryan's speeches evolved over time; in December 1894, in a speech in Congress, he first used a phrase from which would come the conclusion to his most famous address: as originally stated, it was \"I will not help to crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.\"\nA myth has arisen that Bryan was an unknown prior to 1896. This was not the case; Bryan was well known as an orator on the tariff and silver questions. Albert Shaw, editor of \"The Review of Reviews\", stated that after Bryan's nomination, many easterners professed not to have heard of him but: \"If, indeed, they had not heard of Mr. Bryan before, they had failed to follow closely the course of American politics in the past eight years. As a Democratic member of the Ways and Means Committee through two Congresses, Mr. Bryan was by all odds the ablest and strongest orator on the Democratic side of the House. His subsequent canvass [campaign] for the United States senatorship in Nebraska was noteworthy and conspicuous on many accounts.\"\nIn the aftermath of the 1894 election, the silver forces, led by Altgeld and others, began an attempt to take over the machinery of the Democratic Party. Historian Stanley Jones, in his study of the 1896 election, suggests that western Democrats would have opposed Cleveland even if the party had held its congressional majority in 1894; with the disastrous defeat, they believed the party would be wiped out in the West if it did not support silver. Bryan biographer Paolo E. Coletta wrote, \"during this year [July 1894 \u2013 June 1895] of calamities, disintegration and revolution, each crisis aided Bryan because it caused division within his party and permitted him to contest for its mastery as it slipped from Cleveland's fingers.\"\nIn early 1896, with the economy still poor, there was widespread discontent with the two existing major political parties. Some people, for the most part Democrats, joined the far-left Populist Party. Many Republicans in the western states, dismayed by the strong allegiance of eastern Republicans to the gold standard, considered forming their own party. When the Republicans in June 1896 nominated former Ohio Governor William McKinley for president and passed at his request a platform strongly supporting \"sound money\" (the gold standard unless modified by international agreement), a number of \"Silver Republicans\" walked out of the convention. The leader of those who left was Colorado Senator Henry M. Teller; he was immediately spoken of as a possible candidate for the Democratic nomination.\nBryan believed that he could, if nominated, unite the disaffected behind a strong silver campaign. However, part of his strategy was to remain inconspicuous until the last possible moment at the convention. He sent letters to national convention delegates, urging them to support silver, and enclosing copies of his photograph, writings, and speeches. Jones points out that though Bryan's speaking engagements were not deemed political by the standards of 1896, by modern measurements he was far more active in campaigning for the nomination than most of the better-known candidates.\nHistorian James A. Barnes, in his historical journal article pointing out myths that have arisen about Bryan's candidacy and campaign, stated that Bryan's efforts bore fruit even before the convention:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By April, 1896, many individuals were quietly working for Bryan's nomination. Circulars were being distributed in Illinois, and admirers in Nebraska, North Carolina, Mississippi, Louisiana, Texas, Arkansas, and other states were urging his selection among their friends. It was not in any concerted or open action, however, that Bryan had his strength; it was in the friendly predisposition of the mass of the delegates that he had hopes.\nSelection of delegates.\nThe 1896 Democratic National Convention followed events unique in post-Civil War American history. One after another, state conventions to elect delegates to the national convention in Chicago repudiated an incumbent elected president of their party, who had not declared whether he would be a candidate for renomination. According to Barnes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The people of the South and the West had for years been convinced of the enormity of the \"crime of 1873\", and they had long since come to regard silver as the sword that would cut the Gordian knot of privilege. Consciousness of grievances of years and not of months was reflected in the decisive action of the state Democratic conventions in the spring and early summer of 1896.\nMany state conventions elected delegates pledged to support bimetallism in the party platform. Gold Democrats were successful in a few states in the Northeast, but had little luck elsewhere. Speakers in some states cursed Cleveland; the South Carolina convention denounced him. Cleveland issued a statement urging Democratic voters to support gold\u2014the next convention to be held, in Illinois, unanimously supported silver; the keynote speaker prayed for divine forgiveness for Cleveland's 1892 nomination. Gold and silver factions in some states, such as Bryan's Nebraska, sent rival delegations to the convention.\n1896 convention.\nThe 1896 Democratic convention opened at the Chicago Coliseum on July 7, 1896. Much activity took place in advance of the formal opening as the silver and (vastly outnumbered) gold forces prepared their strategies. Silver forces were supported by the Democratic National Bimetallic Committee, the umbrella group formed in 1895 to support silver Democrats in their insurgency against Cleveland. Gold Democrats looked to the President for leadership, but Cleveland, trusting few in his party, did not involve himself further in the gold efforts, but spent the week of the convention fishing off the New Jersey coast.\nThe Bimetallic Committee carefully planned to take control of every aspect of the convention, eliminating any threat that the minority gold faction could take power. It made no secret of these preparations. This takeover was considered far more important than was the choice of presidential candidate, and the committee decided to take no position on who should win the race for the nomination, reasoning that the victor, no matter who he was, would be a silver man. Well aware of the overwhelming forces against them, many gold delegates were inclined to concede the platform battle.\nBryan arrived quietly and took rooms at a modest hotel; the Nebraskan later calculated that he spent less than $100 while in Chicago. He arrived convinced that he would win the nomination. He had already begun work on a speech. On the evening of July 5, Bryan was visited by a delegation of Coloradans, seeking his support for Senator Teller. They went away apologetically, not having known Bryan sought the nomination.\nCandidates for the nomination.\nDespite the desire of silver delegates to nominate a candidate who shared their beliefs, and although several states instructed their delegates to vote for a specific candidate, there was no overwhelming favorite for the nomination going into the convention. With a two-thirds vote of the delegates needed to nominate, almost every silver delegate would have to vote for the same candidate to assure success, though any organized support from gold delegates would greatly damage a silver candidate's chances.\nThe only gold man who put together any sort of campaign for the Democratic nomination was Treasury Secretary John G. Carlisle, but he withdrew in April, stating that he was more concerned about the platform of the party than who would lead it. However, as late as June, the gold forces, which still controlled the Democratic National Committee (DNC), continued to believe that the nominee could be pro-gold. Cleveland friend and former Postmaster General Donald M. Dickinson wrote to the President in June 1896 hoping that the delegates would recognize \"common sense\" and be frightened at the thought of nominating a radical.\nOne of the leaders of the silver movement was Illinois Governor Altgeld; a native of Germany, he was constitutionally barred from the presidency by his foreign birth. Going into the convention, the two leading candidates for the nomination were former Congressman Bland, who had originated the Bland-Allison Act, and former Iowa Governor Horace Boies, with Bland considered the frontrunner. These were the only two candidates to put together organizations to try to secure delegate votes, though both efforts were cash-starved. Both men had electoral problems: Bland at age 61 was seen by some as a man whose time had passed; Boies was a former Republican who had once decried bimetallism. There were a large number of potential candidates seen as having less support; these included Vice President Adlai Stevenson of Illinois, Senator Joseph C. Blackburn of Kentucky, Senator Teller, and Bryan.\nSilver advocates take control.\nAlthough Bryan had decided on a strategy to gain the nomination\u2014to give a speech which would make him the logical candidate in the eyes of delegates\u2014he faced obstacles along the way. For one thing, he began the 1896 convention without any official status\u2014the Democratic National Committee, which made the initial determination of which delegations would be seated, had chosen the pro-gold Nebraskans to represent their state. Bryan had been waiting outside the committee room when his rivals were seated by a 27\u201323 vote; contemporary accounts state he was \"somewhat surprised\" at the result. The DNC's action could be reversed, but not until the convention's credentials committee reported. However, Barnes deemed the actions by the committee immaterial to the outcome due to the silver strength in the convention:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anyone who doubts the power the silverites were ready to unleash in a disciplined and irresistible attack needs only to read the results of the election of temporary chairman. The gold men, though they possessed the machinery of the party, had neither the power nor the strength to challenge their opponents. They could only beg them to spare the party the humiliation of broken traditions and the overthrowing of established control. Nevertheless, Senator John W. Daniel of Virginia was by an overwhelming vote elected temporary chairman, and a Committee on Credentials was appointed that seated Bryan and his contesting Nebraska delegation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe demand the free and unlimited coinage of both silver and gold at the present legal ratio of 16 to 1 without waiting for the aid or consent of any other nation. We demand that the standard silver dollar shall be a full legal tender, equally with gold, for all debts, public and private, and we favor such legislation as will prevent for the future the demonitization of any kind of legal tender by private contract.\nFrom the money plank of the Democratic platform\nGood luck favored Bryan\u2014he was considered for various convention roles by the silverites, but each time was not selected. The temporary chairmanship, for example, would have permitted him to deliver the keynote address. However, Bryan, lacking a seat at the start of the convention, could not be elected temporary chairman. Bryan considered this no loss at all; the focus of the convention was on the party platform and the debate which would precede its adoption. The platform would symbolize the repudiation of Cleveland and his policies after the insurgents' long struggle, and Bryan was determined to close the debate on the platform. Bryan, once seated, was Nebraska's representative to the Committee on Resolutions (generally called the \"platform committee\"), which allocated 80\u00a0minutes to each side in the debate and selected Bryan as one of the speakers. South Carolina Senator Benjamin Tillman was to be the other pro-silver speaker, and originally wished to close the debate. However, the senator wanted 50 minutes to speak, too long for a closing address, and at Bryan's request agreed to open the debate instead. Accordingly, Bryan became the final speaker on the platform.\nDelegates, as they waited for the committees to complete their work, spent much of the first two days listening to various orators. Of these, only Senator Blackburn, a silver supporter, sparked much reaction, and that only momentary. Delegates called for better-known speakers, such as Altgeld or Bryan, but were granted neither then; the Illinois governor declined, and the Nebraskan, once seated, spent much of his time away from the convention floor at the platform committee meeting at the Palmer House.\nThe debate on the platform opened at the start of the third day of the convention, July 9, 1896. The session was supposed to begin at 10:00\u00a0a.m., but as delegates, slowed by the long commute from the hotels to the Coliseum and fatigue from the first two days, did not arrive on time, proceedings did not begin until 10:45. Nevertheless, large crowds gathered outside the public entrances; the galleries were quickly packed. Once the convention came to order, Arkansas Senator James K. Jones, chair of the Committee on Resolutions, read the proposed platform to cheers by many delegates; the reading of the pro-gold minority report attracted less applause.\n\"Pitchfork Ben\" Tillman lived up to his nickname with an incendiary address which began with a reference to his home state's role in beginning the Civil War. Although Tillman endorsed silver, his address was so laced with sectionalism that most silver delegates remained silent for fear of being seen as supporting him. Tillman's speech, scheduled to be the only one in support of silver except Bryan's, was so badly received that Senator Jones, who had not planned to speak, gave a brief address asserting that silver was a national issue.\nSenator David B. Hill of New York, a gold supporter, was next. As Hill moved to the podium, a reporter friend passed Bryan a note urging him to make a patriotic speech without hint of sectionalism; Bryan responded, \"You will not be disappointed.\" Hill gave a calm speech defending the gold position, and swayed few delegates. He was followed by two other gold men, Senator William Vilas of Wisconsin and former Massachusetts Governor William E. Russell. Vilas gave a lengthy defense of the Cleveland administration's policies, so long that Russell, fearing that Vilas' speech would cut into his time, asked that the time given to the gold proponents be extended by ten minutes. Bryan consented, on condition that his own time was extended by the same amount; this was agreed to. \"And I needed it for the speech I was to make.\" Bryan later wrote, \"This was another unexpected bit of good fortune. I had never had such an opportunity before in my life and never expect to have again.\"\nVilas quickly lost his audience, which did not want to hear Cleveland defended. Russell's address was inaudible to most of the Coliseum; he was ill and died just over a week later. As the gold men spoke, Bryan ate a sandwich to settle his stomach; he was often nervous before major speeches. Another reporter approached him and asked him who he thought would win the nomination. \"Strictly confidential, not to be quoted for publication: I will be.\"\nBryan addresses the convention.\nAs Russell concluded, to strong applause from gold delegates, there was a buzz of anticipation as Bryan ascended to the podium. There was loud cheering as Bryan stood there, waiting for his audience to calm. Bryan's lecture tours had left him a well-known spokesman for silver. As yet, no one at the convention had effectively spoken for that cause, which was paramount to the delegates. According to political scientist Richard F. Bensel in his study of the 1896 Democratic convention, \"Although the silver men knew they would win this fight, they nonetheless needed someone to tell them\u2014and the gold men\u2014why they must enshrine silver at the heart of the platform.\" Bensel noted, \"The pump was more than primed, it was ready to explode.\" Bryan would say little that he had not said before\u2014the text is similar to that of a speech he had given the previous week at Crete, Nebraska\u2014but he would give the convention its voice.\nBryan began softly,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would be presumptuous, indeed, to present myself against the distinguished gentlemen to whom you have listened if this were a mere measuring of abilities; but this is not a contest between persons. The humblest citizen in all the land, when clad in the armor of a righteous cause, is stronger than all the hosts of error. I come to speak to you in defense of a cause as holy as the cause of liberty\u2014the cause of humanity.\nBryan's opening claimed no personal prestige for himself\u2014but nevertheless placed him as the spokesman for silver. According to Bensel, the self-deprecation helped disarm the delegates. As Bryan was not deemed a major contender for the nomination, even delegates committed to a candidate could cheer him without seeming to betray their allegiance. Bryan then recounted the history of the silver movement; the audience, which had loudly demonstrated its approval of his opening statements, quieted. Throughout the speech, Bryan had the delegates in the palm of his hand; they cheered on cue. The Nebraskan later described the audience as like a trained choir. As he concluded his historical recitation, he reminded the silver delegates that they had come to crown their victory, \"not to discuss, not to debate, but to enter up the judgment already rendered by the plain people of this country\".\nBryan continued with language evoking the Civil War, telling his audience that \"in this contest brother has been arrayed against brother, father against son.\" By then, as he spoke in a sincere tone, his voice sounded clearly and loudly through the hall. He denied, however that the contest was personal; he bore no ill-will towards those who supported the gold standard. However, he stated, facing towards the gold delegates, \"when you come before us and tell us that we are about to disturb your business interests, we reply that you have disturbed our business interests by your course.\" The gold men, during the address, paid close attention and showed their appreciation for Bryan's oratory. Bryan then defended the right of silver supporters to make their argument against opposition from gold men, who were associated with financial interests, especially in the East. Although his statements nominally responded to a point made by Russell, Bryan had thought of the argument the previous evening, and had not used it in earlier speeches. He always regarded it as the best point he made during the speech, and only the ending caused more reaction from his listeners:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We say to you that you have made the definition of a business man too limited in its application. The man who is employed for wages is as much a business man as his employer; the attorney in a country town is as much a business man as the corporation counsel in a great metropolis; the merchant at the cross-roads store is as much a business man as the merchant of New York; the farmer who goes forth in the morning and toils all day, who begins in spring and toils all summer, and who by the application of brain and muscle to the natural resources of the country creates wealth, is as much a business man as the man who goes upon the Board of Trade and bets upon the price of grain; the miners who go down a thousand feet into the earth, or climb two thousand feet upon the cliffs, and bring forth from their hiding places the precious metals to be poured into the channels of trade are as much business men as the few financial magnates who, in a back room, corner the money of the world. We come to speak of this broader class of business men.\nThrough this passage, Bryan maintained the contrast between the common man and the city-dwelling elite. It was clear to listeners as he worked his way through the comparisons that he would refer to the farmer, and when he did, the hall exploded with sound. His sympathetic comparison contrasted the hardworking farmer with the city businessman, whom Bryan cast as a gambler. The galleries were filled with white as spectators waved handkerchiefs, and it was several minutes before he could continue. The police in the convention hall, not sharing the enthusiasm for silver, were described by the press (some of whose members were caught up in the frenzy) as standing as if they thought the audience was about to turn on them. When Bryan resumed, his comparison of miner with miser again electrified the audience; the uproar prevented him from continuing for several minutes. One farmer in the gallery had been about to leave rather than listen to Bryan, whom he deemed a Populist; he had been persuaded to stay. At Bryan's words, he threw his hat into the air, slapped the empty seat in front of him with his coat, and shouted, \"My God! My God! My God!\"\nBryan, having established the right of silver supporters to petition, explained why that petition was not to be denied:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is for these that we speak. We do not come as aggressors. Our war is not a war of conquest; we are fighting in the defense of our homes, our families, and posterity. We have petitioned, and our petitions have been scorned; we have entreated, and our entreaties have been disregarded; we have begged, and they have mocked when our calamity came. We beg no longer; we entreat no more; we petition no more. We defy them!\nWith this call to action, Bryan abandoned any hint at compromise, and adopted the techniques of the radical, polarizing orator, finding no common ground between silver and gold forces. He then defended the remainder of the platform, though only speaking in general terms. He mocked McKinley, said by some to resemble Napoleon, noting that he was nominated on the anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo. The lengthy passage as he discussed the platform and the Republicans helped calm the audience, ensuring he would be heard as he reached his peroration. But Bryan first wished to tie the silver question to a greater cause:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Upon which side will the Democratic Party fight; upon the side of \"the idle holders of idle capital\" or upon the side of \"the struggling masses\"? That is the question which the party must answer first, and then it must be answered by each individual hereafter. The sympathies of the Democratic Party, as shown by the platform, are on the side of the struggling masses, who have ever been the foundation of the Democratic Party.\nHe faced in the direction of the gold-dominated state delegations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are two ideas of government. There are those who believe that, if you will only legislate to make the well-to-do prosperous, their prosperity will leak through on those below. The Democratic idea, however, has been that if you legislate to make the masses prosperous, their prosperity will find its way up through every class which rests upon them. You come to us and tell us that the great cities are in favor of the gold standard; we reply that the great cities rest upon our broad and fertile prairies. Burn down your cities and leave our farms, and your cities will spring up again as if by magic; but destroy our farms and the grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country.\nThis statement attracted great cheering, and Bryan turned to rhetorically demolish the compromise position on bimetallism\u2014that it should only be accomplished through international agreement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is the issue of 1776 over again. Our ancestors, when but three millions in number, had the courage to declare their political independence of every other nation; shall we, their descendants, when we have grown to seventy millions, declare that we are less independent than our forefathers? No, my friends, that will never be the verdict of our people. Therefore, we care not upon what lines the battle is fought. If they say bimetallism is good, but that we cannot have it until other nations help us, we reply that, instead of having a gold standard because England has, we will restore bimetallism, and then let England have bimetallism because the United States has it. If they dare to come out in the open field and defend the gold standard as a good thing, we will fight them to the uttermost.\nNow, Bryan was ready to conclude the speech, and according to his biographer, Michael Kazin, step \"into the headlines of American history\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Having behind us the producing masses of this nation and the world, supported by the commercial interests, the laboring interests, and the toilers everywhere, we will answer their demand for a gold standard by saying to them: \"You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns; you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.\"\nAs Bryan spoke his final sentence, recalling the Crucifixion of Jesus, he placed his hands to his temples, fingers extended; with the final words, he extended his arms to his sides straight out to his body and held that pose for about five seconds as if offering himself as sacrifice for the cause, as the audience watched in dead silence. He then lowered them, descended from the podium, and began to head back to his seat as the stillness held.\nReception and nomination.\nConvention events.\nBryan later described the silence as \"really painful\" and momentarily thought he had failed. As he moved towards his seat, the Coliseum burst into pandemonium. Delegates threw hats, coats, and handkerchiefs into the air. Others took up the standards with the state names on them with each delegation, and planted them by Nebraska's. Two alert police officers had joined Bryan as he left the podium, anticipating the crush. The policemen were swept away by the flood of delegates, who raised Bryan to their shoulders and carried him around the floor. \"The Washington Post\" newspaper recorded, \"bedlam broke loose, delirium reigned supreme.\"\nIt took about 25\u00a0minutes to restore order, and according to Bensel, \"somewhere in the mass demonstration that was convulsing the convention hall, the transfer of sentiment from silver as a policy to Bryan as a presidential candidate took place\". Newspaper accounts of the convention leave little doubt but that, had a vote been taken at that moment (as many were shouting to do), Bryan would have been nominated. Bryan was urged by Senator Jones to allow it, but refused, stating that if his boom would not last overnight, it would never last until November. He soon retired from the convention, returning to his hotel to await the outcome. The convention passed the platform in Bryan's absence and recessed.\nThe balloting began the following morning, July 10, with a two-thirds vote necessary to nominate. Bryan, who remained at his hotel, sent word to the Nebraska delegation to make no deals on his behalf. He stood second out of fourteen candidates in the first ballot, behind Bland. On the second ballot, Bryan still stood second, but had gained as other candidates had fallen away. The third ballot saw Bland still in the lead, but Bryan took the lead on the fourth ballot. According to Jones, it was clear that Bland could not win, and that Bryan could not be stopped. On the fifth ballot, the Illinois delegation, led by Governor Altgeld, switched its votes from Bland to Bryan. Other delegations, seeing that Bryan would be nominated, also switched, securing the victory. Nevertheless, he won the nomination without the votes of the gold delegates, most of whom either left the convention or refused to vote.\nPress reaction.\nMost contemporary press accounts attributed Bryan's nomination to his eloquence, though in the case of Republican and other gold-favoring newspapers, they considered it his demagoguery. The pro-silver \"Cleveland Plain Dealer\" called Bryan's speech \"an eloquent, stirring, and manly appeal\". The \"Chicago Tribune\" reported that Bryan had lit the spark \"which touched off the trail of gun-powder\". The \"St. Louis Post-Dispatch\" opined that with the speech, Bryan \"just about immortalized himself\".\nAccording to the \"New York World\", \"Lunacy having dictated the platform, it was perhaps natural that hysteria should evolve the candidate.\" \"The New York Times\" disparaged Bryan as \"the gifted blatherskite from Nebraska\". The only paper to predict, after Bryan gave his speech, that he would not be nominated was \"The Wall Street Journal\", which stated, \"Bryan has had his day\". The \"Akron Journal and Republican\", no friend to Bryan, opined that \"never probably has a national convention been swayed or influenced by a single speech as was the national Democratic convention\".\nAnti-Semitism controversy.\nBiographer Paolo E. Coletta wrote that after the speech, an anti-Semitic chant was heard from some of the delegates: \"Down with the hooked-nosed Shylocks of Wall Street! Down with the Christ-killing gold bugs!\" This quote, noted by many later commentators, is traced to a profile of famous German anti-Semite Hermann Ahlwardt (who had endorsed Bryan) in \"The Sun\". Author James Ledbetter notes various circumstances that suggest this quote may be fiction or parody, and points out the level of anti-Semitic sentiment in the Populist movement is disputed by historians. The newspaper supported McKinley and the gold standard, the story was published anonymously two months after the speech, and it is unclear the author of the piece attended the speech. The quote was mentioned offhandedly and not reported in news accounts from the time of the convention.\nCampaign and aftermath.\nThe Pullman Company offered Bryan a private car for his trip home; he declined, not wishing to accept corporate favors. As he traveled by rail to Lincoln, he saw farmers and others standing by the tracks, hoping for a glimpse of the new Democratic nominee. He received many letters from supporters, expressing their faith in him in stark terms. One Indiana voter wrote, \"God has sent you amongst our people to save the poor from starvation, and we no [\"sic\"] you will save us.\" A farmer in Iowa, in a letter to Bryan, stated, \"You are the first big man that i [\"sic\"] ever wrote to.\"\nWhen McKinley heard that Bryan was likely to be the nominee, he called the report \"rot\" and hung up the phone. The Republican nominee was slow to realize the surge of support for Bryan after the nomination, stating his view that the silver sentiment would be gone in a month. When McKinley and his advisers, such as industrialist and future senator Mark Hanna, realized that the views were more than transitory, they began intensive fundraising from corporations and the wealthy. The money went for speakers, pamphlets, and other means of conveying their \"sound money\" campaign to the voter. With far less money than McKinley, Bryan embarked on a nationwide campaign tour by train on a then-unprecedented scale. McKinley on the other hand, opted for a front porch campaign. Both men spoke to hundreds of thousands of people from their chosen venues.\nBryan's nomination divided the party. The dissidents nominated their own ticket; the split in the vote would contribute to Bryan's defeat. However, Bryan did gain the support of the Populists, as well as a convention of Silver Republicans. Bryan spoke on silver throughout the campaign; he rarely addressed other issues. Bryan won the South and most of the West, but McKinley's victories in the more populous Northeast and Midwest carried him to the presidency. The Democratic candidate failed to gain a majority of the labor vote; McKinley won in working-class areas as well as wealthy precincts. Although McKinley outpolled him by 600,000\u00a0votes, Bryan received more votes than any previous presidential candidate.\nAfter McKinley's inauguration in March 1897, increases in gold availability from new discoveries and improved refining methods led to a considerable increase in the money supply. Even so, in 1900, Congress passed the Gold Standard Act, formally placing the United States on that standard. Although Bryan ran again on a silver platform in the 1900 presidential election, the issue failed to produce the same resonance with the voters. McKinley won more easily than in 1896, making inroads in the silver West.\nLegacy.\nBryan's speech is considered one of the most powerful political addresses in American history. Stanley Jones, however, suggested that even if Bryan had never delivered it, he would still have been nominated. Jones deemed the Democrats likely to nominate a candidate who would appeal to the Populist Party, and Bryan had been elected to Congress with Populist support. According to rhetorical historian William Harpine in his study of the rhetoric of the 1896 campaign, \"Bryan's speech cast a net for the true believers, but only for the true believers.\" Harpine suggested that, \"by appealing in such an uncompromising way to the agrarian elements and to the West, Bryan neglected the national audience who would vote in the November election\". Bryan's emphasis on agrarian issues, both in his speech and in his candidacy, may have helped cement voting patterns which kept the Democrats largely out of power until the 1930s.\nWriter Edgar Lee Masters called the speech, \"the beginning of a changed America.\" Bryan's words gave rise to later economic and political philosophies, including Huey Long's 1930s Share Our Wealth program, with its trigger phrase, \"Every Man a King\" inspired by Bryan's speech. Author and political commentator William Safire, in his political dictionary, traced the term \"trickle-down economics\" (common in the Reagan era) to Bryan's statement that some believe that government should legislate for the wealthy, and allow prosperity to \"leak through\" on those below. Historian R. Hal Williams suggested that the opposite philosophy, of legislation for the masses leading to prosperity for all, advocated by Bryan in his speech, informed the domestic policies of later Democratic presidents, including Franklin Roosevelt with his New Deal.\nBensel ties the delegates' response to Bryan's address to their uncertainty in their own beliefs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In a very real sense, adoption of the silver plank in the platform was akin to a millennial expectation that the \"laws of economics\" would henceforth be suspended and that the silver men could simply \"will\" that silver and gold would, in fact, trade on financial markets at a ratio of sixteen to one. The silver men were thus in the hunt for a charismatic leader who would underpin what they already desperately wanted to believe. They manufactured that leader in the convention, a fabrication in which Bryan was only too happy to assist.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38727", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38727", "title": "1027", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1027 (MXXVII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38728", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38728", "title": "1029", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1029 (MXXIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38729", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38729", "title": "1024", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1024 (MXXIV) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38730", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38730", "title": "1023", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1023 (MXXIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38731", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38731", "title": "1022", "text": "Calendar year\nThe year 1022 (MXXII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38732", "revid": "50517215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38732", "title": "1021", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1021 (MXXI) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38733", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38733", "title": "1020", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1020 (MXX) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38737", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38737", "title": "Cosmos", "text": "Universe as a complex and orderly system or entity\nThe cosmos (, ; ) is an alternative name for the universe or its nature or order. Usage of the word \"cosmos\" implies viewing the universe as a complex and orderly system or entity.\nThe cosmos is studied in cosmology\u00a0\u2013 a broad discipline covering scientific, religious or philosophical aspects of the cosmos and its nature. Religious and philosophical approaches may include the cosmos among spiritual entities or other matters deemed to exist outside the physical universe.\nEtymology.\nThe verb meant generally 'to dispose, prepare', but especially 'to order and arrange' (troops for battle), 'to set (an army) in array'; also 'to establish' (a government or regime), 'to adorn, dress' (especially of women). Thus meant 'ornaments, decoration' (compare 'dressing the hair' and the English word \"cosmetic\"). The philosopher Pythagoras used the term for the order of the universe. Anaxagoras further introduced the concept of a Cosmic Mind (\"nous\") ordering all things.\nHistory.\nAncient Greek religion.\nThe 1870 book \"Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology\" noted\nThales dogma that water is the origin of things, that is, that it is that out of which every thing arises, and into which every thing resolves itself, Thales may have followed Orphic cosmogonies, while, unlike them, he sought to establish the truth of the assertion. Hence, Aristotle, immediately after he has called him the originator of philosophy brings forward the reasons which Thales was believed to have adduced in confirmation of that assertion; for that no written development of it, or indeed any book by \"Thales\", was extant, is proved by the expressions which Aristotle uses when he brings forward the doctrines and proofs of the Milesian. (p. 1016)\nPlato, describes the idea of the good, or the Godhead, sometimes \"teleologically\", as the ultimate purpose of all conditioned existence; sometimes \"cosmologically\", as the ultimate operative cause; and has begun to develop the \"cosmological\", as also the physico-theological proof for the being of God; but has referred both back to the idea of the Good, as the necessary presupposition to all other ideas, and the cognition of them. (p. 402)\nThe book \"The Works of Aristotle\" (1908, p.\u00a080 \"Fragments\") mentioned\nAristotle says the poet \"Orpheus\" never existed; the Pythagoreans ascribe this Orphic poem to a certain \"Cercon\" (see Cercops).\nBertrand Russell (1947) noted\nThe Orphics were an ascetic sect; wine, to them, was only a symbol, as, later, in the Christian sacrament. The intoxication that they sought was that of \"enthusiasm,\" of union with the god. They believed themselves, in this way, to acquire mystic knowledge not obtainable by ordinary means. This mystical element entered into Greek philosophy with Pythagoras, who was a reformer of Orphism as Orpheus was a reformer of the religion of Dionysus. From Pythagoras Orphic elements entered into the philosophy of Plato, and from Plato into most later philosophy that was in any degree religious.\nAnaximander.\nAnaximander was a pre-Socratic Greek philosopher who is widely referred to as the \"father of astronomy\" and even as the \"father of cosmology\" as a result of his works to explain the origin and makeup of the physical universe. He is regarded as the most important of the Ionian philosophers, and was a pupil of Thales. Traditionally, details of his life and opinions are perpetuated not only by Aristotle and Theophrastos, but also by a great number of secondary authors. He lived throughout the fifth and fourth centuries, BCE, and was most likely the first philosopher to try to rationalize the system of the Earth, Sun, and Moon by the use of geometry and mathematics. Anaximander was also said to have created the first map of the world, however, like much of the rest of his works, this has been lost since his time. There is, however, documentation of Anaximander being responsible for the conception of the first mechanical model of the world, which is outlined by a geocentric model. He postulated that the Earth was at the center of the universe, and that its shape was convex and cylindrical, with life existing on one of the two flat sides. Beyond the Earth, sits the other planets, which Anaximander also details the order of. Next are the fixed stars, which he regarded as wheel-like condensations of air filled with fire, provided at certain places with openings through which flames are discharged. Anaximander places the Moon beyond these stars, and assumed it to also be wheel-like in shape, being nineteen times the size of Earth. Finally, on the top of the universe is the Sun, which interacts with the Moon, and the relationship between them is described in terms of aperture, in which a stoppage in would lead to eclipses.\nIn this model, the Sun is a ring, 28 times the size of the Earth, with a hollow rim, filled with fire, which at a certain place is seen through an aperture as in a pair of bellows. He also postulated regarding the formation of thunder and lightning, maintaining that they are caused by the wind becoming compressed inside a thick cloud and suddenly breaking through, causing the loud sound to be heard as the cloud is bursting. He claimed the fissure then looked like a spark because of the contrast with the dark cloud. Anaximander's model set a precedent for succeeding theories, including Copernicus's system, with the major change being the shift away from the geocentric model and towards the heliocentric model of the universe. The explained model, although accredited to Anaximander, did necessarily take from ideas originated in foreign cultures, such as the astronomical wheels which are known from Persian cosmology. But even without detailed commentary, these elements of the Anaximander tradition give a strong impression of an original and courageous thinker making conscious efforts towards producing a rational explanation of fundamental physical principles, the nature and motion of heavenly bodies, the shape of Earth, its place in the universe, etc.\nEarly views of cosmos.\nEastern and Western thought differed greatly in their understanding of space and the organization of the cosmos. The Chinese saw the Cosmos as empty, infinite, and intertwined with the Earth. Western ideas, based on the ancient Greeks' understanding of the cosmos, believed in a multi-planar divided cosmos that was finite and filled with air.\nEuropean view.\nEarly Europeans viewed the cosmos as a divinely created, spatially finite, bifurcated cosmos, divided into sublunary and superlunary realms. Objects above the lunar disc were believed to be stable, with heavenly bodies believed to be made out of a refined substance called \"quintessence\". This was understood to be a crystalline, completely transparent substance that held all of the superlunary spheres in perfect order. After their creation by God, these spheres did not change except for their rotation above the Earth. Objects below the lunar sphere were subject to constant combination, separation, and recombination. This was because they consisted of the chaotic elements of earth, air, fire, and water.\nThe idea of celestial spheres was developed in the cosmological models of Plato, Eudoxus, Aristotle, Ptolemy, Copernicus, and others. They believed in a stable cosmos created by God, where distinct realms were subject to different kinds of order. Some Europeans maintained the Aristotelian view that infinity could only be seen as an attribute of God, with the cosmos being finite. Furthermore, following the Aristotelian view that \"nature abhors a vacuum\", some Europeans believed that the space between the spheres were filled with air. This theory persisted until the Scientific Revolution, when the discovery that the Sun was in the center of the planetary system rocked cosmological understanding to its core. Other theories such as Atomism posited a void of atoms as the fundamental elements of physics, while Stoicism postulated a void allowing for the cosmos to expand and contract in volume through its cycles.\nChinese view.\nThe Chinese had multiple theories of the processes and components of the cosmos. The most popular of these beliefs was the Xuan Ye theory, the astronomical view of the cosmos as an infinite space with floating pieces of condensed vapor. The Chinese believed that the Earth consisted of condensed \"yin\" and the heavens of \"yang\"; and that these properties coexisted in constant relation to each other, with \"yin\" and \"yang\" being used together to explain processes on Earth as well of those relating the Earth in conjunction with the heavens. This idea was described by Joseph Needham as a cosmos that functioned similarly to a complex organism, with discernible patterns in an ever-changing structure. There was both a pattern and a randomness to the cosmos. Because of this, the Chinese believed that earthly phenomena could affect heavenly bodies.\nThe Chinese believed that \"qi\" was the substance of all things in the cosmos and Earth, including inanimate matter, humans, ideas, emotions, celestial bodies and everything that exists or has existed; and that it was \"qi\" condensing that created all the matter within the cosmos. This is relatively consistent with the modern understanding of the congregation of matter through gravitational fields.\nThe Chinese held a belief associated with the Xuan Ye theory, which held space as both empty and infinite. This was inconsistent with the Aristotelian concepts that nature would not contain a vacuum, and that infinity could only be a divine attribute. The idea of the nothingness of space was later recognized as one of the most important discoveries of modern science.\nIndian view.\nThe Indians believed in a cyclic universe related to three other beliefs: (i), time is endless and space has infinite extension; (ii), earth is not the center of the universe; and (iii), laws govern all development, including the creation and destruction of the universe. The Indians believed that there were three types of space, physiological, physical, and infinite space. The infinite space consists of undivided consciousness and everything that is inside and outside. However, finite division of space is where time begins, and the division of time is where all beings were first created. It was believed that there are connections between the physical and the psychological worlds, and an equivalence existed between the outer cosmos and the inner cosmos of the individual. This is expressed in the famous sentence\u00a0\u2013 \"yat pin\u1e0de tad brahm\u1e47\u1e0de\", \u201cas in the body so in the universe\u201d.\nThe ancient Indians mapped out the outer world or the universe at an altar where Yajurveda listed multiples of ten that reached ten million. The numbers used to count to ten million was used as a reference to show the relation of the planets in the universe to Earth, it was not a relevant scale to the entire universe, therefore backing that they believed the universe to be infinite and endless. The Indians calculated the speed of light to be four thousand four hundred and four (4,404) yojanas per nimesa, or about one hundred eighty six thousand (186,000) miles per second. Ancient Indian beliefs also included the belief that the Earth was created after certain stars, these stars include the Sun, Gemini, Aja, and Kurma. Evidence from the Etymological considerations prove this belief and also points towards the discovery of the twin asses, which in western astrology can be found next to the Cancer constellation as Asellus, Borealis, and Asellus Australis.\nThe Indian cyclic model assumes the existence of countless island universes, which go through their own periods of development and destruction. The conception of cyclicity is taken to be recursive. For an early exposition of these astronomical and cosmological ideas, one may read al-B\u012br\u016bn\u012b's classic history of Indian science, composed in 1030 AD, and for an even earlier, popular, view of Indian ideas, one may consult the Vedantic text called the Yoga V\u0101si\u1e63\u1e6dha (YV), which at 32,000 shlokas is one of the longest books in world literature.\nAustralian view.\nAustralian cosmology has a vast and varied history.\nAustralian cosmology beliefs were based around the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people's ideas, also known as Indigenous astronomy, and it was around before the Babylonians, Greeks, and the Renaissance period. They found ways to observe the Moon, stars, and the Sun, this enabled them to create a sense of time. This also allowed them to navigate across the continent, create calendars, and predict the weather. One of the most important constellations in Australia for the Aboriginal people is the Emu. The Emu constellation represents the connection between the earth and the sky, and stories and representations of their constellations were written on some cave walls in Australia. Another indigenous tribe known as the Euahlayi saw the Milky Way as a river and between the two bright sides represented a Galactic Bulge where the two sons of the creator Baiame and the river made a connection from the earth and the sky. The Yolngu people were one of the first to discover how the tide of the ocean works. They discovered the tide had a direct correlation with the Moon. Their reasoning as to why the ocean did not fill up as much as perhaps when the Moon was full versus a crescent moon is because the Moon was not as full either. This contradicts the father of science, Galileo, who said that the tides correlated with the Earth's orbit around the Sun. Multiple indigenous tribes described winter by the Seven Sisters, a group of stars in the sky that provided hunter-gatherers a sort of calendar to indicate whether they should be hunting or gathering, based on the season.\nSimilarities in observation.\nThere is one way that both the Chinese and the Europeans, along with countless other ancient societies, related to the cosmos. This was through meaning, placed on celestial bodies, that were observed moving above the Earth. The Chinese had a very complex astronomical understanding of the stars and the cosmos that influenced everything from their art and architecture to their myths and science. This was also true of the Greeks and Romans, whose 48 constellations, including the zodiac signs and the constellation of Orion, have been passed down to modern Western cultures. These were likely passed down to them from ancient Babylonian and Egyptian astronomers. Copernicus is said to have been inspired by the fecund sun deity of neoplatonic thought, which may have initially inspired his vision of a heliocentric universe.\nCopernican Revolution.\nCommonly regarded as the foundation of modern astronomy, the common universal view of the cosmos shifted as Nicolaus Copernicus positioned the Sun as the center of the Universe.\nEarly beliefs.\nPrior to the Copernican Revolution, the Ptolemaic system, also known as the geocentric model, was widely accepted. This put the Earth at the center of the universe, with the Sun and other planets revolving around the Earth in an epicyclic orbit. Aristotle's geocentric model was also broadly acknowledged, along with his claim that the planets rotated but did not orbit. The reasoning behind this was due to the belief that all objects outside of the lunar sphere were celestial bodies, and therefore could not change, as they were made of \"quintessence.\"\nThere were notable critiques of this model prior to Copernicus. In the Islamic world, Ibn al-Haytham doubted Ptolemy's notion of the planetary orbits, and Muhammad al-Battani recalculated the parameters. However, both still agreed with the geocentric model.\nOne of the first known astronomers that supported the Heliocentric theory was Aristarchus of Samos. After observing a lunar eclipse, he came to the conclusion that the Sun was farther away from Earth than the Moon and that the Sun was much larger than Earth. He also claimed the Sun was a star. While Aristarchus was later an influence on Copernicus and his groundbreaking work, prior to the 17th century Aristarchus' findings were obstructed by the more established theories of Ptolemy and Aristotle.\nCopernican theory.\nAstronomer and mathematician Nicolaus Copernicus was appointed by the Catholic Church as an official, as his uncle was a bishop in the church. He used his income to further his studies, eventually studying at the University of Bologna in Italy. Copernicus began doubting the knowledge of natural philosophers and their beliefs, claiming that geometrical astronomy instead would result in the true reality of the cosmos. His manuscript, \"De revolutionibus,\" pioneered ideas that would change the course of how both the cosmos and astrology were viewed. Most notably, Copernicus claimed that the Sun was the stationary center of the universe. His work also included calculations on the motions of the Moon, and the motions in latitude and longitude of the planets, all which orbit the Sun. Copernicus' work was not immediately published as it disagreed with Biblical teachings, and he feared his work would be rejected by Catholic officials.\nNeoplatonism.\nCopernicus' work was not entirely mathematical conviction. There is evidence that Copernicus was influenced by neoplatonism. Founded by philosopher Plotinus, neoplatonism believes that the Sun is the symbol of The One, or The Universal Soul. It would make sense then that Copernicus would place the god-like figure at the center of the universe. Neoplatonist Nicholas of Cusa claimed the universe was infinite, containing multiple earths and suns. This changed the belief of a finite universe to an infinite one, which emphasized a more obscure and incomplete version of God.\nCosmology.\nCosmology is the study of the cosmos, and in its broadest sense covers a variety of very different approaches: scientific, religious and philosophical. All cosmologies have in common an attempt to understand the implicit order within the whole of being. In this way, most religions and philosophical systems have a cosmology.\nWhen \"cosmology\" is used without a qualifier, it often signifies physical cosmology, unless the context makes clear that a different meaning is intended.\nPhysical cosmology.\nPhysical cosmology (often simply described as 'cosmology') is the scientific study of the universe, from the beginning of its physical existence. It includes speculative concepts such as a multiverse, when these are being discussed. In physical cosmology, the term \"cosmos\" is often used in a technical way, referring to a particular spacetime continuum within a (postulated) multiverse. The particular cosmos in which humans live, the observable universe, is generally capitalized as \"the Cosmos\".\nIn physical cosmology, the uncapitalized term cosmic signifies a subject with a relationship to the universe, such as 'cosmic time' (time since the Big Bang), 'cosmic rays' (high energy particles or radiation detected from space), and 'cosmic microwave background' (microwave radiation detectable from all directions in space).\nAccording to in Sir William Smith \"Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology\" (1870, see book screenshot for full quote), Pythagoreans described the universe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt appears, in fact, from this, as well as from the extant fragments, that the first book (from Philolaus) of the work contained a general account of the origin and arrangement of the universe. The second book appears to have been an exposition of the nature of numbers, which in the Pythagorean theory are the essence and source of all things. (p. 305)\nIn September 2023, astrophysicists questioned the overall current view of the universe, in the form of the Standard Model of Cosmology, based on the latest James Webb Space Telescope studies.\nIn October 2023, astronomers proposed a new, more comprehensive, view of the cosmos, and which includes all objects in the universe, and suggested that the universe may have begun with instantons, and may be a black hole.\nPhilosophical cosmology.\nCosmology is a branch of metaphysics that deals with the nature of the universe, a theory or doctrine describing the natural order of the universe. The basic definition of Cosmology is the science of the origin and development of the universe. In modern astronomy, the Big Bang theory is the dominant postulation.\nPhilosophy of cosmology is an expanding discipline, directed to the conceptual foundations of cosmology and the philosophical contemplation of the universe as a totality. It draws on the fundamental theories of physics\u00a0\u2013 thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, quantum mechanics, quantum field theory, and special and general relativity\u00a0\u2013 and on several branches of philosophy\u00a0\u2013 philosophy of physics, philosophy of science, metaphysics, philosophy of mathematics, and epistemology.\nReligious cosmology.\nIn theology, the cosmos is the created heavenly bodies (Sun, Moon, wandering stars, and fixed stars). The concept of cosmos as the created universe and its arrangement has been important in Christendom since its very inception, as it is heavily used in the New Testament and occurs over 180 times. In Christian theology, the word is sometimes used synonymously with \"aion\" to refer to \"worldly life\" or \"this world\" or \"this age\" as opposed to the afterlife or world to come, although \"aion/aeon\" is also at times used in a more other-worldly sense as the eternal plane of the divine.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38738", "revid": "42", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38738", "title": "Oskar I of Sweden", "text": ""}
{"id": "38739", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38739", "title": "Karl XV of Sweden", "text": ""}
{"id": "38740", "revid": "6098631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38740", "title": "Louis I of Hungary", "text": "King of Hungary and Croatia from 1342 to 1382\nLouis I, also known as Louis the Great (; ; ) or Louis the Hungarian (; 5 March 1326\u00a0\u2013 10 September 1382), was King of Hungary and Croatia from 1342 and King of Poland from 1370 until his death in 1382. He was the first child of Charles I of Hungary and his wife, Elizabeth of Poland, to survive infancy. A 1338 treaty between his father and Casimir III of Poland, Louis's maternal uncle, confirmed Louis's right to inherit the Kingdom of Poland if his uncle died without a son. In exchange, Louis was obliged to assist his uncle to reoccupy the lands that Poland had lost in previous decades. He bore the title Duke of Transylvania between 1339 and 1342 but did not administer the province.\nLouis was of age when he succeeded his father in 1342, but his deeply religious mother exerted a powerful influence on him. He inherited a centralized kingdom and a rich treasury from his father. During the first years of his reign, Louis launched a crusade against the Lithuanians and restored royal power in Croatia; his troops defeated a Tatar army, expanding his authority towards the Black Sea. When his brother, Andrew, Duke of Calabria, husband of Queen Joanna I of Naples, was assassinated in 1345, Louis accused the queen of his murder and punishing her became the principal goal of his foreign policy. He launched two campaigns to the Kingdom of Naples between 1347 and 1350. His troops occupied large territories on both occasions, and Louis adopted the styles of Neapolitan sovereigns (including the title of King of Sicily and Jerusalem), but the Holy See never recognized his claim. Louis's arbitrary acts and atrocities committed by his mercenaries made his rule unpopular in Southern Italy. He withdrew all his troops from the Kingdom of Naples in 1351.\nLike his father, Louis administered Hungary with absolute power and used royal prerogatives to grant privileges to his courtiers. However, he also confirmed the liberties of the Hungarian nobility at the Diet of 1351, emphasizing the equal status of all noblemen. At the same Diet, he introduced an entail system and a uniform rent payable by the peasants to the landowners, and confirmed the right to free movement for all peasants. He waged wars against the Lithuanians, Serbia, and the Golden Horde in the 1350s, restoring the authority of Hungarian monarchs over territories along frontiers that had been lost during previous decades. He forced the Republic of Venice to renounce the Dalmatian towns in 1358. He also made several attempts to expand his suzerainty over the rulers of Bosnia, Moldavia, Wallachia, and parts of Bulgaria and Serbia. These rulers were sometimes willing to yield to him, either under duress or in the hope of support against their internal opponents, but Louis's rule in these regions was only nominal during most of his reign. His attempts to convert his pagan or Orthodox subjects to Catholicism made him unpopular in the Balkan states. Louis established a university in P\u00e9cs in 1367, but it was closed within two decades because he did not arrange for sufficient revenues to maintain it.\nLouis inherited Poland after his uncle's death in 1370. Since he had no sons, he wanted his subjects to acknowledge the right of his daughters to succeed him in both Hungary and Poland. For this purpose, he issued the Privilege of Koszyce (now Ko\u0161ice in Slovakia) in 1374 spelling out the liberties of Polish noblemen. However, his rule remained unpopular in Poland. In Hungary, he authorized the royal free cities to delegate jurors to the high court hearing their cases and set up a new high court. Suffering from a skin disease, Louis became even more religious during the last years of his life. At the beginning of the Western Schism, he acknowledged Urban VI as the legitimate pope. After Urban deposed Joanna and put Louis's relative Charles of Durazzo on the throne of Naples, Louis helped Charles occupy the kingdom. In Hungarian historiography, Louis was regarded for centuries as the most powerful Hungarian monarch who ruled over an empire \"whose shores were washed by three seas\".\nChildhood and youth (1326\u20131342).\nBorn on 5 March 1326, Louis was the third son of Charles I of Hungary and his wife, Elizabeth of Poland. He was named for his father's uncle, Louis, Bishop of Toulouse, canonized in 1317. The first-born son of his parents, Charles, died before Louis was born. Louis became his father's heir after the death of his brother Ladislaus in 1329.\nHe had a liberal education by the standards of his age and learned French, German and Latin. He showed a special interest in history and astrology. A cleric from Wroc\u0142aw, Nicholas, taught him the basic principles of Christian faith. However, Louis's religious zeal was due to his mother's influence. In a royal charter, Louis remembered that in his childhood, a knight of the royal court, Peter Poh\u00e1ros, often carried him on his shoulders. His two tutors, Nicholas Drugeth and Nicholas Tapolcs\u00e1nyi, saved the lives of both Louis and his younger brother, Andrew, when Felician Z\u00e1h attempted to assassinate the royal family in Visegr\u00e1d on 17 April 1330.\nLouis was only nine when he stamped a treaty of alliance between his father and John of Bohemia. A year later, Louis accompanied his father in invading Austria. On 1 March 1338, John of Bohemia's son and heir, Charles, Margrave of Moravia, signed a new treaty with Charles I of Hungary and Louis in Visegr\u00e1d. According to the treaty, Charles of Moravia acknowledged the right of Charles I's sons to succeed their maternal uncle, Casimir III of Poland, if Casimir died without a male issue. Louis also pledged that he would marry the margrave's three-year-old daughter, Margaret.\nCasimir III's first wife, Aldona of Lithuania, died on 26 May 1339. Two leading Polish noblemen\u00a0\u2013 Zbigniew, chancellor of Krak\u00f3w, and Spycimir Leliwita\u00a0\u2013 persuaded Casimir, who had not fathered a son, to make his sister, Elizabeth, and her offspring his heirs. According to the 15th-century Jan D\u0142ugosz, Casimir held a general sejm in Krak\u00f3w where \"the assembled prelates and nobles\" proclaimed Louis as Casimir's heir, but the reference to the sejm is anachronistic. Historian Paul W. Knoll writes that Casimir preferred his sister's family to his own daughters or a member of a cadet branch of the Piast dynasty, because he wanted to ensure the king of Hungary's support against the Teutonic Knights. Louis's father and uncle signed a treaty in Visegr\u00e1d in July whereby Casimir III made Louis his heir if he died without a son. In exchange, Charles I pledged that Louis would reoccupy Pomerania and other Polish lands lost to the Teutonic Order without Polish funds and would only employ Poles in the royal administration in Poland.\nLouis received the title of Duke of Transylvania from his father in 1339, but he did not administer the province. According to a royal charter from the same year, Louis's bride, Margaret of Bohemia, lived in the Hungarian royal court. Louis's separate ducal court was first mentioned in a royal charter of 1340.\nReign.\nFirst years (1342\u20131345).\nCharles I died on 16 July 1342. Five days later, Csan\u00e1d Telegdi, Archbishop of Esztergom, crowned Louis king with the Holy Crown of Hungary in Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r. Although Louis had attained the age of majority, his mother Elizabeth \"acted as a sort of co-regent\" for decades, because she exerted a powerful influence on him. Louis inherited a rich treasury from his father, who had strengthened royal authority and ruled without holding Diets during the last decades of his reign.\nLouis introduced a new system of land grants, excluding the grantee's brothers and other kinsmen from the donation in contrast with customary law: such estates escheated to the Crown if the grantee's last male descendants died. On the other hand, Louis often \"promoted a daughter to a son\", that is authorized a daughter to inherit her father's estates, although customary law prescribed that the landed property of a deceased nobleman who had no sons was to be inherited by his kinsmen. Louis often granted this privilege to the wives of his favorites. Louis also frequently authorized landowners to apply capital punishment in their estates, limiting the authority of the magistrates of the counties.\nWilliam Drugeth, an influential advisor of Louis's late father, died in September 1342. He bequeathed his landed property to his brother, Nicholas, but Louis confiscated those estates. In late autumn, Louis dismissed his father's Voivode of Transylvania, Thomas Sz\u00e9cs\u00e9nyi, although Sz\u00e9cs\u00e9nyi's wife was a distant cousin of the queen mother. Louis especially favored the Lackfis: eight members of the family held high offices during his reign. Andrew Lackfi was the commander of the royal army during the first war of Louis's reign. In late 1342 or early 1343, he invaded Serbia and restored the Banate of Macs\u00f3, which had been lost during his father's reign.\nRobert the Wise, King of Naples, died on 20 January 1343. In his testament, he declared his granddaughter, Joanna I, his sole heir, excluding Louis's younger brother, Andrew, Joanna's husband, from becoming co-ruler. Louis and his mother regarded this as an infringement of a previous agreement between the late kings of Naples and Hungary. He visited his bride's father, Charles of Moravia, in Prague to persuade him to intervene on Andrew's behalf with Charles's former tutor, Pope Clement VI, the overlord of the Kingdom of Naples. Louis also sent envoys to his Neapolitan relatives and the high officials of the kingdom, urging them to promote his brother's interests. Their mother, Elizabeth, left for Naples in the summer, taking with her almost the whole royal treasure, including more than of silver and of gold. During her seven-month-long stay in Italy, she was only able to persuade her daughter-in-law and the pope to promise that Andrew would be crowned as Joanna's husband.\nAccording to the nearly contemporaneous chronicle of John of K\u00fck\u00fcll\u0151, Louis launched his first campaign against a group of Transylvanian Saxons, who had refused to pay taxes, and forced them to yield in the summer of 1344. During his stay in Transylvania, Nicholas Alexander\u00a0\u2013 who was the son of Basarab, the ruling prince of Wallachia\u00a0\u2013 swore loyalty to Louis on his father's behalf in Brass\u00f3 (now Bra\u0219ov in Romania); thus the suzerainty of the Hungarian monarchs over Wallachia was, at least outwardly, restored.\nLouis joined a crusade against the pagan Lithuanians in December 1344. The crusaders\u00a0\u2013 including John of Bohemia, Charles of Moravia, Peter of Bourbon, and William of Hainaut and Holland\u00a0\u2013 laid siege to Vilnius. However, a Lithuanian invasion of the lands of the Teutonic Knights forced them to lift the siege. Louis returned to Hungary in late February 1345. He dispatched Andrew Lackfi, Count of the Sz\u00e9kelys, to invade the lands of the Golden Horde in retaliation for the Tatars' earlier plundering raids against Transylvania and the Szepess\u00e9g (now Spi\u0161 in Slovakia). Lackfi and his army of mainly Sz\u00e9kely warriors inflicted a defeat on a large Tatar army on 2 February 1345. Hungarian warriors were victorious in their campaign, decapitating the local Tatar leader, the brother-in-law of the Khan, Atlam\u00ef\u015f, and making the Tatars flee toward the coastal area. The Golden Horde was pushed back behind the Dniester River, thereafter the Golden Horde's control of the lands between the Eastern Carpathians and the Black Sea weakened. A conflict between Louis's uncle and father-in-law (Casimir III of Poland and Charles of Moravia) led to a war between Poland and Bohemia in April. In this war Louis supported his uncle with reinforcements in accordance with the agreement of 1339.\nWhile Louis's armies were fighting in Poland and against the Tatars, Louis marched to Croatia in June 1345 and besieged Knin, the former seat of the late Ivan Nelipac, who had successfully resisted Louis's father, forcing his widow and son to surrender. The counts of Corbavia and other Croatian noblemen also yielded to him during his stay in Croatia. The citizens of Zadar rebelled against the Republic of Venice and accepted his suzerainty. Louis meanwhile returned to Visegr\u00e1d. He dispatched Stephen II, Ban of Bosnia, to assist the burghers of Zadar, but the ban did not fight against the Venetians.\nNeapolitan campaigns (1345\u20131350).\nLouis's brother Andrew was murdered in Aversa on 18 September 1345. Louis and his mother accused Queen Joanna I, Prince Robert of Taranto, Duke Charles of Durazzo, and other members of the Neapolitan branches of the Capetian House of Anjou of plotting against Andrew. In his letter of 15 January 1346 to Pope Clement VI, Louis demanded that the pope dethrone the \"husband-killer\" queen in favor of Charles Martel, her infant son by Andrew. Louis also laid claim to the regency of the kingdom during the minority of his nephew, referring to his patrilinear descent from the first-born son of Robert the Wise's father, Charles II of Naples. He even promised to increase the amount of yearly tribute that the kings of Naples would pay to the Holy See. After the pope failed to fully investigate Andrew's murder, Louis decided to invade southern Italy. In preparation for the invasion, he sent his envoys to Ancona and other Italian towns before summer 1346.\nWhile his envoys negotiated in Italy, Louis marched to Dalmatia to relieve Zadar, but the Venetians bribed his commanders. When the citizens broke out and attacked the besiegers on 1 July, the royal army failed to intervene, and the Venetians overcame the defenders outside the walls of the town. Louis withdrew but refused to renounce Dalmatia, although the Venetians offered to pay 320,000 golden florins as compensation. Lacking military support from Louis, however, Zadar surrendered to the Venetians on 21 December 1346.\nLouis sent small expeditions one after one to Italy at the beginning of his war against Joanna, because he did not want to harass the Italians who had suffered from a famine the previous year. His first troops departed under the command of Nicholas V\u00e1s\u00e1ri, Bishop of Nyitra (now Nitra in Slovakia), on 24 April 1347. Louis also hired German mercenaries. He departed from Visegr\u00e1d on 11 November. After marching through Udine, Verona, Modena, Bologna, Urbino, and Perugia, he entered the Kingdom of Naples on 24 December near L'Aquila, which had yielded to him.\nQueen Joanna remarried, wedding a cousin, Louis of Taranto, and fled for Marseille on 11 January 1348. Their other relatives, Robert of Taranto and Charles of Durazzo, visited Louis in Aversa to yield to him. Louis received them amicably and convinced them to persuade their brothers, Philip of Taranto and Louis of Durazzo, to join them. After their arrival, King Louis's \"smile was replaced by the harshest expression as he unveiled with terrible words the true feelings he had for the princes and that he had kept hidden until then\", according to the contemporaneous Domenico da Gravina. He repeated his former accusations, blamed his kinsmen for his brother's murder, and had them captured on 22 January. The next day Charles of Durazzo\u00a0\u2013 the husband of Joanna I's sister, Mary\u00a0\u2013 was beheaded upon Louis's orders. The other princes were kept captive and sent to Hungary, together with Louis's infant nephew, Charles Martel.\nLouis marched to Naples in February. The citizens offered him a ceremonious entry, but he refused, threatening to let his soldiers sack the town if they did not raise the taxes. He adopted the traditional titles of the kings of Naples\u00a0\u2013 \"King of Sicily and Jerusalem, Duke of Apulia and Prince of Capua\"\u00a0\u2013 and administered the kingdom from the Castel Nuovo, garrisoning his mercenaries in the most important forts. He used unusually brutal methods of investigation to capture all accomplices in the death of his brother, according to Domenico da Gravina. Most local noble families (including the Balzos and the Sanseverinos) refused to cooperate with him. The pope refused to confirm Louis's rule in Naples, which would have united two powerful kingdoms under Louis's rule. The pope and the cardinals declared Queen Joanna innocent of her husband's murder at a formal meeting of the College of Cardinals.\nThe arrival of the Black Death forced Louis to leave Italy in May. He made Ulrich Wolfhardt governor of Naples, but his mercenaries did not hinder Joanna I and her husband from returning in September. Louis, who had signed a truce for eight years with Venice on 5 August, sent new troops to Naples under the command of Stephen Lackfi, Voivode of Transylvania, in late 1349. Lackfi reoccupied Capua, Aversa and other forts that had been lost to Joanna I, but a mutiny among his German mercenaries forced him to return to Hungary. The Black Death had meanwhile reached Hungary. The first wave of the epidemic ended in June, but it returned in September, killing Louis's first wife, Margaret. Louis also fell ill, but survived the plague. Although the Black Death was less devastating in the sparsely populated Hungary than in other parts of Europe, there were regions that became depopulated in 1349, and the demand for work force increased in the subsequent years.\nLouis proposed to renounce the Kingdom of Naples if Clement dethroned Joanna. After the pope refused, Louis departed for his second Neapolitan campaign in April 1350. He suppressed a mutiny that occurred among his mercenaries while he and his troops were waiting for the arrival of further troops in Barletta. While marching towards Naples, he faced resistance at many towns because his vanguards, which were under the command of Stephen Lackfi, had become notorious for their cruelty.\nDuring the campaign, Louis personally led assaults and climbed city walls together with his soldiers, endangering his own life. While besieging Canosa di Puglia, Louis fell into the moat from a ladder when a defender of the fort hit him with a stone. He dove into a river without hesitation to save a young soldier who was swept away while exploring a ford upon his order. An arrow pierced Louis's left leg during the siege of Aversa. After the fall of Aversa to Hungarian troops on 3 August, Queen Joanna and her husband again fled from Naples. However, Louis decided to return to Hungary. According to the contemporaneous historian Matteo Villani, Louis attempted to \"leave the kingdom without losing face\" after he had run out of money and experienced the resistance of the local population.\nTo celebrate the Jubilee of 1350, Louis visited Rome during his journey back to Hungary. He arrived in Buda on 25 October 1350. With the mediation of the Holy See, the envoys of Louis and Queen Joanna's husband, Louis of Taranto, signed a truce for six months. The pope promised Louis that the queen's role in her husband's murder would again be investigated, and he ordered her to pay 300,000 gold florins as a ransom for the imprisoned Neapolitan princes.\nExpansion (1350\u20131358).\nCasimir III of Poland urged Louis to intervene in his war with the Lithuanians who had occupied Brest, Volodymyr-Volynskyi, and other important towns in Halych and Lodomeria in the previous years. The two monarchs agreed that Halych and Lodomeria would be integrated into the Kingdom of Hungary after Casimir's death. Casimir also authorized Louis to redeem the two realms for 100,000 florins if Casimir fathered a son. Louis led his army to Krak\u00f3w in June 1351. Because Casimir fell ill, Louis became the sole commander of the united Polish and Hungarian army. He invaded the lands of the Lithuanian prince, K\u0119stutis, in July. K\u0119stutis seemingly accepted Louis's suzerainty on 15 August and agreed to be baptised, along with his brothers, in Buda. However, K\u0119stutis did nothing to fulfill his promises after Polish and Hungarian troops were withdrawn. In an attempt to capture K\u0119stutis, Louis returned, but he could not defeat the Lithuanians, who even killed one of his allies, Boleslaus III of P\u0142ock, in battle. Louis returned to Buda before 13 September. A papal legate visited Louis to persuade him to wage war against Stefan Du\u0161an, Emperor of the Serbs, who had forced his Roman Catholic subjects to be re-baptised and join the Serbian Orthodox Church.\nTo deal with the grievances of the Hungarian noblemen, Louis held a Diet in late 1351. He confirmed all but one of the provisions of the Golden Bull of 1222, declaring that all noblemen enjoyed the same liberties in his realms. He rejected only the provision that authorized noblemen who died without a son to freely bequeath their estates. Instead, he introduced an entail system, prescribing that the estates of a nobleman who had no male descendants passed to his kinsmen, or if there were no male relatives to the Crown, upon his death. At the same Diet, Louis ordered that all landowners were to collect the \"ninth\", that is one tenth of specified agricultural products, from the peasants who held plots on their estates. On the other hand, he confirmed the right of all peasants to freely move to another landowner's estates.\nThe \"general accord\" between Louis and the royal couple of Naples \"was accepted by both sides\" during 1351, according to the contemporaneous Niccol\u00f2 Acciaioli. Joanna I and her husband returned to the Kingdom of Naples and Louis's troops were withdrawn. Louis even renounced the ransom that Joanna I had promised to pay for the liberation of the imprisoned Neapolitan princes, stating that he had not gone to \"war for greed, but to avenge the death of his brother\". Louis continued to use the titles of his grandfather, Charles Martel of Anjou (the firstborn son of Charles II of Naples), styling himself as \"Prince of Salerno and lord of Monte Sant'Angelo\".\nCasimir III laid siege to Belz and Louis joined his uncle in March 1352. During the siege, which ended without the surrender of the fort, Louis was heavily injured in his head. Algirdas, Grand Duke of Lithuania, hired Tatar mercenaries who stormed into Podolia, Louis returned to Hungary because he feared a Tatar invasion of Transylvania. Pope Clement proclaimed a crusade against the Lithuanians and the Tatars in May, authorizing Louis to collect a tithe from Church revenues during the next four years. The pope stated that he had never \"granted a tenth of such duration\", emphasizing the link between his magnanimity and the release of the imprisoned Neapolitan princes. The pope also authorized Louis to seize the pagans' and schismatics' lands bordering on his kingdom.\nAlthough Louis signed an alliance with the Republic of Genoa in October 1352, he did not intervene in the Genoese\u2013Venetian War, because his truce of 1349 with Venice was still in force. Louis married Elizabeth of Bosnia, who was the daughter of his vassal, Stephen II, in 1353. Historian Gyula Krist\u00f3 says that this marriage showed Louis's renewed interest in the affairs of the Balkan Peninsula. While he was hunting in Z\u00f3lyom County (now in Slovakia) in late November 1353, a brown bear attacked him, inflicting 24 wounds on his legs. Louis's life was saved by a knight of the court, John Beseny\u0151, who killed the beast with his sword.\nAccording to Matteo Villani, Louis launched an expedition against the Golden Horde at the head of an army of 200,000 horsemen in April 1354. The young Tatar ruler, whom historian Iv\u00e1n Bert\u00e9nyi identified as Jani Beg, did not want to wage war against Hungary and agreed to sign a peace treaty. Although no other primary source mentioned that campaign and treaty, the Tatars made no plundering raids in Transylvania after 1354, which suggests that Villani's report is reliable. In the same year, Louis invaded Serbia, Stefan Du\u0161an successfully repelled the invasion, preserving, or even extending his original borders in the north. Under pressure, Du\u0161an initiated negotiations with the Holy See for acknowledgement of the popes' primacy. Peace with Du\u0161an was concluded in May 1355. The following year, Louis sent reinforcements to Casimir III to fight against the Lithuanians, and Hungarian troops supported Albert II, Duke of Austria, against Z\u00fcrich. The Venetian delegates offered Louis 6\u20137,000 golden ducats as a compensation for Dalmatia, but Louis refused to give up his plan to reconquer the province. He signed an alliance with Albert II of Austria and Nicolaus of Luxemburg, Patriarch of Aquileia, against Venice. Upon his order, Croatian lords besieged and captured Klis, a Dalmatian fortress that Stefan Du\u0161an's sister, Jelena, had inherited from her husband, Mladen \u0160ubi\u0107.\nIn summer 1356, Louis invaded Venetian territories without a formal declaration of war. He laid siege to Treviso on 27 July. A local nobleman, Giuliano Baldachino, noticed that Louis sat alone while writing his letters on the banks of Sile River on each morning. Baldachino proposed the Venetians to assassinate him in exchange for 12,000 golden florins and Castelfranco Veneto, but they refused his offer because he did not share the details of his plans with them. Louis returned to Buda in the autumn, but his troops continued the siege. Pope Innocent VI urged the Venetians to make a peace with Hungary. The pope made Louis the \"standard-bearer of the Church\" and granted him a three-year tithe to fight against Francesco II Ordelaffi and other rebellious lords in the Papal States. Louis sent an army under Nicholas Lackfi's command to support the pope's troops in Italy.\nLouis marched to Dalmatia in July 1357. Split, Trogir, and \u0160ibenik soon got rid of Venetian governors and yielded to Louis. After a short siege, Louis's army also captured Zadar with the assistance of its townspeople. Tvrtko I of Bosnia, who had succeeded Louis's father-in-law in 1353, surrendered western Hum to Louis, who claimed that territory as his wife's dowry. In the Treaty of Zadar, which was signed on 18 February 1358, the Republic of Venice renounced all Dalmatian towns and islands between the Gulf of Kvarner and Durazzo in favor of Louis. The Republic of Ragusa also accepted Louis's suzerainty. The Dalmatian towns remained self-governing communities, owing only a yearly tribute and naval service to Louis, who also abolished all commercial restrictions that had been introduced during the Venetians' rule. The merchants of Ragusa were explicitly entitled to freely trade in Serbia even during a war between Hungary and Serbia.\nWars in the Balkans (1358\u20131370).\nSerbia started to disintegrate after the death of Stefan Du\u0161an. According to Matteo Villani, an unidentified Serbian lord sought Hungarian assistance against his more powerful (and also unnamed) enemy in the late 1350s. Historians John V. A. Fine and P\u00e1l Engel write that the Serbian lord was a member of the Rastislali\u0107 family; Gyula Krist\u00f3 and Iv\u00e1n Bert\u00e9nyi identify him as Lazar Hrebeljanovi\u0107. Royal charters of 1358 show that Hungarian troops fought in Serbia in October 1358. The next summer Louis also marched to Serbia, but Stefan Uro\u0161 V of Serbia avoided battle.\nLouis and the royal army stayed in Transylvania in November 1359 and January 1360, implying that he planned a military expedition against Wallachia or another neighboring territory. A charter of 1360 said that a Romanian voivode, Drago\u0219 of Giule\u0219ti, restored Louis's suzerainty in Moldavia after a rebellion of local Romanians. According to most Moldavian chronicles, Drago\u0219, who is sometimes identified with Drago\u0219 of Giule\u0219ti and sometimes as Drago\u0219 of Bedeu, departed \"from the Hungarian country, from Maramure\u0219\" at the head of his retinue, crossed the Carpathian Mountains while chasing an aurochs and settled in the valley of the Moldova River in 1359. The same chronicles presented this \"dismounting\" by Drago\u0219 as a decisive step towards the development of the Principality of Moldavia. Another Romanian voivode, Bogdan, who had rebelled against Louis and plundered the estates of the Romanian landowners loyal to the king already in the 1340s, departed from Hungary and invaded Moldavia in the early 1360s. Bogdan expelled the descendants of Louis's vassal, Drago\u0219, from the principality. According to John of K\u00fck\u00fcll\u0151, Louis launched several expeditions against Bogdan, but their dates cannot be determined. Bogdan ruled Moldavia as an independent prince.\nUpon the pope's request, Louis sent Hungarian troops to relieve Bologna, which was besieged by Bernab\u00f2 Visconti's troops. After Visconti lifted the siege, Louis's mercenaries pillaged the region and refused to cooperate with the papal legate; Louis had the commander of the army imprisoned. After a conflict emerged between Emperor Charles IV and Rudolf IV, Duke of Austria, rumors spread about a conspiracy to dethrone the emperor in favor of Louis or Rudolf. Charles IV, Rudolf IV and Louis met in Nagyszombat (now Trnava in Slovakia) in May. The emperor and the duke mutually surrendered their claims to the other party's realms. Louis also persuaded the emperor to renounce his suzerainty over the Duchy of P\u0142ock in Poland.\nLouis decided to convert the Jews in Hungary to Catholicism around 1360. After experiencing resistance, he expelled them from his realms. Their immovable property was confiscated, but they were allowed to take their personal property with them and also to recover the loans they had made. No pogrom took place, which was unusual in Europe in the 14th century, according to historian Raphael Patai.\nEmperor Charles IV and Rudolf IV of Austria signed a treaty of alliance against the patriarch of Aquileia, who was Louis's ally, in August 1361. Fearing the formation of a coalition along the western borders of Hungary, Louis asked his former enemy, Louis of Taranto (Joanna I's husband), to send at least one of his brothers to Buda, and mediated a reconciliation between Rudolph IV and the patriarch. At a meeting with Louis's envoys in Prague, Emperor Charles made an insulting remark about Louis's mother, stating that she \"was shameless\", according to Jan D\u0142ugosz's chronicle. Louis demanded an apology, but the emperor did not answer.\nIn preparation for a war against Bohemia, Louis ordered the mobilization of the royal army and marched to Trencs\u00e9n (now Tren\u010d\u00edn in Slovakia). However, his supposed allies (Rudolf IV of Austria, Meinhard III of Tyrol and Casimir III of Poland) failed to join him, and the emperor initiated negotiations that lasted for months with the mediation of Casimir III. Louis was finally reconciled with Charles IV at their meeting in Uhersk\u00e9 Hradi\u0161t\u011b on 8 May 1363.\nLouis invaded Bosnia from two directions in the spring of 1363. An army under the command of Palatine Nicholas Kont and Nicholas Ap\u00e1ti, Archbishop of Esztergom, laid siege to Srebrenica, but the fortress did not surrender. As the royal seal was stolen during the siege, a new seal was made and all Louis's former charters were to be confirmed with the new seal. The army under Louis's personal command besieged Sokolac in July, but could not capture it. Hungarian troops returned to Hungary in the same month. Pope Urban V proclaimed a crusade against the Muslim powers of the Mediterraneum upon Peter I of Cyprus's request on 31 March 1363. Urban V urged Louis to join the crusade, emphasizing that he was a powerful monarch, a devout Christian, and \"well-placed to help\". The next month the pope levied a three-year tithe on the church revenues in Hungary and asked Louis to support the papal officials to collect the tax. However, Louis made every effort to hinder the activities of the papal tax collectors, stating that he needed resources to cover the costs of his future wars against the infidels and the pope's enemies in Italy.\nLouis signed a treaty with Emperor Charles and Rudolf IV of Austria in Brno in early 1364, which put an end to their conflicts. In September, Louis visited Krak\u00f3w to attend the large congress where Peter I of Cyprus attempted to persuade a dozen European monarchs to join the crusade. Louis was the only monarch to promise assistance, but later failed to fulfill his promise. At the congress, Casimir III of Poland confirmed Louis's right to succeed him in Poland if he died without a male issue. Louis, who had not fathered a son either, invited a distant relative of his, Charles of Durazzo, to Hungary in 1364, but did not make the young prince his official heir. Louis allowed the Jews to return to Hungary in the same year; legal proceedings between the Jews and those who had seized their houses lasted for years.\nLouis assembled his armies in Temesv\u00e1r (now Timi\u0219oara in Romania) in February 1365. According to a royal charter that year, he was planning to invade Wallachia because the new voivode, Vladislav Vlaicu, had refused to obey him. However, he ended up heading a campaign against the Bulgarian Tsardom of Vidin and its ruler Ivan Sratsimir, which suggests that Vladislav Vlaicu had in the meantime yielded to him. Louis seized Vidin and imprisoned Ivan Stratsimir in May or June. Within three months, his troops occupied Ivan Stratsimir's realm, which was organized into a separate border province, or banate, under the command of Hungarian lords.\nThe Byzantine Emperor, John V Palaiologos visited Louis in Buda in early 1366, seeking his assistance against the Ottoman Turks, who had set foot in Europe. This was the first occasion that a Byzantine Emperor left his empire to plead for a foreign monarch's assistance. According to Louis's physician, Giovanni Conversini, at his first meeting with Louis, the emperor refused to dismount and to take off his hat, which offended Louis. John V pledged that he would promote the union of the Byzantine Church with the Papacy, and Louis promised to send him help, but neither the emperor nor Louis fulfilled their promises. Pope Urban encouraged Louis not to send help to Constantinople before the emperor guaranteed the Church union.\nLouis stayed in Transylvania between June and September 1366, implying that he waged war against Moldavia. He issued a decree authorizing the Transylvanian noblemen to pass judgments against \"malefactors belonging to any nation, especially Romanians\". He also decreed that testimony of a Romanian knez who had received a royal charter of grant weighed the same as that of a nobleman. In the same year, Louis granted the Banate of Severin and the district of Fogaras to Vladislav Vlaicu of Wallachia, who had accepted his suzerainty. Tvrtko I of Bosnia also accepted Louis's suzerainty after Hungarian troops assisted him in regaining his throne in early 1367.\nLouis made attempts to convert his pagan or \"schismatic\" subjects to Catholicism, even by force. The conversion of the pagan Cumans who had settled in Hungary a century before was completed during his reign, according to John of K\u00fck\u00fcll\u0151. After the conquest of Vidin, he sent Franciscan friars to the new banate to convert the local Orthodox population, which caused widespread discontent among the Bulgarians. In 1366, he ordered that all Serbian priests be converted and rebaptised. He also decreed that only Roman Catholic noblemen and knezes were allowed to hold landed property in the district of Sebes in Temes County. Louis supported the religious orders, especially the Franciscans and the Paulines, for whom he and his mother set up dozens of new monasteries. Upon Louis's request, Pope Urban V sanctioned the establishment of a university in P\u00e9cs in 1367, with the exception of a faculty of theology. However, Louis did not arrange for sufficient revenues and the university was closed by 1390.\nVladislav Vlaicu of Wallachia made an alliance with Ivan Shishman, a half-brother of the former ruler of Vidin, Ivan Sratsimir. Their united armies imposed a blockade on Vidin. Louis marched to the Lower Danube and ordered Nicholas Lackfi, Voivode of Transylvania, to invade Wallachia in the autumn of 1368. The voivode's army marched through the valley of the Ialomi\u021ba River, but the Wallachians ambushed it and killed many Hungarian soldiers, including the voivode. However, Louis's campaign against Wallachia from the west was successful and Vladislav Vlaicu yield to him in next summer. Upon his initiative, Louis restored Ivan Stratsimir in Vidin. Ivan Stratsimir swore loyalty to Louis and sent his two daughters as hostages to Hungary.\nFrom the late 1360s, Louis suffered from a skin disease with symptoms similar to leprosy. Thereafter he became even more zealous and dedicated more time to praying and religious contemplation. After his meeting with Louis in 1372, the papal legate, John de Cardailhac, stated: \"I call God as my witness that I have never seen a monarch more majestic and more powerful ... or one who desires peace and calm as much as he.\" He also changed the priorities of his foreign policy and began neglecting the Balkan states. Casimir III of Poland and Louis signed a treaty against Emperor Charles IV in Buda in February 1369. At their next meeting in Pressburg (now Bratislava in Slovakia) in September, Albert I of Bavaria, and Rupert I of the Palatinate joined their coalition against the emperor and the Habsburgs. However, Emperor Charles IV persuaded the two Wittelsbachs (Albert I and Rupert I) to break off the coalition in September 1370.\nUnion with Poland and reforms (1370\u20131377).\nCasimir III of Poland died on 5 November 1370. Louis arrived after his uncle's funeral and ordered the erection of a splendid Gothic marble monument to the deceased king. He was crowned king of Poland in the Krak\u00f3w Cathedral on 17 November. Casimir III had willed his patrimony\u00a0\u2013 including the duchies of Sieradz, \u0141\u0119czyca and Dobrzy\u0144\u00a0\u2013 to his grandson, Casimir IV, Duke of Pomerania. However, the Polish prelates and lords were opposed to the disintegration of Poland and Casimir III's testament was declared void. Louis visited Gniezno and made his Polish mother, Elizabeth, regent before returning to Hungary in December. His uncle's two surviving daughters (Anna and Jadwiga) accompanied him, and the Polish Crown Jewels were transferred to Buda, which raised discontent among Louis's new subjects. Louis's wife gave birth to a daughter, Catherine, in 1370, seventeen years after their marriage; a second daughter, Mary, was born in 1371. Thereafter Louis's made several attempts to safeguard his daughters' right to succeed him.\nDuring a war between Emperor Charles IV and Stephen II, Duke of Bavaria, Louis intervened on the duke's behalf and the Hungarian army invaded Moravia. After the duke and the emperor signed a peace treaty, Louis and the emperor agreed upon the betrothal of their children early the next year. The Ottomans annihilated the Serbian armies in the Battle of Marica on 26 September 1371. Lazar Hrebeljanovi\u0107, one of the Serbian lords, swore loyalty to Louis. Pope Gregory XI urged Louis to resist the Ottomans but also pleaded with him to send reinforcements to Italy to fight against Bernab\u00f2 Visconti. A war broke out between the Republic of Venice and Francesco I da Carrara, Lord of Padova, who was an ally of Louis, in the summer of 1372. Louis sent reinforcements to Italy to assist Francesco da Carrara. The Venetians defeated the Hungarian troops at Treviso and captured its commander, Nicholas Lackfi, forcing Louis I to sign a peace treaty on 23 September 1373.\nLouis and the representatives of the Polish nobility started negotiations of Louis's succession in Poland in the autumn of 1373. After a year of negotiations, he issued the so-called Privilege of Koszyce on 17 September 1374, reducing the tax that Polish noblemen paid to the king by about 84% and promising a remuneration to noblemen who participated in foreign military campaigns. In exchange, the Polish lords confirmed the right of Louis's daughters to inherit Poland.\nLouis invaded Wallachia in May 1375, because the new prince of Wallachia, Radu I, had formed an alliance with the Bulgarian ruler, Ivan Shishman, and the Ottoman Sultan Murad I. The Hungarian army routed the united forces of the Wallachians and their allies, and Louis occupied the Banate of Severin, but Radu I did not yield. During the summer, Wallachian troops stormed into Transylvania and Ottomans pillaged the Banat.\nFrom the middle of the 1370s, the Lackfis' influence diminished and new favorites emerged in the royal court. James Szepesi was appointed judge royal in 1373, and Nicholas Garay became the palatine in 1375. The organization of central government was also modified to create a more centralized power structure. Louis's \"secret seal\", that he had always taken with him during his wars and journeys, was declared authentic, and Louis entrusted it to the secret chancellor who was always to accompany him. A new high official, the Lord Chancellor were authorized to use the great seal in the king's name in 1376 or 1377. Demetrius, Bishop of Zagreb, who was of humble origin, was the first to hold this new office. The Lord Chancellor became the head of a new central court of justice, called the court of \"the king's special presence\" in 1377. From around the same time, the royal free towns delegated jurors to assist the master of the treasury, who headed the court of appeal for the towns. A new official, the treasurer, took over the financial duties of the master of the treasury.\nThe Lithuanians made raids in Halych, Lodomeria, and Poland, almost reaching Krak\u00f3w in November 1376. A riot broke out in Krak\u00f3w against the unpopular queen mother, Elizabeth, on 6 December. The rioters slaughtered about 160 servants of the queen-mother, forcing her to flee to Hungary. Taking advantage of the situation, W\u0142adys\u0142aw the White, Duke of Gniewkowo, who was a male member of the royal Piast dynasty, announced his claim to the Polish crown. However, Louis's partisans defeated the pretender, and Louis made him abbot of the Pannonhalma Archabbey in Hungary. Louis appointed Vladislaus II of Opole his governor in Poland. In summer 1377, Louis invaded the territories held by the Lithuanian prince, George, in Lodomeria. His Polish troops soon captured Che\u0142m, while Louis seized George's seat, Belz, after besieging it for seven weeks. He incorporated the occupied territories in Lodomeria, together with Galicia, into the Kingdom of Hungary. Three Lithuanian princes\u00a0\u2013 Fedor, Prince of Ratno, and two princes of Podolia, Alexander and Boris\u00a0\u2013 accepted Louis's suzerainty.\nLast years (1377\u20131382).\nTvrtko I of Bosnia had himself crowned king, adopting the title of \"King of Serbia, Bosnia and the Coastland\", in 1377. Whether Louis had approved Tvrtko's coronation cannot be decided. A new war broke out between Venice and Genoa in 1378. Louis supported the Genoese and Trogir became the regular base of the Genoese fleet, which transformed Dalmatia into an important theater of war. Louis also sent reinforcements to Francesco I da Carrara to fight against the Venetians.\nThe cardinals who had turned against Pope Urban VI elected a new pope, Clement VII on 20 September 1378, which gave rise to the Western Schism. Louis acknowledged Urban VI as the legitimate pope and offered him support to fight against his opponents in Italy. As Joanna I of Naples decided to join Clement VII's camp, Pope Urban excommunicated and dethroned her on 17 June 1380. The pope acknowledged Charles of Durazzo, who had lived in Louis's court, as the lawful king of Naples. After Charles of Durazzo promised that he would not claim Hungary against Louis's daughters, Louis dispatched him to invade Southern Italy at the head of a large army. Within a year, Charles of Durazzo occupied the Kingdom of Naples, and forced Queen Joanna to surrender to him on 26 August 1381.\nThe envoys of Louis and Venice had meanwhile started negotiations on a new peace treaty, which was signed in Turin on 24 August 1381. According to the treaty, Venice renounced Dalmatia and also promised to pay 7,000 golden florins as an annual tribute to Hungary. Louis also stipulated that Venice was to transfer the relics of St Paul of Thebes to the newly established Pauline monastery at Budaszentl\u0151rinc.\nRoyal charters referred to military actions in Lodomeria and Wallachia in the first half of 1382, but no further information of those wars was preserved. Louis, whose health was quickly deteriorating, invited the representatives of the Polish prelates and lord for a meeting in Z\u00f3lyom (now Zvolen in Slovakia). Upon his demand, the Poles swore loyalty to his daughter, Mary, and her fianc\u00e9, Sigismund of Luxemburg, on 25 July 1382. Louis died in Nagyszombat (now Trnava in Slovakia) in the night on 10 or 11 September 1382. He was buried in the Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r Cathedral in a chapel that had been built upon his orders.\nFamily.\nLouis's first wife, Margaret, was the oldest child of Charles, Margrave of Moravia, and his first wife, Blanche of Valois. Margaret was born in 1335. The exact date of the marriage of Louis and Margaret is unknown, but it occurred between 1342 and 1345. Margaret died childless on 7 September 1349.\nAccording to the \"Chronicle of Parth\u00e9nope\u200a\", the Neapolitan princes whom Louis had imprisoned during his first campaign in Southern Italy proposed that he marry Queen Joanna I's younger sister and heir, Mary. She was the widow of Charles of Durazzo, who had been executed on Louis's orders. During the siege of Aversa in the summer of 1350, Louis met her envoy in the nearby Trentola-Ducenta and the terms of their marriage were accepted. However, Mary was forced to marry Robet of Baux after Louis left Southern Italy.\nLouis married his second wife, Elizabeth, around 20 June 1353. Elizabeth was the daughter of Stephen II, Ban of Bosnia, and Stephen's wife, Elizabeth of Kuyavia. Louis and his new wife were within the prohibited degree of kinship, because Louis's mother and his wife's grandmother were cousins, but they applied for a papal dispensation only about four months after their marriage. Historian Iv\u00e1n Bert\u00e9nyi says that this haste suggests that Elizabeth, who had been living in the court of Louis's mother, was pregnant at the time of the marriage. If this theory is valid, Louis's and his wife's first child was stillborn. Their next child, Catherine, was born in 1370 and died in 1378. The next daughter, Mary, who would succeed Louis in Hungary, was born in 1371. Louis's youngest daughter, Jadwiga, who was born in 1373, became queen regnant of Poland.\nLegacy.\nLouis was the only Hungarian monarch to receive the epithet \"Great\". He was mentioned under this byname not only in Hungarian chronicles in the 14th and 15th centuries, but also in a 17th-century genealogy of the Capetians. Both his chivalrous personality and his successful military campaigns contributed to the development of his fame as a \"great king\". Louis waged wars in almost each year during his reign. Louis \"always desired peace at home and war abroad for neither can be made without the other\", according to Antonio Bonfini's late 15th-century chronicle. Historian Enik\u0151 Csukovits writes that Louis's military actions show that he continued and accomplished his father's policy through recovering Croatia and Dalmatia and waging wars in Southern Italy, in Lithuania and in the Balkan Peninsula. On the other hand, P\u00e1l Engel says that Louis's \"expeditions often lacked a realistic goal and sometimes even a reasonable pretext ... it was war itself that gave him pleasure\".\nIn the age of Romantic nationalism, Hungary during Louis's reign was described as an empire \"whose shores were washed by three seas\" in reference to the Adriatic, Baltic and Black Seas. For instance, in 1845 the poet S\u00e1ndor Pet\u0151fi referred to Louis's reign as a period when \"the falling stars of the north, the east and the south were all extinguished in Hungarian seas\". Poland remained an independent country during Louis's reign and its borders did not extend to the Baltic Sea, and Louis's suzerainty along the northwestern shores of the Black Sea was also uncertain.\nIn Polish historiography, two contrasting evaluations of Louis's reign in Poland coexisted. The \"pessimistic\" tradition can be traced back to the views of the late 14th-century Jan of Czarnk\u00f3w, who was banished from Poland during Louis's reign. Czarnk\u00f3w emphasized that \"there was no stability in the Kingdom of Poland\" and the royal officials \"continually pillaged the property of the poor people\" during Louis's reign. According to the \"optimistic\" historiographic tradition, Louis continued Casimir the Great's policy of preserving the unity of Poland against the separatist magnates of Greater Poland with the assistance of lords from Lesser Poland.\nJohn of K\u00fck\u00fcll\u0151 emphasized that Louis \"ruled neither with passion, nor with arbitrariness, but rather as the guardian of righteousness\". Antonio Bonfini also described Louis as a just king wandering among his subjects in disguise to protect them the royal officials' arbitrary acts. Even Jan of Czarnk\u00f3w underlined that Louis \"did not rule in an absolute manner; on the contrary, the foundations ... of [the Poles'] freedom were laid by him\".\nNew palaces and castles built at Z\u00f3lyom, Di\u00f3sgy\u0151r and Louis's other favorite hunting places were \"masterpieces of the highest European standards\" of his age, according to historian L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Kontler. Louis initiated the compellation of the \"Illuminated Chronicle\", which preserved the text of earlier chronicles. The 147 miniatures decorating the \"Illuminated Chronicle\" testify the mastery of Hungarian workshops during Louis's reign.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38743", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38743", "title": "Cape Cod", "text": "Peninsula in Massachusetts, United States\nCape Cod is a peninsula extending into the Atlantic Ocean from the southeastern corner of Massachusetts, in the northeastern United States. Its historic, maritime character and ample beaches attract heavy tourism during the summer months. The name Cape Cod, coined in 1602 by Bartholomew Gosnold, is the ninth-oldest English place-name in the U.S.\nAs defined by the Cape Cod Commission's enabling legislation, Cape Cod is coextensive with Barnstable County, Massachusetts. It extends from Provincetown in the northeast to Woods Hole in the southwest, and is bordered by Plymouth to the northwest. The Cape is divided into fifteen towns, several of which are in turn made up of multiple named villages. Cape Cod forms the southern boundary of the Gulf of Maine, which extends north-eastward to Nova Scotia.\nSince 1914, most of Cape Cod has been separated from the mainland by the Cape Cod Canal. The canal cuts roughly across the base of the peninsula, though small portions of the Cape Cod towns of Bourne and Sandwich lie on the mainland side of the canal. Two highway bridges cross the Cape Cod Canal: the Sagamore Bridge and the Bourne Bridge. In addition, the Cape Cod Canal Railroad Bridge carries railway freight and provides limited passenger service onto the Cape.\nRegion of Cape Cod and the Islands.\nLike Cape Cod itself, the islands south of the Cape have evolved from whaling and trading areas to become resort destinations, attracting wealthy families, celebrities, and tourists. These include the large nearby islands of Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard.\nBoth islands are also famous summer tourist destinations, commonly accessed by ferry from several locations on the cape. The phrases \"Cape Cod and the Islands\" and \"the Cape and Islands\" are often used to describe the whole region of Barnstable County, Dukes County (including Martha's Vineyard and the smaller Elizabeth Islands), and Nantucket County.\nSeveral small islands right off Cape Cod, including Monomoy Island, Monomoscoy Island, Popponesset Island, and Seconsett Island, are also in Barnstable County.\nThe Forbes family-owned Naushon Island was first purchased by John Murray Forbes. Naushon is one of the Elizabeth Islands, many of which are privately owned. One of the publicly accessible Elizabeths is the southernmost island in the chain, Cuttyhunk Island, with a year-round population of 52 people. Several prominent families have established compounds or estates on the larger islands, making these islands some of the wealthiest resorts in the Northeast, yet they retain much of the early merchant trading and whaling culture.\nCape Cod in particular is a popular retirement area; 31.8% of the population of Barnstable County is 65 years old or older., and the average age of residents is the highest of any area in New England. Cape Cod is majority Democrat, but by a smaller margin than the rest of Massachusetts.\nThe bulk of the land in the area is glacial terminal moraine and represents the southernmost extent of glacial coverage in southeast New England; similar glacial formations make up Long Island in New York and Block Island in Rhode Island.\nGeography and political divisions.\nPhysical geography and boundaries.\nThe name \"Cape Cod\", as it was first used in 1602, applied only to the very tip of the peninsula. It remained that way for 125 years until the \"Precinct of Cape Cod\" was incorporated as the Town of Provincetown. No longer in \"official\" use over the ensuing decades, the name came to mean all of the land east of the Manomet and Scusset rivers \u2013 essentially along the line that became the Cape Cod Canal. The creation of the canal separated the majority of the peninsula from the mainland. Many state and federal agencies, including the Cape Cod Commission and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), treat the Cape as an island with regard to disaster preparedness, groundwater management, and other infrastructure factors. Cape Codders tend to refer to the land on the mainland side of the canal as \"off-Cape\", though the legal delineation of Cape Cod, coincident to the boundaries of Barnstable County, includes portions of the towns of Bourne and Sandwich that are located north of the canal.\nCape Cod Bay lies in between Cape Cod and the mainland \u2013 bounded on the north by a line between Provincetown and Marshfield. North of Cape Cod Bay (and Provincetown) is Massachusetts Bay, which contains the Stellwagen Bank National Marine Sanctuary, located north of Provincetown. Cape Cod Bay and Massachusetts Bay are both part of the Gulf of Maine, which includes the waters between the Cape and Nova Scotia. The Atlantic Ocean is to the east of Cape Cod, and to the southwest of the Cape is Buzzards Bay. The Cape Cod Canal, completed in 1916, connects Buzzards Bay to Cape Cod Bay; its creation shortened the trade route between New York and Boston by .\nCape Cod extends into the Atlantic Ocean, with a breadth of between , and covers more than of shoreline. Its elevation ranges from at its highest point, at the top of Pine Hill, in the Bourne portion of Joint Base Cape Cod, down to sea level.\nCape Cod and the Islands form part of a continuous archipelagic region consisting of a chain of islands running from Long Island to the tip of the Cape. This region is historically and collectively known by naturalists as the Outer Lands.\nTowns and villages.\nCape Cod incorporates all of Barnstable County, which comprises 15 towns: Bourne, Sandwich, Falmouth, Mashpee, Barnstable, Yarmouth, Harwich, Dennis, Brewster, Chatham, Orleans, Eastham, Wellfleet, Truro, and Provincetown. Each of these towns includes a number of villages; see Barnstable County for a complete list.\nBarnstable, the most populated municipality on Cape Cod, is the only one to have adopted a city form of government, whose legislative body is an elected 13-member council. However, like other smaller Massachusetts cities, Barnstable retained its \"Town of Barnstable\" moniker. All of the other towns elect a 5-member Board of Selectmen as the executive policy-setting board and utilize Town Meetings as their legislative body.\nCape Cod and the Islands.\nTo the south of Cape Cod lie Nantucket Sound; Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard, both large islands; and the mostly privately owned Elizabeth Islands.\nSections.\nFor most of the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries, Cape Cod was considered to consist of three sections (see map):\nGeology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"East of America, there stands in the open Atlantic the last fragment of an ancient and vanished land. Worn by the breakers and the rains, and disintegrated by the wind, it still stands bold.\"\n Henry Beston, \"The Outermost House\"\nThe bulk of the land on Cape Cod consists of glacial landforms, formed by terminal moraine and outwash plains. This represents the southernmost extent of glacial coverage in southeast New England; similar glacial formations make up Long Island in New York and Block Island in Rhode Island. Together, these formations are known as the Outer Lands, or more obscurely as the \"Isles of Stirling\". Geologically speaking, Cape Cod is quite young, having been laid down some 16,000 to 20,000 years ago.\nMost of Cape Cod's geological history involves the advance and retreat of the Laurentide Ice Sheet in the late Pleistocene geological era and the subsequent changes in sea level. Using radiocarbon dating techniques, researchers have determined that around 23,000 years ago, the ice sheet reached its maximum southward advance over North America, and then started to retreat. Many kettle ponds \u2013 clear, cold lakes \u2013 were formed and remain on Cape Cod as a result of the receding glacier. By about 18,000 years ago, the ice sheet had retreated past Cape Cod. By roughly 15,000 years ago, it had retreated past southern New England. With so much of Earth's water locked up in massive ice sheets, the sea level was lower. Truro's bayside beaches used to be a petrified forest before it became a beach.\nAs the ice began to melt, the sea began to rise. Initially, sea level rose quickly, about per 1,000 years, but then the rate declined. On Cape Cod, sea level rose roughly per millennium between 6,000 and 2,000 years ago. After that, it continued to rise at about per millennium. By 6,000 years ago, the sea level was high enough to start eroding the glacial deposits that the vanished continental ice sheet had left on Cape Cod. The water transported the eroded deposits north and south along the outer Cape's shoreline through a process known as longshore drift. Those reworked sediments that moved north went to the tip of Cape Cod. The entire town of Provincetown, at the extreme tip of the Cape, is a spit consisting largely of deposited marine sediment that was eroded and transported from farther south along the shore. Those sediments that instead moved south created the islands and shoals of Monomoy. So while other parts of the Cape have dwindled from the action of the waves, these parts of the Cape have grown through the deposition of sediment in just the last 6,000 years.\nThis process continues today. Due to their exposure to the open ocean, the Cape and islands are subject to considerable coastal erosion. Due to erosion, the Cape will be completely submerged by the sea within several thousand years. This erosion causes the washout of beaches and the destruction of the barrier islands; for example, the ocean broke through the barrier island at Chatham during Hurricane Bob in 1991, allowing waves and storm surge to hit the coast with no obstruction. Consequently, the sediment and sand from the beaches are being washed away and deposited elsewhere. While this destroys land in some places, it creates land elsewhere, most noticeably in marshes where sediment is deposited by flowing water.\nCape Cod's aquifer consists of six hydrologically independent lenses from which all the towns on the Cape obtain drinking water (except Falmouth, which, in 2015, drew 43.5% of its water from Long Pond). Contamination with industrial chemicals and pharmaceutical drugs from septic systems is a concern. In 2023, the state began a nitrogen pollution regulation scheme for Cape Cod and the Islands to address overgrowth of algae, cyanobacteria, and plants.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, the Cape Cod area has an oceanic climate. Locally, the Cape has a more moderate climate than inland locations in eastern New England. On occasion, it takes the brunt of extreme weather systems such as the Blizzard of 2005 and Hurricane Bob. Because of the influence of the Atlantic Ocean on three sides, temperatures are typically a few degrees lower in the summer and often several degrees higher in the winter than the adjacent mainland. Two ocean currents (the Gulf Stream, a warm ocean current from the south, and the Labrador Current, a cold ocean current from the north), meander and interact with each other. As a result, the ocean temperatures on the eastern shore of Cape Cod rarely get above , while along the southern coast (Nantucket Sound), water temperatures can sometimes reach or higher.\nThe water surrounding Cape Cod moderates winter temperatures nearly enough to extend the humid subtropical climate zone to what could be its northernmost limit in eastern North America, as the peninsula is split between USDA hardiness zones 7a (Upper and Mid Cape) and 7b (Lower and Outer Cape). Consequently, many subtropical indicator plant species typically found in more southerly latitudes are grown there, including \"Camellias\", \"Ilex opaca\", \"Magnolia grandiflora\" and \"Albizia julibrissin\". However, Cape Cod falls below the threshold, as the warmest month, July, averages around .\nCape Cod's climate is also known for a delayed spring season due to the sea remaining cold from the winter; by the same token, the summer heat retained in the sea moderates fall temperatures in comparison to the adjacent inland area. The highest temperature yet recorded on the peninsula was in Provincetown, the lowest temperature recorded was in Barnstable.\nPrecipitation on Cape Cod and the islands of Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket is the lowest in the southern New England region, averaging slightly less than a year (most parts of New England average ). This is due to the maritime influence inhibiting summertime thunderstorm development and maintenance. The region does not experience a greater number of sunny days, however, as the number of cloudy days is the same as inland locales, in addition to increased fog. On average, roughly of snow, which is about less than Boston, falls in an average winter.\nOnce every five or six years, a tropical storm, accompanied by very high and potentially damaging winds and heavy rain, will strike the region. About once every 11 or 12 years a hurricane brings damaging winds and storm surges to the region. Several Category 3 storms have struck Cape Cod since record-keeping began, such as a hurricane in 1869, the 1938 New England hurricane, and Hurricane Carol in 1954. Strong Category 2 storms, such as the 1869 Saxby Gale, Hurricane Edna in 1954, and Hurricane Bob in 1991, also caused considerable damage. Notable Category 1 storms include the 1944 Great Atlantic hurricane and Hurricane Donna in 1960. Other notable storms include the Gale of 1815, which would likely have been rated a strong hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson scale, and the so-called \"Perfect Storm\" of October 31, 1991. The February 2013 nor'easter produced winds in excess of and dropped over of snow on some parts of Cape Cod. The storm knocked out power to tens of thousands of Cape Cod residents, some for up to two weeks.\nHistory.\nWampanoag peoples.\nCape Cod has been the home of the indigenous Wampanoag for centuries prior to European colonization. They lived from the sea and were accomplished farmers. They understood the principles of sustainable forest management, and were known to light controlled fires to keep the underbrush in check. They helped the Pilgrims, who arrived in the fall of 1620, survive at their new Plymouth Colony.\nThe Wampanoag gradually lost their lands during the period of European incursion through land cessions and violent conflict with white settlers. The documentary \"Natives of the Narrowland\" (1993), narrated by actress Julie Harris, shows the history of the Wampanoag people through Cape Cod archaeological sites.\nIn 1974, the Mashpee Wampanoag Tribal Council was formed to articulate the concerns of those with Native American ancestry. They petitioned the federal government in 1975 and again in 1990 for official recognition of the Mashpee Wampanoag as a tribe. In May 2007, the Wampanoag tribe was federally recognized.\nEuropean exploration.\nCape Cod was a landmark for early explorers. It may have been the \"Promontory of Vinland\" mentioned by the Norse voyagers (985\u20131025), although this is disputed. The Manomet River area (taken up by the western end of the Cape Cod Canal in the early 20th century) is claimed by some to have been visited by Leif Eiriksson, and a stone wall discovered in Provincetown in 1805 is also claimed to have been built by his younger brother Thorvald Eiriksson around AD 1007, when the keel of his ship was repaired in the harbor, according to Norse sagas. He was killed later in the same journey and is said to have been returned to this spot for burial. However, there is no tangible support of the presence of Norse voyagers on Cape Cod, and the view is not generally accepted by archaeologists or historians.\nGiovanni da Verrazzano approached it from the south in 1524. He named Martha's Vineyard Claudia, after Claude of France, the wife of Francis I of France. In 1525, Portuguese explorer Est\u00eav\u00e3o Gomes called it Cabo de la Arenas while sailing under the Spanish crown.\nIn 1602, Bartholomew Gosnold named the tip Cape Cod, the surviving term and the ninth oldest English place-name in the U.S. Samuel de Champlain charted its sand-silted harbors in 1606, and Henry Hudson landed there in 1609. Captain John Smith noted it on his map of 1614, and at last the Pilgrims entered the \"Cape Harbor\" and made their first landing near Provincetown on November 11, 1620. They had their first encounter with the native inhabitants in nearby Eastham.\nEuropean settlement.\nCape Cod was among the first places settled by Puritan colonists in North America. The Cape's fifteen towns developed slowly, aside from Barnstable (1639), Sandwich (1637), and Yarmouth (1639). The final town to be established on the Cape was Bourne in 1884, breaking off from Sandwich. Provincetown was a group of huts until the 18th century. A channel from Massachusetts Bay to Buzzards Bay is shown on Southack's map of 1717. The present Cape Cod Canal was slowly developed from 1870 to 1914. The federal government purchased it in 1928.\nBecause of early colonial settlement and intensive land use, the Cape's vegetation was depauperate and trees were scarce by the time that Henry Thoreau saw Cape Cod during his four visits over 1849 to 1857. The settlers heated by fires, and it took 10 to 20 cords (40 to 80 m3) of wood to heat a home, so they cleared most of Cape Cod of timber early on. They planted familiar crops, but these were unsuited to Cape Cod's thin, glacially derived soils. For instance, much of Eastham was planted with wheat. The settlers practiced the burning of woodlands to release nutrients into the soil. Improper and intensive farming led to erosion and the loss of topsoil. Farmers grazed their cattle on the grassy dunes of coastal Massachusetts, only to watch \"in horror as the denuded sands 'walked' over richer lands, burying cultivated fields and fences.\" Dunes on the outer Cape became more common, and many harbors filled in with eroded soils.\nBy 1800, much of Cape Cod's firewood had to be transported by boat from Maine. The paucity of vegetation was worsened by the raising of merino sheep that reached its peak in New England around 1840. The early Industrial Revolution occurred through much of Massachusetts and Rhode Island, but it mostly bypassed Cape Cod due to a lack of significant waterpower in the area. The Cape developed as a large fishing and whaling center as a result, and also because of its geographic position. After 1860 and the opening of the American West, farmers abandoned agriculture on the Cape. By 1950, forests had recovered to an extent not seen since the 18th century.\nModern era.\nCape Cod became a summer haven for city dwellers beginning at the end of the 19th century. Improved rail transportation made the towns of the Upper Cape, such as Bourne and Falmouth, accessible to Bostonians. At the beginning of the twentieth century, the Northeastern mercantile elite built many large, shingled \"cottages\" along Buzzards Bay. The relaxed summer environment offered by Cape Cod was highlighted by writers including Joseph C. Lincoln, who published novels and countless short stories about Cape Cod folks in popular magazines such as \"The Saturday Evening Post\" and the \"Delineator\".\nGuglielmo Marconi made the first transatlantic wireless transmission originating in the United States from Cape Cod, at Wellfleet. The beach below the bluffs where his station was located is now called Marconi Beach. In 1914, he began construction of a new transatlantic wireless receiver station in Chatham and a companion transmitter station in Marion. In 1920, the stations were acquired by RCA and, in 1921, Chatham began operations as a maritime radio station communicating to ships at sea using the callsign WCC. WCC supported the communications of Amelia Earhart, Howard Hughes, Admiral Byrd, and the \"Hindenburg\". Marconi chose Chatham due to its vantage point on the Atlantic Ocean, surrounded on three sides by water. Walter Cronkite narrated a 17-minute documentary in 2005 about the history of the Chatham Station.\nMuch of the east-facing Atlantic seacoast of Cape Cod consists of wide, sandy beaches. In 1961, a significant portion of this coastline, already slated for housing subdivisions, was made a part of the Cape Cod National Seashore by President John F. Kennedy. It was protected from private development and preserved for public use. Large portions are open to the public, including the Marconi Site in Wellfleet. This is a park encompassing the site of the first two-way transoceanic radio transmission from the United States. (Theodore Roosevelt used Marconi's equipment for this transmission.)\nThe Kennedy Compound in Hyannis Port was President Kennedy's summer White House during his presidency, and the Kennedy family continues to maintain residences on the compound. President Grover Cleveland maintained a summer home in the Gray Gables section of Bourne. Other notable residents of Cape Cod have included actress Julie Harris, US Supreme Court justice Louis Brandeis, figure skater Todd Eldredge, composer and radio personality Canary Burton, and novelists Norman Mailer and Kurt Vonnegut. Influential natives included patriot James Otis, historian and writer Mercy Otis Warren, jurist Lemuel Shaw, and naval officer John Percival.\nLighthouses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Lighthouses, from ancient times, have fascinated members of the human race. There is something about a lighted beacon that suggests hope and trust and appeals to the better instincts of mankind.\"\n Edward Rowe Snow\nBeginning in 1797, lighthouses were erected along Cape Cod to aid in navigation. Highland Light (or Cape Cod Light) is the oldest and tallest of these, and remains as one of a number of working lighthouses on Cape Cod and the Islands. Many of Cape Cod's earliest lighthouses featured a light tower that was attached directly to \u2013 and centered on the roof of \u2013 the keeper's dwelling. A stairway to the lantern room was accessible only from the top floor of the house. This came to be known as a Cape Cod style lighthouse, yet today, the only fully intact specimens are on the west coast of the United States.\nMost of Cape Cod's lighthouses are operated by the U.S. Coast Guard, with some exceptions, such as the Nauset Light, which has been owned since 1997 by the Cape Cod National Seashore (National Park Service) and operated since 2004 in partnership between that agency and the non-profit Nauset Light Preservation Society.\nIn 1996, both Highland Light and Nauset Light were moved further from the shore because they were each at risk of being lost due to erosion by the sea. Highland Light, then from the ocean, was moved to the west, and Nauset Light, from the bluff, was moved west.\nThe lighthouses of Cape Cod include:\nTransportation.\nRoad.\nCape Cod is accessible via Route 3 to the Sagamore Bridge via Boston. Route 6 runs throughout the length of Cape Cod. It is also accessible via I-95 through Providence and then from I-195 to the Bourne Bridge. These two bridges are the lifeline of Cape Cod. The traffic on Cape Cod peaks during the peak season and slows down in the off-season.\nAs of August 2025, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts was planning a $2.4 billion project to build a new bridge from the mainland onto Cape Cod, replacing the Sagamore and Bourne bridges, which would be the state's largest public works project in decades.\nAir.\nCape Cod Gateway Airport is the largest airport on Cape Cod. Cape Air has year-round service there, while other airlines like American Airlines and JetBlue run seasonally. Provincetown Municipal Airport has seasonal Cape Air service in the summer.\nThere is one military airport at Otis Air National Guard Base.\nThe closest major airports to Cape Cod are Logan International Airport and Rhode Island T. F. Green International Airport.\nFerry service.\nBoston Harbor City Cruises and Bay State Cruise Company run seasonal 90-minute fast ferries between Boston and Provincetown.\nBus.\nThe Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority runs year-round buses throughout Cape Cod.\nLong-distance bus service is available through Plymouth &amp; Brockton and Peter Pan Bus, connecting Cape Cod to South Station and Logan International Airport.\nRail service.\nThe third bridge over the Cape Cod Canal is a vertical-lift railroad bridge, providing an alternative land transport option. After the bridge, the track splits in two directions, heading towards Hyannis in one direction and North Falmouth in the other. The track to Hyannis is used for both freight and passenger services, while the Falmouth track is used mostly for freight with very limited passenger service.\nPassenger.\nThe CapeFlyer is a seasonal passenger rail service between Boston and Hyannis that operates on summer weekends from Memorial Day through Labor Day.\nThe Cape Cod Central Railroad is a heritage railroad on Cape Cod. The service is primarily tourist-oriented and includes a dinner train over a scenic route between Hyannis and the Cape Cod Canal lasting about 2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 hours round trip. Select trains feature stops at West Barnstable and Sandwich. Additional service is also provided from the Buzzards Bay station, and a small number of trains also depart from North Falmouth.\nFreight.\nActive freight service remains in the Upper Cape, both along the main line from Bourne to Hyannis and on the spur to North Falmouth. One of the more frequent operations is the transport of municipal waste to a waste-to-energy plant in Rochester, as well as the removal of debris and refuse from Joint Base Cape Cod in Falmouth. Massachusetts Coastal Railroad is currently the sole operator of freight rail on the Cape, taking over from Bay Colony Railroad in 2007.\nHistoric.\nDaily passenger rail service by the New Haven Railroad from Boston to Cape Cod ended in June 1959. Summertime \"Day Cape Codder\" service by the New Haven from New York City to the Cape ended in 1964. In 1978, the tracks east of South Dennis were abandoned and replaced with the Cape Cod Rail Trail. Another bike path, the Shining Sea Bikeway, was built over abandoned tracks between Woods Hole and Falmouth in 1975, and in 2008 the rail line between Falmouth and North Falmouth was removed and the right-of-way converted into an extension of the Shining Sea Bikeway.\nIn 1986, Amtrak operated a seasonal service in the summer from New York City to Hyannis called the \"Cape Codder\". From 1988, Amtrak and the Massachusetts Department of Transportation increased service to a daily frequency, until service ended in 1996, leaving a gap until the current CapeFlyer service began in 2013.\nBicycle.\nBicycle and pedestrian access to the Cape is possible via a sidewalk on the southbound side of the Bourne Bridge. There are a number of dedicated bike trails and paths around the Cape, including:\nFor long-distance biking, the mostly on-road Claire Saltonstall Bikeway connects Cape Cod to the Charles River Bike Path in Boston.\nTourism.\nCape Cod has a year-round population of about 220,000, and it experiences a tourist season during the warmer months, the beginning and end of which can be roughly approximated as Memorial Day and Columbus Day, respectively. Many businesses specifically target summer visitors, although the \"on season\" has been expanding somewhat in recent years due to Indian Summer, reduced lodging rates, the number of people visiting the Cape after Labor Day who have no school-age children, and the elderly\u2014reducing the true \"off-season\" to six or seven months. In the late 20th century, tourists and owners of second homes began visiting the Cape more and more in the spring and fall, softening the definition of the high season and expanding it somewhat.\nProvincetown berths the original East Coast whale watching fleet (Dolphin Fleet) who patrol the Stellwagen Bank National Marine Sanctuary. The fleet guarantees a whale sighting (mostly humpback whale, fin whale, minke whale, sei whale, and the critically endangered North Atlantic right whale) and is the only federally certified operation qualified to rescue whales. Provincetown has also long been known as an art colony, attracting writers and artists. The town is home to the Cape's most attended art museum, the Provincetown Art Association and Museum.\nCape Cod is a popular destination for beachgoers from all over, with of coastline. Beaches\u2014both public and private\u2014are easily accessible. The Cape has upwards of sixty public beaches, many of which offer parking for non-residents for a daily fee (in summer). The Cape Cod National Seashore has of sandy beach and many walking paths.\nCape Cod is also popular for its outdoor activities, such as beach walking, biking, boating, fishing, go-karts, golfing, kayaking, miniature golf, and unique shopping. There are 27 public, daily-fee golf courses and 15 private courses on Cape Cod. Bed and breakfasts or vacation houses are often used for lodging.\nEach summer, the Naukabout Music Festival is held at the Barnstable County Fair Grounds located in East Falmouth, typically during the first weekend of August. The festival features local, regional, and national talent, along with food, arts, and family-friendly activities. Some particularly well-known Cape products and industries include cranberries, shellfish (particularly oysters and clams), and lobstering.\nSport fishing.\nCape Cod is known around the world as a spring-to-fall destination for sport anglers. Among the species most widely pursued are striped bass, bluefish, bluefin tuna, false albacore (little tunny), bonito, tautog, flounder and fluke. The Cape Cod Bay side of the Cape, from Sandwich to Provincetown, has numerous harbors, saltwater creeks, and shoals that hold bait fish and attract the larger game fish, such as striped bass, bluefish and bluefin tuna.\nThe outer edge of the Cape, from Provincetown to Falmouth, faces the open Atlantic from Provincetown to Chatham, and then the more protected water of Nantucket and Vineyard Sounds, from Chatham to Falmouth. The bays, harbors and shoals along this coastline also provide a robust habitat for game species, and during the late summer months warm-water species such as mahi-mahi and marlin will also appear on the southern edge of Cape Cod's waters. Nearly every harbor on Cape Cod hosts sport fishing charter boats, which run from May through October.\nOne of the most popular fishing spots on the East Coast is the Cape Cod Canal. Striped bass, especially, in season attract anglers from far and wide. A large part of the attraction involves ease of access. Ample free parking exists all along the waterway, and the banks are a short walk from one's vehicle. This reduces fishing to the basics \u2013 a pole and a few lures.\nSports.\nThe Cape has nine amateur baseball franchises playing within Barnstable County in the Cape Cod Baseball League. The Wareham Gatemen also play in the Cape Cod Baseball League in nearby Wareham in Plymouth County. The league's beginning is unsettled, even fanciful. Without any basis whatsoever, some claim a start date of 1875. However, the first Cape Cod League was formed in Sandwich in 1910. It did not last. Three years later, in 1913, another Cape Cod Baseball League was organized. This venture lasted two years. In 1916, a third attempt at league play barely got off the ground. Then, in 1923, an initial four teams met in Hyannis and started a successful federation along the lines of the present league. Outstanding players from throughout the region competed until the war effort led to a shutdown in 1940. In 1946, the local town teams from the prewar County Twilight League and Lower Cape Cod League organized under the Cape Cod Baseball League banner. As the years passed, local players were moved aside by outside college stars. Finally, in 1963, the league became a wholly summer collegiate circuit sanctioned by the National Collegiate Athletic Association with some Major League financial support. The current teams in the league are the Bourne Braves, Brewster Whitecaps, Chatham Anglers (formerly the Chatham Athletics), Cotuit Kettleers, Falmouth Commodores, Harwich Mariners, Hyannis Harbor Hawks (formerly the Hyannis Mets), Orleans Firebirds (formerly the Orleans Cardinals), Wareham Gatemen and the Yarmouth\u2013Dennis Red Sox. MLB scouts frequent the games in the summer, looking for stars of the future.\nAlong with the Cape Cod Baseball League and the former junior hockey team, the Cape Cod Islanders, many high school players are being recruited as well. Barnstable and Harwich have each sent multiple players to Division 1 colleges for baseball. Harwich has also won three state titles since 1996 (1996, 2006, 2007). Bourne and Sandwich, rivals in hockey, have each won state championships recently, Bourne in 2004 and Sandwich in 2007. Nauset won their first state championship in hockey in 2025. Barnstable and Martha's Vineyard are also considered state hockey powerhouses. Barnstable and Falmouth hold the title of having one of the longest Thanksgiving football rivalries in the country. The teams have played each other every year on Thanksgiving since 1895. High school football teams on the Cape have also recently become successful and the region has also become a hot spot for college recruiting. In 2011, four high school football teams from the Cape won state championships in their respective divisions; Dennis-Yarmouth (Division 2A), Bourne (Division 3A), Mashpee (Division 4), as well as Nantucket and Upper Cape Cod Tech (Division 5). Also, numerous other Cape schools have made appearances in the football state championship game recently, including Barnstable in 2012, Martha's Vineyard in 2008, Cape Cod Tech in 2006, and Dennis-Yarmouth in 2013. The Bourne and Barnstable girls' volleyball teams are two of the best teams in the state and Barnstable is considered one of the best programs in the country. Bourne won the state title in 2003 and 2007, and Barnstable has won 12 Division 1 state titles in the past 13 years and has won the state title three consecutive seasons (2011 to 2013). In the 2010 cross-country season, Sturgis Charter Public School's Division 4 cross-country team remained virtually unbeaten throughout their running season.\nThe end of each summer is marked with the running of the Falmouth Road Race, held on the third Saturday in August. It draws about 10,000 runners to the Cape and showcases the finest runners in the world (mainly for the large purse that the race is able to offer). The race is long, which is a non-standard distance. The reason for the unusual distance is that the man who thought the race up (Tommy Leonard) was a bartender who wanted a race along the coast from one bar (The Cap'n Kidd in Woods Hole) to another (The Brothers Four in Falmouth Heights). While the bar in Falmouth Heights is now the British Beer Company, the race still starts at the front door of the Cap'n Kidd in Woods Hole and now finishes at the beach in Falmouth Heights. Prior to the Falmouth race is an annual race through Brewster called the Brew Run, held early in August.\nEducation.\nEvery town on the Cape has access to elementary, middle, and high school education, although some schools service several towns. These schools include Dennis-Yarmouth Regional High School, located in Yarmouth, which serves Yarmouth and Dennis; Monomoy Regional High School, located in Harwich, which serves Harwich and Chatham; and Nauset Regional High School in Eastham, which serves the towns of Brewster, Orleans, Eastham, Wellfleet, Truro, and Provincetown.\nBarnstable High School is the Cape's largest. Sturgis Charter Public School, a public charter school in Hyannis, is open to students from the Cape and surrounding regions, extending as far as Plymouth. The Cape also has two vocational high schools. One is the Cape Cod Regional Technical High School in Harwich, and the other is Upper Cape Cod Regional Technical High School in Bourne.\nIn 1976 the Cape schools and districts petitioned the Massachusetts Legislature to create an educational collaborative, the Cape Cod Collaborative, to facilitate cooperation and efficiency in providing gifted and talented, and special needs programs. With locations in Osterville and Bourne the Cape Cod Collaborative provides transportation services, professional development, autism support, developmental training, itinerant services and an alternative education program. Each summer, in cooperation with the Massachusetts Maritime Academy, it operates a science-based program for gifted and talented students from around the Cape.\nMashpee High School is home to the Mashpee Chapter of SMPTE, the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers. This chapter is the first and only high-school chapter in the world to be a part of this organization and has received much recognition within the Los Angeles broadcasting industry as a result.\nIn addition to public schools, Cape Cod has a wide range of private schools. The town of Barnstable has Trinity Christian Academy, Cape Cod Academy, St Francis Xavier Preparatory School, and Saint John Paul II High School. Sandwich offers the Waldorf School of Cape Cod, Harwich offers the Lighthouse Charter School for elementary and middle-school students, and Falmouth offers Falmouth Academy. Riverview School is located in East Sandwich and is a special co-ed boarding school that serves students as old as 22 who have learning disabilities.\nCape Cod contains three institutions of higher education. One is the Cape Cod Community College located in West Barnstable. The second is Massachusetts Maritime Academy in the village of Buzzards Bay. Massachusetts Maritime Academy is the oldest continuously operating maritime college in the United States. The third is Bridgewater State University, which opened a satellite campus in South Yarmouth in January 2015. The school will provide 40 undergraduate and graduate courses leading to the completion of bachelor's degree and master's degree programs in Early Childhood Education, Educational Leadership, Secondary Education, Reading, and Special Education. The campus will also offer Certificate Programs in Business and Social Work. Undergraduate credit courses in History are also available.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38744", "revid": "609285", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38744", "title": "German submarine U-96", "text": "U-96 may refer to one of the following German submarines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "38746", "revid": "51049109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38746", "title": "Oscar I of Sweden", "text": "King of Sweden and Norway from 1844 to 1859\nOscar I (born Joseph Fran\u00e7ois Oscar Bernadotte; 4 July 1799 \u2013 8 July 1859) was King of Sweden and Norway from 8 March 1844 until his death. He was the second monarch of the House of Bernadotte.\nThe only child of King Charles XIV John, Oscar inherited the thrones upon the death of his father. Throughout his reign he would pursue a liberal course in politics in contrast to Charles XIV John, instituting reforms and improving ties between Sweden and Norway. In an address to him in 1857, the Riksdag declared that he had promoted the material prosperity of the kingdom more than any of his predecessors.\nEarly life and family.\nOscar was born at 291 Rue Cisalpine in Paris (today: 32 Rue Monceau) to Jean-Baptiste Jules Bernadotte, then-French Minister of War and later Marshal of the Empire and Sovereign Prince of Pontecorvo, and D\u00e9sir\u00e9e Clary, Napoleon Bonaparte's former fianc\u00e9e. He was named Joseph after his godfather Joseph Bonaparte, who was married to his mother's elder sister Julie, but was also given the names Fran\u00e7ois Oscar. The latter name was chosen by Napoleon after one of the heroes in the Ossian cycle of poems, and was the name that came to be used in the family, mainly by the mother and the aunt. D\u00e9sir\u00e9e is said to have chosen Napoleon to be Oscar's godfather. He spent his first years in France, living with his mother and aunt, partly in Paris, partly at Joseph Bonaparte's country residence, the Ch\u00e2teau de Mortefontaine north of Paris. In 1807, he received his first tutor, Le Moine.\nPrince of Sweden.\nAs the Swedish king Charles XIII was without legitimate heirs and Sweden therefore was without an heir to the throne, Oscar's father was proposed as a possible candidate to the Swedish throne in 1810. As one of the arguments for his election, it was argued that he already had a son and the future succession to the throne was secured. A portrait of the young Oscar was handed out at the Diet of the Four Estates assembled in \u00d6rebro to elect an heir to the throne, serving as a lever for the election of Bernadotte. On 21 August 1810, the Riksdag elected Oscar's father as heir-presumptive to the Swedish throne. Two months later, on 5 November, he was formally adopted by the king under the name of \"Charles John\"; Oscar was then created a Prince of Sweden with the style of \"Royal Highness\", and further accorded the title of Duke of S\u00f6dermanland. Oscar and his mother moved from Paris to Stockholm in June 1811; while Oscar soon acclimated to life at the royal court, quickly acquiring the Swedish language, D\u00e9sir\u00e9e had difficulty adjusting and despised the cold weather. Consequently, she left Sweden in the summer of 1811, and would not return until 1823.\nOscar, who was accompanied to Sweden by Le Moine, immediately got a teacher of Swedish and was soon able to serve as his father's interpreter. On 17 January 1816, Oscar was elected an honorary member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, and in 1818 was appointed chancellor of Uppsala University, where he spent one semester.\nOscar became Crown Prince in 1818 upon the death of his adoptive grandfather, and the accession of Charles John to the Swedish and Norwegian thrones.\nMarriage and issue.\nSeeking to legitimise the new Bernadotte dynasty, Charles XIV John had selected four princesses as candidates for marriage, in order of his priority:\nOscar would eventually marry Josephine, first by proxy at the Leuchtenberg Palace in Munich on 22 May 1823 and in person at a wedding ceremony conducted in Stockholm on 19 June 1823.\nThe couple had five children:\nOscar also had two extramarital sons (unofficially called the \"Princes of Lapland\") by actress Emilie H\u00f6gquist:\nBy Countess Jaquette L\u00f6wenhielm (n\u00e9e Gyldenstolpe) Oscar had a premarital daughter:\nCrown Prince.\nIn 1824 and 1833, Oscar briefly served as Viceroy of Norway.\nIn 1832\u20131834 he completed the romantic opera \"Ryno, the errant knight\", which had been left unfinished on the death of the young composer Eduard Brendler. In 1839 he wrote a series of articles on popular education, and in 1841 anonymously published \"Om Straff och straffanstalter\", a work advocating prison reforms.\nReign.\nIn 1838 Charles XIV John began to suspect that his son was plotting with the Liberal politicians to bring about a change of ministry, or even his own abdication. If Oscar did not actively assist the opposition on this occasion, his disapprobation of his father's despotic behaviour was notorious, though he avoided an actual rupture. Yet his liberalism was of the most cautious and moderate character, as the opposition\u2014shortly after his accession to the thrones in 1844\u2014discovered to their great chagrin. The new king would not hear of any radical reform of the cumbersome and obsolete 1809 Instrument of Government, which made the king a near-autocrat. However, one of his earliest measures was to establish freedom of the press. He also passed the first law supporting gender equality in Sweden when he in 1845 declared that in the absence of a will specifying otherwise, brothers and sisters should have equal inheritance. Oscar I also formally established equality between his two kingdoms by introducing new flags with the common Union badge of Norway and Sweden, as well as a new coat of arms for the union.\nIn foreign affairs, Oscar I was a friend of the principle of nationality; in 1848 he supported Denmark against the Kingdom of Prussia in the First War of Schleswig by placing Swedish and Norwegian troops in cantonments in Funen and North Schleswig (1849\u20131850), and was the mediator of the Truce of Malm\u00f6 (26 August 1848). He was also one of the guarantors of the integrity of Denmark (the London Protocol, 8 May 1852).\nAs early as 1850, Oscar I had conceived the plan of a dynastic union of the three Scandinavian kingdoms, but such difficulties presented themselves that the scheme had to be abandoned. He succeeded, however, in reversing his father's favored-nation policy towards Imperial Russia. His fear lest Russia should demand a stretch of coast along the Varanger Fjord induced him to remain neutral during the Crimean War, and, subsequently, to conclude an alliance with the United Kingdom and the Second French Empire (25 November 1855) for preserving the territorial integrity of Sweden-Norway.\nDeath.\nIn the 1850s, Oscar's health began to rapidly deteriorate; he became paralyzed in 1857 and died two years later at the Royal Palace in Stockholm on 8 July 1859, four days after his 60th birthday. He was buried in the traditional burial site for Swedish monarchs, the Riddarholmen Church on the islet of Riddarholmen in central Stockholm. His eldest son, who had served as regent during his absence, succeeded him as Charles XV.\nHonours.\nSwedish and Norwegian honours\nForeign honours\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38748", "revid": "48096126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38748", "title": "Brittany", "text": "Cultural area in northwestern France\nBrittany ( ) is a peninsula, historical country and cultural area in the north-west of modern France, covering the western part of what was known as Armorica in Roman Gaul. It became an independent kingdom and then a duchy before being united with the Kingdom of France in 1532 as a province governed as a separate nation under the crown. Brittany is the traditional homeland of the Breton people and is one of the six Celtic nations, retaining a distinct cultural identity that reflects its history.\nBrittany has also been referred to as Little Britain (as opposed to Great Britain, with which it shares an etymology). It is bordered by the English Channel to the north, Normandy to the northeast, eastern Pays de la Loire to the southeast, the Bay of Biscay to the south, and the Celtic Sea and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. Its land area is 34,023\u00a0km2 (13,136 sq mi).\nBrittany is the site of some of the world's oldest standing architecture, home to the Cairn of Barnenez, the Tumulus Saint-Michel and others, which date to the early 5th millennium BC. Today, the historical province of Brittany is split among five French departments: Finist\u00e8re in the west, C\u00f4tes-d'Armor in the north, Ille-et-Vilaine in the northeast, Morbihan in the south and Loire-Atlantique in the southeast. Loire-Atlantique now belongs to the Pays de la Loire region while the other four departments make up the Brittany region.\nAt the 2010 census, the population of historic Brittany was estimated to be 4,475,295. In 2017, the largest metropolitan areas were Nantes (934,165 inhabitants), Rennes (733,320 inhabitants), and Brest (321,364 inhabitants).\nA nationalist movement seeks greater autonomy within the French Republic, or independence from it. The reunification of Brittany is supported by half of the inhabitants of Brittany and of Loire-Atlantique, and is considered a prerequisite to further autonomy.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Brittany\", along with its French, Breton and Gallo equivalents , and , derive from the Latin , which means 'land of the Britons'. This word had been used by the Romans since the 1st century to refer to Great Britain, and more specifically the Roman province of Britain. This word derives from a Greek word or , used by Pytheas, an explorer from Massalia who visited the British Isles around 320 BC. The Greek word itself comes from the common Brythonic ethnonym reconstructed as , itself from Proto-Celtic (ultimately from Proto-Indo-European 'to cut, make').\nIn Roman times, \"Armorica\" included what is now Brittany. This was an indefinite region that extended along the English Channel coast from the Seine estuary, then along the Atlantic coast to the Loire estuary and, according to several sources, maybe to the Garonne estuary. This term probably comes from a Gallic word, , which means 'close to the sea'. Another name, \"Letauia\" (in English \"Litavis\"), was used until the 12th century. It possibly means 'wide and flat' or 'to expand' and it gave the Welsh name for Brittany, .\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire, many Cornish Britons settled in western Armorica to escape the Saxons and the region started to be called \"Britannia\", although this name only replaced \"Armorica\" in the sixth century or perhaps by the end of the fifth.\nBreton-speaking people may pronounce the word \"Breizh\" in two different ways, according to their region of origin. Breton can be divided into two main dialects: the \"KLT\" (Kerne-Leon-Tr\u00e9gor) and the dialect of the Vannetais. KLT speakers pronounce it and would write it \"Breiz\", while the Vannetais speakers pronounce it and would write it \"Breih\". The official spelling \"Breizh\" is a compromise between both variants. In 1941, efforts to unify the dialects led to the creation of the so-called \"Breton zh\", a standard which has never been widely accepted. Gallo, on the other hand, has never had a widely accepted orthography, and several coexist. For instance, the name of the region in that language can be written \"Berta\u00e8yn\" in \"ELG\" orthography, or \"Bert\u00e8gn\" in \"MOGA\", and a couple of other orthographies also exist.\nHistory.\nPrehistoric origins.\nBrittany has been inhabited by humans since the Lower Palaeolithic. This population was scarce and very similar to the other Neanderthals found in the whole of Western Europe. Their only original feature was a distinct culture, called the \"Colombanian\". One of the oldest hearths in the world has been found in Plouhinec, Finist\u00e8re.\nHomo sapiens settled in Brittany around 35,000 years ago. They replaced or absorbed the Neanderthals and developed local industries, similar to the Ch\u00e2telperronian or to the Magdalenian. After the last glacial period, the warmer climate allowed the area to become heavily wooded. At that time, Brittany was populated by relatively large communities who started to change their lifestyles from a life of hunting and gathering, to become settled farmers. Agriculture was introduced during the 5th millennium BC by migrants from the south and east. However, the Neolithic Revolution in Brittany did not happen due to a radical change of population, but by slow immigration and exchange of skills.\nNeolithic Brittany is characterised by important megalithic production and sites such as Quelf\u00e9nnec, it is sometimes designated as the \"core area\" of megalithic culture. The oldest monuments, cairns, were followed by princely tombs and stone rows. The Morbihan \"d\u00e9partement\", on the southern coast, comprises a large share of these structures, including the Carnac stones and the Broken Menhir of Er Grah in the Locmariaquer megaliths, the largest single stone erected by Neolithic people.\nGallic era.\nDuring the protohistorical period, Brittany was inhabited by five Celtic tribes:\nThose people had strong economic ties to the Insular Celts, especially for the tin trade . Several tribes also belonged to an \"Armorican confederation\" which, according to Julius Caesar, gathered the Curiosolitae, the Redones, the Osismii, the Unelli, the Caletes, the Lemovices and the Ambibarii. The Unelli, Caletes, and Lemovices were respectively located in Cotentin (Lower-Normandy), pays de Caux (Upper-Normandy), and Limousin (Aquitaine); the location of the Ambibarii is unknown. The Caletes are sometimes also considered Belgians, and \"Lemovices\" is probably a mistake for \"Lexovii\" (Lower-Normandy).\nGallo-Roman era.\nDuring the Gallic Wars, the Veneti were defeated in the Battle of Morbihan off the coast of Brittany. At the conclusion of the Gallic Wars, the region became part of the Roman Republic in 51 BC. It was included in the province of Gallia Lugdunensis in 13 BC. Gallic towns and villages were redeveloped according to Roman standards, and several cities were created. These cities are Condate (Rennes), Vorgium (Carhaix), Darioritum (Vannes) and Condevincum or Condevicnum (Nantes). Together with Fanum Martis (Corseul), they were the capitals of the local civitates. They all had a grid plan and a forum, and sometimes a temple, a basilica, thermae or an aqueduct, like Carhaix.\nThe Romans also built three major roads through the region. However, most of the population remained rural. The free peasants lived in small huts, whereas the landowners and their employees lived in proper villae rusticae. The Gallic deities continued to be worshiped, and were often assimilated to the Roman gods. Only a small number of statues depicting Roman gods were found in Brittany, and most of the time they combine Celtic elements.\nDuring the 3rd century AD, the region was attacked several times by Franks, Alamanni and pirates. At the same time, the local economy collapsed and many farming estates were abandoned. To face the invasions, many towns and cities were fortified, like Nantes, Rennes and Vannes.\nThis area was also affected by the Bagaudae (also spelled bacaudae) during this period, which were groups of peasant insurgents. The Bagaudae achieved some temporary and scattered successes under the leadership of peasants as well as former members of local ruling elites.\nImmigration of the Britons.\nToward the end of the 4th century, the Britons of Domnon\u00e9e (modern Devon and Cornwall) on the South-Western peninsula of Great Britain began to emigrate to Armorica, which is why the Breton language is more closely related to recorded Cornish.\nThe Romano-Britons.\nThe history behind such an establishment is unclear, but medieval Breton, Angevin and Welsh sources connect it to a figure known as Conan Meriadoc. Welsh literary sources assert that Conan came to Armorica on the orders of the Roman usurper Magnus Maximus, who sent some of his British troops to Gaul to enforce his claims and settled them in Armorica. This account was supported by the Counts of Anjou, who claimed descent from a Roman soldier expelled from Lower Brittany by Conan on Magnus's orders.\nBattle of the Catalaunian Plains.\nThe army recruited for Flavius Aetius to combat Attila the Hun at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains included Romans, Visigoths, Franks, Alans and Armoricans, amongst others. The Alans were placed front and centre, opposite the Huns. The Armoricans supplied archers who attacked the Huns' front lines during the main battle and thwarted Attila's night assault on the Roman camp with a hail of arrows \"like rain\". After the battle was won, Aetius sent the Alans to Armorica and Galicia.\nRiothamus.\nThe late 5th century Brittonic leader Riothamus received correspondence from the eminent Roman jurist Sidonius Apollinaris and was called \"King of the Britons\" by Jordanes. Some suggest that he was a Breton, though others believe that he was from Britain, pointing to the passage that he arrived in the land of the Biturges \"by way of Ocean\", which would hardly have been efficient or required for a Breton. Both historians describe Riothamus's losing battle against King Euric of the Visigoths at D\u00e9ols around the year 470.\nIn response to a plea from the Roman Emperor Anthemius, Riothamus had led twelve thousand men to establish a military presence in Bourges in central Gaul, but was betrayed by Arvandus, the Praetorian Prefect of Gaul, and subsequently ambushed by Euric's army. After a long battle, the Armorican survivors escaped to Avallon in Burgundy, after which they are lost to history. According to Breton king-lists, Riotham survived and reigned as Prince of Domnonia until his death sometime between 500 and 520, though this may have been a different person.\nAdditional waves of Britons.\nBrythonic (British Celtic) settlement increased during the Anglo-Saxon invasion of Britain in the 5th and 6th centuries to seek refuge from the Anglo-Saxon invaders. It is from this event that Brittany derives its name. \nScholars such as L\u00e9on Fleuriot have suggested a two-wave model of migration from Britain which saw the emergence of an independent Breton people and established the dominance of the Brythonic Breton language in Armorica. Their petty kingdoms are now known by the names of the counties that succeeded them\u2014Domnon\u00e9e (Devon), Cornouaille (Cornwall), L\u00e9on (Caerleon); but these names in Breton and Latin are in most cases identical to their British homelands. (In Breton and French, however, Gwened or Vannetais continued the name of the indigenous Veneti.) Although the details remain confused, these colonies consisted of related and intermarried dynasties which repeatedly unified (as by the 7th-century Saint Judica\u00ebl) before splintering again according to Celtic inheritance practices.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe Kingdom of Brittany.\nAt the beginning of the medieval era, Brittany was divided among three kingdoms, Domnonea, Cornouaille and Bro\u00ebrec. These realms eventually merged into a single state during the 9th century. The unification of Brittany was carried out by Nominoe, king between 845 and 851 and considered as the Breton \"Pater Patriae\". Among the immigrant Britons, there were some clergymen who helped the evangelisation of the region, which was still pagan, particularly in rural areas.\nHis son Erispoe secured the independence of the new kingdom of Brittany and won the Battle of Jengland against Charles the Bald. The Bretons won another war in 867, and the kingdom reached then its maximum extent: It received parts of Normandy, Maine and Anjou and the Channel Islands.\nViking occupation.\nBrittany was heavily attacked by the Vikings at the beginning of the 10th century. The kingdom lost its eastern territories, including Normandy and Anjou, and the county of Nantes was given to Fulk I of Anjou in 909. Nantes was seized by the Vikings in 914. At this time Brittany was also called Lydwiccum.\nDuchy of Brittany.\nNantes was eventually liberated by Alan II of Brittany in 937 with the support of his godbrother King \u00c6thelstan of England.\nAlan II totally expelled the Vikings from Brittany and recreated a strong Breton state. For aiding in removing the problem, Alan paid homage to Louis IV of France (who was \u00c6thelstan's nephew and had returned from England in the same year as Alan II) and thus Brittany ceased to be a kingdom and became a duchy.\nNorman allies.\nSeveral Breton lords helped William the Conqueror to invade England and the Bretons formed over a third of the landing force in 1066. They received large estates there (e.g. William's double-second cousin Alan Rufus and the latter's brother Brian of Brittany). The Bretons helped to liberate the Cornish, replacing Anglo-Saxon land owners. Some of these lords were powerful rivals.\nInternal disputes.\nMedieval Brittany was far from being a united nation. The French king maintained envoys in Brittany, alliances contracted by local lords often overlapped and there was no specific Breton unity. For example, Brittany replaced Latin with French as its official language in the 13th century, 300 years before France did so, and the Breton language did not have formal status.\nThe foreign policy of the Duchy changed many times; the Dukes were usually independent, but they often contracted alliances with England or France depending on who was threatening them at that point. Their support for each nation became very important during the 14th century because the English kings had started to claim the French throne.\nThe Breton War of Succession, a local episode of the Hundred Years' War, saw the House of Blois, backed by the French, fighting with the House of Montfort, backed by the English. The Montforts won in 1364 and enjoyed a period of total independence until the end of the Hundred Years' War, because France was weakened and stopped sending royal envoys to the Court of Brittany.\nEnglish diplomatic failures led to the Breton cavalry commanders Arthur, Comte de Richemont (later to become Arthur III, Duke of Brittany) and his nephew Peter II, Duke of Brittany playing key roles on the French side during the deciding stages of the war (including the battles of Patay, Formigny and Castillon and the Treaty of Arras).\nBrittany importantly lost the Mad War against France in 1488, mostly because of its internal divisions that were exacerbated by the corruption at the court of Francis II, Duke of Brittany. Indeed, some rebel Breton lords were fighting on the French side.\nUnion with the French Crown and modern period.\nAs a result of the Mad War, the Duke Francis II could not have his daughter Anne married without the king of France's consent. Nonetheless, she married the Holy Roman Emperor in 1490, leading to a crisis with France. Charles VIII of France besieged Rennes and had the marriage cancelled. He eventually married Anne. After he died childless, Anne had to marry his heir and cousin Louis XII. Anne unsuccessfully tried to preserve Breton independence, but she died in 1514, and the union between the two crowns was formally carried out by Francis I in 1532. He granted several privileges to Brittany, such as exemption from the gabelle, a tax on salt that was very unpopular in France. Under the Ancien R\u00e9gime, Brittany and France were governed as separate countries but under the same crown, so Breton aristocrats in the French royal court were classed as (foreign princes).\nFrom the 15th to the 18th century, Brittany reached an economic golden age. The region was located on the seaways near Spain, England and the Dutch Republic and it greatly benefited from the creation of the French colonial empire. Local seaports like Brest and Saint-Brieuc quickly expanded, and Lorient, first spelt \"L'Orient\", was founded in the 17th century. Saint-Malo was then known for its corsairs, Brest was a major base for the French Navy and Nantes flourished with the Atlantic slave trade. On its side, the inland provided hemp ropes and canvas and linen sheets. However, Colbertism, which encouraged the creation of many factories, did not favour the Breton industry because most of the royal factories were opened in other provinces. Moreover, several conflicts between France and Britain during the 18th century resulted in British blockades which weakened the Breton economy, leading it to go into recession.\nThe centralisation problem.\nTwo significant revolts occurred in the 17th and 18th centuries: the Revolt of the papier timbr\u00e9 (1675) and the Pontcallec conspiracy (1719). Both arose from attempts to resist centralisation and assert Breton constitutional exceptions to tax.\nBreton exodus.\nMany Bretons crossed the Atlantic to support the American War of Independence. These included naval officers such as Armand de Kersaint and soldiers such as Charles Armand Tuffin, marquis de la Rou\u00ebrie.\nThe French Revolution of 1789 \u2013 Division of Brittany into five departments.\nThe Duchy was legally abolished with the French Revolution that began in 1789 \u2013 and in 1790 the province of Brittany was divided into five departments: C\u00f4tes-du-Nord (later C\u00f4tes-d'Armor), Finist\u00e8re, Ille-et-Vilaine, Loire-Inf\u00e9rieure (later Loire-Atlantique) and Morbihan. Brittany essentially lost all its special privileges that existed under the Duchy. Three years later, the area became a centre of royalist and Catholic resistance to the Revolution during the Chouannerie.\nDuring the 19th century, Brittany remained in economic recession, and many Bretons emigrated to other French regions, particularly to Paris. This trend remained strong until the beginning of the 20th century. Nonetheless, the region was also modernising, with new roads and railways being built, and some places being industrialised. Nantes specialised in shipbuilding and food processing (sugar, exotic fruits and vegetables, fish, etc.), Foug\u00e8res in glass and shoe production, and metallurgy was practised in small towns such as Ch\u00e2teaubriant and Lochrist, known for its labour movements.\nThe region remained deeply Catholic, and during the Second Empire, the conservative values were strongly reasserted. When the Republic was re-established in 1871, there were rumours that Breton troops were mistrusted and mistreated at Camp Conlie during the Franco-Prussian War because of fears that they were a threat to the Republic.\nDuring the 19th century, the Breton language started to decline precipitously, mainly because of the Francization policy conducted under the Third Republic. On one hand, children were not allowed to speak Breton at school, and were punished by teachers if they did. Famously, signs in schools read: \"It is forbidden to speak Breton and to spit on the floor\" (\"Il est interdit de parler Breton et de cracher par terre\").\nAt the same time, the Celtic Revival led to the foundation of the Breton Regionalist Union (URB) and later to independence movements linked to Irish, Welsh, and Scottish and Cornish independence parties in the UK, and to pan-Celticism. However, the audience of these movements remained very low and their ideas did not reach a large public until the 20th century. The Seiz Breur movement, created in 1923, permitted a Breton artistic revival but its ties with Nazism and the collaborationism of the Breton National Party during World War II weakened Breton nationalism in the post-war period.\nBrittany lost 240,000 men during the First World War. The Second World War was also catastrophic for the region. It was invaded by Nazi Germany in 1940 and freed after Operation Cobra in August 1944. However, the areas around Saint-Nazaire and Lorient only surrendered on 10 and 11 May 1945, several days after the German capitulation. The two port towns had been virtually destroyed by Allied air raids, like Brest and Saint-Malo, and other towns, such as Nantes and Rennes, had also suffered.\nIn 1956, Brittany was legally reconstituted as the Region of Brittany, although the region excluded the ducal capital of Nantes and the surrounding area. Nevertheless, Brittany retained its cultural distinctiveness, and a new cultural revival emerged during the 1960s and 1970s. Bilingual schools were opened, singers started to write songs in Breton, and ecological catastrophes such as the Amoco Cadiz oil spill or the Erika oil spill and water pollution from intensive pig farming favoured new movements to protect the natural heritage.\nGovernment and politics.\nTraditional subdivisions.\nBrittany as a political entity disappeared in 1790, when it was divided into five d\u00e9partements. The Breton d\u00e9partements more or less correspond to the nine Catholic dioceses that appeared at the beginning of the Middle Ages. They were often called \"pays\" or \"bro\" (\"country\" in French and Breton) and they also served as fiscal and military districts. Brittany is also divided between \"Lower Brittany\" (\"Basse Bretagne\" and \"Breizh Izel\"), corresponding to the western half, where Breton is traditionally spoken, and \"Upper Brittany\" (\"Haute Bretagne\" and \"Breizh Uhel\"), corresponding to the eastern half, where Gallo is traditionally spoken. The historical Breton dioceses were:\nDuring the French Revolution, four dioceses were suppressed and the five remaining ones were modified to have the same administrative borders as the d\u00e9partements.\nCapital cities.\nBrittany has several historical capital cities. When it was an independent duchy, the Estates of Brittany, which can be compared to a parliament, met in various towns: Dinan, Plo\u00ebrmel, Redon, Rennes, Vitr\u00e9, Gu\u00e9rande, and, most of all, Vannes, where they met 19 times, and Nantes, 17 times. The Court and the government were also very mobile, and each dynasty favoured its own castles and estates. The dukes mostly lived in Nantes, Vannes, Redon, Rennes, Foug\u00e8res, Dol-de-Bretagne, Dinan and Gu\u00e9rande. All these towns except Vannes and Gu\u00e9rande are located in Upper Brittany, thus not in the Breton speaking area.\nAmong all these towns, only Nantes, Rennes and Vannes, which were the biggest ones, could really pretend to the capital status. The dukes were crowned in Rennes and they had a large castle there; it was however destroyed during the 15th century. Vannes, on its side, was the seat of the Chamber of Accounts and of the Parliament until the union with France. The Parliament was then transferred to Rennes, and the Chamber of Accounts to Nantes. Nantes, nicknamed \"the city of the Dukes of Brittany\", was also the permanent residence of the last dukes. The Ch\u00e2teau des ducs de Bretagne still stands in the city centre. Nowadays, Rennes is the only official capital of the region of Brittany. It is also the seat of an ecclesiastical province encompassing Brittany and the Pays de la Loire region.\nPresent subdivisions.\nDuring the French Revolution, Brittany was divided into five \"d\u00e9partements\", each made up of three or four \"arrondissements\". The arrondissements are further divided in cantons, which are themselves made up of one or several communes. The communes and the d\u00e9partements have a local council elected by their citizens, but arrondissements and cantons are not run by elected officials. The cantons serve as an electoral district for the election of the d\u00e9partement councils and arrondissements are run by a subprefect appointed by the French president. The president also appoints a prefect in each d\u00e9partement.\nBecause the d\u00e9partements are small and numerous, the French government tried to create wider regions during the 20th century. For the Breton nationalists, it was an occasion to recreate Brittany as a political and administrative entity, but the new region had to be economically efficient. Nantes and its \"d\u00e9partement\", Loire-Atlantique, raised concerns because they were off-centered, more integrated with the Loire Valley than with the Breton peninsula. The French government and local politicians also feared that Nantes, because of its population and its former Breton capital status, would have maintained a harmful competition with Rennes to get the regional institutions and investments.\nSeveral drafts for French regions had been proposed since the 1920s, and the definitive regions were drawn in 1956. The new Brittany had four d\u00e9partements, and Loire-Atlantique formed the Pays de la Loire region together with parts of Anjou, Maine and Poitou. In 1972, the regions received their present competencies, with an elected regional council. Since then, the region of Brittany has had its own council and administrative bodies.\nReunification.\nWhen the region of Brittany was created, several local politicians opposed the exclusion of Loire-Atlantique, and the question still remains.\nThe obstacles to reunification are the same as in 1956: having Nantes in Brittany could harm the position of Rennes and create an economic imbalance between Lower and Upper Brittany. Moreover, the Pays de la Loire region could not exist without Loire-Atlantique, because it would lose its political and economic capital. Without Loire-Atlantique, the other d\u00e9partements would not form an efficient region any more, and would have to integrate neighbouring regions such as the Centre-Val de Loire and Nouvelle-Aquitaine.\nHowever, several institutions have backed the reunification, such as the regional council of Brittany since 2008 and the Loire-Atlantique council since 2001. Some politicians like Jean-Marc Ayrault, the former French prime minister and former mayor of Nantes, favour instead the creation of a \"Greater West region\", which would encompass Brittany and the Pays de la Loire region. Polls show that 58% of the Bretons and 62% of the inhabitants in Loire-Atlantique favour the reunification.\nPolitical tendencies.\nUntil the end of the 20th century, Brittany had been characterised by a strong Catholic and conservative influence. However, some areas such as the industrial region around Saint-Nazaire and Lorient and the surroundings of Tr\u00e9guier are traditional Socialist and Communist strongholds. Left-wing parties, mainly the Socialist party and the Greens, have become more powerful after the 1970s and they have formed a majority in the Regional Council of Brittany since 2004. The Loire-Atlantique and Ille-et-Vilaine councils have also been held by the left since 2004.\nThe Socialist party has held the C\u00f4tes-d'Armor council since 1976, and the Finist\u00e8re council since 1998. On its side, Morbihan remains a right-wing stronghold. The local parties have a very small audience, except the Union D\u00e9mocratique Bretonne which has seats at the Regional Council and in other local assemblies. It advocates more autonomy for the region and its positions are very close to the Socialist parties. It also has a strong ecological orientation. The audience of far-right parties is lower in Brittany than in the rest of France.\nGeography and natural history.\nBrittany is the largest French peninsula. It is around and stretches toward the northwest and the Atlantic Ocean. It is bordered to the north by the English Channel, to the south by the Bay of Biscay and the waters located between the western coast and Ushant Island form the Iroise Sea.\nThe Breton coast is very indented, with many cliffs, rias and capes. The Gulf of Morbihan is a vast natural harbour with some forty islands that is almost a closed sea. In total, around 800 islands lie off the mainland; the largest being Belle \u00cele, in the south. Brittany has over of coastline; it represents a third of the total French coastline.\nThe region is generally hilly because it corresponds to the western end of the Armorican Massif, a very old range that also extends in Normandy and the Pays de la Loire region. Because of this continuity, the Breton border with the rest of France is not marked by any strong geographical landmark, apart from the river Couesnon, which separates Brittany from Normandy.\nThe Armorican Massif reaches its maximum elevation outside of Brittany, in neighbouring Mayenne, at 417 m, and slopes towards the west before straightening on its western extremity, with the Montagnes Noires and the Monts d'Arr\u00e9e. The highest hill in Brittany is the \"Roc'h Ruz\" in the Monts d'Arr\u00e9e, at . It is closely followed by several neighbouring hills culminating at around 384 m above sea level.\nCoastal areas are usually named \"Armor\" or \"Arvor\" (\"by the sea\" in Breton), and the inland is called \"Argoat\" (\"by the forest\"). The best soils were primitively covered by large forests which had been progressively replaced by bocage during the Middle Ages. The Breton bocage, with its small fields enclosed by thick hedgerows, has almost disappeared since the 1960s to fit the modern agricultural needs and methods, particularly mechanisation.\nSeveral forests still exist, such as the Paimpont forest, sometimes said to be the Arthurian Broc\u00e9liande. The poor and rocky areas are covered by large heathland and moorlands, and Brittany has several marshes, like the Bri\u00e8re, included in a regional natural park. Another regional park encompasses the Monts d'Arr\u00e9e and the Iroise seacoast. The Iroise Sea is also a UNESCO biosphere reserve.\nGeology.\nThe Breton peninsula appeared during the Cadomian Orogeny, which formed its northern coastline, between Guingamp and Foug\u00e8res. The southern part emerged during the Hercynian orogeny. At the same time, an intense volcanic activity left large quantities of granite. Between the Cadomian and Hercynian periods, the region was submerged several times and the sea left fossils and sedimentary rocks, mostly schist and sandstone. Because of the absence of limestone, soils in Brittany are usually acidic.\nThe Armorican massif straightened and flattened several times during the formation of the Pyrenees and the Alps. Changes in sea levels and climate led to a strong erosion and to the formation of more sedimentary rocks. Metamorphism is responsible for the distinctive local blue schist and for the rich subsoil of the Groix island, which comprises glaucophane and epidote.\nDuring the Quaternary glaciations, Brittany was covered by loess and rivers started to fill the valleys with alluvial deposits. The valleys themselves were a result of a strong tectonic activity between the African and the Eurasian Plate. The present Breton landscape did not acquire its final shape before one million years ago. The Breton subsoil is characterised by a huge amount of fractures that form a large aquifer containing several millions square meters of water.\nClimate.\nBrittany lies within the north temperate zone. It has a changeable, maritime climate, similar to Cornwall. Rainfall occurs regularly but sunny, cloudless days are also common. In the summer months, temperatures in the region can reach , yet the climate remains comfortable, especially when compared to the French regions located south of the Loire. The temperature difference between summer and winter is about 15 degrees, but it varies depending on the proximity of the sea. The weather is generally milder on the seacoast than inland but rainfall occurs with the same intensity on both. The Monts d'Arr\u00e9e, despite their low elevation, have much more rainfall than the rest of the region. The south coast, between Lorient and Pornic, enjoys more than 2,000 hours of sunshine per year.\nFlora and fauna.\nBrittany's wildlife is typical of France with several distinctions. On one hand, the region, due to its long coastline, has a rich oceanic fauna, and some birds cannot be seen in other French regions. On the other hand, the species found in the inland are usually common for France, and because Brittany is a peninsula, the number of species is lower in its western extremity than in the eastern part.\nA variety of seabirds can be seen close to the seaside, which is home to colonies of cormorants, gulls, razorbills, northern gannets, common murres and Atlantic puffins. Most of these birds breed on isolated islands and rocks and thus are hard to observe. The inland is home to common European species including pheasants, barn swallows, woodcocks, common swifts, and partridges.\nLike Cornwall, Wales and Ireland, the waters of Brittany attract marine animals including basking sharks, grey seals, leatherback turtles, dolphins, porpoises, jellyfish, crabs and lobsters. Bass is common along the coast, small-spotted catsharks live on the continental shelf, rattails and anglerfish populate the deep waters. River fish of note include trout, Atlantic salmon, pikes, shades and lampreys. The Breton rivers are also home to beavers and otters and to some invasive American species, such as the coypu which destroys the ecosystem and accelerated the extinction of the European mink.\nAmong the invertebrates, Brittany is notably home to the escargot de Quimper, the freshwater pearl mussel and the white-clawed crayfish. The larger Breton mammals died out during the modern period, including the wolf. Today, mammals of note include roe deer, wild boar, foxes, hares and several species of bat.\nBrittany is widely known for the Breton horse, a local breed of draft horse, and for the Brittany gun dog. The region also has its own breeds of cattle, some of which are on the brink of extinction: the Bretonne Pie Noir, the Froment du L\u00e9on, the Armorican and the Nantaise.\nThe Breton forests, dunes, moorlands and marshes are home to several iconic plants, such as endemic cistus, aster and linaria varieties, the horseshoe vetch and the lotus maritimus.\nEducation.\nBrittany has the same education system as the rest of France. As in other French regions, formal education before the 19th century was the preserve of the elite. Before 1460, Brittany did not have a university, and Breton students had to go to Angers, Poitiers or Caen. The University of Nantes was founded under the duke Francis II, who wanted to affirm the Breton independence from France. All the traditional disciplines were taught here: arts, theology, law and medicine. During the 17th century, it had around 1,500 students. It declined during the 18th century, mostly because Nantes was flourishing with the Atlantic slave trade and paid no attention to its cultural institutions.\nA mayor eventually asked the university to be relocated to Rennes, more devoted to culture and science, and the faculties progressively moved there after 1735. The transfer was interrupted by the French Revolution, and all the French universities were dissolved in 1793.\nNapoleon reorganised the French education system in 1808. He created new universities and invented two secondary education institutions: the \"coll\u00e8ges\" and the \"lyc\u00e9es\" which were opened in numerous towns to educate boys and form a new elite. A new University of Rennes was progressively recreated during the 19th century.\nIn the meantime, several laws were promoted to open schools, notably for girls. In 1882, Jules Ferry succeeded in passing a law which made primary education in France free, non-clerical (la\u00efque) and mandatory. Thus, free schools were opened in almost every village of Brittany.\nLanguage of humiliation.\nJules Ferry also promoted education policies establishing French language as the language of the Republic, and mandatory education was a mean to eradicate regional languages and dialects. In Brittany, it was forbidden for the pupils to speak Breton or Gallo, and the two were strongly depreciated. Humiliating practices aimed at stamping out the Breton language and culture prevailed in state schools until the late 1960s.\nIn response, the Diwan schools were founded in 1977 to teach Breton by immersion. They have taught a few thousand young people from elementary school to high school, and they have gained more fame owing to their high level of results in school exams.\nA bilingual approach has also been implemented in some state schools after 1979, and some Catholic schools have done the same after 1990. Besides, Brittany, with the neighbouring Pays de la Loire region, remains a stronghold for Catholic private education with around 1,400 schools.\nOther Institutes of Learning.\nDuring the 20th century, tertiary education was developed with the creation of the \u00c9cole centrale de Nantes in 1919, the University of Nantes in 1961, the ESC Bretagne Brest in 1962, the University of Western Brittany in 1971, the \u00c9cole Nationale Sup\u00e9rieure des T\u00e9l\u00e9communications de Bretagne in 1977 and the University of Southern Brittany in 1995. The Catholic University of the West, based in Angers, also opened classes in several Breton towns. In 1969, the University of Rennes was divided between the University of Rennes 1 and the University of Rennes 2 \u2013 Upper Brittany. After the Second World War, the Ecole Sp\u00e9ciale Militaire de Saint-Cyr, the foremost French military academy, settled in Co\u00ebtquidan.\nEconomy.\nBrittany, apart from some areas such as Lorient, Nantes and Saint-Nazaire, has never been heavily industrialised. Today, fishing and agriculture remain important activities. Brittany has more than 40,000 farms, mostly oriented towards cattle, pig and poultry breeding, as well as cereal and vegetable production. The number of farms tends to diminish, but as a result, they are merged into very large estates. Brittany is the first producer in France for vegetables (green beans, onions, artichokes, potatoes, tomatoes, etc.). Cereals are mostly grown for cattle feeding. Wine, especially muscadet, is made in a small region south of Nantes. Brittany is the first region in France for fishing. The activity employs around 15,000 people, and more than 2500 firms work in fish and seafood processing.\nAlthough relatively new, the Breton industry has been constantly growing since 1980. Food processing (meat, vegetables, etc.) represents a third of the industrial jobs, but other activities are also important for the local economy. Shipbuilding, both commercial and military, is implanted in Saint-Nazaire (Chantiers de l'Atlantique), Lorient and Brest; Airbus has plants in Saint-Nazaire and Nantes; and Peugeot has a large factory in Rennes. Brittany is the second French region for telecommunication and the fifth for electronics, two activities mainly developed in Rennes, Lannion and Brest.\nThe unemployment rate in Brittany is lower than in other French regions and it is usually around 6 or 7% of the active population. Due to the 2008 financial crisis, unemployment rose to 8.7% in the Region Brittany and 8.4% in Loire-Atlantique in late 2012. However, these figures remain under the French national rate (9.9% at the same period). Some industries, such as construction, industry, catering or transport, usually have difficulties finding employees.\nIn 2018, Region Brittany's gross domestic product reached 99\u00a0billion euros. It was the ninth richest region in France and it produced 4% of the national GDP. The Breton GDP per capita was around 29,694 euros in 2018. That means it was lower than the French average of 30,266 euros, and below the European Union average of 30,900 euros. The GDP of the Loire-Atlantique \"d\u00e9partement\" is around 26\u00a0billion euros, and the GDP of the five historical Breton d\u00e9partements would be at around 108\u00a0billion euros.\nTourism.\nTourism is particularly important for the seacoast and Brittany is one of the most visited regions in France. In April 2019, The Guardian's travel section included two Brittany locations in its list of \"20 of the most beautiful villages in France\". The two were Rochefort-en-Terre with \"its covered market, 12th-century church, medieval castle, 19th-century chateau, and 16th- and 17th-century mansions\" and Locronan, where \"East India Company's offices still stand on the village square, as well as 17th-century merchants' dwellings\".\nDemographics.\nIn 2017, the population in Region Brittany was estimated to 3,318,904 and Loire-Atlantique had around 1,394,909 inhabitants, thus historical Brittany's population can be estimated at 4,713,813, the highest in its history. The population in Region Brittany had grown by 0.9% between 1999 and 2000, and the growth rate reached more than 1% in Ille-et-Vilaine and Morbihan. The region around Rennes and the south are the more attractive areas, whereas the population is declining in the centre and in the westernmost parts. While most of the metropolitan areas are growing, the cities themselves tend to stagnate or regress, such as for Brest, Lorient, Saint-Brieuc and Saint-Malo. In 2017, Ille-et-Vilaine had 1,060,199 inhabitants, it was followed by Finist\u00e8re 909,028 inhabitants, Morbihan 750,863 inhabitants, and C\u00f4tes-d'Armor, with 598,814 inhabitants.\nThe largest cities in Region Brittany as of 2017 were Rennes, with 216,815 inhabitants, Brest 140,064, Quimper 62,985, Lorient 57,149, Vannes 53,352, Saint-Malo 46,097 and Saint-Brieuc 44,372. All the other communes had under 25,000 inhabitants. Brittany is also characterised by a great number of small towns, such as Vitr\u00e9, Concarneau, Morlaix or Auray. Loire-Atlantique has two major cities, Nantes, with 309,346 inhabitants and an urban area encompassing 972,828, and Saint-Nazaire, with 69,993 inhabitants. Loire-Atlantique's population is more rapidly growing than Region Brittany's and it is the 12th most populated French d\u00e9partement. Nevertheless, since the 1990s, Rennes has consistently ranked as one of France's fastest growing metropolitan areas.\nIn 1851, Brittany had around 2.7\u00a0million inhabitants and the demographic growth stayed low until the second half of the 20th century, mainly because of an important emigration. Brittany had 3.2\u00a0million inhabitants in 1962 and the growth was mainly due to Loire-Atlantique and the steady growth of Nantes. Without the Loire-Atlantique's figures, the Breton population only numbered 2.4\u00a0million in 1962, nearly unchanged from its population of 2.3\u00a0million in 1851. After the 1960s, the whole region has had a strong demographic growth because of the decline of the traditional emigration to richer French regions. Instead, Brittany has become attractive, particularly for families, young retired persons and active people over 35 years old.\nRegional identity.\nBreton political parties do not have wide support and their electoral success is small. However, Bretons have a strong cultural identity. According to a poll made in 2008, 50% of the inhabitants of the region of Brittany considered themselves as much Breton as French, 22.5% felt more Breton than French, and 15.4% more French than Breton. A minority, 1.5%, considered themselves Breton but not French, while 9.3% did not consider themselves to be Breton at all.\n51.9% of the poll respondents agreed that Brittany should have more political power, and 31.1% thought that it should stay the same. Only 4.6% favoured independence, and 9.4% were undecided.\nA 2012 poll taken in the five departments of historical Brittany showed that 48% of the respondents considered themselves belonging first to France, 37% to Brittany, and 10% to Europe. It also showed that Breton identity is stronger among people younger than 35. 53% of them considering themselves to belong first to Brittany. 50% of the older respondents considered themselves belonging first to France. Primary Breton identity is at its lowest among the respondents over 65: 58% consider themselves to belong first to France, with European identify secondary. 21% of the respondents over 65 considering themselves to be European first. Breton self-identification is stronger among people who vote left-wing. It is stronger among employees than employers.\nRegional languages.\nFrench, the sole official language of the French Republic, is spoken today by the vast majority in Brittany, for whom it is usually their mother tongue. However, French was not widely known in the region before the 19th century, and two regional languages exist in Brittany: Breton and Gallo. They are separated by a language border that has constantly moved back since the Middle Ages.\nThe current border runs from Plouha on the English Channel to the Rhuys Peninsula on the Bay of Biscay. Because of their origins and practice, Breton and Gallo can be compared to Scottish Gaelic and Scots language in Scotland. Both have been recognised as \"Langues de Bretagne\" (languages of Brittany) by the Regional Council of Brittany since 2004.\nBreton.\nBreton is a Celtic language derived from the historical Common Brittonic language, and is most closely related to Cornish and Welsh. It was imported to Western Armorica during the 5th century by Britons fleeing the Anglo-Saxon invasion of Britain. Breton remained the language of the rural population, but since the Middle Ages the bourgeoisie, the nobility, and the higher clergy have spoken French.\nGovernment policies in the 19th and 20th centuries made education compulsory and, at the same time, forbade the use of Breton in schools to push non-French speakers into adopting the French language. Nevertheless, until the 1960s Breton was spoken or understood by many of the inhabitants of western Brittany. During the 1970s, Breton schools were opened and the local authorities started to promote the language, which was on the brink of extinction because parents had stopped teaching it to their children.\nHaving declined from more than one million speakers around 1950 to about 200,000 in the first decade of the 21st century, of whom 61% are more than 60 years old, Breton is classified as \"severely endangered\" by the UNESCO \"Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger\". However, the number of children attending bilingual classes has risen 33% between 2006 and 2012 to 14,709.\nThe Breton language has several dialects which have no precise limits but rather form a continuum. Most of them are very similar to each other, with only some phonetic and lexical differences. The three main dialects spoken in the western end of Brittany are:\nin opposition to the \"Vannetais\", spoken around Vannes, which is the most differentiated Breton dialect.\nAccording to a 1999 INSEE survey, 12% of the adults of Brittany speak Breton.\nGallo.\nGallo is spoken on the eastern half of Brittany. It is not itself a Celtic language. Like French, it is also descended from Latin (and is classified in the Langues d'o\u00efl branch), but has some Celtic influences, particularly in its vocabulary, whereas French has influences from both Celtic (Gaulish) and Frankish (the Germanic language which arrived after Latin in much of the rest of France).\nUnlike Breton, Gallo does not have a long promotion history and it is still often perceived as a poor rural dialect. Moreover, because of its linguistic relationship with Gallo, French imposed itself more easily as the main language in Upper Brittany than in Breton speaking areas. Gallo was simply perceived as an incorrect way of speaking French rather than a separate language. Gallo transmission from parents to children is extremely low and efforts to standardise and publish books in Gallo did not reverse the decline of the language and its lack of prestige.\nGallo is also threatened by the Breton language revival, because Breton is gaining ground in territories that were not previously part of the main Breton-speaking area, and most of all because Breton appears as the national language of Brittany, thus leaving no place for Gallo.\nGallo had never been written before the 20th century, and several writing systems were created. They are however rarely known by the population and signs in Gallo are often unreadable, even for fluent speakers. In Loire-Atlantique, where Gallo is not promoted at all by the local authorities, many people do not even know the word \"Gallo\" and have no idea that it has writing systems and publications.\nThe Gallo community is estimated at between 28,300 and 200,000 speakers. The language is taught on a non-compulsory basis in some schools, high-schools and universities, particularly in Ille-et-Vilaine.\nReligion.\nBretons are mainly Catholic and the Christianisation occurred during the Roman Gaul and Frank era. During the Briton emigration to Brittany, several Christian missionaries, mostly Welsh, came in the region and founded dioceses. They are known as the \"Seven founder saints\":\nOther notable early missionaries are Gildas and the Irish saint Columbanus. Bretons recognize more than 300 local \"saints\", though only a few are officially accepted by the Catholic Church. Since the 19th century at least, Brittany has been known as one of the most devoutly Catholic regions in France, together with the neighbouring Pays de la Loire region. The proportion of students attending Catholic private schools is the highest in France. The patron saint of Brittany is Saint Anne, the Virgin's mother, but Ivo of Kermartin, a 13th-century priest, called Saint-Yves in French and Sant-Erwan in Breton, can also be considered as a patron saint. His feast, 19 May, is Brittany's national day.\nMany distinctive traditions and customs have also been preserved in Brittany. Among them, the \"Pardons\" are one of the most traditional demonstrations of popular Catholicism. These penitential ceremonies occur in some villages in Lower Brittany on the feast day of the parish's saint. The penitents form a procession and they walk together to a shrine, a church or any sacred place. Some Pardons are reputed for their length, and they all finish by large meals and popular feasts.\nThere is a very old pilgrimage called the \"Tro Breizh\" (tour of Brittany), where the pilgrims walk around Brittany from the grave of one of the seven founder saints to another. Historically, the pilgrimage was made in one trip (a total distance of around 600\u00a0km) for all seven saints. Nowadays, however, pilgrims complete the circuit over the course of several years. In 2002, the Tro Breizh included a special pilgrimage to Wales, symbolically making the reverse journey of the Welshmen Sant Paol, Sant Brieg, and Sant Samzun.\nThe most powerful folk figure is the Ankou or the \"Reaper of Death\". Sometimes a skeleton wrapped in a shroud with the Breton flat hat, sometimes described as a real human being (the last dead of the year, devoted to bring the dead to Death), he makes his journeys by night carrying an upturned scythe which he throws before him to reap his harvest. Sometimes he is on foot but mostly he travels with a cart, the \"Karrig an Ankou\", drawn by two oxen and a lean horse. Two servants dressed in the same shroud and hat as the Ankou pile the dead into the cart, and to hear it creaking at night means you have little time left to live.\nAs official religious statistics are forbidden in France, there are no official figures about religious practices in Brittany. However, successive polls show that the region has grown more nonreligious over time. Catholicism started to decline after the Second World War, during the urbanisation of Brittany. A poll conducted in 2006 showed that Morbihan was the only \"d\u00e9partement\" to have a strong Catholic population, around 70% of its inhabitants belonging to that religion. Loire-Atlantique and C\u00f4tes-d'Armor were among the least Catholic French \"d\u00e9partements\", with only 50% of the population practicing Catholics, while Ille-et-Vilaine and Finist\u00e8re were at around 65%. Other religions are almost non-existent, apart from Islam which is practiced by between 1 and 3% of the inhabitants in Ille-et-Vilaine and Loire-Atlantique.\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nBrittany is home to many megalithic monuments; the words \"menhir\" and \"dolmen\" come from the Breton language. The largest menhir alignments are the Carnac stones. Other major sites include the Barnenez cairn, the Locmariaquer megaliths, the Menhir de Champ-Dolent, the Mane Braz tumulus and the Gavrinis tomb. Monuments from the Roman period are rare, but include a large temple in Corseul and scarce ruins of villas and city walls in Rennes and Nantes.\nBrittany has a large number of medieval buildings. They include numerous Romanesque and French Gothic churches, usually built in local sandstone and granite, castles and half-timbered houses visible in villages, towns and cities. Several Breton towns still have their medieval walls, such as Gu\u00e9rande, Concarneau, Saint-Malo, Vannes, Foug\u00e8res and Dinan. Major churches include Saint-Pol-de-L\u00e9on Cathedral, Tr\u00e9guier Cathedral, Dol Cathedral, Nantes Cathedral and the Kreisker chapel. Most of the Breton castles were rebuilt between the 13th and the 15th century, such as the Ch\u00e2teau de Suscinio, the Ch\u00e2teau de Dinan, the Ch\u00e2teau de Combourg, the Ch\u00e2teau de Largo\u00ebt, the Ch\u00e2teau de Tonqu\u00e9dec, the Josselin Castle and the Ch\u00e2teau de Tr\u00e9cesson. The most impressive castles can be seen along the border with France, where stand the Ch\u00e2teau de Foug\u00e8res, the Ch\u00e2teau de Vitr\u00e9, the Ch\u00e2teau de Ch\u00e2teaubriant and the Ch\u00e2teau de Clisson.\nThe French Renaissance occurred when Brittany lost its independence. The Renaissance architecture is almost absent in the region, except in Upper Brittany, close to the border with France. Major sites include the Ch\u00e2teau des ducs de Bretagne, the last permanent residence of the dukes, which displays the transition from late Gothic to Renaissance style. The Ch\u00e2teau de Ch\u00e2teaubriant, a former fortress, was transformed into a vast palace in the Italian style.\nIn Lower Brittany, the medieval style never totally disappeared. However, local innovations permitted some changes and the birth of a particular style. Its most distinctive feature is the parish close, which displays an elaborately decorated church surrounded by an entirely walled churchyard. Many villages still have their closes, they date from the 16th and 17th centuries and sometimes include an elaborately carved calvary sculpture.\nDuring the 17th and the 18th centuries, the main seaports and towns obtained a typical French look, with baroque and neoclassical buildings. Nantes, which was at the time the biggest French harbour, received a theatre, large avenues and quays, and Rennes was redesigned after a fire in 1720. At the same period, the wealthy ship-owners from Saint-Malo built many mansions called \"Malouini\u00e8res\" around their town. Along the coast, Vauban and other French architects designed several citadels, such as in Le Palais and Port-Louis. In rural areas, Breton houses remained simple, with a single floor and a longhouse pattern. They were built with local materials: mostly granite in Lower Brittany and schist in Upper Brittany. Slates and reeds were usually used for roofing. During the 19th century, the Breton architecture was mainly characterised by the Gothic Revival and Eclecticism. Clisson, the southernmost Breton town, was rebuilt in an Italian Romantic style around 1820. The Breton lighthouses were mostly built during the 19th century. The most famous are Ar Men, Phare d'Eckm\u00fchl, La Vieille and La Jument. The lighthouse on the \u00cele Vierge is, with 77 meters, the highest in Europe.\nAt the end of the 19th century, several seaside resorts were created along the coast and villas and hotels were built in historicist, Art Nouveau, and later in the Art Deco styles. These architectures are particularly present in Dinard, La Baule and B\u00e9nodet. Architecture from the 20th century can be seen in Saint-Nazaire, Brest and Lorient, three cities destroyed during the Second World War and rebuilt afterwards, and in the works of the Breton nationalist architects like James Bouill\u00e9 and Olier Mordrel.\nFine arts.\nUntil the 19th century, Catholicism had been the main inspiration for Breton artists. The region has a great number of baroque retables, made between the 17th and the 19th century. Breton sculptors were also famous for their ship models that served as ex-votos and for their richly decorated furniture, which features na\u00efve Breton characters and traditional patterns. The box-bed is the most famous Breton piece of furniture. The Breton style had a strong revival between 1900 and the Second World War and it was used by the Seiz Breur movement. The Seiz Breur artists also tried to invent a modern Breton art by rejecting French standards and mixing traditional techniques with new materials. The leading artists of that period were the designer Ren\u00e9-Yves Creston, the illustrators Jeanne Malivel and Xavier Haas, and the sculptors Raffig Tullou, Francis Renaud, Georges Robin, Joseph Savina, Jules-Charles Le Bozec and Jean Fr\u00e9our.\nBrittany is also known for its needlework, which can be seen on its numerous headdress models, and for its faience production, which started at the beginning of the 18th century. Quimper faience is known worldwide for its bowls and plates painted by hand, and other towns, such as Pornic, also maintain a similar tradition. The potteries usually feature na\u00efve Breton characters in traditional clothing and daily scenes. The designs have a strong traditional Breton influence, but Orientalism and Art Deco have also been used.\nBecause of its distinct culture and natural landscape, Brittany has inspired many French artists since the 19th century. The Pont-Aven School, which started to emerge in the 1850s and lasted until the beginning of the 20th century, had a decisive influence on modern painting. The artists who settled in Pont-Aven wanted to break away from the Academic style of the and later from Impressionism when it began to decline. Among them were Paul Gauguin, Paul Signac, Marc Chagall, Paul S\u00e9rusier and Raymond Wintz. Before them, Brittany had also been visited by Academic and Romantic painters like Jean Antoine Th\u00e9odore de Gudin and Jules Achille No\u00ebl who were looking for dramatic seascapes and storms.\nMusic.\nSince the early 1970s, Brittany has experienced a tremendous revival of its folk music. Numerous festivals were created, along with smaller \"fest-noz\" (popular feasts). The \"bagado\u00f9\", bands composed of bagpipes, bombards and drums (including snare), are also a modern creation, inspired by the Scottish pipe bands. The Lann-Bihou\u00e9 bagad, one of the most well-known, belongs to the French Navy. It is the only one that does not take part to the annual bagado\u00f9 competitions. Celtic harp is also common, as are vocals and dances. The Kan ha diskan is the most common type of singing. The performers sing calls and responses while dancing. Breton dances usually imply circles, chains or couples and they are different in every region. The oldest dances seem to be the passepied and the gavotte, and the newest ones derive from the quadrille and French Renaissance dances.\nIn the 1960s, several Breton artists started to use contemporary patterns to create a Breton pop music. Among them, Alan Stivell contributed most in popularising the Celtic harp and Breton music in the world. He also used American rock and roll in his works and influenced 1970s Breton bands such as Kornog, Gwerz (band) and Tri Yann, who revived traditional songs and made them popular across France. Soldat Louis is the main Breton rock band, and Breton singers include Gilles Servat, Glenmor, Dan Ar Braz, Yann-Fa\u00f1ch Kemener, Denez Prigent, Nolwenn Korbell and Nolwenn Leroy. The Manau Hip hop group from Paris has strong Breton and Celtic inspirations. You can also find the well known group Matmatah from Brest.\nYann Tiersen, who composed the soundtrack for \"Am\u00e9lie\", C\u00e9cile Corbel the compositor of \"Arrietty and the borrowers\", the Electro band Yelle and the avant-garde singer Brigitte Fontaine are also from Brittany. The 19th-century composer Louis-Albert Bourgault-Ducoudray was one of the first western European composers to be influenced by what is now known as world music.\nIn 2022, Alvan and Ahez have been selected to represent France in the Eurovision Song Contest 2022. Their song, Fulenn, is sung entirely in Breton and is about the legend of Katel Kollet, a lady who dances with the devil.\nLegends and literature.\nBrittany is closely associated with the Matter of Britain and King Arthur. According to Wace, Broc\u00e9liande is located in Brittany and it is nowadays considered to be Paimpont forest. There, ruins of a castle surrounded by a lake are associated with the Lady of the Lake, a dolmen is said to be Merlin's tomb and a path is presented as Morgan le Fay's Val sans Retour. Tristan and Iseult are also said to have lived in Brittany. Another major Breton legend is the story about Ys, a city swallowed by the ocean.\nBreton literature before the 19th century was mostly oral. The oral tradition entertained by medieval poets died out during the 15th century and books in Breton were very rare before 1850. At that time, local writers started to collect and publish local tales and legends and wrote original works. Published between 1925 and the Second World War, the literary journal Gwalarn favoured a modern Breton literature and helped translating widely known novels into Breton. After the war, the journal \"Al Liamm\" pursued that mission. Among the authors writing in Breton are Auguste Brizeux, a Romantic poet, the neo-Druidic bard Erwan Berthou, Th\u00e9odore Hersart de La Villemarqu\u00e9, who collected the local legends about King Arthur, Roparz Hemon, founder of Gwalarn, P\u00ear-Jakez Helias, Glenmor, P\u00ear Denez and Meavenn.\nBreton literature includes 19th-century historical novels by \u00c9mile Souvestre, travel journals by Anatole Le Braz, poems and novels by Charles Le Goffic, the works of the singer-songwriter Th\u00e9odore Botrel and of the maritime writer Henri Queff\u00e9lec. Brittany is also the birthplace of many writers like Fran\u00e7ois-Ren\u00e9 de Chateaubriand, Jules Verne, Ernest Renan, F\u00e9licit\u00e9 Robert de Lamennais and Pierre Ab\u00e9lard Max Jacob, Alfred Jarry, Victor Segalen, Xavier Grall, Jean Rouaud, Ir\u00e8ne Frain, Herve Jaouen, Alain Robbe-Grillet, Pierre-Jakez H\u00e9lias, Tristan Corbi\u00e8re, Paul F\u00e9val, Jean Gu\u00e9henno, Arthur Bern\u00e8de, Andr\u00e9 Breton, Patrick Poivre d'Arvor.\nThe \"Asterix\" comics, set during the time of Julius Caesar and written in the second half of the twentieth century, are set in Armorica, now Brittany.\nMuseums.\nThe Museum of Brittany, located in Rennes, was founded in 1856. Its collections are mainly dedicated to the history of the region. Museums dedicated to Prehistory and local megaliths are located in Carnac and Penmarch, while several towns like Vannes and Nantes have a museum presenting their own history.\nThe Museum of Fine Arts of Rennes owns a large collection of Egyptian, Greek and Roman antiquities as well as drawings and engravings by Domenico Ghirlandaio, Parmigianino, Albrecht D\u00fcrer and Rembrandt. Its French art collection gathers works by Georges de La Tour, Fran\u00e7ois Boucher, Paul Gauguin, Auguste Rodin, Camille Corot and Robert Delaunay. It has also works by Pablo Picasso, Rubens, Peter Lely and Paolo Veronese. The collections of the Museum of Fine Arts of Nantes are more dedicated to modern and contemporary art and contain works by Edward Burne-Jones, Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix, Gustave Courbet, Paul Signac, Tamara de Lempicka, Wassily Kandinsky, Max Ernst, Pierre Soulages and Piero Manzoni. The Museums of Fine Arts of Brest and Quimper offer similar collections, with large quantities of French painting together with the works of some Italian and Dutch artists. The Museum of Fine Arts Pont-Aven is dedicated to the School of Pont-Aven. Contemporary sculptures can be seen in the park around the Ch\u00e2teau de Kergu\u00e9hennec, in Bignan.\nMuseums in Saint-Malo, Lorient and Douarnenez are dedicated to ships and maritime traditions and history. The Mus\u00e9e national de la Marine has a large annex in Brest and a submarine is opened to visitors in Lorient. In the same town, it is also possible to visit the Keroman Submarine Museum, and the \"Cit\u00e9 de la voile \u00c9ric Tabarly\", a museum dedicated to sailing. In Saint-Nazaire, where many transatlantic ships were built, including and , a museum showing transatlantic interiors was installed in a Second World War base. Nantes has a museum dedicated to Jules Verne, a Natural History Museum and a museum of archaeology and design, the Mus\u00e9e Dobr\u00e9e.\nFestivals.\nBrittany has a vibrant calendar of festivals and events. It hosts some of France's biggest contemporary music festivals, such as La Route du Rock in Saint-Malo, the Vieilles Charrues in Carhaix, the Rencontres Trans Musicales in Rennes, the Festival du Bout du Monde in Crozon, the Hellfest in Clisson and the Astropolis in Brest, or in Landerneau and Saint-Nolff. The Festival Interceltique de Lorient welcomes each year participants all the Celtic nations and their diasporas. La Folle Journ\u00e9e, in Nantes, is the largest classical music festival in France.\nThe Breton culture is highlighted during the \"F\u00eate de la Bretagne\", which occurs in many places around Saint-Yves's day (19 May), and during the Festival de Cornouaille in Quimper. Several towns also organise historical re-enactments and events celebrating local traditions, such as the Filets Bleus in Concarneau which celebrates fishing.\nBrittany also has some film festivals like the Three Continents Festival in Nantes. The Utopiales international science fiction festival is held in the same city. Brest and Douarnenez both organise large tall ship meetings (See Brest Maritime Festival).\nSport.\nFootball, cycling and sailing are the three most popular sports in Brittany. Major football teams are the FC Nantes, the Stade Rennais F.C., the FC Lorient, the Stade Brestois 29, the Vannes OC and the En Avant de Guingamp. Professional footballers coming from the region also form the Brittany national football team which sometimes plays with national teams.\nSeveral Bretons have won the Tour de France: Bernard Hinault, Louison Bobet, Jean Robic and Lucien Petit-Breton as riders, and Cyrille Guimard as a \"directeur sportif\".\nRugby Union is less popular in the North than in the south of France, but Rugby Club Vannes are one of few professional teams in northern France. They currently play in the top tier of French Rugby, Top 14.\nSailing is particularly important for sea-resorts like La Trinit\u00e9-sur-Mer, Pornichet, Concarneau, Lorient and the \u00eeles de Gl\u00e9nan, where a prestigious school is located. A great number of Bretons have become acclaimed sailors, such as: \u00c9ric Tabarly, Lo\u00efck Peyron, Jean Le Cam, Michel Desjoyeaux, Olivier de Kersauson, Thomas Coville, Vincent Riou and Marc Pajot. The Route du Rhum, the Transat Qu\u00e9bec-Saint-Malo, the Jules Verne Trophy are the main Breton sailing competitions. The Solitaire du Figaro stages often start in Brittany.\nGouren, a style of folk wrestling, is the most popular Breton sport. The Boule bretonne is related to p\u00e9tanque. The \"Palets\", common in Upper Brittany and in other French regions, is also related to p\u00e9tanque, but players use iron disks instead of balls and they have to throw them on a wooden board.\nGaelic football is also a growing sport in the region, with club teams and a 'county' GAA team representing Brittany against other European 'counties' such as Galicia.\nCuisine.\nAlthough Muscadet and Gros Plant white wines are produced south of the Loire, the traditional drink of Brittany is cider. Brittany is the second-largest cider-producing region in France. Breton cider is traditionally served in a bowl or a cup. Brittany also has a long beer-brewing tradition, tracing its roots back to the 17th century. Young artisanal brewers are keeping a variety of beer types alive, such as \"Coreff de Morlaix\", \"Tri Martolod\" and \"Britt\". Stronger alcohols include the \"chouchen\", a sort of mead made with wild honey, and an apple eau de vie called \"lambig\". Cr\u00eapes and galettes are the two most well-known Breton dishes. The cr\u00eapes, made and served with butter, are eaten for dessert and the galettes are usually salty and made with buckwheat. They traditionally replaced bread as basic food and they can be served with cheese, sausages, bacon, mushrooms or eggs. They can be accompanied by Breton buttermilk called \"lait ribot\". Brittany also has a dish similar to the pot-au-feu known as the kig ha farz, which consists of stewed pork or beef with buckwheat dumplings. Surrounded by the sea, Brittany offers a wide range of fresh seafood and fish, especially mussels and oysters. Among the seafood specialities is a fish stew called cotriade. The beurre blanc sauce, invented in Saint-Julien-de-Concelles, close to Nantes, is often served with fish. Brittany is also known for its salt, mainly harvested around Gu\u00e9rande and used in butter and milk caramels. The region is notable for its biscuit factories, many towns having their own: Quimper, Lorient, Pont-Aven, Saint-Brieuc, BN and LU in Nantes, La Trinitaine in La Trinit\u00e9-sur-Mer, and Galettes Saint-Michel in Saint-Michel-Chef-Chef. They usually make their biscuits with salted butter and sell them in iron boxes. Famous Breton pastries include the \"kouign amann\" (\"butter cake\" in Breton) made with bread dough and high quantities of butter and sugar, and the \"far\", a sort of sweet Yorkshire pudding usually made with dried plums.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nUntil the 1970s, the Breton road network was poor because maritime and rail transport prevailed. The French president Charles de Gaulle implemented a major road construction plan in the 1970 and Brittany received over 10\u00a0billion francs of investments during 25 years. More than 10,000\u00a0km of motorways were built, permitting Breton road transport to multiply by four. The Breton motorways are not toll roads, contrarily to the usual French highways.\nThe main road artery linking cities and other settlements along the north coast is the Route nationale 12 which connects the cities of Rennes, Saint-Brieuc, Morlaix and Brest. It also provides a link to southern Normandy, terminating in Paris. In south Brittany the Route nationale 165 performs a similar role along the south coast providing connections between Nantes, Vannes, Lorient, Quimper and Brest. The Route nationale 164 crosses the centre of the peninsula and connects Rennes to Loud\u00e9ac, Carhaix and Ch\u00e2teaulin, and the Route nationale 166 links Rennes to Vannes. The Route nationale 137 provides connections between Saint-Malo, Rennes and Nantes and terminates in Bordeaux.\nNantes is linked to Paris by the A11 autoroute, and Rennes is both on the A81 autoroute to Paris and the A84 autoroute to Caen. These highways are standard French toll roads.\nAir.\nThe biggest Breton airport is Nantes Atlantique Airport. Destination served include the United Kingdom, Italy, Germany, Ireland and Morocco. The Brest Bretagne Airport is the second airport in Brittany. It is followed by Rennes \u2013 Saint-Jacques, Lorient South Brittany and Dinard \u2013 Saint-Malo. The Saint-Brieuc \u2013 Armor airport serves flights between Brittany and the Channel Islands. Others smaller airport operates domestic flights in Quimper, and Lannion.\nRail.\nBrittany is on two major TGV lines, one linking Paris to Nantes and Le Croisic, on the south coast, and another linking Paris to Rennes and Brest. An extension of the LGV Atlantique, which stops at Le Mans, was completed in 2017, bringing the line to Rennes. This extension is known as the LGV Bretagne-Pays de la Loire. TGV services also link the region with major cities in France such as Lyon, Strasbourg, Marseille, and Lille. Regional services are operated by TER Bretagne providing connections between small towns such as Vannes, Carhaix, Roscoff and Paimpol. TER Bretagne also manages coach lines and connections between Rennes and Nantes. TER Pays de la Loire operates trains between Nantes and smaller towns in Loire-Atlantique.\nSea.\nThere are ferry services that take passengers, vehicles and freight to Ireland, the United Kingdom and the Channel Islands. The main companies are Brittany Ferries which operates lines between Plymouth and Roscoff, Portsmouth and Saint-Malo, and Roscoff and Cork. Irish Ferries operates the route Rosslare-Roscoff and Condor Ferries link Saint-Malo with Jersey.\nCycling.\nCycling has always been one of the main sports of Brittany, but leisure cycling and the infrastructure to support it have been growing extremely rapidly. An extensive network of cycle paths and recommended cycle routes has opened up all over the region. Some of these are routes using mainly smaller roads and both signposted and maintained by communes individually, but many are based on dedicated cycle paths often formed by converting disused railway tracks. These help form routes such as 'V\u00e9lodyss\u00e9e' from Roscoff to Nantes and several major routes under the 'V' label (following signs V1, V2 etc.). The old tow-path of the Nantes-Brest canal is now open to cyclists along its entire 385\u00a0km length though in places (unlike rail-based cycle paths) it is very meandering and leaving the path will both shorten the distance and provide variety.\nThough the marked cyclepaths such as the Nantes-Brest canal offer the opportunity for safe, easy, traffic free cycling, the real 'richness' of Brittany is its incredible network of country lanes. Those the terrain can be described as 'rolling' the gradients are generally moderate (rarely over 5% \u2013 usually far less) and unlike the canal paths they do link small villages where cyclists can find somewhere to refresh themselves. The increase in cycling holiday-makers has given new life to the network of small campsites and hotels/chambre d'hotes especially inland where the economy struggled in the past. As a general rule cyclists are very well respected in the region and many larger towns have cycle-lanes \u2013 however traffic is 'cycle-friendly' even in their absence.\nSymbols.\nThe modern flag of Brittany was designed in 1923. It is called \"Gwenn ha Du\" (\"white and black\" in Breton) and it features eleven ermine spots (their number may vary) and nine stripes, the black ones represent the Breton speaking historical dioceses, and the white ones symbolise the gallo speaking dioceses. The flag was created to replace the traditional ermine plain standard, considered too aristocratic and royalist. It was inspired by the American flag and the British Red Ensign. Since the 1920s, the flag has become very popular and it is flown from a large number of institutions. Apart from the ermine flag, Breton historic banners include the Kroaz Du, a white flag with a black cross, the perfect negative of the Cornish flag.\nThe coat of arms of Brittany, \"ermine plain\", was adopted by John III in 1316. Ermine had been used in Brittany long before, and there is no clue to its origin. It was probably chosen by the dukes because of its similarity with the French fleur-de-lis. The ermine, or stoat, as an animal became the badge of John IV at the end of the 14th century. It appeared later on numerous locations, including churches and castles. According to popular traditions, Anne of Brittany was hunting with her court when she saw a white ermine who preferred to die than to cross a dirty marsh. This episode would have inspired the duchess' motto : \"Potius mori quam foedari\" (\"rather death than dishonour\"). The motto has later been reused by Breton regiments, local World War II Resistants and cultural movements.\nThe Breton anthem, although not official, is \"Bro Gozh ma Zado\u00f9\" \u2013 (\"Old Land of My Fathers\"). It re-employs both the Welsh anthem's music and that of \"Bro Goth agan Tasow\" (the national anthem of Cornwall; its lyrics were written at the end of the 19th century).\nColloquial Breton emblems include the Celtic triskelion, the menhirs and dolmens, local dishes such as the galettes, the bigoud\u00e8ne headdress and the traditional black round hat, the fisherman and his yellow raincoat, etc. \"BZH\" is a common abbreviation for \"Breizh\" (\"Brittany\" in Breton) and people often put BZH stickers on their car-plates, although it is forbidden under French laws. \".bzh\" is an approved Internet top level domain for the Breton culture and languages.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38749", "revid": "50398985", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38749", "title": "Juggling", "text": "Circus skill manipulating objects\nJuggling is a physical skill, performed by a juggler, involving the manipulation of objects for recreation, entertainment, art or sport. The most recognizable form of juggling is toss juggling. Juggling can be the manipulation of one object or many objects at the same time, most often using one or two hands but other body parts as well, like feet or head. Jugglers often refer to the objects they juggle as props. The most common props are balls, clubs, or rings. Some jugglers use more dramatic objects such as knives, fire torches or chainsaws. The term \"juggling\" can also commonly refer to other prop-based manipulation skills, such as diabolo, plate spinning, devil sticks, poi, cigar boxes, contact juggling, hooping, yo-yo, hat manipulation and kick-ups.\nEtymology.\nThe words \"juggling\" and \"juggler\" derive from the Middle English \"jogelen\" (\"to entertain by performing tricks\"), which in turn is from the Old French \"jangler\". There is also the Late Latin form \"joculare\" of Latin \"joculari\", meaning \"to jest\". Although the etymology of the terms \"juggler\" and \"juggling\" in the sense of manipulating objects for entertainment originates as far back as the 11th century, the current sense of \"to juggle\", meaning \"to continually toss objects in the air and catch them\", originates from the late 19th century.\nFrom the 12th to the 17th century, \"juggling\" and \"juggler\" were the terms most consistently used to describe acts of magic, though some have called the term \"juggling\" a lexicographical nightmare, stating that it is one of the least understood relating to magic. In the 21st century, the term \"juggling\" usually refers to toss juggling, where objects are continuously thrown into the air and caught again, repeating in a rhythmical pattern.\nAccording to James Ernest in his book \"Contact Juggling\", most people will describe juggling as \"throwing and catching things\"; however, a juggler might describe the act as \"a visually complex or physically challenging feat using one or more objects\". David Levinson and Karen Christensen describe juggling as \"the sport of tossing and catching or manipulating objects [...] keeping them in constant motion\". \"Juggling, like music, combines abstract patterns and mind-body coordination in a pleasing way.\"\nOrigins and history.\nAncient to 20th century.\nThe earliest record of juggling is suggested in a panel from the 15th (1994 to 1781 B.C.) Beni Hasan tomb of an unknown Egyptian prince, showing female dancers and acrobats throwing balls. Juggling has been recorded in many early cultures including Egyptian, Nabataean, Chinese, Indian, Greek, Roman, Norse, Aztec (Mexico) and Polynesian civilizations.\nJuggling in ancient China was an art performed by some warriors. One such warrior was Xiong Yiliao, whose juggling of nine balls in front of troops on a battlefield reportedly caused the opposing troops to flee without fighting, resulting in a complete victory.\nIn Europe, juggling was an acceptable diversion until the decline of the Roman Empire, after which the activity fell into disgrace. Throughout the Middle Ages, most histories were written by religious clerics who frowned upon the type of performers who juggled, called gleemen, accusing them of base morals or even practicing witchcraft. Jugglers in this era would only perform in marketplaces, streets, fairs, or drinking houses. They would perform short, humorous and bawdy acts and pass a hat or bag among the audience for tips. Some kings' and noblemen's bards, fools, or jesters would have been able to juggle or perform acrobatics, though their main skills would have been oral (poetry, music, comedy and storytelling).\nIn 1768, Philip Astley opened the first modern circus. A few years later, he employed jugglers to perform acts along with the horse and clown acts. Since then, jugglers have been associated with circuses.\nIn the early 19th century, troupes from Asia, such as the famous \"Indian Jugglers\" referred to by William Hazlitt, arrived to tour Britain, Europe and parts of America.\nIn the 19th century, variety and music hall theatres became more popular, and jugglers were in demand to fill time between music acts, performing in front of the curtain while sets were changed. Performers started specializing in juggling, separating it from other kinds of performance such as sword swallowing and magic. The Gentleman Juggler style was established by German jugglers such as Salerno and Kara. Rubber processing developed, and jugglers started using rubber balls. Previously, juggling balls were made from balls of twine, stuffed leather bags, wooden spheres, or various metals. Solid or inflatable rubber balls meant that bounce juggling was possible. Inflated rubber balls made ball spinning easier and more readily accessible. Soon in North America, vaudeville theatres employed jugglers, often hiring European performers.\n20th century.\nIn the early to mid-20th century, variety and vaudeville shows decreased in popularity due to competition from motion picture theatres, radio and television, and juggling suffered as a result. Music and comedy transferred very easily to radio, but juggling could not. In the early years of TV, when variety-style programming was popular, jugglers were often featured; but developing a new act for each new show, week after week, was more difficult for jugglers than other types of entertainers; comedians and musicians can pay others to write their material, but jugglers cannot get other people to learn new skills on their behalf.\nThe International Jugglers' Association, founded in 1947, began as an association for professional vaudeville jugglers, but restrictions for membership were eventually changed, and non-performers were permitted to join and attend the annual conventions. The IJA continues to hold an annual convention each summer and runs a number of other programs dedicated to advance the art of juggling worldwide.\nWorld Juggling Day was created as an annual day of recognition for the hobby, with the intent to teach people how to juggle, to promote juggling and to get jugglers together and celebrate. It is held on the Saturday in June closest to the 17th, the founding date of the International Jugglers' Association.\nMost cities and large towns now have juggling clubs. These are often based within, or connected to, universities and colleges. There are also community circus groups that teach young people and put on shows. The Juggling Edge maintains a searchable database of most juggling clubs.\nSince the 1980s, a juggling culture has developed. The scene revolves around local clubs and organizations, special events, shows, magazines, web sites, internet forums and, possibly most importantly, juggling conventions. In recent years, there has also been a growing focus on juggling competitions. Juggling today has evolved and branched out to the point where it is synonymous with all prop manipulation. The wide variety of the juggling scene can be seen at any juggling convention.\nJuggling conventions or festivals form the backbone of the juggling scene. The focus of most of these conventions is the main space used for open juggling. There will also be more formal workshops in which expert jugglers will work with small groups on specific skills and techniques. Most juggling conventions also include a main show (open to the general public), competitions, and juggling games.\nPopular forms.\nJuggling can be categorised by various criteria:\n Juggling up until the latter half of the 20th century has been principally practised as a profession. Since the 1960s, and even more so from the 1980s, juggling has also been practiced as a hobby. The popularity of juggling acts performing outside the circus has meant an increase in the number of professional jugglers in the last thirty years. Festivals, fairs, retail promotions and corporate events have all booked juggling acts. The increase in hobby juggling has resulted in juggling stores opening and numerous juggling conventions being run to fulfill the needs of an increasingly popular pastime.\n Balls, clubs, rings, diabolos, devil sticks, shaker cups, and cigar boxes are several types of objects that are commonly juggled. Other objects, such as scarves, knives, fruits and vegetables, flaming torches, chainsaws, and toilet plungers, have also been used.\n The best known type of juggling is toss juggling, which is throwing and catching objects in the air without the objects touching the ground. Bounce juggling is bouncing objects (usually balls) off the ground. Contact juggling is manipulating the object in constant contact with the body. One division of juggling by method is into toss, balancing (equilibristics), gyroscopic (spin), and contact juggling.\n This type of juggling involves performing tricks of varying levels of difficulty. The tricks can use the basic patterns of toss juggling but add more difficult levels of object manipulation. Other tricks can be independent of these basic patterns and involve other variations of object manipulation. Many patterns and tricks can be described using Siteswap Notation and is commonly used to share patterns between Jugglers.\n Numbers juggling is the goal of juggling as many objects as possible. This is often the initial goal of beginner jugglers, as it is commonly seen in the circus and stage juggling acts. Numbers juggling records are noted by a number of organizations.\n Juggling is most commonly performed by an individual. However, multiple-person juggling is also popular and is performed by two or more people. Various methods of passing the objects between the jugglers is used \u2014 this can be through the air (as in toss juggling), bounced off the ground, simply handed over, or a number of other ways depending on the objects and the style of juggling. For example, one variation is where two club jugglers stand facing each other, each juggling a three-club pattern themselves, but then simultaneously passing between each other. Another variation is where the jugglers are back-to-back, and (usually) any passes to the other person travel over their heads.\n Juggling has more recently developed as a competitive sport by organizations such as the World Juggling Federation. Sport juggling competitions reward pure technical ability and give no extra credit for showmanship or for juggling with props such as knives or torches. Albert Lucas created the first sport juggling organization in the early nineties \u2212 the International Sport Juggling Federation, which promotes joggling and other athletic forms of juggling.\nWorld records.\nThere is no organization that tracks all juggling world records.\nToss juggling and club passing world records used to be tracked by the Juggling Information Service Committee on Numbers Juggling (JISCON) (now defunct). Some records are tracked by Guinness World Records.\nPerformance.\nStyle.\nProfessional jugglers perform in a number of different styles, which are not mutually exclusive. These juggling styles have developed or been introduced over time with some becoming more popular at some times than others.\nCircus juggling.\nTraditional circus-style juggling emphasises high levels of skill and sometimes large-scale props to enable the act to \"fill\" the circus ring. The juggling act may involve some comedy or other circus skills such as acrobatics, but the principal focus is the technical skill of the jugglers. Costumes are usually colourful with sequins. Variations within this style include the traditions from Chinese and Russian circus.\nComedy juggling.\nComedy juggling acts vary greatly in their skill level, prop use and costuming. However, they all share the fact that the focus of the performance is comedic rather than a demonstration of technical juggling skill. Comedy juggling acts are most commonly seen in street performance, festivals and fairs.\nGentleman juggling.\nGentleman juggling was popular in variety theatres and usually involves juggling some of the elements of a gentleman's attire, namely hats, canes, gloves, cigars, and other everyday items such as plates and wine bottles. The style is often sophisticated and visual rather than comedic, though it has been interpreted in many different styles. French juggler Gaston Palmer, for example, gained a kind of notoriety for his comedic execution of gentleman juggling tricks.\nThemed juggling.\nJugglers perform themed acts, sometimes with specifically themed props and usually in themed costumes. Examples include jesters, pirates, sports, Victorians and chefs.\nVenues.\nCircus.\nJugglers commonly feature in circuses, with many performers having enjoyed a star billing. Circus jugglers come from many countries and include those from Russia and other Eastern European countries, China, Latin America and other European countries. Some of the greatest jugglers from the past 50 years are from Eastern Europe, including Sergej Ignatov, Andrii Kolesnikov, Evgenij Biljauer, and Gregory Popovich.\nVariety theatres.\nVariety theatres have a long history of including juggling acts on their billing. Vaudeville in the USA and Music halls in the UK regularly featured jugglers during the heyday of variety theatre in the first half of 20th century. Variety theatre has declined in popularity but is still present in many European countries, particularly Germany. Television talent shows have introduced juggling acts to a wider audience with the newest examples being Britain's Got Talent and America's Got Talent.\nCasinos.\nIn North America jugglers have often performed in casinos, in places like Las Vegas. Germany and the United States have produced some of the greatest jugglers from the past 50 years, most notably Francis Brunn from Germany and Anthony Gatto from the United States.\nFestivals and fairs.\nThere is a wide variety of festivals and fairs where juggling acts are sometimes booked to perform. Music, food and arts festivals have all booked professional performers. The festivals can range from very large scale events such as Glastonbury Festival to small town or village fairs. The acts may differ from year to year or a one-act may become a regular feature at these yearly events.\nHistorically themed events.\nRenaissance fairs in North America and medieval fairs in Europe often book professional jugglers. Other historically themed events such as Victorian, maritime, and large-scale festivals of history such as the one organised by English Heritage regularly employ juggling acts as part of the event.\nStreet performance.\nIn many countries such as the UK, USA, Australia, Spain, France jugglers perform on the street (busking). Street juggling acts usually perform what is known as a circle show and collect money at the end of the performance in a hat or bottle. Most street jugglers perform comedy juggling acts. Well known locations for this kind of street performance include Covent Garden in London, Faneuil Hall in Boston, Outside the Pump Rooms in Bath, Prince's Street in Edinburgh, outside the Pompidou Centre in Paris, Circular Quay in Sydney, and Pearl Street in Boulder.\nSpace.\nJuggling has been performed in space despite the fact that the micro-gravity environment of orbit deprives the juggled objects of the essential ability to fall. This was accomplished initially by Don Williams, as part of a Houston scientist's \"Toys In Space\" project, with apples and oranges.\nTwo person juggling passing multiple objects between them was first accomplished in space by Greg Chamitoff and Richard Garriott while Garriott was visiting the International Space Station as a Spaceflight Participant in October 2008. Their juggling of objects while in orbit was featured in \"Apogee of Fear\", the first science fiction movie made in space by Garriott and 'Zero-G Magic', a magic show also recorded in space by Chamitoff and Garriott at that time.\nHealth benefits.\nAccording to an Oxford University study, juggling improves cerebral connectivity performance.\nNotable jugglers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMathematics.\nMathematics has been used to understand juggling as juggling has been used to test mathematics. The number of possible patterns \"n\" digits long using \"b\" or fewer balls is \"b\"\"n\" and the average of the numbers in a siteswap pattern equal the number of balls required for the pattern. For example, the number of three digit three ball patterns is 33 = 27, and the box, (4,2x)(2x,4), requires (4+2+4+2)/4 = 3 balls.\n\"The time that a ball spends in flight is proportional to the square root of the height of the throw,\" meaning that the number of balls used greatly increases the amount of speed or height required, which increases the need for accuracy between the direction and synchronization of throws.\nCoupled oscillation and synchronization (\"the tendency of two limbs to move at the same frequency\") appear to be easier in all patterns and also required by certain patterns. For example, \"the fountain pattern...can be stably performed in two ways...one can perform the fountain with different frequencies for the two hands, but that coordination is difficult because of the tendency of the limbs to synchronize,\" while \"in the cascade...the crossing of the balls between the hands demands that one hand catches at the same rate that the other hand throws.\"\nClaude Shannon, builder of the first juggling robot, developed a juggling theorem, relating the time balls spend in the air and in the hands: \"(F+D)H=(V+D)N\", where \"F\" = time a ball spends in the air, \"D\" = time a ball spends in a hand/time a hand is full, \"V\" = time a hand is vacant, \"N\" = number of balls, and \"H\" = number of hands. For example, a hand's and a ball's perspectives in the two-hand (\"H\") three-ball (\"N\") cascade pattern:\n toss: 1st 2nd 3rd\n hand: D--VD\u2014VD\u2014V\n ball: D--F--D--F--\n R L R\n L R L\n(F+D)H=(V+D)N\n(3+3)2=(1+3)3\n6\u00d72=4\u00d73\n12=12\nJuggling notation.\nJuggling tricks and patterns can become very complex, and hence can be difficult to communicate to others. Therefore, notation systems have been developed for specifying patterns, as well as for discovering new patterns.\nDiagram-based notations are the clearest way to show juggling patterns on paper, but as they are based on images, their use is limited in text-based communication. Ladder diagrams track the path of all the props through time, where the less complicated causal diagrams only track the props that are in the air, and assumes that a juggler has a prop in each hand. Numeric notation systems are more popular and standardized than diagram-based notations. They are used extensively in both a written form and in normal conversations among jugglers.\nSiteswap is by far the most common juggling notation. Various heights of throw, considered to take specific \"beats\" of time to complete, are assigned a relative number. From those, a pattern is conveyed as a sequence of numbers, such as \"3\", \"744\", or \"97531\". Those examples are for two hands making alternating or \"asynchronous\" throws, and often called \"vanilla siteswap\". For showing patterns in which both hands throw at the same time, there are other notating conventions for synchronous siteswap. There is also \"multiplex siteswap\" for patterns where one hand holds or throws two or more balls on the same beat. Other extensions to siteswap have been developed, including passing siteswap, Multi-Hand Notation (MHN), and General Siteswap (GS).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOrganizations\nResources\nOther"}
{"id": "38751", "revid": "44421492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38751", "title": "ArXiv", "text": "Online archive of e-prints\narXiv (pronounced as \"archive\"\u2014the X represents the Greek letter chi \u27e8\u03c7\u27e9) is an open-access repository of electronic preprints and postprints (known as e-prints) approved for posting after moderation, but not peer reviewed. It consists of scientific papers in the fields of mathematics, physics, astronomy, electrical engineering, computer science, quantitative biology, statistics, mathematical finance, and economics, which can be accessed online. In many fields of mathematics and physics, almost all scientific papers are self-archived on the arXiv repository before publication in a peer-reviewed journal. Some publishers also grant permission for authors to archive the peer-reviewed postprint. Begun on August 14, 1991, arXiv.org passed the half-million-article milestone on October 3, 2008, had hit a million by the end of 2014 and two million by the end of 2021. As of November 2024, the submission rate is about 24,000 articles per month.\nHistory.\narXiv was made possible by the compact TeX file format, which allowed scientific papers to be easily transmitted over the Internet and rendered client-side. Around 1990, Joanne Cohn began emailing physics preprints to colleagues as TeX files, but the number of papers being sent soon filled mailboxes to capacity. Paul Ginsparg recognized the need for central storage, and in August 1991 he created a central repository mailbox stored at the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) that could be accessed from any computer. Additional modes of access were soon added: FTP in 1991, Gopher in 1992, and the World Wide Web in 1993. The term e-print was quickly adopted to describe the articles.\nIt began as a physics archive, called the LANL preprint archive, but soon expanded to include astronomy, mathematics, computer science, quantitative biology and, most recently, statistics. Its original domain name was xxx.lanl.gov. Due to LANL's lack of interest in the rapidly expanding technology, in 2001 Ginsparg changed institutions to Cornell University and changed the name of the repository to arXiv.org.\nGinsparg brainstormed the new name with his wife; the domain \"archive\" was already claimed, so \"chi\" was replaced with \"X\" standing in as the Greek letter chi and the \"e\" dropped for symmetry around the \"X\".\narXiv was an early adopter and promoter of preprints. Its success in sharing preprints was one of the precipitating factors that led to the later movement in scientific publishing known as open access. Mathematicians and scientists regularly upload their papers to arXiv.org for worldwide access and sometimes for reviews before they are published in peer-reviewed journals. Ginsparg was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship in 2002 for his establishment of arXiv. The annual budget for arXiv was approximately $826,000 for 2013 to 2017, funded jointly by Cornell University Library, the Simons Foundation (in both gift and challenge grant forms) and annual fee income from member institutions. This model arose in 2010, when Cornell sought to broaden the financial funding of the project by asking institutions to make annual voluntary contributions based on the amount of download usage by each institution. Each member institution pledges a five-year funding commitment to support arXiv. Based on institutional usage ranking, the annual fees are set in four tiers from $1,000 to $4,400. Cornell's goal is to raise at least $504,000 per year through membership fees generated by approximately 220\u00a0institutions.\nIn September 2011, Cornell University Library took overall administrative and financial responsibility for arXiv's operation and development. Ginsparg was quoted in the \"Chronicle of Higher Education\" as joking that it \"was supposed to be a three-hour tour, not a life sentence\". However, Ginsparg remains on the arXiv's Scientific Advisory Board and its Physics Advisory Committee.\nIn January 2022, arXiv began assigning DOIs to articles, in collaboration with DataCite.\nData format.\nEach arXiv paper has a \"uniquely specific identifier\":\nDifferent versions of the same paper are specified by a version number at the end. For example, codice_7. If no version number is specified, the default is the latest version.\narXiv uses a category system. Each paper is tagged with one or more categories. Some categories have two layers. For example, codice_8 is the \"Trading and Market Microstructure\" category within \"quantitative finance\". Other categories have one layer. For example, codice_9 is \"high energy physics experiments\".\nModeration process and endorsement.\nAlthough arXiv is not peer reviewed, a collection of moderators for each area review the submissions; they may recategorize any that are deemed off-topic, or reject submissions that are not scientific papers, or sometimes for undisclosed reasons. The lists of moderators for many sections of arXiv are publicly available, but moderators for most of the physics sections remain unlisted.\nAdditionally, an \"endorsement\" system was introduced in 2004 as part of an effort to ensure content is relevant and of interest to current research in the specified disciplines. Under the system, for categories that use it, an author must be endorsed by an established arXiv author before being allowed to submit papers to those categories. Endorsers are not asked to review the paper for errors but to check whether the paper is appropriate for the intended subject area. New authors from recognized academic institutions generally receive automatic endorsement, which in practice means that they do not need to deal with the endorsement system at all. However, the endorsement system has attracted criticism for allegedly restricting scientific inquiry.\nA majority of the e-prints are also submitted to journals for publication, but some work, including some very influential papers, remain purely as e-prints and are never published in a peer-reviewed journal. A well-known example of the latter is an outline of a proof of Thurston's geometrization conjecture, including the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture as a particular case, uploaded by Grigori Perelman in November 2002. Perelman appears content to forgo the traditional peer-reviewed journal process, stating: \"If anybody is interested in my way of solving the problem, it's all there [on the arXiv]\u00a0\u2013 let them go and read about it\". Despite this non-traditional method of publication, other mathematicians recognized this work by offering the Fields Medal and Clay Mathematics Millennium Prizes to Perelman, both of which he refused.\nWhile arXiv does contain some dubious e-prints, such as those claiming to refute famous theorems or proving famous conjectures such as Fermat's Last Theorem using only high-school mathematics, a 2002 article which appeared in \"Notices of the American Mathematical Society\" described those as \"surprisingly rare\". arXiv generally re-classifies these works, e.g. in \"General mathematics\", rather than deleting them; however, some authors have voiced concern over the lack of transparency in the arXiv screening process.\nIn November 2025, arXiv announced that it would no longer accept computer science review articles and position papers that had not been vetted by an academic journal or conference due to an increase in AI-generated research.\nWithdrawn preprints.\nIt has been reported that 14,000 preprints have been withdrawn at arXiv, most commonly due to \"crucial errors\". A lesser number of the withdrawals were due to the preprint being subsumed by another publication. The report itself was posted at arXiv December, 2024.\nSubmission formats.\nPapers can be submitted in any of several formats, including LaTeX, and PDF printed from a word processor other than TeX or LaTeX. The submission is rejected by the arXiv software if generating the final PDF file fails, if any image file is too large, or if the total size of the submission is too large. arXiv now allows one to store and modify an incomplete submission, and only finalize the submission when ready. The time stamp on the article is set when the submission is finalized.\nAccess.\nThe standard access route is through the arXiv.org website, which is publicly accessible and does not require an account. Other interfaces and access routes have also been created by other un-associated organisations.\nMetadata for arXiv is made available through OAI-PMH, the standard for open access repositories. Content is therefore indexed in all major consumers of such data, such as BASE, CORE and Unpaywall. As of 2020, the Unpaywall dump links over 500,000 arxiv URLs as the open access version of a work found in CrossRef data from the publishers, making arXiv a top 10 global host of green open access.\nFinally, researchers can select sub-fields and receive daily e-mailings or RSS feeds of all submissions in them.\nCopyright status of files.\nFiles on arXiv can have a number of different copyright statuses:\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38753", "revid": "40753954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38753", "title": "ArXiv.org", "text": ""}
{"id": "38754", "revid": "40753954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38754", "title": "Www.arXiv.org", "text": ""}
{"id": "38755", "revid": "28032115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38755", "title": "Xxx.lanl.gov", "text": ""}
{"id": "38758", "revid": "29631755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38758", "title": "Dolby AC-3", "text": ""}
{"id": "38765", "revid": "39076087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38765", "title": "Integrase", "text": "Class of enzymes\nRetroviral integrase (IN) is an enzyme produced by a retrovirus (such as HIV) that integrates (forms covalent links between) its genetic information into that of the host cell it infects. Retroviral INs are not to be confused with phage integrases (recombinases) used in biotechnology, such as \u03bb phage integrase, as discussed in site-specific recombination.\nThe macromolecular complex of an IN macromolecule bound to the ends of the viral DNA ends has been referred to as the \"intasome\"; IN is a key component in this and the retroviral pre-integration complex.\nStructure.\nAll retroviral IN proteins contain three canonical domains, connected by flexible linkers:\nCrystal and NMR structures of the individual domains and 2-domain constructs of integrases from HIV-1, HIV-2, SIV, and Rous Sarcoma Virus (RSV) have been reported, with the first structures determined in 1994. Biochemical data and structural data suggest that retroviral IN functions as a tetramer (dimer-of-dimers), with all three domains being important for multimerization and viral DNA binding. In addition, several host cellular proteins have been shown to interact with IN to facilitate the integration process: e.g., the host factor, human chromatin-associated protein LEDGF, tightly binds HIV IN and directs the HIV pre-integration complex towards highly expressed genes for integration.\nHuman foamy virus (HFV), an agent harmless to humans, has an integrase similar to HIV IN and is therefore a model of HIV IN function; a 2010 crystal structure of the HFV integrase assembled on viral DNA ends has been determined.\nFunction and mechanism.\nIntegration occurs following production of the double-stranded linear viral DNA by the viral RNA/DNA-dependent DNA polymerase reverse transcriptase.\nThe main function of IN is to insert the viral DNA into the host chromosomal DNA, an essential step for HIV replication. Integration is a \"point of no return\" for the cell, which becomes a permanent carrier of the viral genome (provirus). Integration is in part responsible for the persistence of retroviral infections. After integration, the viral gene expression and particle production may take place immediately or at some point in the future, the timing depends on the activity of the chromosomal locus hosting the provirus.\nRetroviral INs catalyze two reactions:\nBoth reactions are catalyzed in the same active site, and involve transesterification without involving a covalent protein-DNA intermediate (in contrast to Ser/Tyr recombinase-catalyzed reactions).\nIn HIV.\nHIV integrase is a 32kDa viral protein consisting of three domains- N-terminus, catalytic core domain, and C-terminus, which each have distinct properties and functions contributing to the efficacy of HIV integrase.\nThe N-terminus is composed of 50 amino acid residues which contain a conserved histidine, histidine, cytosine, cytosine sequence which chelates zinc ions, furthermore enhancing the enzymatic activity of the catalytic core domain. As metal chelation is vital in integrase efficacy, it is a target for the development of retroviral therapies.\nThe catalytic core domain, like the N-terminus, contains highly conserved amino acid residues -Asp64, Asp116, Glu152- as the conserved DDE (Asp-Asp-Glu) motif contributes to the endonuclease and polynucleotide transferase functions of integrase. Mutations in these regions inactivates integrase and prevents genome integration.\nThe C-terminus domain binds to host DNA non-specifically and stabilizes the integration complex.\nIntegration mechanism.\nFollowing synthesis of HIV's doubled stranded DNA genome, integrase binds to the long tandem repeats flanking the genome on both ends. Using its endonucleolytic activity, integrase cleaves a di or trinucleotide from both 3' ends of the genome in a processing known as 3'-processing. The specificity of cleavage is improved through the use of cofactors such as Mn2+ and Mg2+ which interact with the DDE motif of the catalytic core domain, acting as cofactors to integrase function.\nThe newly generated 3'OH groups disrupt the host DNA's phosphodiester linkages through SN2-type nucleophilic attack. The 3' ends are covalently linked to the target DNA. The 5' over hangs of the viral genome are then cleaved using host repair enzymes, those same enzymes are believed to be responsible for the integration of the 5' end into the host genome forming the provirus.\nAntiretroviral therapy.\nIn November 2005, data from a phase 2 study of an investigational HIV integrase inhibitor, MK-0518, demonstrated that the compound has potent antiviral activity. On October 12, 2007, the Food and Drug Administration (U.S.) approved the integrase inhibitor Raltegravir (MK-0518, brand name Isentress). The second integrase inhibitor, elvitegravir, was approved in the U.S. in August 2012.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38769", "revid": "49772073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38769", "title": "Mercia", "text": "Kingdom in the Anglo-Saxon Heptarchy (527\u2013918)\nMercia () was one of the principal kingdoms founded at the end of Sub-Roman Britain; the area was settled by Anglo-Saxons in an era called the Heptarchy. It was centred on the River Trent and its tributaries, in a region now known as the Midlands of England.\nThe royal court moved around the kingdom without a fixed capital city. Early in its existence Repton seems to have been the location of an important royal estate. According to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", it was from Repton in 873\u2013874 that the Great Heathen Army deposed the King of Mercia. Slightly earlier, King Offa seems to have favoured Tamworth. It was there where he was crowned, and where he resided during multiple Christmases.\nFor the three centuries between 600 and 900, known as Mercian Supremacy or the \"Golden Age of Mercia\", having annexed or gained submissions from five of the other six kingdoms of the Heptarchy (East Anglia, Essex, Kent, Sussex and Wessex), Mercia dominated England south of the Humber estuary. During King Offa's reign, a dyke was created as the boundary between Mercia and the Welsh kingdoms. Nicholas Brooks noted that \"the Mercians stand out as by far the most successful of the various early Anglo-Saxon peoples until the later ninth century\", and some historians, such as Sir Frank Stenton, believe the unification of England south of the Humber estuary was achieved during Offa's reign.\nKing Peada converted to Christianity around 656. The Diocese of Mercia was founded in this year, with the first bishop (Diuma) based at Repton. The religion was firmly established in the kingdom by the late 7th century. After 13 years at Repton, in 669, Saint Chad (the fifth bishop) moved the bishopric to Lichfield and, in 691, the Diocese of Mercia became the Diocese of Lichfield. There has been a diocese based in the city ever since. For a brief period between 787 and 799 or 803 the diocese was an archbishopric. The current bishop, Michael Ipgrave, is the 99th since the diocese was established.\nAt the end of the 9th century, following the invasions of the Vikings and their Great Heathen Army, Danelaw absorbed much of the former Mercian territory. Danelaw at its height included London, all of East Anglia and most of the North of England.\nThe final Mercian king, Ceolwulf II, died in 879 with the kingdom appearing to have lost its political independence. Initially, it was ruled by a lord or ealdorman under the overlordship of Alfred the Great, who styled himself \"King of the Anglo-Saxons\". The kingdom had a brief period of independence in the mid-10th century and in 1016, by which time it was viewed as a province with temporary independence. Wessex conquered and united all the kingdoms into the Kingdom of England. The kingdom became an earldom until 1071.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nMercia's exact evolution at the start of the Anglo-Saxon era remains more obscure than that of Northumbria, Kent, or even Wessex. Mercia developed an effective political structure and was Christianised later than the other kingdoms. Archaeological surveys show that Angles settled the lands north of the River Thames by the 6th century. The name \"Mercia\" is Mercian Old English for \"boundary folk\" (see Welsh Marches), and the traditional interpretation is that the kingdom originated along the frontier between the native Brythonic Speaking Romano-British Welsh and the Anglo-Saxon invaders. However, Peter Hunter Blair argued an alternative interpretation: that they emerged along the frontier between Northumbria and the inhabitants of the Trent river valley.\nAlthough its earliest boundaries remain obscure, a general agreement persists that the territory that was called \"the first of the Mercians\" in the Tribal Hidage covered much of south Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, Northamptonshire, Staffordshire and northern Warwickshire.\nThe earliest person named in any records as a king of Mercia is Creoda, said to have been the great-grandson of Icel. Coming to power around 584, he built a fortress at Tamworth which became the seat of Mercia's kings. His son Pybba succeeded him in 593. Cearl, a kinsman of Creoda, followed Pybba in 606; in 615, Cearl gave his daughter Cwenburga in marriage to Edwin, king of Deira, whom he had sheltered while he was an exiled prince.\nThe Mercian kings were the only Anglo-Saxon Heptarchy ruling house known to claim a direct family link with a pre-migration Continental Germanic monarchy.\nPenda and the Mercian Supremacy.\nThe next Mercian king, Penda, ruled from about 626 or 633 until 655. Some of what is known about Penda comes from the hostile account of Bede, who disliked him \u2013 both as an enemy to Bede's own Northumbria and as a pagan. However, Bede admits that Penda freely allowed Christian missionaries from Lindisfarne into Mercia and did not restrain them from preaching. In 633 Penda and his ally Cadwallon of Gwynedd defeated and killed Edwin, who had become not only ruler of the newly unified Northumbria, but bretwalda, or high king, over the southern kingdoms. When another Northumbrian king, Oswald, arose and again claimed overlordship of the south, he also suffered defeat and death at the hands of Penda and his allies \u2013 in 642 at the Battle of Maserfield. In 655, after a period of confusion in Northumbria, Penda brought 30 sub-kings to fight the new Northumbrian king Oswiu at the Battle of Winwaed, in which Penda in turn lost the battle and his life.\nThe battle led to a temporary collapse of Mercian power. Penda's son Peada, who had converted to Christianity at Repton in 653, succeeded his father as king of Mercia; Oswiu set up Peada as an under-king; but in the spring of 656 he was murdered and Oswiu assumed direct control of the whole of Mercia. A Mercian revolt in 658 threw off Northumbrian domination and resulted in the appearance of another son of Penda, Wulfhere, who ruled Mercia as an independent kingdom (though he apparently continued to render tribute to Northumbria for a while) until his death in 675. Wulfhere initially succeeded in restoring the power of Mercia, but the end of his reign saw a serious defeat by Northumbria. The next king, \u00c6thelred, defeated Northumbria in the Battle of the Trent in 679, settling once and for all the long-disputed control of the former kingdom of Lindsey. \u00c6thelred was succeeded by C\u0153nred, son of Wulfhere; both these kings became better known for their religious activities than anything else, but the king who succeeded them in 709, Ceolred, is said in a letter of Saint Boniface to have been a dissolute youth who died insane. So ended the rule of the direct descendants of Penda.\nAt some point before the accession of \u00c6thelbald in 716 the Mercians conquered the region around Wroxeter, known to the Welsh as Pengwern or as \"The Paradise of Powys\". Elegies written in the persona of its dispossessed rulers record the sorrow at this loss.\nThe next important king of Mercia, \u00c6thelbald, reigned from 716 to 757. For the first few years of his reign he had to face two strong rival kings, Wihtred of Kent and Ine of Wessex. But when Wihtred died in 725, and Ine abdicated in 726 to become a monk in Rome, \u00c6thelbald was free to establish Mercia's hegemony over the rest of the Anglo-Saxons south of the Humber. \u00c6thelbald suffered a setback in 752, when the West Saxons under Cuthred defeated him, but he seems to have restored his supremacy over Wessex by 757.\nIn July 2009, the Staffordshire Hoard of Anglo-Saxon gold was discovered by Terry Herbert in a field at Hammerwich, near Brownhills and close to Lichfield in Staffordshire. Lichfield functioned as the religious centre of Mercia. The artefacts have tentatively been dated by Svante Fischer and Jean Soulat to the 7th\u20138th centuries. Whether the hoard was deposited by Anglo-Saxon pagans or Christians remains unclear, as does the purpose of the deposit.\nReign of Offa and rise of Wessex.\nAfter the murder of \u00c6thelbald by one of his bodyguards in 757, a civil war broke out which concluded with the victory of Offa, a descendant of Pybba. Offa (reigned 757 to 796) had to build anew the hegemony which his predecessor had exercised over the southern English, and he did this so successfully that he became the greatest king Mercia had ever known. Not only did he win battles and dominate Southern England, but also he took an active hand in administering the affairs of his kingdom, founding market towns and overseeing the first major issues of gold coins in Britain; he assumed a role in the administration of the Catholic Church in England (sponsoring the short-lived archbishopric of Lichfield, 787 to 799), and even negotiated with Charlemagne as an equal. Offa is credited with the construction of Offa's Dyke, which marked the border between Wales and Mercia.\nOffa exerted himself to ensure that his son Ecgfrith of Mercia would succeed him, but after Offa's death in July 796 Ecgfrith survived for only five months, and the kingdom passed to a distant relative named Coenwulf in December 796. In 821 Coenwulf's brother Ceolwulf succeeded to the Mercian kingship; he demonstrated his military prowess by his attack on and destruction of the fortress of Deganwy in Gwynedd. The power of the West Saxons under Egbert (King of Wessex from 802 to 839) grew during this period, however, and in 825 Egbert defeated the Mercian king Beornwulf (who had overthrown Ceolwulf in 823) at Ellendun.\nThe Battle of Ellendun proved decisive. At this point, Mercia lost control of Kent, Sussex, Surrey, and possibly also Essex. Beornwulf was slain while suppressing a revolt amongst the East Angles, and his successor, a former ealdorman named Ludeca (reigned 826\u2013827), met the same fate. Another ealdorman, Wiglaf, subsequently ruled for less than two years before Egbert of Wessex drove him out of Mercia. In 830 Wiglaf regained independence for Mercia, but by this time Wessex had clearly become the dominant power in England. \"Circa\" 840 Beorhtwulf succeeded Wiglaf.\nArrival of the Danes.\nIn 852, Burgred came to the throne, and with Ethelwulf of Wessex subjugated North Wales. In 868 Danish invaders occupied Nottingham. The Danes drove Burgred from his kingdom in 874 and Ceolwulf II took his place. In 877 the Danes seized the eastern part of Mercia, which became part of the Danelaw. Ceolwulf, the last king of Mercia, left with the western half, reigned until 879. From about 883 until his death in 911 \u00c6thelred, Lord of the Mercians, ruled Mercia under the overlordship of Wessex. Alfred changed his title from 'king of the West Saxons' to 'king of the Anglo-Saxons' to reflect the acceptance of his overlordship of all southern England not under Danish rule. All coins struck in Mercia after the disappearance of Ceolwulf in c.\u2009879 were in the name of the West Saxon king. \u00c6thelred had married \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d (c. 870 \u2013 12 June 918), daughter of Alfred the Great of Wessex (r.\u2009871\u00a0\u2013\u00a0899), and she assumed power when her husband became ill at some time in the last ten years of his life.\nAfter \u00c6thelred's death in 911 \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d ruled as \"Lady of the Mercians\", but Alfred's successor as King of the Anglo-Saxons, Edward the Elder (r.\u2009899\u00a0\u2013\u00a0924), took control of London and Oxford, which Alfred had placed under \u00c6thelred's control. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d and her brother continued Alfred's policy of building fortified burhs, and by 918 they had conquered the southern Danelaw in East Anglia and Danish Mercia.\nLoss of independence.\nWhen \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d died in 918, \u00c6lfwynn, her daughter by \u00c6thelred, succeeded as \"Second Lady of the Mercians\", but within six months Edward had deprived her of all authority in Mercia and taken her to Wessex. Edward was succeeded as king of the Anglo-Saxons by his eldest son \u00c6thelstan (r.\u2009924\u00a0\u2013\u00a0939), who had been brought up in Mercia, and he was immediately accepted as king, but not in Wessex until the following year. In 927 he conquered Northumbria and thus became the first king of all England. Mercia briefly regained a political existence separate from Wessex in 955\u2013959, when Edgar became king of Mercia, and again in 1016, when Cnut and Edmund Ironside divided the English kingdom between themselves, with Cnut taking Mercia. Mercia maintained its separate identity as an earldom until the Norman Conquest in 1066.\nMercian Old English.\nThe name 'Mercia' is a Latinisation of an Old English word derived from the Mercian Old English, , meaning \"borderland\". The dialect thrived between the 8th and 13th centuries and was referred to by John Trevisa, writing in 1387:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For men of the est with men of the west, as it were undir the same partie of hevene, acordeth more in sownynge of speche than men of the north with men of the south, therfore it is that Mercii, that beeth men of myddel Engelond, as it were parteners of the endes, understondeth better the side langages, northerne and southerne, than northerne and southerne understondeth either other...\nJ. R. R. Tolkien is one of many scholars who have studied and promoted the Mercian dialect of Old English and introduced various Mercian terms into his legendarium \u2013 especially in relation to the Kingdom of Rohan, otherwise known as the \"Mark\" (a name cognate with \"Mercia\"). The Mercian dialect is the basis of Tolkien's language of Rohan, and a number of its kings are given the same names as monarchs who appear in the Mercian royal genealogy, e.g., Fr\u00e9awine, Fr\u00e9al\u00e1f and \u00c9omer (see List of kings of the Angles).\nMercian prose.\nDuring the ninth century, Mercia was a major centre for the production of Old English prose texts, including translations of Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History\", Felix's \"Life of Guthlac\" and Gregory the Great's \"Dialogues\", as well as works such as the Old English Martyrology.\nMercian religion.\nThe first kings of Mercia were pagans, and they resisted the encroachment of Christianity longer than other kingdoms in the Anglo-Saxon Heptarchy.\nMercian rulers remained resolutely pagan until the reign of Peada in 656, although this did not prevent them joining coalitions with Christian Welsh rulers to resist Northumbria. The first appearance of Christianity in Mercia, however, had come at least thirty years earlier, following the Battle of Cirencester of 628, when Penda incorporated the formerly West Saxon territories of Hwicce into his kingdom.\nThe conversion of Mercia to Christianity occurred in the latter part of the 7th century, and by the time of Penda's defeat and death, Mercia was largely surrounded by Christian states. Diuma, an Irish monk and one of Oswiu's missionaries, was subsequently ordained a bishop \u2013 the first to operate in Mercia. Christianity finally gained a foothold in Mercia when Oswiu supported Peada as sub-king of the Middle Angles, requiring him to marry Oswiu's daughter, Alchflaed, and to accept her religion.\nDecisive steps to Christianise Mercia were taken by Chad (Latinised by Bede as \"Ceadda\"), the fifth bishop to operate in Mercia. This controversial figure was given land by King Wulfhere to build a monastery at Lichfield. Evidence suggests that the Lichfield Gospels were made in Lichfield around 730. As in other Anglo-Saxon kingdoms, the many small monasteries established by the Mercian kings allowed the political/military and ecclesiastical leadership to consolidate their unity through bonds of kinship.\nSubdivisions of Mercia.\nFor knowledge of the internal composition of the Kingdom of Mercia, we must rely on a document of uncertain age (possibly late 7th century), known as the \"Tribal Hidage\" \u2013 an assessment of the extent (but not the location) of land owned (reckoned in hides), and therefore the military obligations and perhaps taxes due, by each of the Mercian tribes and subject kingdoms by name. This hidage exists in several manuscript versions, some as late as the 14th century. It lists a number of peoples, such as the Hwicce, who have now vanished, except for reminders in various placenames. The major subdivisions of Mercia were as follows:\nThe Mercians dwelling south of the River Trent. Folk groups within included the \"Toms\u00e6te\" around Tamworth and the \"Pencers\u00e6te\" around Penkridge (roughly corresponding to southern Staffordshire and northern Warwickshire).\nThe Mercians dwelling north of the River Trent (roughly corresponding to eastern Staffordshire, Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire).\nAn early phase of Mercian expansion, possibly 6th century (roughly corresponding to southern Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, Rutland, Northamptonshire and Oxfordshire).\nOnce a kingdom in its own right, disputed with Northumbria in the 7th century before finally coming under Mercian control (roughly corresponding to the historic riding of Lindsey in Lincolnshire).\nA collection of many smaller folk groups under Mercian control from the 7th century, including the \"Spaldingas\" around Spalding, the \"Bilmingas\" and \"Wideringas\" near Stamford, the \"North Gyrwe\" and \"South Gyrwe\" near Peterborough, the \"West Wixna\", \"East Wixna\", \"West Wille\" and \"East Wille\" near Ely, the \"Sweordora\", \"Hurstingas\" and \"Gifle\" near Bedford, the \"Hicce\" around Hitchin, the \"Cilterns\u00e6te\" in the Chilterns and the \"Feppingas\" near Thame (roughly corresponding to Cambridgeshire, Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire, Buckinghamshire and southern Oxfordshire).\nOnce a kingdom in its own right, disputed with Wessex in the 7th century before finally coming under Mercian control. Smaller folk groups within included the \"Stoppingas\" around Warwick and the \"Aros\u00e6te\" near Droitwich (roughly corresponding to Gloucestershire, Worcestershire and southern Warwickshire).\nA people of the Welsh border, also known as the Westerna, under Mercian control from the 7th century. Smaller folk groups within included the \"Temers\u00e6te\" near Hereford and the \"Hahls\u00e6te\" near Ludlow (roughly corresponding to Herefordshire and southern Shropshire).\nA people of the Welsh border under Mercian control from the 7th century. Smaller folk groups within included the \"Rhiws\u00e6te\" near Wroxeter and the \"Meres\u00e6te\" near Chester (roughly corresponding to northern Shropshire, Flintshire and Cheshire).\nAn isolated folk group of the Peak District, under Mercian control from the 7th century (roughly corresponding to northern Derbyshire).\nA disorganised region under Mercian control from the 7th century (roughly corresponding to Merseyside, Greater Manchester, and Lancashire south of the River Ribble). It was the most northern extent of the kingdom, and at certain times was claimed by Northumbria and Danelaw. \nTaken over from Essex in the 8th century, including London (roughly corresponding to Greater London, Hertfordshire, and Surrey).\nAfter Mercia was annexed by Wessex in the early 10th century, the West Saxon rulers divided it into shires modelled after their own system, cutting across traditional Mercian divisions. These shires survived mostly intact until 1974, and even today still largely follow their original boundaries.\nModern uses of the name Mercia.\nThe term \"midlands\" is first recorded (as \"mydlonde-shiris\") in 1475. John Bateman, writing in 1876 or 1883, referred to contemporary Cheshire and Staffordshire landholdings as being in Mercia. The most credible source for the idea of a contemporary Mercia is Thomas Hardy's Wessex novels. The first of these appeared in 1874 and Hardy himself considered it the origin of the conceit of a contemporary Wessex. Bram Stoker set his 1911 novel \"The Lair of the White Worm\" in a contemporary Mercia that may have been influenced by Hardy, whose secretary was a friend of Stoker's brother. Although 'Edwardian Mercia' never had the success of 'Victorian Wessex', it was an idea that appealed to the higher echelons of society. In 1908 Sir Oliver Lodge, Principal of Birmingham University, wrote to his counterpart at Bristol, welcoming a new university worthy of \"...the great Province of Wessex whose higher educational needs it will supply. It will be no rival, but colleague and co-worker with this university, whose province is Mercia...\".\nThe British Army has made use of several regional identities in naming larger, amalgamated formations. After the Second World War, the infantry regiments of Cheshire, Staffordshire and Worcestershire were organised in the Mercian Brigade (1948\u20131968). Today, \"Mercia\" appears in the titles of two regiments, the Mercian Regiment, founded in 2007, which recruits in Cheshire, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Worcestershire, and parts of Greater Manchester and the West Midlands, and the Royal Mercian and Lancastrian Yeomanry, founded in 1992 as part of the Territorial Army. In 1967, the police forces of Herefordshire, Shropshire and Worcestershire were combined into the West Mercia Constabulary, which changed its name to West Mercia Police in 2009.\nTelephone directories across the Midlands include a large number of commercial and voluntary organisations using \"Mercia\" in their names, and in 2012 a new football league was formed called the Mercian Regional Football League.\nHits Radio Coventry &amp; Warwickshire, a commercial radio station, was originally launched in 1980 as Mercia Sound, later becoming Mercia FM, and then Mercia.\nSymbolism and attributed heraldry.\nThere is no authentic indigenous Mercian heraldic device, as heraldry did not develop in any recognizable form until the High Middle Ages.\nThe saltire as a symbol of Mercia may have been in use since the time of King Offa. By the 13th century, the saltire had become the attributed arms of the Kingdom of Mercia. The arms are blazoned \"Azure, a saltire Or\", meaning a gold (or yellow) saltire on a blue field. The arms were subsequently used by the Abbey of St Albans, founded by King Offa of Mercia. With the dissolution of the Abbey and the incorporation of the borough of St Albans the device was used on the town's corporate seal and was officially recorded as the arms of the town at an heraldic visitation in 1634.\nThe saltire is used as both a flag and a coat of arms. As a flag, it is flown from Tamworth Castle, the ancient seat of the Mercian Kings, to this day. \nThe flag also appears on street signs welcoming people to Tamworth, the \"ancient capital of Mercia\". It was also flown outside Birmingham Council House during 2009 while the Staffordshire Hoard was on display in the city before being taken to the British Museum in London. The cross has been incorporated into a number of coats of arms of Mercian towns, including Tamworth, Leek and Blaby. It was recognised as the Mercian flag by the Flag Institute in 2014.\nThe silver double-headed eagle surmounted by a golden three-pronged Saxon crown has been used by several units of the British Army as a heraldic device for Mercia since 1958, including the Mercian Regiment. It is derived from the attributed arms of Leofric, Earl of Mercia in the 11th century. Leofric is sometimes attributed a black, single-headed eagle instead.\nThe wyvern, a type of dragon, came to have a strong association with Mercia in the 19th century. The Midland Railway, which used a white (silver) wyvern \"sans legs\" (legless) as its crest, having inherited it from the Leicester and Swannington Railway, asserted that the \"wyvern was the standard of the Kingdom of Mercia\", and that it was \"a quartering in the town arms of Leicester\". The symbol appeared on numerous stations and other company buildings in the region, and was worn as a silver badge by all uniformed employees. However, in 1897 the \"Railway Magazine\" noted that there appeared \"to be no foundation that the wyvern was associated with the Kingdom of Mercia\". It has been associated with Leicester since the time of Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster and Leicester (c. 1278\u20131322), the most powerful lord in the Midlands, who used it as his personal crest, and was recorded in a heraldic visitation of the town in 1619.\nIn Bram Stoker's 1911 novel \"The Lair of the White Worm\", explicitly set in Mercia (see above), the Mercian white wyvern \"sans legs\" of the Midland Railway was transformed into a monstrous beast, the eponymous worm of the title. The word \"worm\" is derived from Old English \"wyrm\" and originally referred to a dragon or serpent. \"Wyvern\" derives from Old Saxon \"wivere\", also meaning serpent, and is etymologically related to viper.\nThe ultimate source for the symbolism of white dragons in England would appear to be Geoffrey of Monmouth's fictional work, \"The History of the Kings of Britain\" (c. 1136), which recounts an incident in the life of Merlin where a red dragon is seen fighting a white dragon and prevailing. The red dragon was taken to represent the Welsh and their eventual victory over the Anglo-Saxon invaders, symbolised by the white dragon.\nThe philologist and Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey has suggested that the Middle Kingdom in J. R. R. Tolkien's \"Farmer Giles of Ham\", a story dominated by a dragon, is based on Mercia, the part of England where Tolkien grew up. This dragon, Chrysophylax, though mostly hostile, eventually helps Giles found a realm of his own, the Little Kingdom. Shippey states further that \"the Mark\", the land of the Riders of Rohan \u2013 all of whom have names in the Mercian dialect of Old English \u2013 was once the usual term for central England, and it would have been pronounced and written \"marc\" rather than the West Saxon \"mearc\" or the Latinized \"Mercia\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38772", "revid": "50951696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38772", "title": "Sergio Leone", "text": "Italian filmmaker (1929\u20131989)\nSergio Leone ( ; ; 3 January 1929 \u2013 30 April 1989) was an Italian filmmaker, credited as the pioneer of the spaghetti Western genre. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest directors in the history of cinema.\nLeone's film-making style includes juxtaposing extreme close-up shots with lengthy long shots. His films include the Dollars Trilogy of Westerns featuring Clint Eastwood: \"A Fistful of Dollars\" (1964), \"For a Few Dollars More\" (1965), and \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\" (1966); and the \"Once Upon a Time\" films: \"Once Upon a Time in the West\" (1968), \"Duck, You Sucker!\" (1971), and \"Once Upon a Time in America\" (1984).\nEarly life.\nBorn on 3 January 1929 in Rome, Leone was the son of the cinema pioneer Vincenzo Leone (known as Roberto Roberti or Leone Roberto Roberti) and silent film actress Edvige Valcarenghi (known as Bice Waleran). His mother was of Milanese and remote Austrian descent. During his schooldays, Leone was a classmate of his later musical collaborator Ennio Morricone in third grade. After watching his father work on film sets, Leone began his own career in the film industry at the age of 18 after dropping out of law studies at the university.\nWorking in Italian cinema, he began as an assistant to Vittorio De Sica during the production for the movie \"Bicycle Thieves\" in 1948. Leone began writing screenplays during the 1950s, primarily for the \"sword and sandal\" (or \"peplum\") historical epics, popular at the time. He also worked as an assistant director on several large-scale international productions shot at the Cinecitt\u00e0 Studios in Rome, notably \"Quo Vadis\" (1951) and \"Ben-Hur\" (1959), financially backed by the American studios.\nWhen director Mario Bonnard fell ill during the production of the 1959 Italian epic \"The Last Days of Pompeii\" (\"Gli Ultimi Giorni di Pompei\"), starring Steve Reeves, Leone was asked to step in and complete the film. As a result, when the time came to make his solo directorial debut with \"The Colossus of Rhodes\" (\"Il Colosso di Rodi\", 1961), Leone was well-equipped to produce low-budget films that looked like larger-budget Hollywood movies.\nCareer.\nCinema must be spectacle, that's what the public wants. And for me the most beautiful spectacle is that of the myth.\n1960s.\nIn the mid-1960s, historical epics fell out of favor with audiences, but Leone had shifted his attention to a subgenre which came to be known as the \"spaghetti Western\", owing its origin to the American Western. His film \"A Fistful of Dollars\" (\"Per un pugno di dollari\", 1964) was based upon Akira Kurosawa's Edo-era samurai adventure \"Yojimbo\" (1961). Leone's film elicited a legal challenge from the Japanese director, though Kurosawa's film was, in turn, probably based on the 1929 Dashiell Hammett novel, \"Red Harvest\". \"A Fistful of Dollars\" is also notable for establishing Clint Eastwood as a star. Until that time, Eastwood had been an American television actor with few credited film roles.\nThe look of \"A Fistful of Dollars\" was established by its Spanish locations, which presented a violent and morally complex vision of the American Old West. The film paid tribute to traditional American Western films, but significantly departed from them in storyline, plot, characterization, and mood. Leone gains credit for one great breakthrough in the Western genre still followed today; in traditional Western films, many heroes and villains looked alike as if they had just stepped out of a fashion magazine, with clearly drawn moral opposites, even down to the hero wearing a white hat and the villain wearing a black hat (except for the most successful of the \"traditional western cowboys\" \u2013 Hopalong Cassidy, who wore a black outfit upon a pale horse). Leone's characters were, in contrast, more \"realistic\" and complex: usually lone wolves in their behavior; they rarely shaved, looked dirty, and sweated profusely, with a strong suggestion of criminal behavior. The characters were also morally ambiguous by appearing generously compassionate, or nakedly and brutally self-serving, as the situation demanded. Relationships revolved around power and retributions were emotion-driven rather than conscience-driven. Some critics have noted the irony of an Italian director who could not speak English, and had never even visited the United States, let alone the American Old West, almost single-handedly redefining the typical vision of the American cowboy. According to Christopher Frayling's book \"Something to do with Death\", Leone knew a great deal about the American Old West. It fascinated him as a child, which carried into his adulthood and his films.\nLeone's next two films, \"For a Few Dollars More\" (\"Per qualche dollaro in pi\u00f9\", 1965) and \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\" (\"Il buono, il brutto, il cattivo\", 1966), completed what has come to be known as the Man with No Name trilogy (or the Dollars Trilogy), with each film being more financially successful and more technically accomplished than its predecessor. The films featured innovative music scores by Ennio Morricone, who worked closely with Leone in devising the themes. Leone had a personal way of shooting scenes with Morricone's music ongoing. In addition, Clint Eastwood stayed with the film series, joined later by Eli Wallach, Lee van Cleef, and Klaus Kinski.\nBased on the success of the Man with No Name trilogy, Leone was invited to the United States in 1967 to direct \"Once Upon a Time in the West\" (\"C'era una volta il West\") for Paramount Pictures. The film was shot mostly in Almer\u00eda, Spain, and Cinecitt\u00e0 in Rome. It was also briefly shot in Monument Valley, Utah. The film starred Charles Bronson, Henry Fonda, Jason Robards, and Claudia Cardinale. \"Once Upon a Time in the West\" emerged as a long and violent dreamlike meditation upon the mythology of the American Old West, with many stylistic references to iconic Western films. Audience tension is maintained throughout this nearly three-hour film by concealing both the hero's identity and his unpredictable motivation until the final predictable shootout scene. The film's script was written by Leone and his longtime friend and collaborator Sergio Donati, from a story by Bernardo Bertolucci and Dario Argento, both of whom went on to have significant careers as directors. Before its release, it was ruthlessly edited by Paramount, and achieved low box-office results in the United States. Nevertheless, it was a huge hit in Europe, grossing nearly three times its $5\u00a0million budget among French audiences, and highly praised among North American film students. It has come to be regarded by many as Leone's best film.\n1970s.\nAfter \"Once Upon a Time in the West\", Leone directed \"Duck, You Sucker!\" (\"Gi\u00f9 la testa\", 1971). Leone was intending merely to produce the film, but due to artistic differences with then-director Peter Bogdanovich, Leone was asked to direct the film, instead. \"Duck, You Sucker!\" is a Mexican Revolution action drama, starring James Coburn as an Irish revolutionary and Rod Steiger as a Mexican bandit who is conned into becoming a revolutionary.\nLeone continued to produce, and on occasion, step in to reshoot scenes, in other films. One of these films was \"My Name Is Nobody\" (1973) by Tonino Valerii, a comedy Western film that poked fun at the spaghetti Western genre. It starred Henry Fonda as an old gunslinger facing a final confrontation after the death of his brother. Terence Hill also starred in the film as the young stranger who helps Fonda leave the dying West with style.\nLeone's other productions included \"A Genius, Two Partners and a Dupe\" (1975, another Western comedy starring Terence Hill); \"The Cat\" (\"Il Gatto\"; 1977, starring Ugo Tognazzi), and \"A Dangerous Toy\" (\"Il Giocattolo\"; 1979, starring Nino Manfredi). Leone also produced three comedies by actor/director Carlo Verdone, which were \"Fun Is Beautiful\" (\"Un Sacco Bello\", 1980), \"Bianco, rosso e Verdone\" (\"White, Red and Verdone\" \u2013 Verdone means \"strong green\" \u2013 a pun referring to the three colors of the Italian flag, the star and to director Verdone, 1981) and \"Troppo Forte\" (\"Great!\", 1986). During this period, Leone also directed various award-winning TV commercials for European television.\nIn 1978, he was a member of the jury at the 28th Berlin International Film Festival.\n1980s.\nLeone turned down the offer to direct \"The Godfather\", in favor of working on another gangster story he had conceived earlier. He devoted 10 years to this project, based on the novel \"The Hoods\" by former mobster Harry Grey, which focused on a quartet of New York City Jewish gangsters of the 1920s and 1930s who had been friends since childhood. The finished four-hour film, \"Once Upon a Time in America\" (1984), featured Robert De Niro and James Woods. It was a meditation on another aspect of popular American mythology, the role of greed and violence and their uneasy coexistence with the meaning of ethnicity and friendship. It received a raucous, record-breaking ovation of nearly 20 minutes at the 1984 Cannes Film Festival (reportedly heard by diners at restaurants across the street from the Palais), at a time in Cannes's history before marathon applause became a regular occurrence. Despite such a fawning reception, Warner Brothers felt it was too long. The studio drastically recut it down to two hours for the American market, abandoning its flashback structure for a linear narrative. This version suffered heavy criticism and flopped. The original version, released in the rest of the world, achieved somewhat better box office returns and a mixed critical response. When the original version of the film was released on home video in the US, it gained major critical acclaim, with some critics hailing the film as a magnum opus.\nAccording to biographer Sir Christopher Frayling, Leone was deeply hurt by the studio-imposed editing and poor commercial reception of \"Once Upon a Time in America\" in North America. It was his last film.\nIn 1988, he was head of the jury at the 45th Venice International Film Festival.\nDeath and unrealized projects.\nLeone died on 30 April 1989 at his home in Rome of a heart attack at the age of 60. He is buried in the cemetery of Pratica di Mare.\n\"A Place Only Mary Knows\".\nA treatment for an \"Americanized\" Western was written by Leone, Luca Morsella, and Fabio Toncelli. It is speculated to have been Leone's last Western and was to have starred Mickey Rourke and Richard Gere as the two main leads. Set during the height of the American Civil War, the story focused on a Union drafter, Mike Kutcher from Georgia, whose job is to enroll men into the Union Army. The other is Richard Burns, a Southern shady businessman transplanted to the North after a successful heist with his ex-lover and partner, Mary. They try searching for the buried treasure left behind in an unmarked grave outside Atlanta in \"A Place Only Mary Knows\". Joined by a freed slave and an Italian immigrant, Francesco, who arrives via the Port of Boston, they try desperately to avoid the battles of the ongoing war between the states.\nThe film was to have been an homage to classic writers from literature such as Edgar Lee Masters (\"Spoon River Anthology\"), Ambrose Bierce (\"An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge\"), Mark Twain (\"The Private History of a Campaign that Failed\"), Stephen Crane (\"The Red Badge of Courage\"), and Margaret Mitchell (\"Gone with the Wind\"), whose novel he had wanted to film a remake of. Although the written treatment never got turned into a full screenplay, Leone's son Andrea had it published in a June 2004 issue of the Italian cinema magazine \"Ciak\". It is not certain if the treatment's publication will ever lead to a full production in America or Italy.\n\"Leningrad: The 900 Days\".\nWhile finishing work on \"Once Upon a Time in America\" in 1982, Leone was impressed with Harrison Salisbury's non-fiction book \"The 900 Days: The Siege of Leningrad\", and he planned on adapting the book as a war epic. Although no formal script had been completed or leaked, Leone came up with the opening scene and basic plot. According to the documentary \"Once Upon a Time, Sergio Leone\", the film opened \"in medias res\" as the camera goes from focusing on a Soviet hiding from the Nazis' artillery fire to panning hundreds of feet away to show the German Army Panzer divisions approaching the walls of the city. The plot was to focus on an American photographer on assignment (whom Leone wanted to be played by Robert De Niro) becoming trapped in Leningrad as the German Luftwaffe begin to bombard the city. Throughout the course of the film, he becomes romantically involved with a Soviet woman, whom he later impregnates, as they attempt to survive the prolonged siege and the secret police, because relationships with foreigners are forbidden. According to Leone, \"In the end, the cameraman dies on the day of the liberation of the city, when he is currently filming the surrender of the Germans. And the girl is aware of his death by chance seeing a movie news: the camera sees it explode under a shell\".\nBy 1989, Leone set the film's budget at $100\u00a0million, and had secured half of that amount in financing from independent backers from the Soviet Union. He had convinced Ennio Morricone to compose the film score, and Tonino Delli Colli was tapped to be the cinematographer. Shooting was scheduled to begin sometime in 1990. The project was canceled when Leone died two days before he was to officially sign on for the film. Alex Cox offered to replace Leone as director, but was unable to secure the remaining $50\u00a0million required to produce the film.\n\"Don Quixote\".\nAccording to Frayling's biography of Leone, \"Something to Do with Death\", he envisioned a contemporary adaptation of Cervantes' 17th-century novel \"Don Quixote\" with Clint Eastwood in the title role and Eli Wallach as Sancho Panza. He had discussed doing the project throughout the 1960s\u20131970s, and he started seriously considering it toward the end of his life.\n\"Colt\".\nIn 1987, Sergio Leone contacted his old collaborators Sergio Donati and Fulvio Morsella, pitching an idea for a TV miniseries about a Colt revolver that passed from owner to owner throughout the Old West, similar to Anthony Mann's film \"Winchester '73\" (1950). Donati indicated that Leone was interested in a more revisionist take on the genre than his earlier works, wanting to show the Old West \"like it really was\". Leone abandoned this project in favor of \"A Place Only Mary Knows\", though Donati wrote a treatment and the project remained in gestation for years after Leone's death.\nAn adaptation based on Leone's subject is currently in production. Appointed director is Italian film-maker Stefano Sollima.\nOther.\nLeone was also an avid fan of Margaret Mitchell's novel \"Gone with the Wind\" and the 1939 film adaptation. His relatives and close friends stated that he talked about filming a remake that was closer to the original novel, but it never advanced beyond discussions to any serious form of production.\nIn 1969, Leone was contracted to direct \"99 and 44/100% Dead\" with Marcello Mastroianni and Charles Bronson starring. He was replaced as director by John Frankenheimer, while Mastroianni was recast with Richard Harris. \nLeone was a fan of Louis-Ferdinand C\u00e9line's novel \"Journey to the End of the Night\" and was considering a film adaptation in the late 1960s; he incorporated elements of the story into \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\" and \"Duck, You Sucker!\" but his idea of adapting the novel itself never got past the planning stages.\nLeone was an early choice to direct \"Flash Gordon\" (1980). Leone was a fan of the original Alex Raymond comic strip, but turned down the film because the script did not resemble Raymond's work.\nAwards and honours.\nHe received the \"America Award\" from the Italy\u2013USA Foundation posthumously in 2014.\nIn 2019, Poste Italiane issued a commemorative postage stamp honoring Leone."}
{"id": "38773", "revid": "26252035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38773", "title": "Otto Preminger", "text": "Austrian-American director, producer, and actor (1905\u20131986)\nOtto Ludwig Preminger ( ; ; 5 December 1905 \u2013 23 April 1986) was an Austrian-American film and theatre director, film producer and actor. He directed more than 35 feature films in a five-decade career after leaving the theatre, and was one of the most influential directors in Hollywood during the 1940s and 1950s. He was nominated for three Academy Awards, twice for Best Director and once for Best Picture, among many other accolades.\nAfter achieving theatrical prominence in Vienna, Preminger emigrated to the United States in the mid-1930s, working as a director for 20th Century Fox. He first gained attention for film noir mysteries such as \"Laura\" (1944) and \"Fallen Angel\" (1945), while in the 1950s and 1960s, he directed high-profile adaptations of popular novels and stage works. Several of these later films pushed the boundaries of censorship by dealing with themes which were then taboo in Hollywood, such as premarital sexuality (\"The Moon Is Blue\", 1953), drug addiction (\"The Man with the Golden Arm\", 1955), rape (\"Anatomy of a Murder\", 1959) and homosexuality (\"Advise &amp; Consent\", 1962). He also had several acting roles, most famously as a Nazi POW camp commandant in \"Stalag 17\".\nPreminger was also notorious for his temperamental and perfectionist attitude on-set, which led to rows with several actors and earned him the nicknames \"Otto the Monster\" and \"Otto the Ogre\". Turner Classic Movies wrote that Preminger \"enjoyed a long reign in Hollywood as the quintessence of the dictatorial European auteur.\"\nEarly life.\nPreminger was born in 1905 in Wischnitz, Bukovina, Austria-Hungary (present-day Vyzhnytsia, Ukraine), into a Jewish family. His parents were Josefa (n\u00e9e Fraenkel) and Markus Preminger. The couple provided a stable home life for Otto and his younger brother Ingwald, known as \"Ingo\", later the producer of the original film version of \"M*A*S*H\" (1970).\nAfter the assassination in 1914 of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, which led to the Great War, Russia entered the war on the Serbian side. Bukovina was invaded by the Russian Army and the Preminger family fled. His father secured a position as public prosecutor in Graz, capital of Styria. When the Preminger family relocated, Otto was nearly nine and was enrolled in a school where instruction in Catholicism was mandatory and Jewish history and religion had no place on the syllabus. Ingo, not yet four, remained at home.\nAfter a year in Graz, Markus Preminger claims that he was summoned to Vienna and offered an eminent position (roughly equivalent to that of the United States Attorney General), but was told that the position would be his only if he converted to Catholicism, which he refused to do. The next year, he moved his family to Vienna, where Otto later claimed to have been born.\nIn 1928, Preminger earned a law degree from the University of Vienna.\nCareer.\nTheater.\nOtto Preminger's first theatrical ambition was to become an actor. In his early teens, he was able to recite from memory many of the great monologues from the international classic repertory, and, never shy, he demanded an audience. Preminger's most successful performance in the National Library rotunda was Mark Antony's funeral oration from \"Julius Caesar\". As he read, watched, and after a fashion began to produce plays, he began to miss more and more classes in school.\nWhen the war came to an end, Markus formed his own law practice. He instilled in both his sons a sense of fair play as well as respect for those with opposing viewpoints. As his father's practice continued to thrive in postwar Vienna, Otto began seriously contemplating a career in the theater. In 1923, when Preminger was 17, his soon-to-be mentor, Max Reinhardt, the renowned Viennese-born director, announced plans to establish a theatrical company in Vienna. Reinhardt's announcement was seen as a call of destiny to Preminger. He began writing to Reinhardt weekly, requesting an audition. After a few months, Preminger, frustrated, gave up, and stopped his daily visit to the post office to check for a response. Unbeknownst to him, a letter was waiting with a date for an audition which Preminger had already missed by two days.\nHe juggled a commitment to university (attendance of which his parents insisted upon) and to his new position as a Reinhardt apprentice. The two developed a mentor-and-prot\u00e9g\u00e9 relationship, becoming both a confidant and teacher. When the theater opened, on 1 April 1924, Preminger appeared as a furniture mover in Reinhardt's comedic staging of Carlo Goldoni's \"The Servant of Two Masters\". His next appearance came the next month with William Dieterle (who would later move to Hollywood) in \"The Merchant of Venice\". Other notable \"alumni\" with whom Preminger would work the same year were Mady Christians, who died of a stroke after having been blacklisted during the McCarthy era, and Nora Gregor, who was to star in Jean Renoir's \"La R\u00e8gle du jeu\" (1939).\nThe following summer, a frustrated Preminger was no longer content to occupy the place of a subordinate and he decided to leave the Reinhardt fold. His status as a Reinhardt muse gave him an edge over much of his competition when it came to joining German-speaking theater. His first theater assignments as a director in Aussig were plays ranging from the sexually provocative Wedekind \"Lulu\" plays, to the Berlin-tried, melodramatic Sergei Tretyakov play \"Roar China!\".\nIn 1930, a wealthy industrialist from Graz approached Otto with an offer to direct a film called (\"The Great Love\"). Preminger did not have the same passion for the medium as he had for theater. He accepted the assignment nonetheless. The film premiered at the Emperor Theater in Vienna on 21 December 1931, to strong reviews and business. From 1931 to 1935, he directed twenty-six shows.\nOn 3 August 1931, he wed a Hungarian woman, Marion Mill. The couple married only thirty minutes after her divorce from her first husband had been finalized.\nHollywood.\nIn April 1935, as Preminger was rehearsing a boulevard farce, \"The King with an Umbrella\", he received a summons from American film producer Joseph Schenck to a five o'clock meeting at the Imperial Hotel. Schenck and partner, Darryl F. Zanuck, co-founders of Twentieth Century-Fox, were on the lookout for new talent. Within a half-hour of meeting Schenck, Preminger accepted an invitation to work for Fox in Los Angeles.\nPreminger's first assignment was to direct a vehicle for Lawrence Tibbett. Preminger worked efficiently, completing the film well within the budget and well before the scheduled shooting deadline. The film opened to tepid notices in November 1936. Zanuck gave Preminger the task of directing another B-picture screwball comedy film \"Danger \u2013 Love at Work\". Simone Simon was cast but later fired by Zanuck and replaced with Ann Sothern. The premise was that eight members of an eccentric, wealthy family have inherited their grandfather's land, and the protagonist is a lawyer tasked with persuading the family to hand the land over to a corporation that believes there is oil on the property. One of the female members of the wealthy family provides the romantic interest.\nIn November 1937, Zanuck's perennial emissary Gregory Ratoff brought Preminger the news that Zanuck had selected him to direct \"Kidnapped\", which was to be the most expensive feature to date for Twentieth Century-Fox. Zanuck himself had adapted the Robert Louis Stevenson novel. After reading Zanuck's script, Preminger knew he was in trouble since he would be a foreign director directing in a foreign setting. During the shooting of \"Kidnapped\", while screening footage of the film with Zanuck, the studio head accused Preminger of making changes in a scene; in particular, one with child actor Freddie Bartholomew and a dog. Preminger, composed at first, explained, claiming he shot the scene exactly as written.\nZanuck insisted that he knew his own script. The confrontation escalated and ended with Preminger exiting the office and slamming the door. Days later, the lock to Preminger's office was changed, and his name was removed from the door. Later, a representative of Zanuck offered Preminger a buyout deal which he rejected: Preminger wanted to be paid for the remaining eleven months of his two-year contract. He searched for work at other studios, but received no offers\u2014only two years after his arrival in Hollywood, he was unemployed in the film industry. He returned to New York, and began to re-focus on the stage. Success came quickly on Broadway for Preminger, with long-running productions, including \"Outward Bound\" with Laurette Taylor and Vincent Price, \"My Dear Children\" with John and Elaine Barrymore and \"Margin for Error\", in which Preminger played a shiny-domed villainous Nazi. Preminger was offered a teaching position at the Yale School of Drama and began commuting twice a week to Connecticut to lecture on directing and acting.\n20th Century Fox purchased the screen rights of \"Margin for Error\" for approximately $25,000 in the spring of 1941, and William Goetz, who was running Fox in Zanuck's absence, was soon impressed with Preminger and offered him a new seven-year contract calling on his services as both a director and actor. Preminger took full measure of the temporary studio czar, and accepted. He completed production on schedule, although with a slightly increased budget, by November 1942. Critics were dismissive upon the film's release the following February, noting the bad timing of the release, coinciding with the war. Before his next assignment with Fox, Preminger was asked by movie mogul Samuel Goldwyn to appear as a Nazi once more, this time in a Bob Hope comedy, \"They Got Me Covered\".\nPreminger hoped to find possible properties he could develop before Zanuck's return, one of which was Vera Caspary's suspense novel \"Laura\". Before production would begin on \"Laura\", Preminger was given the green light to produce and direct \"Army Wives\", another B-picture morale booster for a country at war. Its focus was on showing the sacrifices made by women as they send their husbands off to the front.\n\"Laura\".\nZanuck returned from the armed services with his grudge against Preminger intact. Preminger was not granted permission to direct \"Laura\", only to serve as producer. Rouben Mamoulian was selected to direct. Mamoulian began ignoring Preminger and started to rewrite the script. Although Preminger had no complaints about the casting of the relatively unknown Gene Tierney and Dana Andrews, he balked at their choice for the film's villain, Waldo, actor Laird Cregar. Preminger explained to Zanuck that audiences would immediately identify Cregar as a villain, especially after Cregar's role as Jack the Ripper in \"The Lodger\".\nPreminger wanted stage actor Clifton Webb to play Waldo and persuaded his boss to give Webb a screen test. Webb was cast and Mamoulian was fired for creative differences, which also included Preminger wanting Dana Andrews to be a more classy detective instead of a gumshoe detective. \"Laura\" started filming on 27 April 1944, with a projected budget of $849,000. After Preminger took over, the film continued shooting well into late June. When released, the film was an instant hit with audiences and critics alike, earning Preminger his first Academy Award nomination for direction.\nPeak years.\nPreminger expected acclaim for \"Laura\" would promote him to work on better pictures, but his professional fate was in the hands of Zanuck, who had Preminger take over for the ailing Ernst Lubitsch on \"A Royal Scandal\", a remake of Lubitsch's own silent \"Forbidden Paradise\" (1924), starring Pola Negri as Catherine the Great. Before he suffered a heart attack, Lubitsch had spent months in preparation, and had already cast the film. Preminger cast Tallulah Bankhead, whom he had known since 1938 when he was directing on Broadway.\nBankhead learned that Preminger's family would be barred from emigrating to the U.S. due to immigration quotas, and she asked her father (who was Speaker of the House) to intervene to save them from the Nazis. He did, which earned Bankhead Preminger's loyalty. Thus when Lubitsch wanted to make the film into a vehicle for Greta Garbo, Preminger, although he would have been eager to direct the film that brought Garbo out of retirement, refused to betray Bankhead. They became good friends and got along well during filming. The film received generally lackluster reviews as the Ruritanian romance genre had become outdated, and it failed to earn back its cost of production.\n\"Fallen Angel\" (1945) was exactly what Preminger had been anticipating. In \"Fallen Angel\", a con man and womanizer ends up by chance in a small California town, where he romances a sultry waitress and a well-to-do spinster. When the waitress is found killed, the drifter, played by Dana Andrews, becomes the prime suspect. Linda Darnell played the doomed waitress. \"Centennial Summer\" (1946), Preminger's next film, would be his first shot entirely in color. The reviews and box office draw were tepid when the film was released in July 1946, but by the end of that year Preminger had one of the most sumptuous contracts on the lot, earning $7,500 a week.\n\"Forever Amber\", based on Kathleen Winsor's internationally popular novel \"Forever Amber\", published in 1944, was Zanuck's next investment in adaptation. Preminger had read the book and disliked it immensely. Preminger had another bestseller aimed at a female audience in mind, \"Daisy Kenyon\". Zanuck pledged that if Preminger did \"Forever Amber\" first, he could make \"Daisy Kenyon\" afterwards. \"Forever Amber\" had already been shooting for nearly six weeks when Preminger replaced director John Stahl. Zanuck had already spent nearly $2 million on the production.\nOnly after turning to his revised script did Preminger learn Zanuck had recast star Peggy Cummins with Linda Darnell. Zanuck was convinced that whoever played Amber would become a big star, and he wanted that woman to be one of the studio's own. Zanuck had bought the book because he believed its scandalous reputation promised big box-office returns, and he was not surprised when the Catholic Legion of Decency condemned the film for glamorizing a promiscuous heroine who has a child out of wedlock; they successfully lobbied 20th Century Fox to make changes to the film. \"Forever Amber\" opened to big business in October 1947 and garnered decent reviews. Preminger called the film \"the most expensive picture I ever made and it was also the worst\".\nPreminger maintained a busy schedule, working with writers on scripts for two planned projects, \"Daisy Kenyon\" (1947) and \"The Dark Wood\"; the latter was not produced. Joan Crawford starred in \"Daisy Kenyon\" alongside Dana Andrews, Ruth Warrick and Henry Fonda. \"Variety\" proclaimed the film \"high powered melodrama surefire for the femme market\". After the modest success of \"Daisy Kenyon\", Preminger saw \"That Lady in Ermine\" as a further opportunity. Betty Grable was cast opposite Douglas Fairbanks Jr. The film had previously been another Lubitsch project, but after Lubitsch's sudden death in November 1947, Preminger took over. His next film was a period piece based on \"Lady Windermere's Fan\". Over the spring and early summer of 1948 Preminger turned Oscar Wilde's play into \"The Fan\" (1949), which starred Madeleine Carroll; the film opened to poor notices.\nChallenging taboos and censorship.\nSeveral of his films in this period dealt with controversial and taboo themes, thereby challenging both the Motion Picture Association of America's Production Code of censorship and the Hollywood blacklist. The Catholic Legion of Decency condemned the comedy \"The Moon Is Blue\" (1953) on the grounds of moral standards. The film was based on a Broadway play which had inspired mass protests for its use of the words \"virgin\" and \"pregnant\". Refusing to remove the offending words, Preminger had the film released without the Production Code Seal of Approval. Based on the novel by Nelson Algren, \"The Man with the Golden Arm\" (1955) was one of the first Hollywood films to deal with heroin addiction.\nLater, \"Anatomy of a Murder\" (1959), with its frank courtroom discussions of rape and sexual intercourse led to the censors objecting to the use of words such as \"rape\", \"sperm\", \"sexual climax\" and \"penetration\". Preminger made but one concession (substituting \"violation\" for \"penetration\") and the picture was released with MPAA approval, marking the beginning of the end of the Production Code. With \"Exodus\" (1960) Preminger struck a first major blow against the Hollywood blacklist by acknowledging banned screenwriter Dalton Trumbo. The film is an adaptation of the Leon Uris bestseller about the founding of the state of Israel. Preminger also acted in a few movies including the World War II Luft-Stalag Commandant, Oberst von Scherbach of the German POW camp \"Stalag 17\" (1953), directed by Billy Wilder.\nFrom the mid-1950s, most of Preminger's films used animated titles designed by Saul Bass, and many had jazz scores. At the New York City Opera, in October 1953, Preminger directed the American premiere (in English translation) of Gottfried von Einem's opera \"Der Proze\u00df\", based on Franz Kafka's novel \"The Trial\". Soprano Phyllis Curtin headed the cast. Preminger also adapted two operas for the screen during the decade. \"Carmen Jones\" (1954) is a reworking of the Bizet opera \"Carmen\" to a wartime African-American setting while \"Porgy and Bess\" (1959) is based on the George Gershwin opera. In 1960 Preminger produced the play, Critic's Choice, written by Ira Levin and starring Henry Fonda. Ida Martucci, author of the book, Jive Jungle, was the production assistant. It opened on Broadway at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre on December 14, 1960, and closed on May 27, 1961. His two films of the early 1960s were \"Advise &amp; Consent\" (1962), a political drama from the Allen Drury bestseller with a homosexual subtheme, and \"The Cardinal\" (1963), a drama set in the Vatican hierarchy for which Preminger received his second Best Director Academy Award nomination.\nLater career.\nBeginning in 1965, Preminger made a string of films in which he attempted to make stories that were fresh and distinctive, but the films he made, including \"In Harm's Way\" (1965) and \"Tell Me That You Love Me, Junie Moon\" (1970), became both critical and financial flops. One exception was \"Such Good Friends\" (1971), which earned a Golden Globe nomination for its star Dyan Cannon.\nPreminger made a guest appearance as \"Mr. Freeze\" on the \"Batman\" television series, succeeding George Sanders and preceding Eli Wallach in the role of the supervillain.\nPreminger's \"Hurry Sundown\" (1967) is a lengthy drama set in the U.S. South and was partly intended to break cinematic racial and sexual taboos. However, the film was poorly received and ridiculed for a heavy-handed approach, and for the dubious casting of Michael Caine as an American Southerner. It was followed by several other films which were critical and commercial failures, including \"Skidoo\" (1968), a failed attempt at a hip sixties comedy (and Groucho Marx's last film), and \"Rosebud\" (1975), a terrorism thriller which was also widely ridiculed. Several publicized disputes with leading actors did further damage to Preminger's reputation. His last film, an adaptation of the Graham Greene espionage novel \"The Human Factor\" (1979), had financial problems and was barely released.\nDirecting style and personality.\nAs noted above, both as a director and (later in his career) as the producer of his own films, Preminger repeatedly broke new ground, by challenging long-established norms and taboos in Hollywood films. He was also known for his efficiency as a filmmaker\u2014for most of his career he routinely completed his films on time and on budget. He frequently favoured long takes, often filmed dialogue in two-shots, rather than intercutting, and preferred minimal cuts. John Ford was also known for similar techniques, filming as few takes as possible, and \"cutting in the camera\", and it is likely that Preminger preferred these methods for the same reasons as Ford, who had learned from hard experience that shooting as little footage as possible reduced costs, while also minimising the ability of studio executives to recut their films against their wishes.\nHowever, despite his liberal social outlook, Preminger became notorious for his domineering and abrasive personality, his explosive temper, and his dictatorial manner on set, which earned him nicknames like \"Otto the Terrible\" and \"Otto the Ogre\"\u2014although it has been speculated that (like his contemporary John Ford) Preminger's tyrannical persona and abusive behaviour were to some extent a calculated pose, intended to garner publicity, keep his cast and crew under his control, and keep interfering studio executives at bay.\nPreminger evidently had relatively few conflicts with the major stars with whom he worked, although there were notable exceptions. Lana Turner (originally cast in the role that subsequently went to Lee Remick) quit \"Anatomy of a Murder\" a month before filming was due to start, over a dispute about her wardrobe, with Turner telling the press that she couldn't deal with Preminger's domineering personality, and renowned British actor Paul Scofield reportedly quit \"Saint Joan\" after he got into a heated argument with Preminger during the first cast read-through of the script.\nLaurence Olivier, who played a police inspector in the psychological thriller \"Bunny Lake Is Missing\" (1965), shot in England, recalled in his autobiography \"Confessions of an Actor\" that he found Preminger a \"bully\". Adam West, who portrayed the lead in the 1960s \"Batman\" television series, echoed Olivier's opinion. He remembered Preminger as being rude and unpleasant, especially when he disregarded the typical thespian etiquette of subtly cooperating when being helped to his feet, in a scene by West and Burt Ward.\nPreminger became notorious for his abusive and bullying behaviour towards his crews, and he was especially intolerant of less experienced actors\u2014he reputedly completely memorised every line of each script before shooting began, and would fly into a rage at any actor who struggled to remember their lines. He is said to have grabbed one nervous young actor by the shoulders and screamed in his face \"Relax! Relax!\" Composer Elmer Bernstein, who scored \"The Man with the Golden Arm\" recalled, \"He was a scary character. I thought he was going to throw me out of the office when I told him that what I had in mind was to do a jazz-based score. But he said that that was what I had been hired for, and that was what I should go away and do.\"\nLinda Darnell was another famous target of Preminger's temper\u2014he reportedly screamed at her almost every day for two months during the filming of \"Forever Amber\". She came to loathe him, and the combination of the long hours of filming, heavy dieting and Preminger's constant harangues caused Darnell to collapse twice on set, and she was ordered to take ten days off by a doctor. During rehearsals for the Herman Wouk play \"Modern Primitive\", Preminger screamed so violently at an actor who struggled to remember his lines that the man allegedly suffered a nervous breakdown, and one witness later commented, \"I had never seen such terrifying rage in anyone,\" describing the director as having \"veins standing out on his forehead\" and \"literally foaming at the mouth\".\nOne of the most infamous examples of his mistreatment of inexperienced actors was Jean Seberg, whom he plucked from obscurity and directed in \"Saint Joan\" and \"Bonjour Tristesse\". Seberg later commented: \"With him, I became a nervous wreck, crying and jumping when the phone started ringing, incapable of walking calmly across a room.\" Preminger imposed an intense, constant and minute level of control over Seberg throughout their association, and her co-star Richard Widmark later characterised Preminger's behaviour towards her as \"sadistic\". Tom Tryon, the star of Preminger's 1963 feature \"The Cardinal\", received similar treatment\u2014Preminger would scream at him, zoom in on his shaking hands, and repeatedly fired and rehired him, with the result that Tryon was hospitalised with a body rash and peeling skin, due to nerves. Interviewed some 30 years later, Tryon admitted that he still hated talking about the experience, and his brother Bill Tryon told the same interviewer: \"I'll never watch that movie again the rest of my life, knowing what Tom went through.\"\nPreservation.\nThe Academy Film Archive has preserved several of Otto Preminger's films, including \"The Man With the Golden Arm\", \"The Moon is Blue\", \"The Cardinal\" and \"Advise &amp; Consent\".\nPersonal life.\nPreminger and his wife Marion became increasingly estranged. He lived like a bachelor, as was the case when he met the burlesque performer Gypsy Rose Lee and began an open relationship with her during the mid-1940s.\nLee had already attempted to break into movie roles, but she was not taken seriously as anything more than a stripper. She acted mainly in very small roles in B pictures. Preminger's liaison with Lee produced a child, Erik. Lee rejected the idea of Preminger's helping to support the child and instead elicited a vow of silence from Preminger: he was not to reveal Erik's paternity to anyone, including Erik himself. Lee called the boy Erik Kirkland after her husband, Alexander Kirkland, from whom she was separated at the time. It was not until 1966, when Preminger was 60 years old and Erik was 22, that father and son finally met.\nIn May 1946, Marion asked for a divorce, after meeting a wealthy (and married) Swedish financier, Axel Wenner-Gren. The Premingers' divorce ended smoothly and speedily. Marion did not seek alimony, only personal belongings. Axel's wife, however, was unwilling to grant a divorce. Marion returned to Otto and resumed appearances as his wife, and nothing more. Preminger had begun dating Natalie Draper, a niece of Marion Davies.\nFrom 1951 to 1960, Preminger was married to model Mary Gardner. However, while filming \"Carmen Jones\" (1954), Preminger began an affair with the film's star, Dorothy Dandridge, which lasted four years. During that period he advised her on career matters, including an offer made to Dandridge for the featured role of Tuptim in \"The King and I\" (1956). Preminger advised her to turn it down, as he believed it unworthy of her. The role went to Rita Moreno and the film was a smash hit, and Dandridge later regretted taking Preminger's advice.\nDuring the 1968 presidential election, Preminger was supportive of Democratic presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy, before he was assassinated.\nIn 1970, Preminger was a subject of ridicule in Tom Wolfe's essay \"Radical Chic: That Party at Lenny's,\" where he was portrayed verbally dueling with Black Panther Field Marshal Donald Cox.\nIn 1971, he married Hope Bryce, a costume designer, who remained his spouse until his death. They had two children: twins Mark William and Victoria Elizabeth.\nDeath.\nPreminger died in his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan in 1986, aged 80, from lung cancer. Some of Preminger's associates, including his son Erik, have claimed that he suffered from Alzheimer's disease in his final years, though Hope Bryce denied that Preminger was ever diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease when interviewed by Foster Hirsch. He was survived by his wife, Hope, and three children: his son, Erik, and twins Mark William and Victoria Elizabeth. Preminger was cremated and his ashes are in a niche in the Azalea Room of the Velma B. Woolworth Memorial Chapel at Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx.\nAwards.\nPreminger's \"Anatomy of a Murder\" was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. As the producer of the film, he received the nomination. He was twice nominated for Best Director: for \"Laura\" and for \"The Cardinal\". He won the Bronze Berlin Bear award for the film \"Carmen Jones\" at the 5th Berlin International Film Festival.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nJournals\nBooks"}
{"id": "38774", "revid": "49117425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38774", "title": "Don Siegel", "text": "American film director (1912\u20131991)\nDonald Siegel ( ; October 26, 1912 \u2013 April 20, 1991) was an American film director and producer.\nSiegel was described by \"The New York Times\" as \"a director of tough, cynical and forthright action-adventure films whose taut plots centered on individualistic loners\". He directed the science-fiction horror film \"Invasion of the Body Snatchers\" (1956), as well as five films with Clint Eastwood, including the police thriller \"Dirty Harry\" (1971) and the prison drama \"Escape from Alcatraz\" (1979). He also directed John Wayne's final film, the Western \"The Shootist\" (1976).\nEarly life.\nSiegel was born in 1912 to a Jewish family in Chicago; his father was Samuel Siegel, a mandolin player. Siegel attended schools in New York and later graduated from Jesus College, Cambridge in England. For a short time, he studied at Beaux Arts in Paris, but left at age 20 and later went to Los Angeles.\nCareer.\nSiegel found work in the Warner Bros. film library after meeting producer Hal Wallis, and later rose to head of the montage department, where he directed thousands of montages, including the opening montage for \"Casablanca\". In 1945, two shorts he directed, \"Star in the Night\" and \"Hitler Lives\", won Academy Awards, which launched his career as a feature director.\nSiegel directed whatever material came his way, often transcending the limitations of budget and script to produce interesting and adept works. He made the original \"Invasion of the Body Snatchers\" (1956), described by \"The Guardian\" in 2014 as a \"fatalistic masterpiece\" and \"a touchstone for the sci-fi genre\" which spawned three remakes. For television, he directed two episodes of \"The Twilight Zone\", \"Uncle Simon\" (1963) and \"The Self-Improvement of Salvadore Ross\" (1964), and was the producer of \"The Legend of Jesse James\" (1965). He worked with Eli Wallach in \"The Lineup\", Elvis Presley and Dolores del R\u00edo in \"Flaming Star\" (1960), with Steve McQueen in \"Hell Is for Heroes\", and Lee Marvin in the influential \"The Killers\" (1964) before directing five of Eastwood's films that were commercially successful in addition to being well received by critics. These included the action films \"Coogan's Bluff\" and \"Dirty Harry\", the Albert Maltz-scripted Western \"Two Mules for Sister Sara\", the American Civil War melodrama \"The Beguiled\", and the prison-break picture \"Escape from Alcatraz\". He was a considerable influence on Eastwood's own career as a director, and Eastwood's film \"Unforgiven\" is dedicated \"for Don and Sergio\".\nSiegel had a long collaboration with composer Lalo Schifrin, who scored five of his films: \"Coogan's Bluff\", \"The Beguiled\", \"Dirty Harry\", \"Charley Varrick\", and \"Telefon\". Schifrin composed and recorded what would have been his sixth score for Siegel on \"Jinxed!\" (1982), but it was rejected by the studio despite Siegel's objections. This conflict was one of several fights Siegel had on his last film.\nSiegel was also important to the career of director Sam Peckinpah. In 1954, Peckinpah was hired as a dialogue coach for \"Riot in Cell Block 11\". His job entailed acting as an assistant to the director, Siegel. The film was shot on location at Folsom Prison. Siegel's location work and his use of actual prisoners as extras in the film made a lasting impression on Peckinpah. He worked as a dialogue coach on four additional Siegel films: \"Private Hell 36\" (1954), \"An Annapolis Story\" (1955), \"Invasion of the Body Snatchers\" (1956), and \"Crime in the Streets\" (1956). Twenty-five years later, Peckinpah was all but banished from the industry due to his troubled film productions. Siegel gave the director a chance to return to filmmaking. He asked Peckinpah if he would be interested in directing 12 days of second unit on Siegel's \"Jinxed!\" film. Peckinpah immediately accepted, and his earnest collaboration with his longtime friend was noted within the industry. While Peckinpah's work was uncredited, it led to his hiring as the director of his final film \"The Osterman Weekend\" (1983).\nCameos.\nSiegel had a small role as a bartender in Eastwood's \"Play Misty for Me\", and in \"Dirty Harry\". In Philip Kaufman's 1978 \"Invasion of the Body Snatchers\", a remake of Siegel's 1956 film, he appears as a taxi driver. In \"Charley Varrick\" starring Walter Matthau (a film slated for Eastwood, but ultimately turned down by the actor), he has a cameo as a ping-pong player. He also appears in the 1985 John Landis film \"Into the Night.\" Siegel also has a small role in \"The Killers.\"\nPersonal life and death.\nSiegel and actress Viveca Lindfors were married from 1948 to 1953. They had a son, Kristoffer Tabori. Siegel married Doe Avedon in 1957. They adopted four children and then divorced in 1975.\nSiegel married Carol Rydall, a former secretary to Clint Eastwood. Siegel and Rydall remained together until he died at age 78 from cancer in Nipomo, California. Siegel is buried near Highway 1 in the coastal Cayucos-Morro Bay District Cemetery. He was an atheist.\nFilmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38776", "revid": "23838081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38776", "title": "Major League Baseball", "text": "North American professional baseball league\nMajor League Baseball (MLB) is a professional baseball league in North America composed of 30 teams, divided equally between the National League (NL) and the American League (AL), with 29 in the United States and 1 in Canada. MLB is one of the major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada and is considered the premier professional baseball league in the world. Each team plays 162 games per season, with Opening Day held during the last week of March or the first week of April. Six teams in each league then advance to a four-round postseason tournament in October, culminating in the World Series, a best-of-seven championship series between the two league champions first played in 1903. MLB is headquartered in Midtown Manhattan.\nFormed in 1876 and 1901, respectively, the NL and AL cemented their cooperation with the National Agreement in 1903, making MLB the oldest major professional sports league in the United States and Canada. They remained legally separate entities until 2000, when they merged into a single organization led by the commissioner of baseball. Baseball's first all-professional team, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, was founded in 1869. The first few decades of professional baseball saw rivalries between leagues, and players often jumped from one team or league to another. These practices were essentially ended by the National Agreement of 1903, in which AL and NL agreed to respect each other's player contracts, including the contentious reserve clause, which bound players to their teams.\nThe period from about 1900 to 1920 was the dead-ball era, when home runs were rarely hit. Professional baseball was rocked by the Black Sox Scandal, a conspiracy to fix the 1919 World Series. Baseball survived the scandal, albeit with major changes in its governance as the relatively weak National Commission was replaced with a powerful commissioner of baseball with near-unlimited authority over the sport. MLB rose in popularity in the decade following the Black Sox Scandal, and unlike major leagues in other sports, it endured the Great Depression and World War II without any of its teams folding. Shortly after the war, Jackie Robinson broke baseball's color barrier.\nSome teams moved to different cities in the 1950s and 1960s. The AL and NL added eight clubs in the 1960s, which started the expansion era: two in 1961, two in 1962, and four in 1969. Player discontent with established labor practices, especially the reserve clause, led to the organization of the Major League Baseball Players Association to collectively bargain with the owners, which in turn led to the introduction of free agency in baseball. Modern stadiums with artificial turf surfaces began to change the game in the 1970s and 1980s. Home runs began to dominate the game during the 1990s. In the mid-2000s, media reports disclosed the use of anabolic steroids among MLB players; a 2006\u201307 investigation produced the Mitchell Report, which found that many players had used steroids and other performance-enhancing substances, including at least one player from each team.\nMLB is the third-wealthiest professional sports league in the world by revenue after the National Football League (NFL) and the National Basketball Association (NBA). Baseball games are broadcast on television, radio, and the internet throughout North America and in several other countries. MLB has the highest total season attendance of any sports league in the world; in , it drew 71.4 million spectators. MLB also oversees Minor League Baseball, which comprises lower-tier teams affiliated with the major league clubs, the MLB Draft League, a hybrid amateur-professional showcase league, and the Arizona Fall League, an off-season showcase league for minor league players. MLB and the World Baseball Softball Confederation jointly manage the international World Baseball Classic tournament. The New York Yankees have the most championships with 27. The reigning champions are the Los Angeles Dodgers, who defeated the Toronto Blue Jays in the 2025 World Series.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nIn the 1860s, aided by soldiers playing the game in camp during the Civil War, \"New York\"-style baseball expanded into a national game and spawned baseball's first governing body, the National Association of Base Ball Players (NABBP). The NABBP existed as an amateur league for 12 years. By 1867, more than 400 clubs were members. Most of the strongest clubs remained those based in the northeastern United States. For professional baseball's founding year, MLB uses the year 1869\u2014when the first professional team, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, was established.\nA schism developed between professional and amateur ballplayers after the founding of the Cincinnati club. The NABBP split into an amateur organization and a professional organization. The National Association of Professional Base Ball Players, often known as the National Association (NA), was formed in 1871. Its amateur counterpart disappeared after only a few years. The modern Chicago Cubs and Atlanta Braves franchises trace their histories back to the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players in the 1870s.\nIn 1876, the National League of Professional Base Ball Clubs (later known as the National League or NL) was established after the NA proved ineffective. The league placed its emphasis on clubs rather than on players. Clubs could now enforce player contracts, preventing players from jumping to higher-paying clubs. Clubs were required to play the full schedule of games instead of forfeiting scheduled games when the club was no longer in the running for the league championship, which happened frequently under the NA. A concerted effort was made to curb gambling on games, which was leaving the validity of results in doubt. The first game in the NL\u2014on Saturday, April 22, 1876 (at Jefferson Street Grounds in Philadelphia)\u2014is often pointed to as the beginning of MLB.\nThe early years of the NL were tumultuous, with threats from rival leagues and a rebellion by players against the hated \"reserve clause\", which restricted the free movement of players between clubs. Teams came and went; 1882 was the first season where the league's membership was the same as the preceding season's, and only four franchises survived to see 1900. Competitor leagues formed regularly and also disbanded regularly. The most successful was the American Association (1882\u20131891), sometimes called the \"beer and whiskey league\" for its tolerance of the sale of alcoholic beverages to spectators. For several years, the NL and American Association champions met in a postseason championship series\u2014the first attempt at a World Series. The two leagues merged in 1892 as a single 12-team NL, but the NL dropped four teams after the 1899 season. This led to the formation of the American League (AL) in 1901 under president Ban Johnson, and the resulting bidding war for players led to widespread contract-breaking and legal disputes.\nThe war between the AL and NL caused shock waves throughout the baseball world. At a meeting at the Leland Hotel in Chicago in 1901, the other baseball leagues negotiated a plan to maintain their independence. A new National Association was formed to oversee these minor leagues.\nAfter 1902, the NL, AL, and NA signed a new National Agreement which tied independent contracts to the reserve-clause contracts. The agreement also set up a formal classification system for minor leagues, the forerunner of today's system that was refined by Branch Rickey.\nOther recognized leagues.\nSeveral other early defunct baseball leagues are considered major leagues, and their statistics and records are included with those of the two modern major leagues. In 1969, the Special Baseball Records Committee of Major League Baseball officially recognized six major leagues: the National League, American League, American Association, Union Association (1884), Players' League (1890), and Federal League (1914\u20131915). The status of the National Association as a major league has been a point of dispute among baseball researchers; while its statistics are not recognized by Major League Baseball, its statistics \"are\" included with those of other major leagues by some baseball reference websites, such as Retrosheet. Some researchers, including Nate Silver, dispute the major-league status of the Union Association by pointing out that franchises came and went and that the St. Louis club was deliberately \"stacked\"; the St. Louis club was owned by the league's president and it was the only club that was close to major-league caliber.\nIn December 2020, Major League Baseball announced its recognition of seven leagues within Negro league baseball as major leagues: the first and second Negro National Leagues (1920\u20131931 and 1933\u20131948), the Eastern Colored League (1923\u20131928), the American Negro League (1929), the East\u2013West League (1932), the Negro Southern League (1932), and the Negro American League (1937\u20131948). In 2021, baseball reference website Baseball-Reference.com began to include statistics from those seven leagues into their major-league statistics. In May 2024, Major League Baseball announced that it was \"absorbing the available Negro Leagues numbers into the official historical record.\"\nDead-ball era.\nThe period between 1900 and 1919 is commonly referred to as the \"dead-ball era\". Games of this era tended to be low-scoring and were often dominated by pitchers, such as Walter Johnson, Cy Young, Christy Mathewson, Mordecai Brown, and Grover Cleveland Alexander. The term also accurately describes the condition of the baseball itself. The baseball used American rather than the modern Australian wool yarn and was not wound as tightly, affecting the distance that it would travel. More significantly, balls were kept in play until they were mangled, soft and sometimes lopsided. During this era, a baseball cost $3, (), and owners were reluctant to purchase new balls. Fans were expected to throw back fouls and (rare) home runs. Baseballs also became stained with tobacco juice, grass, and mud, and sometimes the juice of licorice, which some players would chew for the purpose of discoloring the ball.\nAlso, pitchers could manipulate the ball through the use of the spitball (In 1921, use of this pitch was restricted to a few pitchers with a grandfather clause). Additionally, many ballparks had large dimensions, such as the West Side Grounds of the Chicago Cubs, which was to the center field fence, and the Huntington Avenue Grounds of the Boston Red Sox, which was to the center field fence, thus home runs were rare, and \"small ball\" tactics such as singles, bunts, stolen bases, and the hit-and-run play dominated the strategies of the time. Hitting methods like the Baltimore chop were used to increase the number of infield singles. On a successful Baltimore chop, the batter hits the ball forcefully into the ground, causing it to bounce so high that the batter reaches first base before the ball can be fielded and thrown to the first baseman.\nThe adoption of the foul strike rule\u2014in the NL in 1901, in the AL two years later\u2014quickly sent baseball from a high-scoring game to one where scoring runs became a struggle. Before this rule, foul balls were not counted as strikes: a batter could foul off any number of pitches with no strikes counted against him; this gave an enormous advantage to the batter.\nAfter the 1919 World Series between the Chicago White Sox and Cincinnati Reds, baseball was rocked by allegations of a game-fixing scheme known as the Black Sox Scandal. Eight players\u2014\"Shoeless\" Joe Jackson, Eddie Cicotte, Claude \"Lefty\" Williams, George \"Buck\" Weaver, Arnold \"Chick\" Gandil, Fred McMullin, Charles \"Swede\" Risberg, and Oscar \"Happy\" Felsch\u2014intentionally lost the World Series in exchange for a ring worth $100,000 (). Despite being acquitted, all were permanently banned from MLB.\nRise in popularity.\nBaseball's popularity increased in the 1920s and 1930s. The 1920 season was notable for the death of Ray Chapman of the Cleveland Indians. Chapman, who was struck in the head by a pitch and died a few hours later, became the only MLB player to die of an on-field injury. Both leagues quickly began to require the use of new, white baseballs whenever a ball became scuffed or dirty, helping bring the \"dead-ball\" era to an end.\nThe following year, the New York Yankees made their first World Series appearance. By the end of the 1930s, the team had appeared in 11 World Series, winning eight of them. Yankees slugger Babe Ruth had set the single-season home run record in 1927, hitting 60 home runs; breaking his own record of 29 home runs.\nImpacted negatively by the Great Depression, baseball's popularity had begun a downward turn in the early 1930s. By 1932, only two MLB teams turned a profit. Attendance had fallen, due at least in part to a 10% federal amusement tax added to baseball ticket prices. Baseball owners cut their rosters from 25 men to 23, and even the best players took pay cuts. Team executives were innovative in their attempts to survive, creating night games, broadcasting games live by radio, and rolling out promotions such as free admission for women. Throughout the Great Depression, no MLB teams moved or folded.\nWorld War II era.\nThe onset of World War II created a shortage of professional baseball players, as more than 500 men left MLB teams to serve in the military. Many of them played on service baseball teams that entertained military personnel in the US or in the Pacific. MLB teams of this time largely consisted of young men, older players, and those with a military classification of 4F, indicating mental, physical, or moral unsuitability for service. Men like Pete Gray, a one-armed outfielder, got the chance to advance to the major leagues. However, MLB rosters did not include any black players through the end of the war. Black players, many of whom served in the war, were still restricted to playing Negro league baseball.\nWartime blackout restrictions, designed to keep outdoor lighting at low levels, caused another problem for baseball. These rules limited traveling and night games to the point that the 1942 season was nearly canceled. On January 14, 1942, MLB commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis wrote to U.S. president Franklin D. Roosevelt, pleading for the continuation of baseball during the war. Roosevelt responded, \"I honestly feel that it would be best for the country to keep baseball going. There will be fewer people unemployed and everybody will work longer hours and harder than ever before. And that means that they ought to have a chance for recreation and for taking their minds off their work even more than before.\"\nWith the approval of President Roosevelt, spring training began in 1942 with few repercussions. The war interrupted the careers of stars including Stan Musial, Bob Feller, Ted Williams, and Joe DiMaggio, but baseball clubs continued to field their teams.\nBreaking the color barrier.\nBranch Rickey, president and general manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers, began making efforts to introduce a black baseball player to the previously all-white professional baseball leagues in the mid-1940s. He selected Jackie Robinson from a list of promising Negro league players. After obtaining a commitment from Robinson to \"turn the other cheek\" to any racial antagonism directed at him, Rickey agreed to sign him to a contract for $600 a month (). In what was later referred to as \"The Noble Experiment\", Robinson was the first black baseball player in the International League since the 1880s, joining the Dodgers' farm club, the Montreal Royals, for the 1946 season.\nThe following year, the Dodgers called up Robinson to the major leagues. On April 15, 1947, Robinson made his major league debut at Ebbets Field before a crowd of 26,623 spectators, including more than 14,000 black patrons. Black baseball fans began flocking to see the Dodgers when they came to town, abandoning the Negro league teams that they had followed exclusively. Robinson's promotion met a generally positive, although mixed, reception among newspaper writers and white major league players. Manager Leo Durocher informed his team, \"I don't care if he is yellow or black or has stripes like a fucking zebra. I'm his manager and I say he plays.\"\nAfter a strike threat by some players, NL president Ford C. Frick and Commissioner Happy Chandler let it be known that any striking players would be suspended. Robinson received significant encouragement from several major-league players, including Dodgers teammate Pee Wee Reese who said, \"You can hate a man for many reasons. Color is not one of them.\" That year, Robinson won the inaugural Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award (separate NL and AL Rookie of the Year honors were not awarded until 1949).\nLess than three months later, Larry Doby became the first African-American to break the color barrier in the American League with the Cleveland Indians. The next year, a number of other black players entered the major leagues. Satchel Paige was signed by the Indians and the Dodgers added star catcher Roy Campanella and Don Newcombe, who was later the first winner of the Cy Young Award for his outstanding pitching.\nWomen in baseball.\nMLB banned the signing of women to contracts in 1952, but that ban was lifted in 1992. There have been no female MLB players since then. \nRelocation and expansion.\nFrom 1903 to 1952, the major leagues consisted of two eight-team leagues whose 16 teams were located in ten cities, all in the northeastern and mid-western United States: New York City had three teams and Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, and St. Louis each had two teams. St. Louis was the southernmost and westernmost city with a major league team. The longest possible road trip, from Boston to St. Louis, took about 24 hours by railroad. After a half-century of stability, starting in the 1950s, teams began to move out of cities with multiple teams into cities that had not had them before. From 1953 to 1955, three teams moved to new cities: the Boston Braves became the Milwaukee Braves, the St. Louis Browns became the Baltimore Orioles, and the Philadelphia Athletics became the Kansas City Athletics.\nThe 1958 season began to turn Major League Baseball into a nationwide league. Walter O'Malley, owner of the Brooklyn Dodgers and \"perhaps the most influential owner of baseball's early expansion era,\" moved his team to Los Angeles, marking the first major league franchise on the West Coast. O'Malley also helped persuade the rival New York Giants to move west to become the San Francisco Giants. Giants owner Horace Stoneham had been contemplating a move to Minnesota amid slumping attendance at the aging Polo Grounds ballpark when O'Malley invited him to meet San Francisco mayor George Christopher in New York. After Stoneham was persuaded to move to California, \"Time\" magazine put O'Malley on its cover. MLB commissioner Ford C. Frick had opposed the meeting, but the dual moves proved successful for both franchises and for MLB. Had the Dodgers moved out west alone, the St. Louis Cardinals\u2014 away\u2014would have been the closest NL team. Instead, the joint move made West Coast road trips economical for visiting teams. The Dodgers set a single-game MLB attendance record in their first home appearance with 78,672\u00a0fans.\nIn 1961, the first Washington Senators franchise moved to Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul to become the Minnesota Twins. Two new teams were added to the American League at the same time: the Los Angeles Angels (who soon moved from downtown L.A. to nearby Anaheim) and a new Washington Senators franchise. The NL added the Houston Astros and the New York Mets in 1962. The Astros (known as the \"Colt .45s\" during their first three seasons) became the first southern major league franchise since the Louisville Colonels folded in 1899 and the first franchise to be located along the Gulf Coast. The Mets established a reputation for futility by going 40\u2013120 during their first season of play in the nation's media capital\u2014and by playing only a little better in subsequent campaigns\u2014but in their eighth season (1969) the Mets became the first of the 1960s expansion teams to play in the postseason, culminating in a World Series title over the heavily favored Baltimore Orioles.\nIn 1966, the major leagues moved to the \"Deep South\" when the Milwaukee Braves moved to Atlanta. In 1968, the Kansas City Athletics moved west to become the Oakland Athletics. In 1969, the American and National Leagues both added two expansion franchises. The American League added the Seattle Pilots (who became the Milwaukee Brewers after one disastrous season in Seattle) and the Kansas City Royals. The NL added the first Canadian franchise, the Montreal Expos, as well as the San Diego Padres.\nIn 1972, the second Washington Senators moved to the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex to become the Texas Rangers. In 1977, baseball expanded again, adding a second Canadian team, the Toronto Blue Jays, as well as the Seattle Mariners. Subsequently, no new teams were added until 1993, and no teams moved until 2005.\nPitching dominance and rule changes.\nBy the late 1960s, the balance between pitching and hitting had swung in favor of the pitchers. In 1968\u2014later nicknamed \"the year of the pitcher\"\u2014Boston Red Sox player Carl Yastrzemski won the American League batting title with an average of just .301, the lowest in MLB history. Detroit Tigers pitcher Denny McLain won 31 games, making him the only pitcher to win 30 games in a season since Dizzy Dean in 1934. St. Louis Cardinals starting pitcher Bob Gibson achieved an equally remarkable feat by allowing an ERA of just 1.12.\nFollowing these pitching performances, in December 1968 the MLB Playing Rules Committee voted to reduce the strike zone from knees to shoulders to top of knees to armpits and lower the pitcher's mound from 15 to 10\u00a0inches, beginning in the 1969 season.\nIn 1973, the American League, which had been suffering from much lower attendance than the National League, sought to increase scoring even further by initiating the designated hitter (DH) rule.\nNew stadiums and artificial surfaces.\nThroughout the 1960s and 1970s, as baseball expanded, the National Football League (NFL) had been surging in popularity, making it economical for many of these cities to build multi-purpose stadiums instead of single-purpose baseball fields. Because of climate and economic issues, many of these facilities had playing surfaces made from artificial turf, as well as the oval designs characteristic of stadiums designed to house both baseball and football. This often resulted in baseball fields with relatively more foul territory than older stadiums. These characteristics changed the nature of professional baseball, putting a higher premium on speed and defense over home-run hitting power since the fields were often too big for teams to expect to hit many home runs and foul balls hit in the air could more easily be caught for outs.\nTeams began to be built around pitching\u2014particularly their bullpens\u2014and speed on the basepaths. Artificial surfaces meant balls traveled quicker and bounced higher, so it became easier to hit ground balls \"in the hole\" between the corner and middle infielders. Starting pitchers were no longer expected to throw complete games; it was enough for a starter to pitch 6\u20137 innings and turn the game over to the team's closer, a position which grew in importance over these decades. As stolen bases increased, home run totals dropped. After Willie Mays hit 52 home runs in 1965, only one player (George Foster) reached that mark until the 1990s.\nScandals and a changing game.\nDuring the 1980s, baseball experienced a number of significant changes the game had not seen in years. Home runs were on the decline throughout the decade, with players hitting 40 home runs just 13 times and no one hitting more than 50 home runs in a season for the first time since the dead-ball era (1900\u20131919).\nThe 1981 MLB strike from June 12 until July 31 forced the cancellation of 713 games and resulted in a split-season format.\nIn 1985, Pete Rose broke Ty Cobb's all-time hits record with his 4,192nd hit. In 1989, Rose received a lifetime ban from baseball as a result of betting on baseball games while manager of the Cincinnati Reds. Rose was the first person to receive a lifetime ban from baseball since 1943. 1985 also saw the Pittsburgh drug trials which involved players who were called to testify before a grand jury in Pittsburgh related to cocaine trafficking.\nThe 1994\u201395 MLB strike from August 12, 1994, to April 25, 1995, caused the cancellation of over 900 games and the forfeit of the entire 1994 postseason.\nSteroid era, further expansion and near contraction.\nRoutinely in the late 1990s and early 2000s, baseball players hit 40 or 50 home runs in a season, a feat that was considered rare even in the 1980s. It later became apparent that at least some of this power surge was a result of players using steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs.\nIn 1993, the National League added the Florida Marlins in Miami and the Colorado Rockies in Denver. In 1998, the Brewers switched leagues by joining the National League, and two new teams were added: the National League's Arizona Diamondbacks in Phoenix and the American League's Tampa Bay Devil Rays.\nAfter the 2001 season, the team owners voted in favor of contraction. Several MLB teams had been considered for elimination in early talks about contraction, but the Montreal Expos and the Minnesota Twins were the two teams that came closest to folding under the plan. Plans for MLB contraction were halted when the Twins landlord was awarded a court injunction that required the team to play its 2002 home games at their stadium. MLB owners agreed to hold off on reducing the league's size until at least 2006.\nThe Montreal Expos became the first franchise in over three decades to move when they became the Washington Nationals in 2005. This move left Canada with just one team, but it also returned baseball to Washington after a 33-year absence. This franchise shift, like many previous ones, involved baseball's return to a city that had been previously abandoned.\nThe modern game.\nIn recent years, with the advent of technologies such as Statcast and its use of Hawk-Eye starting in 2020 as well as with advanced statistics as provided by sites such as FanGraphs and Baseball Savant, MLB has evolved. With the ability to see precise movements of pitchers and batters, teams can assess the mechanics of a player and help them improve. Statcast also provides some features such as tracking the paths of most batted balls, tracking the speed of most batted balls, and tracking the exit velocity of most batted balls. Statcast has allowed for advanced defensive analytics that have not been possible before tracking of players due to how subjective fielding can be.\nThe rate of teams using a defensive shift has gone up from 13.7% in 2016 to 33.6% in 2022 because advanced statistics support this as an effective way to stop hitters from getting hits. Because the shift reduces the number of balls in play that result in hits and MLB wishes to increase interest in baseball, MLB announced in September 2022 that extreme infield defensive shifts would be banned starting in 2023. To be compliant, there must be two fielders on each side of second base, and those fielders must have both of their feet on the infield dirt at the time the pitch is thrown. If this rule is not followed, the choice of an automatic ball or the outcome of the play is given to the batting team.\nThe game of baseball has also slowed down significantly due to an increased number of strikeouts and walks\u2014two outcomes that generally take many pitches to complete\u2014and an increased amount of time taken for a pitcher to pitch. In 2020, it took an average of three hours and six minutes to complete a 9 inning game, a number which has steadily ticked up for years. Along with the restrictions on defensive shifts, MLB announced the introduction of a pitch clock for the 2023 season and beyond, which is something that has been an experiment in MiLB for a few years. The pitch clock starts at 15 seconds. By the time the clock reaches 10 seconds, the catcher must be in their crouch behind home plate. When the clock reaches 8 seconds, the batter must be in the batter's box and be \"alert\". Before the 15 second timer reaches 0 seconds, the pitcher must have started their \"motion to pitch\". If any of these deadlines are violated, the count of the batter will be increased by one ball if the defending team violated the pitch clock or one strike if it is the offensive team who violated the pitch clock. Additionally, in order to prevent circumventing these rules, pickoffs and step-offs \u2014 which reset the pitch clock \u2014 are only allowed two times total per plate appearance, and if a pitcher attempts a third pickoff and fails to get the runner out, a ball will be called. Similarly, a batter is restricted to calling a timeout (an action which resets the pitch clock) just once per plate appearance.\nIn 2019, MLB opened an investigation into allegations that members of the 2017 World Series champion Houston Astros stole signs from opposing teams using technology during the 2017 and 2018 seasons. The Astros were found guilty in January 2020 and while no active players faced any repercussions due to an immunity agreement in exchange for testimony, Astros general manager Jeff Luhnow and field manager A. J. Hinch were suspended for the entire 2020 season. The Astros were fined the maximum allowable $5\u00a0million and forfeited their first- and second-round picks in the 2020 and 2021 drafts. The Boston Red Sox were also found guilty of stealing signs during the 2017 and 2018 seasons, with the latter season ending in a World Series victory. Red Sox manager Alex Cora was suspended for a year and the team was fined with the loss of a second round draft pick in the 2020 draft as a result.\n21st-century relocation and potential expansion.\nIn November 2023, the Oakland Athletics relocation to Las Vegas was approved by MLB owners. They are scheduled to play the 2025 through 2027 seasons in West Sacramento, California, while a new stadium is built in the Las Vegas metropolitan area, and will be referred to as simply the \"Athletics\" and \"A's\", with no city name attached.\nMLB has discussed preparations for another round of expansion, and several investment groups are vying for a franchise. In 2025, commissioner Rob Manfred said MLB could add two more teams and pursue a geographic realignment of its leagues and divisions.\nTeams.\nBraves \nMarlins \nMets \nPhillies \nNationals \nCubs \nReds \nBrewers \nPirates \nCardinals \nDiamondbacks \nRockies \nDodgers \nPadres \nGiants \nOrioles \nRed Sox \nYankees \nRays \nBlue Jays \nWhite Sox \nGuardians \nTigers \nRoyals \nTwins \nAthletics \nAstros \nAngels \nMariners \nRangers \n \n\"An asterisk (*) denotes a relocation of a franchise. See respective team articles for more information.\"\nOrganizational structure.\nMLB is governed by the Major League Baseball Constitution. This document has undergone several incarnations since its creation in 1876. Under the direction of the commissioner of baseball, MLB hires and maintains the sport's umpiring crews, and negotiates marketing, labor, and television contracts. MLB maintains a unique, controlling relationship over the sport, including most aspects of Minor League Baseball. This is due in large part to the 1922 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in \"Federal Baseball Club v. National League\", which held that baseball is not interstate commerce and therefore not subject to federal antitrust law; MLB is the only league that has such a status, and has not faced any competition since this case. This ruling has been weakened only slightly in subsequent years. The weakened ruling granted more stability to the owners of teams and has resulted in values increasing at double-digit rates. There were several challenges to MLB's primacy in the sport, with notable attempts to establish competing leagues occurring during the late 1800s, from 1913 to 1915 with the short-lived Federal League, and in 1960 with the aborted Continental League.\nThe chief executive of MLB is the commissioner, Rob Manfred. The deputy commissioner of baseball administration and chief legal officer is Dan Halem. There are seven other executives: executive vice president and general counsel, chief operations and strategy officer, chief communications officer, chief financial officer and senior advisor, executive vice president and chief marketing officer, chief revenue officer, and chief baseball development officer.\nThe multimedia branch of MLB is MLB Advanced Media, which is based in New York City. This branch oversees MLB.com and each of the 30 teams' websites. Its charter states that MLB Advanced Media holds editorial independence from the league, but it is under the same ownership group and revenue-sharing plan. MLB Productions is a similarly structured wing of the league, focusing on video and traditional broadcast media. MLB also owns 67 percent of MLB Network, with the other 33 percent split between several cable operators and satellite provider DirecTV. It operates out of studios in Secaucus, New Jersey, and also has editorial independence from the league.\nLeague organization.\nIn 1920, the weak National Commission, created to manage relationships between the two leagues, was replaced with the much more powerful commissioner of baseball, who had the power to make decisions for all of professional baseball unilaterally. From 1901 to 1960, the American League and National League fielded eight teams apiece.\nIn the 1960s, MLB expansion added eight teams, including the first non-U.S. team (the Montreal Expos). Two teams (the Seattle Mariners and the Toronto Blue Jays) were also added in the 1970s. From 1969 through 1993, each league consisted of an East and West Division. In 1993, the National League expanded with two teams, the Florida Marlins and the Colorado Rockies, to even up the number of teams in both leagues. A third division, the Central Division, was formed in each league in 1994. Until 1996, the two leagues met on the field only during the World Series and the All-Star Game. Regular-season interleague play was introduced in 1997.\nIn March 1995, two new franchises, the Arizona Diamondbacks and Tampa Bay Devil Rays (now known as the Tampa Bay Rays), were awarded by MLB, which began play in 1998. This addition brought the total number of franchises to 30. In early 1997, MLB decided to assign one new team to each league: Tampa Bay joined the AL and Arizona joined the NL. The original plan was to have an odd number of teams in each league (15 per league, with five in each division), but in order for every team to be able to play daily, this would have required interleague play to be scheduled throughout the entire season. However, it was unclear at the time if the interleague play would continue after the 1998 season, as it had to be approved by the players' union. For this and other reasons, it was decided that both leagues should continue to have an even number of teams, and therefore, one existing club would have to switch leagues. The agreed in November 1997 to move from the AL to the NL, thereby making the AL a 14-team league and the NL a 16-team league. At the same time, the Detroit Tigers agreed to move from the AL East to the AL Central (to replace Milwaukee), with the expansion Tampa Bay Devil Rays joining the AL East. Later, when the Houston Astros changed ownership prior to the 2013 season, the team moved from the NL Central to the AL West, resulting in both leagues having three divisions of five teams each and allowing all teams to have a more balanced schedule. Interleague play is now held throughout the season.\nIn 2000, the AL and NL were dissolved as legal entities, and MLB became a single, overall league \"de jure\", similar to the National Football League (NFL), National Basketball Association (NBA) and National Hockey League (NHL)\u2014albeit with two components called \"leagues\" instead of \"conferences\". The same rules and regulations are used in both leagues, with one former exception: the AL operated under the designated hitter (DH) rule, while the NL did not. In 2020, the NL used the designated hitter (DH) rule for the first time. As part of the settlement of the 2021\u201322 Major League Baseball lockout, this change was made permanent, thus making the rules in the two leagues identical.\nUniforms.\nA baseball uniform is a type of uniform worn by baseball players and by some non-playing personnel, such as field managers and coaches. It is worn to indicate the person's role in the game and\u2014through the use of logos, colors, and numbers\u2014to identify the teams and their players, managers, and coaches.\nTraditionally, home uniforms display the team name on the front, while away uniforms display the team's home location. In modern times, however, exceptions to this pattern have become common, with teams using their team name on both uniforms. Most teams also have one or more alternate uniforms, usually consisting of the primary or secondary team color on the vest instead of the usual white or gray. In the past few decades throwback uniforms have become popular.\nThe New York Knickerbockers were the first baseball team to use uniforms, taking the field on April 4, 1849, in pants made of blue wool, white flannel shirts (jerseys) and straw hats. Caps and other types of headgear have been a part of baseball uniforms from the beginning. Baseball teams often wore full-brimmed straw hats or no cap at all since there was no official rule regarding headgear. Under the 1882 uniform rules, players on the same team wore uniforms of different colors and patterns that indicated which position they played. This rule was soon abandoned as impractical.\nIn the late 1880s, Detroit and Washington of the National League and Brooklyn of the American Association were the first to wear striped uniforms. By the end of the 19th century, teams began the practice of having two different uniforms, one for when they played at home in their own baseball stadium and a different one for when they played away (on the road) at the other team's ballpark. It became common to wear white pants with a white color vest at home and gray pants with a gray or solid (dark) colored vest when away. By 1900, both home and away uniforms were standard across the major leagues.\nIn June 2021, MLB announced a long-term deal with cryptocurrency exchange FTX, which includes the FTX logo appearing on umpire uniforms during all games. FTX is MLB's first-ever umpire uniform patch partner. On November 11, 2022, FTX filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. MLB removed the FTX patches from umpires' uniforms before the 2023 season.\nSeason structure.\nSpring training.\nSpring training is a series of practices and exhibition games preceding the start of the regular season. Teams hold training camps in the states of Arizona and Florida, where the early warm weather allows teams to practice and play without worrying about the late winter cold. Spring training allows new players to compete for roster and position spots and gives existing team players practice time prior to competitive play. The teams that hold spring training in Arizona are grouped into the Cactus League, while teams that hold camp in Florida are known as the Grapefruit League.\nSpring training typically lasts almost two months, starting in mid-February and running until just before the season-opening day, traditionally the first week of April. As pitchers benefit from a longer training period, pitchers and catchers begin spring training several days before the rest of the team.\nRegular season.\nEach team plays 162 games per season. A team's schedule is typically organized into three-game series, sets of consecutive games against the same opponent, with occasional two- or four-game series. Postponed games or continuations of suspended games can result in an ad hoc one-game or five-game series. All games of a series are usually hosted by the same team, and multiple series are typically grouped together. I.e, a team usually hosts several series in a row, called a homestand, and follows that by going on several road series in a row. Teams generally play games five to seven days per week. Most games are scheduled at night, although teams will often play day games on Opening Day, holidays, and for the last game of a series to allow teams extra time to travel to their next opponent. Sunday games are generally played during the afternoon, allowing teams to travel to their next destination prior to a Monday night game.\nIn the current three-division structure, each team plays 13 games against each of its four divisional opponents. It plays one home series and one away series, amounting to six or seven games, against the 10 other teams in its league. A team also plays 3-game series with all the other teams in the other league, alternating home teams each year. Furthermore, each team has an interleague \"natural rival\" (in some cases its counterpart in the same metro area) with which it plays two home games and two away games each year.\nWith an odd number of teams in each league (15), it is necessary to have two teams participate in interleague play for most days in the season, except when two or more teams have a day off. Each team plays 20 interleague games throughout the season, usually with just one interleague game per day, but for one weekend in late May, all teams will participate in an interleague series. Before 2013, interleague play was structured differently: there would be one weekend in mid-May and another period consisting typically of the last two-thirds of June in which all teams played interleague games (save for two NL teams each day), and no interleague games were scheduled outside those dates. (Before 2013, season-long interleague play was not necessary, because each league had an even number of teams. In 2013, the Houston Astros moved to the American League, so that each league would have 15 teams.) Prior to the adoption of the universal designated hitter in 2022, whether the DH was in use depended on whether the home team was from the AL, where the DH was used, or the NL, where it was not.\nStarting with the 2023 season, the scheduling formula changed, with each team playing at least one series against every other team every year. Each team plays 13 games against teams in the same division, with one 3-game and one 4-game series at each park, six or seven games against teams within the same league but in other divisions, with one 3-game (or 4-game series) at each park, and one 3-game series against teams in the other league, alternating home teams each year, except for each team's designated interleague rival, which will continue to consist of two 2-game series at each of the teams' home parks.\nBeginning with the 2022 season, teams compete for the six playoff berths in their respective leagues. To secure a berth, a team must either win its division or capture a wild card spot by having one of the three best records among the non-winners in its entire league. With the adoption of a third wild card, the former practice of breaking ties with an additional regular-season game, known as Game 163, was dropped in favor of a tie-breaker formula.\nAll-Star Game.\nIn early-to-mid July, just after the midway point of the season, the Major League Baseball All-Star Game is held during a four-day break from the regular-season schedule. The All-Star Game features a team of players from the American League (AL)\u2014led by the manager of the previous AL World Series team\u2014and a team of players from the National League (NL), similarly managed, in an exhibition game. From 1959 to 1962, two games were held each season, one was held in July and one was held in August. The designated-hitter rule was used in the All-Star Game for the first time in 1989. Following games used a DH when the game was played in an AL ballpark. Since 2010, the DH rule has been in effect regardless of venue.\nThe first official All-Star Game was held as part of the 1933 World's Fair in Chicago, Illinois, and was the idea of Arch Ward, then sports editor for \"The Chicago Tribune\". Initially intended to be a one-time event, its great success resulted in making the game an annual one. Ward's contribution was recognized by Major League Baseball in 1962 with the creation of the \"Arch Ward Trophy\", given to the All-Star Game's Most Valuable Player each year. (In 1970, it was renamed the Commissioner's Trophy, until 1985, when the name change was reversed. In 2002, it was renamed the Ted Williams Most Valuable Player Award.)\nBeginning in 1947, the eight position players in each team's starting lineup have been voted into the game by fans. The fan voting was discontinued after a 1957 ballot-box-stuffing scandal in Cincinnati: seven of the eight slots originally went to Reds players, two of whom were subsequently removed from the lineup to make room for Willie Mays and Hank Aaron. Fan voting was reinstated in 1970 and has continued ever since, including internet voting in recent years.\nThe 2002 contest in Milwaukee controversially ended in an 11-inning tie when both managers ran out of pitchers. In response, starting in 2003 the league which wins the All-Star game received home-field advantage in the World Series: the league champion hosted the first two games at its own ballpark as well as the last two (if necessary). The National League did not win an All-Star game and thus gain a home-field advantage until 2010; it was able to overcome this disadvantage and win in three of the seven World Series from 2003 to 2009. This was discontinued after the 2016 season.\nMLB All-Stars from both leagues have worn uniforms from their respective teams at the game with one exception. In the 1933 All-Star Game, the National League All-Star Team members wore special gray uniforms with \"National League\" written in navy blue letters across the front of the jersey.\nPostseason.\nThe regular season ends after the first Sunday in October (or the last Sunday in September), after which twelve teams enter the postseason playoffs. These twelve teams consist of the six division champions and six \"wild-card\" teams: the team with the best overall win\u2013loss record in each of the six divisions, and the three teams in each league with the best records other than the division champions. Four rounds of series of games are played to determine the champion:\nWithin each league, the division winners are the 1, 2, and 3-seeds, based on win\u2013loss records. The teams with the first, second, and third best records among non-division winners will be seeded 4, 5, and 6 respectively. Throughout the postseason, home-field advantage is awarded to the team with the higher win-loss record, with tiebreakers being applied if necessary. In the Wild Card Series, the 3-seed will host the 6-seed, and the 4-seed will host the 5-seed, with the winners advancing to the Division Series. Unlike the NFL, there is no reseeding between each series. In the Division Series, the 1-seed goes up against the 4/5-seed and the 2-seed goes up against the 3/6-seed. The winners of those matches will compete in their respective League Championship Series for their league pennant, and the pennant winners will advance to the World Series. Since 2017, home-field advantage in the World Series is determined by regular-season records of the two league champions, replacing a system used for the prior 14 seasons where the champion of the league that won the All-Star Game would receive home-field advantage.\nThe team with home-field advantage in the Wild Card Series will host all three games, and subsequent series' will split home fields between the two teams in a 2-2-1 format in the Division Series and a 2-3-2 format in the League Championship Series and World Series, with the advantaged team hosting games 1 and 2, as well as 6 and 7 (if necessary). With this format, the home-field advantage does not usually play a large role in the postseason unless the series goes to its maximum number of games. However, because the first two games of a postseason series are hosted by the same team, a team starting with two wins will likely have momentum heading into the venue switch.\nInternational play.\nFrom 1986 to 2018, an MLB All-Star team was sent to a biennial end-of-the-season tour of Japan, dubbed the MLB Japan All-Star Series, playing exhibition games in a best-of format against the All-Stars from Nippon Professional Baseball (NPB) or, in 2014 and 2018, their national team, Samurai Japan.\nIn 2008, MLB played the MLB China Series in the People's Republic of China. It was a series of two spring-training games between the San Diego Padres and Los Angeles Dodgers. The games were an effort to popularize baseball in China.\nMLB played the MLB Taiwan All-Star Series in Taiwan in November 2011. It was a series of five exhibition games played by a team made up of MLB players called the MLB All-Stars and the Chinese Taipei national baseball team. The MLB All-Stars swept the series, five games to zero. At the end of the 2011 season, it was announced that the Seattle Mariners and the Oakland Athletics would play their season openers in Japan. In October 2013, Phil Rogers of the \"Chicago Tribune\" wrote that MLB was considering postseason all-star tours in Taiwan and Korea; baseball is increasing in popularity in both countries.\nThe Arizona Diamondbacks opened the 2014 season against Los Angeles Dodgers from March 22\u201323 in Australia. The teams played each other at the historic Sydney Cricket Ground, which has a seating capacity of 46,000. The two games represented the first MLB regular-season play held in that country. The games counted as home games for the Diamondbacks, so they played 79 home games at Chase Field.\nIn 2019, the Boston Red Sox were the home team in a regular-season two-game series against the New York Yankees. The games, which were the first regular-season MLB games held in Europe, were played on June 29\u201330 at London Stadium with the Yankees winning both games.\nThe San Diego Padres and Los Angeles Dodgers opened the 2024 regular season on March 20\u201321 at Gocheok Sky Dome in Seoul, South Korea. The ceremonial first pitch of the opening game was thrown by the first Korean-born MLB player Chan Ho Park, who made his debut with the LA Dodgers in 1994. The two-game Seoul Series resulted in a split between the two teams. There were also four exhibition games played during March 17\u201318, where the Dodgers took on the Kiwoom Heroes and Team Korea, and the Padres faced the LG Twins and Team Korea.\nThe 2025 season began with the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Chicago Cubs playing in Tokyo at the Tokyo Dome for the MLB Tokyo Series 2025.\nTogether with the World Baseball Softball Confederation, MLB sponsors the World Baseball Classic, an international baseball tournament contested by national teams.\nPerformance-enhancing drugs.\nIn 1998, both Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa hit more home runs than the record of 61 set by Yankees right fielder Roger Maris in 1961. Barry Bonds topped the record in 2001 with 73 home runs. McGwire, Bonds, and Sosa became the subjects of speculation regarding the use of performance-enhancing substances. McGwire later admitted that he used a steroid hormone that was still legal in baseball during the 1998 season. Baseball's original steroid testing policy, in effect from 2002 to 2005, provided for penalties ranging from a ten-game suspension for a first positive test to a one-year suspension for a fourth positive test. Players were tested at least once per year, with the chance that several players could be tested many times per year.\nA 2006 book, \"Game of Shadows\" by \"San Francisco Chronicle\" investigative reporters Lance Williams and Mark Fainaru-Wada, chronicled alleged extensive use of performance enhancers, including several types of steroids and growth hormone by baseball superstars Barry Bonds, Gary Sheffield, and Jason Giambi. Former Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell was appointed by Selig on March 30, 2006 to investigate the use of performance-enhancing drugs in MLB. The appointment was made after several influential members of the U.S. Congress made negative comments about both the effectiveness and honesty of MLB's drug policies and Commissioner Selig.\nThe day before the Mitchell Report was to be released in 2007, Selig said, \"I haven't seen the report yet, but I'm proud I did it.\" The report said that after mandatory random testing began in 2004, HGH treatment for athletic enhancement became popular among players, as HGH is not detectable in tests. It pointed out that HGH is likely a placebo with no performance-enhancing effects. The report included substance use allegations against at least one player from each MLB team.\nAccording to ESPN, some people questioned whether Mitchell's director role with the Boston Red Sox created a conflict of interest, especially because no \"prime [Sox] players were in the report\". The report named several prominent Yankees who were parts of World Series clubs; there is a long-running and fierce Yankees\u2013Red Sox rivalry. Former U.S. prosecutor John M. Dowd brought up Mitchell's conflict of interest, but he later said that the former senator had done a good job. Mitchell acknowledged that his \"tight relationship with Major League Baseball left him open to criticism\", but he said that readers who examine the report closely \"will not find any evidence of bias, of special treatment of the Red Sox\".\nOn January 10, 2013, MLB and the players union reached an agreement to add random, in-season HGH testing. They also agreed to implement a new test to reveal the use of testosterone for the 2013 season. The current MLB drug policy provides for an 80-game suspension for a first positive test, a 162-game suspension for a second positive test, and a lifetime suspension for a third positive test. In 2009, allegations surfaced against Alex Rodriguez and David Ortiz, and Manny Ramirez received a 50-game suspension after testing positive for banned substances. In early April 2011, Ramirez retired from baseball rather than face a 100-game suspension for his second positive steroid test. He would later unretire, having the suspension dropped to 50 games, and would serve those in 2012.\nMedia coverage.\nTelevision.\nLinear.\nStarting in 2026, Fox, ESPN, NBC, TBS, and MLB Network will nationally televise MLB games in the United States. Fox has been MLB's primary broadcast television partner since 1996. Since 2008, Fox has broadcast MLB games on Saturdays throughout the entire season; Fox previously only broadcast games from May to September. Fox also holds rights to the All-Star Game each season. Fox also alternates League Championship Series broadcasts, broadcasting the American League Championship Series (ALCS) in odd-numbered years and the National League Championship Series (NLCS) in even-numbered years. Fox broadcasts all games of the World Series.\nESPN has been MLB's cable television partner since 1990. The network has aired the weekly regular season game \"Sunday Night Baseball\" and postseason broadcasts of the Wild Card Series exclusively.\nPrior to the 2026 season, MLB and ESPN exercised a mutual opt-out on their deal that would have ended in 2028; NBC agreed to take over \"Sunday Night Baseball\" and the Wild Card games in the interim while ESPN signed a restructured deal for a package of midweek games on its linear television services.\nTBS began airing Sunday afternoon regular season games (non-exclusive) nationally in 2008, which was then replaced by Tuesday night games in 2022. From 2007 to 2020, TBS had its exclusive rights to any tiebreaker games that determine division or wild card champions. It also airs exclusive coverage of the Division Series round of the playoffs. TBS carries the League Championship Series that are not included under Fox's television agreement; TBS shows the NLCS in odd-numbered years and the ALCS in even-numbered years.\nIn January 2009, MLB launched MLB Network, featuring news and coverage from around the league, and airing 26 live games in the 2009 season. Each team also has local broadcasts for all games not exclusively carried nationally. These games are typically split between a local broadcast television station and a local or regional sports network (RSN), though some teams only air local games through RSNs or through their own team networks.\nAs Canada only contains one team, Sportsnet broadcasts Toronto Blue Jays games nationally. The channel is owned by Rogers Communications, who is also the parent company of the Blue Jays. Sportsnet also televises Fox's Saturday afternoon games, the All-Star Game, playoff games, and the World Series. In April 2011, TSN2 began carrying ESPN \"Sunday Night Baseball\" in Canada. TVA Sports airs Blue Jays games in French.\nStreaming.\nSeveral MLB games are broadcast exclusively on streaming television. After a year of exclusive games on Facebook, MLB partnered with YouTube to stream weekly games on the service beginning in the 2019 season, and extending until 2022. In 2022, MLB made a deal with Apple Inc. to launch \"Friday Night Baseball\" on its Apple TV+ streaming service, and NBC Sports to broadcast \"MLB Sunday Leadoff\", a package of early Sunday afternoon games on Peacock.\nSince the 2023 season's Division Series, HBO Max began simulcasting games broadcast by its sister network TBS (both owned by Warner Bros. Discovery). \nIn the 2024 season, The Roku Channel began streaming \"MLB Sunday Leadoff\". Midway through that season, it was confirmed that TelevisaUnivision had signed a multi-year agreement to broadcast \"MLB En Vivo\" on Tuesdays on UniM\u00e1s, TUDN and ViX, with live clips and highlights of up to 15 games each week.The contract also included exclusive Spanish-language TV rights to the 2024 American League postseason games (ALDS and ALCS) with select games airing on Univision as well as UniM\u00e1s, TUDN and Vix, and Game 1 of that season's World Series, sharing airtime with Fox and Fox Deportes.\nIn 2026 season, Peacock will regain the \"MLB Sunday Leadoff\" package, while Netflix will stream the Home Run Derby (taking over from ESPN) and the opening night of the season.\nBlackout policy.\nMLB has several blackout rules. A local broadcaster has priority to televise games of the team in their market over national broadcasters if the game is not exclusive to the national broadcaster. A market that has a local team playing in a non-exclusive game will receive an alternative programming feed on the national broadcaster. MLB's streaming internet video service is also subject to the same blackout rules. Commissioner Robert Manfred has expressed interest in changing the blackout policy to loosen the rules for streaming options.\nRadio and Internet.\nThe first baseball game ever broadcast on radio was a Pittsburgh Pirates versus Philadelphia Phillies game on August 5, 1921. The game was broadcast by KDKA of Pittsburgh, and the Pirates defeated the Phillies 8\u20135. It was broadcast by KDKA staff announcer Harold Arlin.[#endnote_] That year, KDKA and WJZ of Newark broadcast the first World Series on the radio, between the New York Giants and the New York Yankees, with Grantland Rice and Tommy Cowan calling the games for KDKA and WJZ, respectively. However, the broadcasters were not actually present at the game, but simply gave reports from a telegraph wire. In 1922, WJZ broadcast the entire series, with Rice doing play-by-play. For the 1923 World Series, Rice was joined on Westinghouse for the first time by Graham McNamee.\nDuring the 1923 World Series, Rice was the main broadcaster, but during the fourth inning of Game 3, he turned the microphone over to McNamee. This was the start of McNamee's career, and McNamee became the first color commentator. Although frequently criticized for his lack of expertise, McNamee helped popularize baseball.\nIn 1998, national radio broadcasts moved to ESPN Radio. ESPN Radio currently broadcasts \"Sunday Night Baseball\" games during the regular season, as well as Saturday and occasional weekday games, along with the All-Star Game and all postseason contests. Since 2021, TUDN Radio airs Spanish-language coverage of select regular season and postseason games, including the World Series.\nIn addition, each team employs its own announcers, who broadcast during the regular season. Most teams operate regional networks to cover their fan bases; some of these supposedly regional networks (such as the New York Yankees Radio Network) have a national reach with affiliates located across the United States. Major League Baseball has an exclusive rights deal with XM Satellite Radio, which includes the channel MLB Network Radio and live play-by-play of all games. Many teams also maintain a network of stations that broadcast their games in Spanish; as of 2022[ [update]], the Los Angeles Dodgers are the only team that produces radio broadcasts in a third language, with selected games broadcast in Korean. Both Canadian teams (the Montreal Expos before their move to Washington, DC in 2005, and the Toronto Blue Jays) have produced radio broadcasts in French.\nMLB games are also broadcast live on the internet. All television and radio broadcasts of games are available via subscription to MLB.tv at Major League Baseball's website, MLB.com, and radio-only broadcasts are also available via subscription to MLB.com Gameday Audio. In 2026, MLB.tv will be integrated into the ESPN App.\nSince 2005, Major League Baseball has a partnership with XM Satellite Radio, launching a 24-7 channel, MLB Home Plate (now MLB Network Radio) which carries every major league game. Games are also carried on MLB Gameday Audio.\nWhile all teams maintain a network of stations carrying their games in English, many teams also maintain a Spanish-language network as well. In addition, when the Washington Nationals were based in Montreal as the Montreal Expos, their games were broadcast in both English and French. Selected games of the Los Angeles Dodgers are broadcast in Korean by KMPC.\nFinancial landscape.\nIn modern years, teams have become increasingly reliant on local cable television rights fees, which grew unstable in the 2020s and which are not subject to equal revenue sharing. Following the Disney-Fox merger, Disney divested Fox's regional broadcasting networks, which covered 14 of MLB's 30 teams, to Diamond Sports Network / Bally Sports. Diamond filed for bankruptcy in 2023 and took advantage of debtor-friendly rules in the Bankruptcy Code to cancel or renegotiate its TV deals with a third of the league. Teams that locked themselves into relatively stable deals near the peak of the market found themselves in a stronger financial position relative to the average team than ever before. Critics respond that industry revenues and team valuations are still rising.\nInternational broadcasting.\nDisney Media Networks Latin America through its linear channels (ESPN, ESPN Caribbean, ESPN Brazil) and Disney+ owns the broadcast rights to more than 180 regular season games (at least 1 game per day), the Home Run Derby, the All Star Game and the post season including: the Wild Card Series, the Division Series, the Championship Series and the World Series for all of Latin America and the Caribbean. ESPN broadcasts some MLB games in other countries, including ESPN Australia in Australia and New Zealand, ESPN Africa, and ESPN in the Netherlands.\nIn Mexico, until 2022, Fox Sports aired five regular season games per week and post-season games that belong to the league that broadcasts its American namesake (including the Wild Card Series). Likewise, TUDN carried 4 matches a week until 2022: through the pay television signal, games were broadcast on Tuesdays and Thursdays, while on Saturdays (generally at 12:00\u00a0p.m.) and Sundays (rotating between NBA games, until the start of the NFL season) games were broadcast on Canal 9. Starting with the Championship Series, it only broadcast one division and the whole World Series, these were broadcast on free-to-air television for 59 years. Starting with the 2023 season, Imagen Televisi\u00f3n announced it would begin broadcasting a regular season game every Saturday and Sunday as well as the playoffs and the World Series on open television and its website in Mexico.\nIn Argentina, Fox Sports carries 5 regular season games per week and post-season games that belong to the league that broadcasts its American namesake (including the Wild Card Series).\nIn Venezuela, since the 2016 season the cable channel IVC has the broadcast rights, they currently air 7 games per week. Starting with the 2022 season, Televen broadcasts two games a week and the postseason on free-to-air TV While Venevisi\u00f3n, starting with the 2023 season, would return with the space \"El Juego de la Semana\" that carries a game every Sunday and non-working days on free-to-air television.\nIn the Dominican Republic since 2009 Grupo Altice has broadcast the entire regular season, playoffs and World Series through pay TV while on free-to-air television and radio Grupo Corripio airs 7 games per week and the entire postseason.\nIn Spain, Movistar Plus+ has the rights to broadcast the entire season, including one game daily, and the postseason, covering all games in the championship series and World Series.\nChannel 5 in the United Kingdom previously screened MLB games, including the All-Star Game and postseason games, on Sunday and Wednesday, usually starting at 1 a.m. BST. Most recently, Johnny Gould and Josh Chetwynd presented \"MLB on Five\" on that station. The channel covered baseball beginning on its opening night in 1997, but for financial reasons, the decision was made not to pick up MLB for the 2009 season. BT Sport ESPN show live and recorded games several times a week\u2014it is available with BT Sport and (on a subscriber-basis) Virgin Media in the UK. ESPN America televised many games in the UK and dozens of other countries; in May 2013, ESPN announced that it would shut down the channel on July 31, 2013.\nIn the Middle East, North Africa and France, MLB games are broadcast on beIN Sports channels.\nIn Germany, Austria and Switzerland, as many as 500 MLB games will be broadcast from 2022 exclusively on the Sport1 platforms until . Sport1 also broadcasts MLB games in Hungary, as of 2025[ [update]].\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38778", "revid": "34651759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38778", "title": "Exxon Corporation", "text": ""}
{"id": "38779", "revid": "34649748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38779", "title": "Andrew Fastow", "text": "American convicted felon and financier\nAndrew Stuart Fastow (born December 22, 1961) is an American convicted felon and former financier who was the chief financial officer of Enron Corporation, an energy trading company based in Houston, Texas, until he was fired shortly before the company declared bankruptcy. Fastow was one of the key figures behind the complex web of off-balance-sheet special purpose entities (limited partnerships which Enron controlled) used to conceal Enron's massive losses in their quarterly balance sheets. By unlawfully maintaining personal stakes in these ostensibly independent ghost-entities, he was able to defraud Enron out of tens of millions of dollars.\nThe U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission opened an investigation into his and the company's conduct in 2001. Fastow was sentenced to a six-year prison sentence and ultimately served five years for convictions related to these acts. His wife, Lea Weingarten, also worked at Enron, where she was an assistant treasurer; she pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit wire fraud, money laundering conspiracy and filing fraudulent income tax returns, and was sentenced to 12 months in prison despite a plea bargain which proposed she serve five months in jail, and 5 months in home-detention.\nEarly life and education.\nFastow was born in Washington, D.C. He grew up in New Providence, New Jersey, the son of middle class Jewish parents, Carl and Joan Fastow, who worked in retail and merchandising. Fastow graduated from New Providence High School, where he took part in student government, played on the tennis team, and played in the school band. He was the sole student representative on the New Jersey State Board of Education.\nFastow graduated from Tufts University in 1983 with a B.A. in Economics and Chinese. While there, he met his future wife, Lea Weingarten, daughter of Miriam Hadar Weingarten (a former Miss Israel 1958), whom he married in 1984. Fastow and Weingarten both earned MBAs at Northwestern University and worked for Continental Illinois bank in Chicago. Both he and his wife attended Congregation Or Ami, a conservative synagogue in Houston where he taught Hebrew School.\nEarly career.\nWhile at Continental, Fastow worked on the newly emerging \"asset-backed securities\". The practice spread across the industry \"because it provides an obvious advantage for a bank\", noted the \"Chicago Tribune\". \"It moves assets off the bank's balance sheet while creating revenue.\" In 1994, Continental became the largest U.S. bank to fail in American history until the seizure of Washington Mutual in 2008.\nDue to his work at Continental, Fastow was hired in 1990 by Jeffrey Skilling at the Enron Finance Corp. Fastow was named the chief financial officer at Enron in 1998.\nRise in Enron.\nDeregulation in the US energy markets in the late 1990s provided Enron with trade opportunities, including buying energy from cheap producers and selling it at markets with floating prices. Andrew Fastow was familiar with the market and knowledgeable in how to play it in Enron's favor. This quickly drew the attention of then chief executive officer of Enron Finance Corp Jeffrey Skilling. Skilling, together with Enron founder Kenneth Lay, was constantly concerned with various ways in which he could keep company stock price up, in spite of the true financial condition of the company.\nFastow designed a complex web of companies that solely did business with Enron, with the dual purpose of raising money for the company, and also hiding its massive losses in their quarterly balance sheets. This effectively allowed Enron's audited balance sheet to appear debt free, while in reality it owed more than 30 billion dollars at the height of its debt. While presented to the outside world as being independent entities, the funds Fastow created were to take write-downs off Enron's books and guaranteed not to lose money. Yet, Fastow himself had a personal financial stake in these funds, either directly or through partners amongst them Michael Kopper.\nKopper, Fastow's chief lieutenant, pleaded guilty to taking part in a scam with Fastow that defrauded Enron shareholders of many millions. While defrauding Enron in this way, Fastow was also neglecting basic financial practices such as reporting the \"cash on hand\" and total liabilities. Fastow pressured some of the largest investment banks in the United States, such as Merrill Lynch, Citibank, and others to invest in his funds, threatening to cause them to lose Enron's future business if they did not.\nCollapse.\nIn August, Skilling, who had been promoted to CEO of the entire company in February 2001, abruptly resigned after only six months, citing personal reasons. When reporters for \"The Wall Street Journal\" discovered an Enron \"senior officer\" had recently sold his interest in several partnerships that had done business with Enron, they initially thought that officer was Skilling. However, Enron spokesman Mark Palmer revealed that the \"senior officer\" was actually Fastow.\nAfter a former Enron executive leaked a copy of the offering memorandum for one of Fastow's partnerships, LJM\u2013named for Fastow's wife and two sons\u2013to the \"Journal,\" reporters bombarded Enron with further questions about the partnerships. The scrutiny died down after the September 11 attacks, but ramped up anew two weeks later with pointed questions about how much Fastow had earned from LJM. This culminated in a series of stories that appeared in the \"Journal\" in mid-October detailing the \"vexing conflict-of-interest questions\" about the partnerships, as well as the huge windfall he had reaped from them.\nOn October 23, during a conference call with two directors delegated by the board, Fastow revealed that he had made a total of $45 million from his work with LJM\u2013a staggering total, since he claimed to spend no more than three hours a week on LJM work. On October 24, several banks told Enron that they would not issue loans to the company as long as Fastow remained CFO. The combined weight of these revelations led the board to accept Lay's recommendation to remove Fastow as CFO on October 25, replacing him with industrial markets chief and former treasurer Jeff McMahon. He was officially placed on leave of absence, though the board subsequently determined that it had grounds to fire him for cause.\nIt was later revealed that Fastow had been so focused on creating SPEs that he had neglected the most rudimentary aspects of corporate finance. Under his watch, Enron merely operated on a quarterly basis. Fastow never implemented procedures for tracking the company's cash or debt maturities. As a result, McMahon and a \"financial SWAT team\" put together in the wake of Fastow's ouster discovered Enron had almost no liquidity.\nFastow's approach to hiding losses was so effective that the year before Enron declared bankruptcy, the Enron stock was at an all-time high of $90. As it turned out, the company was already well on its way to financial collapse, to the point that it was all but forced to seek a merger with rival Dynegy. By then, Enron's financial picture had declined so rapidly that the prospect of the Dynegy merger was the only thing keeping it alive. Dynegy tore up the merger agreement on November 28 in part due to the liquidity problems revealed after Fastow's ouster, and Enron declared bankruptcy three days later. By then, Enron's stock had dwindled to 40 cents per share, but not before many employees had been told to invest their retirement savings in Enron stock.\nSentencing and incarceration.\nOn October 31, 2002, Fastow was indicted by a federal grand jury in Houston, Texas, on 78 counts, including fraud, money laundering, and conspiracy. On January 14, 2004, he pleaded guilty to two counts of wire and securities fraud, and agreed to serve a ten-year prison sentence. He also agreed to become an informant and cooperate with federal authorities in the prosecutions of other former Enron executives in order to receive a reduced sentence.\nAfter entering into a plea agreement with a maximum penalty of 10 years in prison and the forfeiture of $23.8 million in assets, on September 26, 2006, Fastow was sentenced to six years in prison, followed by two years of probation. U.S. District Judge Ken Hoyt believed Fastow deserved leniency for his cooperation with the prosecution in several civil and criminal trials involving former Enron employees. Hoyt recommended that Fastow's sentence be served at the low-security Federal Correctional Institution in Bastrop, Texas. Fastow was incarcerated at the Federal Prison Camp near Pollock, Louisiana. On May 18, 2011, Fastow was released to a Houston halfway house for the remainder of his sentence.\nLife after incarceration.\nSoon after his release on December 16, 2011, he began working as a document review clerk for law firm Smyser Kaplan Veselka LLP in Houston.\nSpeaking engagements.\nSince his release, Fastow has worked the public speaking circuit with presentations on ethics and business. In one such speech, Fastow recounts his crimes at Enron and reflects on his guilt:\u201cI found every way I could to technically comply with the [accounting] rules... But what I did was unethical and unprincipled. And it caused harm to people. For that, I deserved to go to prison.\u201dIn March 2012, Fastow spoke on ethics to students at the University of Colorado Boulder Leeds School of Business.\nIn June 2013, Fastow addressed more than 2,000 anti-fraud professionals at the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners' 24th Annual ACFE Global Fraud Conference.\nIn April 2014, Fastow spoke at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, regarding business ethics.\nIn February 2015, he spoke at:\nthe University of St. Thomas,\nthe University of Minnesota,\nthe University of Texas (Austin campus),\nthe University of Houston Bauer College of Business,\nthe University of Southern California's Leventhal School of Accounting, and\nthe University of Missouri School of Accounting.\nIn April 2016, March 2017, March 2018, and March 2019 Fastow spoke at the Ivey Business School. The University of Tampa's Center for Ethics hosted him in October 2017. In March 2022 the National Investor Relations Institute New York Chapter hosted Fastow as guest speaker for a discussion on business ethics, and the ambiguity and complexity of laws and regulations.\nInvestment in KeenCorp.\nFastow became principal and investor in KeenCorp in 2016. KeenCorp is a Netherlands-based company that offers analytics and artificial intelligence products that monitor \"day-to-day workflow: E-mails, Microsoft Teams chats, Google Suite, and Slack\" in order to analyze employee sentiment and engagement.\nOriginally, Fastow connected with KeenCorp when the company was beta testing its software using a digital database of Enron emails.\nIn the media.\nA number of books have been written about Enron and Fastow.\nIn 2003, Fastow was a prominent figure in \"24 Days: How Two Wall Street Journal Reporters Uncovered the Lies that Destroyed Faith in Corporate America\" by the reporters who had broken some of the key stories in the saga, Rebecca Smith and John R. Emshwiller. They painted Fastow as in their words \"a screamer, who negotiated by intimidation and tirade\".\nAlso in 2003, Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind wrote the book \"The Smartest Guys in the Room: The Amazing Rise and Scandalous Fall of Enron\" . In 2005, the book was made into a documentary film \"\".\nIn 2005, Kurt Eichenwald's \"Conspiracy of Fools\" features Fastow as the book's antagonist.\nIn 2009, Lucy Prebble's play Enron featured Fastow as a lead character.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38780", "revid": "15816808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38780", "title": "Mariner 2", "text": "First successful mission to Venus (1962\u20131963)\nMariner 2 (Mariner-Venus 1962), an American space probe to Venus, was the first robotic space probe to report successfully from a planetary encounter. The first successful spacecraft in the NASA Mariner program, it was a simplified version of the Block I spacecraft of the Ranger program and an exact copy of Mariner 1. The missions of the Mariner 1 and 2 spacecraft are sometimes known as the Mariner R missions. Original plans called for the probes to be launched on the Atlas-Centaur, but serious developmental problems with that vehicle forced a switch to the much smaller Agena B second stage. As such, the design of the Mariner R vehicles was greatly simplified. Far less instrumentation was carried than on the Soviet Venera probes of this period\u2014for example, forgoing a TV camera\u2014as the Atlas-Agena B had only half as much lift capacity as the Soviet 8K78 booster. The Mariner 2 spacecraft was launched from Cape Canaveral on August 27, 1962, and passed as close as to Venus on December 14, 1962.\nThe Mariner probe consisted of a diameter hexagonal bus, to which solar panels, instrument booms, and antennas were attached. The scientific instruments on board the Mariner spacecraft were: two radiometers (one each for the microwave and infrared portions of the spectrum), a micrometeorite sensor, a solar plasma sensor, a charged particle sensor, and a magnetometer. These instruments were designed to measure the temperature distribution on the surface of Venus and to make basic measurements of Venus's atmosphere.\nThe primary mission was to receive communications from the spacecraft in the vicinity of Venus and to perform radiometric temperature measurements of the planet. A second objective was to measure the interplanetary magnetic field and charged particle environment.\nEn route to Venus, Mariner 2 measured the solar wind, a constant stream of charged particles flowing outwards from the Sun, confirming the measurements by Luna 1 in 1959. It also measured interplanetary dust, which turned out to be scarcer than predicted. In addition, Mariner 2 detected high-energy charged particles coming from the Sun, including several brief solar flares, as well as cosmic rays from outside the Solar System. As it flew by Venus on December 14, 1962, Mariner 2 scanned the planet with its pair of radiometers, revealing that Venus has cool clouds and an extremely hot surface.\nBackground.\nWith the advent of the Cold War, the two then-superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, both initiated ambitious space programs with the intent of demonstrating military, technological, and political dominance. The Soviets launched the Sputnik 1, the first Earth orbiting satellite, on October 4, 1957. The Americans followed suit with Explorer 1 on February 1, 1958, by which point the Soviets had already launched the first orbiting animal, Laika in Sputnik 2. Earth's orbit having been reached, focus turned to being the first to the Moon. The Pioneer program of satellites consisted of three unsuccessful lunar attempts in 1958. In early 1959, the Soviet Luna 1 was the first probe to fly by the Moon, followed by Luna 2, the first artificial object to impact the Moon.\nWith the Moon achieved, the superpowers turned their eyes to the planets. As the closest planet to Earth, Venus presented an appealing interplanetary spaceflight target. Every 19 months, Venus and the Earth reach relative positions in their orbits around the Sun such that a minimum of fuel is required to travel from one planet to the other via a Hohmann Transfer Orbit. These opportunities mark the best time to launch exploratory spacecraft, requiring the least fuel to make the trip.\nThe first such opportunity of the Space Race occurred in late 1957, before either superpower had the technology to take advantage of it. The second opportunity, around June 1959, lay just within the edge of technological feasibility, and U.S. Air Force contractor Space Technology Laboratory (STL) intended to take advantage of it. A plan drafted January 1959 involved two spacecraft evolved from the first Pioneer probes, one to be launched via Thor-Able rocket, the other via the yet-untested Atlas-Able. STL was unable to complete the probes before June, and the launch window was missed. The Thor-Able probe was repurposed as the deep space explorer Pioneer 5, which was launched March 11, 1960, and designed to maintain communications with Earth up to a distance of as it traveled toward the orbit of Venus. (The Atlas Able probe concept was repurposed as the unsuccessful Pioneer Atlas Moon probes.) No American missions were sent during the early 1961 opportunity. The Soviet Union launched Venera 1 on February 12, 1961, and on May 19\u201320 became the first probe to fly by Venus; however, it had stopped transmitting on February 26.\nFor the summer 1962 launch opportunity, NASA contracted Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in July 1960 to develop \"Mariner A\", a spacecraft to be launched using the yet undeveloped Atlas-Centaur. By August 1961, it had become clear that the Centaur would not be ready in time. JPL proposed to NASA that the mission might be accomplished with a lighter spacecraft using the less powerful but operational Atlas-Agena. A hybrid of Mariner A and JPL's Block 1 Ranger lunar explorer, already under development, was suggested. NASA accepted the proposal, and JPL began an 11-month crash program to develop \"Mariner R\" (so named because it was a Ranger derivative). Mariner 1 would be the first Mariner R to be launched followed by Mariner 2.\nSpacecraft.\nThree Mariner R spacecraft were built: two for launching and one to run tests, which was also to be used as a spare. Aside from its scientific capabilities, Mariner also had to transmit data back to Earth from a distance of more than , and to survive solar radiation twice as intense as that encountered in Earth orbit.\nStructure.\nAll three of the Mariner R spacecraft, including Mariner 2, weighed within of the design weight of , of which was devoted to non-experimental systems: maneuvering systems, fuel, and communications equipment for receiving commands and transmitting data. Once fully deployed in space, with its two solar panel \"wings\" extended, Mariner R was in height and across. The main body of the craft was hexagonal with six separate cases of electronic and electromechanical equipment:\nAt the rear of the spacecraft, a monopropellant (anhydrous hydrazine) 225 N rocket motor was mounted for course corrections. A nitrogen gas fueled stabilizing system of ten jet nozzles controlled by the onboard gyroscopes, Sun sensors, and Earth sensors, kept Mariner properly oriented to receive and transmit data to Earth.\nThe primary high-gain parabolic antenna was also mounted on the underside of Mariner and kept pointed toward the Earth. An omnidirectional antenna atop the spacecraft would broadcast at times that the spacecraft was rolling or tumbling out of its proper orientation, to maintain contact with Earth; as an unfocused antenna, its signal would be much weaker than the primary. Mariner also mounted small antennas on each of the wings to receive commands from ground stations.\nTemperature control was both passive, involving insulated, and highly reflective components; and active, incorporating louvers to protect the case carrying the onboard computer. At the time the first Mariners were built, no test chamber existed to simulate the near-Venus solar environment, so the efficacy of these cooling techniques could not be tested until the live mission.\nScientific instruments.\nBackground.\nAt the time of the Mariner project's inception, few of Venus's characteristics were definitely known. Its opaque atmosphere precluded telescopic study of the ground. It was unknown whether there was water beneath the clouds, though a small amount of water vapor above them had been detected. The planet's rotation rate was uncertain, though JPL scientists had concluded through radar observation that Venus rotated very slowly compared to the Earth, advancing the long-standing (but later disproven) hypothesis that the planet was tidally locked with respect to the Sun (as the Moon is with respect to the Earth). No oxygen had been detected in Venus's atmosphere, suggesting that life as existed on Earth was not present. It had been determined that Venus's atmosphere contained at least 500 times as much carbon dioxide as the Earth's. These comparatively high levels suggested that the planet might be subject to a runaway greenhouse effect with surface temperatures as high as , but this had not yet been conclusively determined.\nThe Mariner spacecraft would be able to verify this hypothesis by measuring the temperature of Venus close-up; at the same time, the spacecraft could determine if there was a significant disparity between night and daytime temperatures. An on-board magnetometer and suite of charged particle detectors could determine if Venus possessed an appreciable magnetic field and an analog to Earth's Van Allen Belts.\nAs the Mariner spacecraft would spend most of its journey to Venus in interplanetary space, the mission also offered an opportunity for long-term measurement of the solar wind of charged particles and to map the variations in the Sun's magnetosphere. The concentration of cosmic dust beyond the vicinity of Earth could be explored as well.\nDue to the limited capacity of the Atlas-Agena, only of the spacecraft could be allocated to scientific experiments.\nInstruments.\nThe magnetometer was attached to the top of the mast below the omnidirectional antenna. Particle detectors were mounted halfway up the mast, along with the cosmic ray detector. The cosmic dust detector and solar plasma spectrometer were attached to the top edges of the spacecraft base. The microwave radiometer, the infrared radiometer and the radiometer reference horns were rigidly mounted to a diameter parabolic radiometer antenna mounted near the bottom of the mast. All instruments were operated throughout the cruise and encounter modes except the radiometers, which were only used in the immediate vicinity of Venus.\nIn addition to these scientific instruments, Mariner 2 had a data conditioning system (DCS) and a scientific power switching (SPS) unit. The DCS was a solid-state electronic system designed to gather information from the scientific instruments on board the spacecraft. It had four basic functions: analog-to-digital conversion, digital-to-digital conversion, sampling and instrument-calibration timing, and planetary acquisition. The SPS unit was designed to perform the following three functions: control of the application of AC power to appropriate portions of the science subsystem, application of power to the radiometers and removal of power from the cruise experiments during radiometer calibration periods, and control of the speed and direction of the radiometer scans. The DCS sent signals to the SPS unit to perform the latter two functions.\nNot included on any of the Mariner R spacecraft was a camera for visual photos. With payload space at a premium, project scientists considered a camera an unneeded luxury, unable to return useful scientific results. Carl Sagan, one of the Mariner R scientists, unsuccessfully fought for their inclusion, noting that not only might there be breaks in Venus's cloud layer, but \"that cameras could also answer questions that we were way too dumb to even pose\".\nMission profile.\nPrelude to Mariner 2.\nThe launch window for Mariner, constrained both by the orbital relationship of Earth and Venus and the limitations of the Atlas Agena, was determined to fall in the 51-day period from July 22 through September 10. The Mariner flight plan was such that the two operational spacecraft would be launched toward Venus in a 30-day period within this window, taking slightly differing paths such that they both arrived at the target planet within nine days of each other, between the December 8 and 16. Only Cape Canaveral Launch Complex 12 was available for the launching of Atlas-Agena rockets, and it took 24 days to ready an Atlas-Agena for launch. This meant that there was only a 27-day margin for error for a two-launch schedule.\nEach Mariner would be launched into a parking orbit, whereupon the restartable Agena would fire a second time, sending Mariner on its way to Venus (errors in trajectory would be corrected by a mid-course burn of Mariner's onboard engines). Real-time radar tracking of the Mariner spacecraft while it was in parking orbit and upon its departure the Atlantic Missile Range would provide real-time radar tracking with stations at Ascension and Pretoria, while Palomar Observatory provided optical tracking. Deep space support was provided by three tracking and communications stations at Goldstone, California, Woomera, Australia, and Johannesburg, South Africa, each separated on the globe by around 120\u00b0 for continuous coverage.\nOn July 22, 1962, the two-stage Atlas-Agena rocket carrying Mariner 1 veered off-course during its launch due to a defective signal from the Atlas and a bug in the program equations of the ground-based guidance computer; the spacecraft was destroyed by the Range Safety Officer.\nTwo days after that launch, Mariner 2 and its booster (Atlas vehicle 179D) were rolled out to LC-12. The Atlas proved troublesome to prepare for launch, and multiple serious problems with the autopilot occurred, including a complete replacement of the servoamplifier after it had suffered component damage due to shorted transistors.\nLaunch.\nAt 1:53 AM EST on August 27, Mariner 2 was launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station Launch Complex 12 at 06:53:14 UTC. The bug in the rocket\u2019s software that resulted in the loss of Mariner 1 had not been identified at the time of the launch. In the event the bug caused no issues with the launch since it was in a section of code that was only used when the data-feed from the ground was interrupted and there were no such interruptions during the launch of Mariner 2.\nThe flight proceeded normally up to the point of the Agena booster engine cutoff, at which point the V-2 vernier engine lost pitch and yaw control. The vernier started oscillating and banging against its stops, resulting in a rapid roll of the launch vehicle that came close to threatening the integrity of the stack. At T+189 seconds, the rolling stopped and the launch continued without incident. The rolling motion of the Atlas resulted in ground guidance losing its lock on the booster and preventing any backup commands from being sent to counteract the roll. The incident was traced to a loose electrical connection in the vernier feedback transducer, which was pushed back into place by the centrifugal force of the roll, which also by fortunate coincidence left the Atlas only a few degrees off from where it started and within the range of the Agena's horizontal sensor. As a consequence of this episode, GD/A implemented improved fabrication of wiring harnesses and checkout procedures.\nFive minutes after liftoff, the Atlas and Agena-Mariner separated, followed by the first Agena burn and second Agena burn. The Agena-Mariner separation injected the Mariner 2 spacecraft into a geocentric escape hyperbola at 26 minutes 3 seconds after liftoff. The NASA NDIF tracking station at Johannesburg, South Africa, acquired the spacecraft about 31 minutes after launch. Solar panel extension was completed approximately 44 minutes after launch. The Sun lock acquired the Sun about 18 minutes later. The high-gain antenna was extended to its acquisition angle of 72\u00b0. The output of the solar panels was slightly above the predicted value.\nAs all subsystems were performing normally, with the battery fully charged and the solar panels providing adequate power, the decision was made on August 29 to turn on cruise science experiments. On September 3, the Earth acquisition sequence was initiated, and Earth lock was established 29 minutes later.\nMid-course maneuver.\nDue to the Atlas-Agena putting Mariner slightly off course, the spacecraft required a mid-course correction, consisting of a roll-turn sequence, followed by a pitch-turn sequence and finally a motor-burn sequence. Preparation commands were sent to the spacecraft at 21:30 UTC on September 4. Initiation of the mid-course maneuver sequence was sent at 22:49:42 UTC and the roll-turn sequence started one hour later. The entire maneuver took approximately 34 minutes. As a result of the mid-course maneuver, the sensors lost their lock with the Sun and Earth. At 00:27:00 UTC the Sun re-acquisition began and at 00:34 UTC the Sun was reacquired. Earth re-acquisition started at 02:07:29 UTC and Earth was reacquired at 02:34 UTC.\nLoss of attitude control.\nOn September 8 at 12:50 UTC, the spacecraft experienced a problem with attitude control. It automatically turned on the gyros, and the cruise science experiments were automatically turned off. The exact cause is unknown as attitude sensors went back to normal before telemetry measurements could be sampled, but it may have been an Earth-sensor malfunction or a collision with a small unidentified object which temporarily caused the spacecraft to lose Sun lock. A similar experience happened on September 29 at 14:34 UTC. Again, all sensors went back to normal before it could be determined which axis had lost lock. By this date, the Earth sensor brightness indication had essentially gone to zero. This time, however, telemetry data indicated that the Earth-brightness measurement had increased to the nominal value for that point in the trajectory.\nSolar panel output.\nOn October 31, the output from one solar panel (with solar sail attached) deteriorated abruptly. It was diagnosed as a partial short circuit in the panel. As a precaution, the cruise science instruments were turned off. A week later, the panel resumed normal function, and cruise science instruments were turned back on. The panel permanently failed on November 15, but Mariner 2 was close enough to the Sun that one panel could supply adequate power; thus, the cruise science experiments were left active.\nEncounter with Venus.\nMariner 2 was the first spacecraft to successfully encounter another planet, passing as close as to Venus after 110 days of flight on December 14, 1962.\nPost encounter.\nAfter encounter, cruise mode resumed. Spacecraft perihelion occurred on December 27 at a distance of . The last transmission from Mariner 2 was received on January 3, 1963, at 07:00 UTC, making the total time from launch to termination of the Mariner 2 mission 129 days. After passing Venus, Mariner 2 entered heliocentric orbit.\nResults.\nThe data produced during the flight consisted of two categories\u2014\"viz.\", tracking data and telemetry data. One particularly noteworthy piece of data gathered during the pioneering fly-by was the high temperature of the atmosphere, measured to be . Various properties of the solar wind were also measured for the first time.\nScientific observations.\nThe microwave radiometer made three scans of Venus in 35 minutes on December 14, 1962, starting at 18:59 UTC. The first scan was made on the dark side, the second was near the terminator, and the third was located on the light side. The scans with the 19\u00a0mm band revealed peak temperatures of on the dark side, 595\u00a0\u00b1\u00a012\u00a0K near the terminator, and 511\u00a0\u00b1\u00a014\u00a0K on the light side. It was concluded that there is no significant difference in temperature across Venus. However, the results suggest a limb darkening, an effect which presents cooler temperatures near the edge of the planetary disk and higher temperatures near the center. This was evidence for the theory that the Venusian surface was extremely hot and the atmosphere optically thick.\nThe infrared radiometer showed that the 8.4\u00a0\u03bcm and 10.4\u00a0\u03bcm radiation temperatures were in agreement with radiation temperatures obtained from Earth-based measurements. There was no systematic difference between the temperatures measured on the light side and dark side of the planet, which was also in agreement with Earth-based measurements. The limb darkening effect that the microwave radiometer detected was also present in the measurements by both channels of the infrared radiometer. The effect was only slightly present in the 10.4\u00a0\u03bcm channel but was more pronounced in the 8.4\u00a0\u03bcm channel. The 8.4\u00a0\u03bcm channel also showed a slight phase effect. The phase effect indicated that if a greenhouse effect existed, heat was transported in an efficient manner from the light side to the dark side of the planet. The 8.4\u00a0\u03bcm and 10.4\u00a0\u03bcm showed equal radiation temperatures, indicating that the limb darkening effect would appear to come from a cloud structure rather than the atmosphere. Thus, if the measured temperatures were actually cloud temperatures instead of surface temperatures, then these clouds would have to be quite thick.\nThe magnetometer detected a persistent interplanetary magnetic field varying between 2\u00a0\u03b3 and 10\u00a0\u03b3 (nanotesla), which agrees with prior \"Pioneer 5\" observations from 1960. This also means that interplanetary space is rarely empty or field-free. The magnetometer could detect changes of about 4\u00a0\u03b3 on any of the axes, but no trends above 10\u00a0\u03b3 were detected near Venus, nor were fluctuations seen like those that appear at Earth's magnetospheric termination. This means that Mariner 2 found no detectable magnetic field near Venus, although that did not necessarily mean that Venus had none. However, if Venus had a magnetic field, then it would have to be at least smaller than 1/10 the magnetic field of the Earth. In 1980, \"Pioneer 12\" indeed showed that Venus has a small weak magnetic field.\nThe Anton type 213 Geiger-M\u00fcller tube performed as expected. The average rate was 0.6 counts per second. Increases in its counting rate were larger and more frequent than for the two larger tubes, since it was more sensitive to particles of lower energy. It detected seven small solar bursts of radiation during September and October and 2 during November and December. The absence of a detectable magnetosphere was also confirmed by the tube; it detected no radiation belt at Venus similar to that of Earth. The count rate would have increased by 104, but no change was measured.\nIt was also shown that in interplanetary space, the solar wind streams continuously, confirming a prediction by Eugene Parker, and the cosmic dust density is much lower than the near-Earth region.\nImproved estimates of Venus's mass and the value of the Astronomical Unit were made. Also, research, which was later confirmed by Earth-based radar and other explorations, suggested that Venus rotates very slowly and in a direction opposite that of the Earth.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38781", "revid": "125638", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38781", "title": "Particle (disambiguation)", "text": "A particle in the physical sciences is a small localized object to which physical properties can be ascribed.\nParticle may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38782", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38782", "title": "Mariner 6 and 7", "text": "Twin NASA flyby missions to Mars (1969\u20131970)\nMariner 6 and Mariner 7 (Mariner Mars 69A and Mariner Mars 69B) were two uncrewed NASA robotic spacecraft that completed the first dual mission to Mars in 1969 as part of NASA's wider Mariner program. Mariner 6 was launched from Launch Complex 36B at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station and Mariner 7 from Launch Complex 36A. The two craft flew over the equator and south polar regions, analyzing the atmosphere and the surface with remote sensors, and recording and relaying hundreds of pictures. The mission's goals were to study the surface and atmosphere of Mars during close flybys, in order to establish the basis for future investigations, particularly those relevant to the search for extraterrestrial life, and to demonstrate and develop technologies required for future Mars missions. Mariner 6 also had the objective of providing experience and data which would be useful in programming the Mariner 7 encounter five days later.\nLaunch.\nThree Mariner probes were constructed for the mission, with two intended to fly and one as a spare in the event of a mission failure. The spacecraft were shipped to Cape Canaveral with their Atlas-Centaur boosters in December 1968 \u2013 January 1969 to begin pre-launch checkouts and testing. On February 14, Mariner 6 was undergoing a simulated countdown on LC-36A, electrical power running, but no propellant loaded in the booster. During the test run, an electrical relay in the Atlas malfunctioned and opened two valves in the pneumatic system which allowed helium pressure gas to escape from the booster's balloon skin. The Atlas began to crumple over, however two pad technicians quickly activated a manual override switch to close the valves and pump helium back in. Although Mariner 6 and its Centaur stage had been saved, the Atlas had sustained structural damage and could not be reused, so they were removed from the booster and placed atop Mariner 7's launch vehicle on the adjacent LC-36B, while a different Atlas was used for Mariner 7.\nNASA awarded the quick-thinking technicians, Bill McClure and Charles (Jack) Beverlin, Exceptional Bravery Medals for their courage in risking being crushed underneath the rocket. In 2014, an escarpment on Mars which NASA'S \"Opportunity\" rover had recently visited was named the McClure-Beverlin Ridge in honor of the pair, who had since died.\nMariner 6 lifted off from LC-36B at Cape Canaveral on February 25, 1969, using the Atlas-Centaur AC-20 rocket, while Mariner 7 lifted off from LC-36A on March 27, using the Atlas-Centaur AC-19 rocket. The boost phase for both spacecraft went according to plan and no serious anomalies occurred with either launch vehicle. A minor LOX leak froze some telemetry probes in AC-20 which registered as a drop in sustainer engine fuel pressure; however, the engine performed normally through powered flight. In addition, BECO occurred a few seconds early due to a faulty cutoff switch, resulting in longer than intended burn time of the sustainer engine, but this had no serious effect on vehicle performance or the flight path. AC-20 was launched at a 108-degree azimuth.\nThe Centaur stage on both flights was set up to perform a retrorocket maneuver after capsule separation. This served two purposes, firstly to prevent venting propellant from the spent Centaur from contacting the probe, secondly to put the vehicle on a trajectory that would send it into solar orbit and not impact the Martian surface, potentially contaminating the planet with Earth microbes.\nSpaceflight.\nOn July 29, 1969, less than a week before closest approach, Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) lost contact with Mariner 7. The center regained the signal via the backup low-gain antenna and regained use of the high gain antenna again shortly after Mariner 6's close encounter. Leaking gases from a battery (which later failed) were thought to have caused the anomaly. Based on the observations that Mariner 6 made, Mariner 7 was reprogrammed in flight to take further observations of areas of interest and actually returned more pictures than Mariner 6, despite the battery's failure.\nClosest approach for Mariner 6 occurred July 31, 1969, at 05:19:07 UT at a distance of above the martian surface. Closest approach for Mariner 7 occurred August 5, 1969 at 05:00:49 UT at a distance of above the Martian surface. This was less than half of the distance used by Mariner 4 on the previous US Mars flyby mission.\nBoth spacecraft are now defunct and in heliocentric orbits.\nScience data and findings.\nBy chance, both spacecraft flew over cratered regions and missed both the giant northern volcanoes and the equatorial grand canyon discovered later. Their approach pictures did, however, photograph about 20 percent of the planet's surface, showing the dark features long seen from Earth \u2013 in the past, these features had been mistaken for canals by some ground-based astronomers. When Mariner 7 flew over the Martian south pole on August 4, 1969, it sent back pictures of ice-filled craters and outlines of the south polar cap. Despite the communication defect suffered by Mariner 7 earlier, these pictures were of better quality than what had been sent by its twin, Mariner 6, a few days earlier when it flew past the Martian equator. In total, 201 photos were taken and transmitted back to Earth, adding more detail than the earlier mission, Mariner 4. Both crafts also studied the atmosphere of Mars.\nComing a week after Apollo 11, Mariner 6 and 7's flyby of Mars received less than the normal amount of media coverage for a mission of this significance.\nThe ultraviolet spectrometer onboard Mariners 6 and 7 was constructed by the University of Colorado's Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP).\nThe engineering model of Mariners 6 and 7 still exists, and is owned by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). It is on loan to LASP, and is on display in the lab's lobby.\nMariner 6 and 7 infrared radiometer observations helped to trigger a scientific revolution in Mars knowledge. The Mariner 6 and 7 infrared radiometer results showed that the atmosphere of Mars is composed mostly of carbon dioxide (CO2), and they were also able to detect trace amounts of water on the surface of Mars.\nSpacecraft and subsystems.\nThe Mariner 6 and 7 spacecraft were identical, consisting of an octagonal magnesium frame base, diagonally and deep. A conical superstructure mounted on top of the frame held the high-gain diameter parabolic antenna and four solar panels, each measuring x , were affixed to the top corners of the frame. The tip-to-tip span of the deployed solar panels was . A low-gain omnidirectional antenna was mounted on a high mast next to the high-gain antenna. Underneath the octagonal frame was a two-axis scan platform which held scientific instruments. Overall science instrument mass was . The total height of the spacecraft was .\nThe spacecraft was attitude stabilized in three axes, referenced to the Sun and the star Canopus. It utilized 3 gyros, 2 sets of 6 nitrogen jets, which were mounted on the ends of the solar panels, a Canopus tracker, and two primary and four secondary Sun sensors. Propulsion was provided by a 223-newton rocket motor, mounted within the frame, which used the mono-propellant hydrazine. The nozzle, with 4-jet vane vector control, protruded from one wall of the octagonal structure. Power was supplied by 17,472 photovoltaic cells, covering an area of on the four solar panels. These could provide 800 watts of power near Earth, and 449 watts while near Mars. The maximum power requirement was 380 watts, once Mars was reached. A 1200 watt-hour, rechargeable, silver-zinc battery was used to provide backup power. Thermal control was achieved through the use of adjustable louvers on the sides of the main compartment.\nThree telemetry channels were available for telecommunications. Channel A carried engineering data at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;8+1\u20443 or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;33+1\u20443 bit/s, channel B carried scientific data at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;66+2\u20443 or 270 bit/s and channel C carried science data at 16,200 bit/s. Communications were accomplished through the high- and low-gain antennas, via dual S-band traveling wave tube amplifiers, operating at 10 or 20 watts, for transmission. The design also included a single receiver. An analog tape recorder, with a capacity of 195 million bits, could store television images for subsequent transmission. Other science data was stored on a digital recorder. The command system, consisting of a central computer and sequencer (CC&amp;S), was designed to actuate specific events at precise times. The CC&amp;S was programmed with both a standard mission and a conservative backup mission before launch, but could be commanded and reprogrammed in flight. It could perform 53 direct commands, 5 control commands, and 4 quantitative commands.\nScientific Instruments.\nBoth spacecraft carried the same set of instruments:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38783", "revid": "1310896692", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38783", "title": "David Boies", "text": "American lawyer (born 1941)\nDavid Boies ( ; born March 11, 1941) is an American lawyer and also chairman of the law firm Boies Schiller Flexner LLP. Boies rose to national prominence for three major cases: leading the U.S. federal government's successful prosecution of Microsoft in \"United States v. Microsoft Corp.\", his unsuccessful representation of Democratic presidential candidate Al Gore in \"Bush v. Gore\", and for successful representation of the plaintiff in \"Hollingsworth v. Perry\", which invalidated California Proposition 8 banning same-sex marriage. Boies has also represented various clients in U.S. lawsuits, including Theranos, tobacco companies, Harvey Weinstein, and Jeffrey Epstein's victims including Virginia Roberts Giuffre.\nEarly life and education.\nBoies was born in Sycamore, Illinois, to two teachers, and raised in a rural, farming community. He has four siblings. His first job was when he was 10 years old\u2014a paper route with 120 customers. Boies has dyslexia and he did not learn to read until the third grade. Canadian journalist Malcolm Gladwell has described the unique processes of reading and learning Boies experienced due to his dyslexia. Boies' mother, for instance, would read stories to him when he was a child, and Boies would memorize them because he could not follow the words on the page.\nIn 1954, the family moved to California. Boies graduated from Fullerton Union High School in Fullerton, California. Boies attended the University of Redlands, in Redlands, California, from 1960 to 1962, received a B.S. degree from Northwestern University in 1964, a J.D. degree \"magna cum laude\" from Yale Law School in 1966 and a LL.M. degree from New York University School of Law 1967; he was awarded an honorary LL.D. from the University of Redlands in 2000. He is on the board of trustees of the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia, which is a museum dedicated to the U.S. Constitution.\nProfessional history.\nLaw firm.\nBoies began his career at Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, joining the firm after graduation from law school in 1966 and becoming a partner in 1973. He left Cravath in 1997 after a major client objected to his representation of the New York Yankees despite the firm having determined there was no conflict of interest. Boies departed the firm within 48 hours of being informed of the client's objection and went on to establish his own firm with his friend Jonathan Schiller, now known as Boies, Schiller &amp; Flexner LLP. It is currently rated 23rd in \"overall prestige\" and 15th among New York law firms by Vault.com, a website on legal career information.\nNotable cases.\n1980s-2000.\nFrom 1984 to 1985, Boies defended CBS in the libel suit \"Westmoreland v. CBS\", but after dragging on for two years, the case was dropped. Following the 2000 U.S. presidential election, he represented Vice President Al Gore in \"Bush v. Gore\". In Jay Roach's \"Recount\", which focuses on the case, Boies is played by Ed Begley Jr. In his 2001 book, prosecutor and author Vincent Bugliosi criticized Boies' abilities as a trial lawyer, arguing that Boies \"wasn't forceful or eloquent at all in making his points\" in \"Bush v. Gore\". \"[A]lthough he seemed to have a very good grasp of the facts, he seemed completely incapable of drawing powerful, irresistible inferences from those facts that painted his opposition into a corner\".\nIn 2000, Boies lost the first important file-sharing case which ultimately put Napster into bankruptcy. \n2001-2010.\nIn 2001 Boies represented the Justice Department in the \"United States v. Microsoft Corp.\" case. Boies won a victory at trial, and the verdict was upheld on appeal. The appellate court overturned the relief ordered (breakup of the company) back to the trial court for further proceedings. Thereafter, the George W. Bush administration settled the case. Bill Gates said Boies was \"out to destroy Microsoft\". In 2001, the \"Washington Monthly\" called Boies \"a brilliant trial lawyer\", \"a latter-day Clarence Darrow\", and \"a mad genius\" for his work on the \"Microsoft\" case. In 2006, Boies, Schiller &amp; Flexner LLP negotiated a major settlement with The American International Group on behalf of its client, C. V. Starr, a firm controlled by Maurice R. Greenberg, the former chairman and chief executive of A.I.G. \nIn 2008 Boies negotiated on behalf of American Express two of the highest civil antitrust settlements ever for an individual company: $2.25 billion from Visa, and $1.8 billion from MasterCard.\nIn 2009, following the California Supreme Court ruling on \"Strauss v. Horton\", Boies joined former Solicitor General Theodore Olson, the opposing attorney in \"Bush v. Gore\", in the lawsuit \"Perry v. Brown\" seeking to overturn the state of California's Proposition 8 ban on same-sex marriage. In August 2010, the District Court judge ruled in their clients' favor, finding Proposition 8 to be unconstitutional. On June 26, 2013, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the proponents of Proposition 8 did not have standing to challenge the ruling, allowing the District Court judgment to stand. Same-sex marriages resumed in California on June 28, 2013. Also in 2009, the Golden Gate Yacht Club retained Boies for their ongoing dispute with Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Nautique de Gen\u00e8ve regarding the 33rd America's Cup.\nIn March 2010, Boies joined the team of attorneys representing Jamie McCourt in her divorce from Los Angeles Dodgers owner Frank McCourt. \n2010s.\nIn 2011 Boies represented filmmaker Michael Moore regarding a Treasury Department investigation into Moore's trip to Cuba while filming for \"Sicko\". Boies, Schiller &amp; Flexner LLP assisted the government in obtaining a $155\u00a0million settlement from Medco Health Solutions related to a \"qui tam\" complaint which alleged that Medco helped some pharmaceutical companies make more money by driving prescriptions to them; along with making the payment Medco also signed a corporate integrity agreement. Boies was part of the legal team representing the National Football League in their antitrust litigation, Brady v. NFL. Boies represented the National Basketball Players Association during the 2011 NBA lockout. He joined sides with Jeffrey Kessler, who opposed Boies as a representative for the players in the 2011 NFL lockout. Boies was the lead counsel for Oracle Corporation in its lawsuit against Google on the use of Java programming language technology in the Android operating system. The case decided that Google did not infringe on Oracle's patents.\nIn 2014, on behalf of Mr. Greenberg, Boies brought a claim that the government's $85 billion bailout of AIG had been unfair to the company's owners. Boies charged Greenberg more than $50 million in legal fees. Although the court accepted some of Boies's arguments, the court refused to award the plaintiffs a single dollar. On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit rejected all of Boies's claims and threw out the trial court's decision.\nIn 2011, Boies began working as legal representation for the now defunct blood testing company, Theranos. Prior to joining their board, he worked for founder Elizabeth Holmes and her company as special adviser and attended all of the company's board meetings. In February 2016, Boies agreed to both sit on the board of directors and act as the attorney for troubled Silicon Valley startup. The controversial dual role was deemed difficult as he would have to represent both the company (as lawyer) and investors (as a director). In the 2022 Hulu miniseries \"The Dropout\", Boies was portrayed by Kurtwood Smith. In 2012, Boies represented three tobacco companies, Philip Morris USA Inc., R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. and Liggett Group LLC, in their appeal of a $2.5\u00a0million Tampa jury verdict in the death of smoker Charlotte Douglas. Later in 2012 Boies defended Gary Jackson, former president of Academi (previously known as BlackWater), in a federal prosecution which alleged he and his co-defendants illegally hid firearm purchases from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.\nIn 2015, Boies represented Bob Weinstein and Harvey Weinstein in renegotiating the Weinsteins' employment contract. According to \"The Wall Street Journal\", Boies negotiated Harvey Weinstein's contract without informing Weinstein Co. directors that he had an investment in the company's movies. In 2017, Boies agreed to join the legal team for Lawrence Lessig's legal fight against winner-take-all Electoral College vote allocations in the states. Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones hired Boies in 2017 to advise on Jones's legal strategy against NFL commissioner Roger Goodell and the NFL compensation committee in the wake of the suspension of the running back Ezekiel Elliott. Since 2019, Boies has represented several of Jeffrey Epstein's victims including Virginia Roberts Giuffre.\n2020s.\nIn 2025, he was hired by Rumble to represent the company in its antitrust suit against Google.\nCriticism.\nInvolvement in defense of Harvey Weinstein.\nBoies helped Weinstein fend off journalist Ken Auletta's inquiry into Weinstein's alleged rape of Rowena Chiu at the Venice Film Festival in 1998. Rose McGowan claimed that Jennifer Siebel Newsom attempted to arrange a deal between her and Boies in an attempt to make her stay quiet about her allegations against Harvey Weinstein whom Boies was representing at the time. In 2017, Boies' firm reportedly directed the Israeli private intelligence company Black Cube to spy on alleged victims of Harvey Weinstein's sexual abuse and on reporters who were investigating Weinstein's actions. Over the course of a year, Weinstein had Black Cube and other agencies \"target\", or collect information on, dozens of individuals, and compile psychological profiles that sometimes focused on their personal or sexual histories. \"Boies personally signed the contract directing Black Cube to attempt to uncover information that would stop the publication of a \"Times\" story about Weinstein's abuses, while his firm was also representing the \"Times\", including in a libel case.\"\nMonths after Cyrus Vance Jr. dropped an investigation into a sexual assault allegation against Weinstein, he received a $10,000 donation from Boies who was representing Weinstein at the time. Andrew Cuomo opened an investigation into Vance's handling of the Weinstein probe. However, after receiving a $25,000 campaign donation from Boies' firm, Cuomo ended the investigation. Boies' firm was representing \"The New York Times\" at the same time. A few days after \"The New Yorker\" broke the story \"Harvey Weinstein's Army of Spies\", \"The New York Times\" announced it had \"terminated its relationship\" with Boies' firm. According to its contract with Weinstein, Black Cube's assignment had been to kill the paper's negative reporting on Weinstein. Boies' involvement in defending Weinstein received criticism from several magazines and newspapers, such as New York\",\" The Atlantic, The New York Times, and \"Bloomberg Businessweek\". In 2021, several attorneys resigned from Boies Schiller Flexner, citing Boies' defence of Weinstein as one of the reasons.\nInvolvement with Theranos.\nBoies served as a lawyer for blood-testing company Theranos. His dual role as attorney and board member of the defunct company is recounted in the book, \"\" by then \"The Wall Street Journal\" investigative reporter John Carreyrou. Boies, along with lawyers Heather King and Michael Brille, and his firm are described as protecting the startup using surveillance of witnesses and journalists, weaponized use of non-disclosure agreements and affidavits, intimidation tactics, and other heavy-handed practices. Boies Schiller Flexner LLP is portrayed by Carreyrou as acting as an extension of Theranos, including the use of the law firm's New York offices for hosting promotional meetings such as a faked blood test administered to \"Fortune\" writer Roger Parloff.\nBoies also served on the Theranos board of directors, raising concerns about conflicts of interest. He agreed to be paid for his firm's work in Theranos stock, which he expected to increase significantly in value. Boies' participation in and support for Theranos directly contributed to the misleading treatment of Walgreen patients, potentially resulting, cited within the report on Theranos by the federal agency CMS (Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services), in \"serious injury or harm, or death\". Boies eventually left the Theranos board of directors, after the U.S. federal government had initiated multiple investigations into the firm.\nPersonal life.\nHis first marriage, to Caryl Louise Maniscalco (n\u00e9e Elwell) ended in divorce. They had two children together, Caryl Louise Boies and David Boies III. \nHe is married to Mary Boies; they have two grown children, Mary Regency Boies and Alexander Boies, and three grandchildren. Through his daughter Mary, he is the father-in-law of Noah Emmerich.\nBoies owns a home in Westchester County, New York, Hawk and Horse Vineyards in Northern California, an oceangoing yacht, and a large wine collection. Boies is dyslexic and is frequently described as having a photographic memory which allows him to recite exact text, page numbers, and legal exhibits. Colleagues attribute part of his courtroom success in part to this ability.\nPhilanthropy.\nDavid and Mary Boies also fund the \"Mary and David Boies Fellowships\" for foreign students at the Harvard Kennedy School. The Boieses give an annual picnic at their home for the incoming Teach for America corps for New York City (300\u2013500 people). They support the Central European and Eurasian Law Institute (CEELI), a Prague-based institute that trains judges from newly democratized countries in Eastern Europe and the Middle East. There is a \"Mary and David Boies Reading Room\" at the CEELI Institute in Prague.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38784", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38784", "title": "2000 U.S. presidential election", "text": ""}
{"id": "38785", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38785", "title": "Mariner 10", "text": "First spacecraft to visit Mercury (1973\u20131975)\nMariner 10 was an American robotic space probe launched by NASA on 3 November 1973, to fly by the planets Mercury and Venus. It was the first spacecraft to visit Mercury and the first to perform a flyby of multiple planets.\n\"Mariner 10\" was launched approximately two years after \"Mariner 9\" and was the last spacecraft in the Mariner program. (Mariner 11 and Mariner 12 were allocated to the Voyager program and redesignated \"Voyager 1\" and \"Voyager 2\".)\nThe mission objectives were to measure Mercury's environment, atmosphere, surface, and body characteristics and to make similar investigations of Venus. Secondary objectives were to perform experiments in the interplanetary medium and to obtain experience with a dual-planet gravity assist mission. \"Mariner 10\"'s science team was led by Bruce C. Murray at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.\nDesign and trajectory.\n\"Mariner 10\" was the first mission to use a gravity assist from one planet (in this case, Venus) to reach another planet. It used Venus to bend its flight path and bring its perihelion down to the level of Mercury's orbit. This maneuver, inspired by the orbital mechanics calculations of the Italian scientist Giuseppe Colombo, put the spacecraft into an orbit that repeatedly brought it back to Mercury. \"Mariner 10\" used the solar radiation pressure on its solar panels and its high-gain antenna as a means of attitude control during flight, the first spacecraft to use active solar pressure control.\nThe components on \"Mariner 10\" can be categorized into four groups based on their common function. The solar panels, power subsystem, attitude control subsystem, and the computer kept the spacecraft operating properly during the flight. The navigational system, including the hydrazine rocket, would keep \"Mariner 10\" on track to Venus and Mercury. Several scientific instruments would collect data at the two planets. Finally, the antennas would transmit this data to the Deep Space Network back on Earth, as well as receive commands from Mission Control. \"Mariner 10\"'s various components and scientific instruments were attached to a central hub, which was roughly the shape of an octagonal prism. The hub stored the spacecraft's internal electronics. The Mariner 10 spacecraft was manufactured by Boeing. NASA set a strict limit of US$98 million for Mariner 10's total cost, which marked the first time the agency subjected a mission to an inflexible budget constraint. No overruns would be tolerated, so mission planners carefully considered cost efficiency when designing the spacecraft's instruments. Cost control was primarily accomplished by executing contract work closer to the launch date than was recommended by normal mission schedules, as reducing the length of available work time increased cost efficiency. Despite the rushed schedule, very few deadlines were missed. The mission ended up about US$1 million under budget.\nAttitude control is needed to keep a spacecraft's instruments and antennas aimed in the correct direction. During course correction maneuvers, the spacecraft may need to rotate so that its rocket engine faces the proper direction before being fired. \"Mariner 10\" determined its attitude using two optical sensors, one pointed at the Sun, and the other at a bright star, usually Canopus; additionally, the probe's three gyroscopes provided a second option for calculating the attitude. Nitrogen gas thrusters were used to adjust \"Mariner 10\"'s orientation along three axes. The spacecraft's electronics were intricate and complex: it contained over 32,000 pieces of circuitry, of which resistors, capacitors, diodes, microcircuits, and transistors were the most common devices. Commands for the instruments could be stored on \"Mariner 10\"'s computer, but were limited to 512 words. The rest had to be broadcast by the Mission Sequence Working Group from Earth. Supplying the spacecraft components with power required modifying the electrical output of the solar panels. The power subsystem used two redundant sets of circuitry, each containing a booster regulator and an inverter, to convert the panels' DC output to AC and alter the voltage to the necessary level. The subsystem could store up to 20 ampere hours of electricity on a 39-volt nickel\u2013cadmium battery.\nThe flyby past Mercury posed major technical challenges for scientists to overcome. Due to Mercury's proximity to the Sun, \"Mariner 10\" would have to endure 4.5 times more solar radiation than when it departed Earth; compared to previous Mariner missions, spacecraft parts needed extra shielding against the heat. Thermal blankets and a sunshade were installed on the main body. After evaluating different choices for the sunshade cloth material, mission planners chose beta cloth, a combination of aluminized Kapton and glass-fiber sheets treated with Teflon. However, solar shielding was unfeasible for some of \"Mariner 10\"'s other components. \"Mariner 10\"'s two solar panels needed to be kept under . Covering the panels would defeat their purpose of producing electricity. The solution was to add an adjustable tilt to the panels, so the angle at which they faced the sun could be changed. Engineers considered folding the panels toward each other, making a V-shape with the main body, but tests found this approach had the potential to overheat the rest of the spacecraft. The alternative chosen was to mount the solar panels in a line and tilt them along that axis, which had the added benefit of increasing the efficiency of the spacecraft's nitrogen jet thrusters, which could now be placed on the panel tips. The panels could be rotated a maximum of 76\u00b0. Additionally, \"Mariner 10\"'s hydrazine rocket nozzle had to face the Sun to function properly, but scientists rejected covering the nozzle with a thermal door as an undependable solution. Instead, a special paint was applied to exposed parts on the rocket so as to reduce heat flow from the nozzle to the delicate instruments on the spacecraft.\nAccurately performing the gravity assist at Venus posed another hurdle. If \"Mariner 10\" was to maintain a course to Mercury, its trajectory could deviate no more than from a critical point in the vicinity of Venus. To ensure that the necessary course corrections could be made, mission planners tripled the amount of hydrazine fuel Mariner 10 would carry, and also equipped the spacecraft with more nitrogen gas for the thrusters than the previous Mariner mission had held. These upgrades proved crucial in enabling the second and third Mercury flybys.\nThe mission still lacked the ultimate safeguard: a sister spacecraft. It was common for probes to be launched in pairs, with complete redundancy to guard against the failure of one or the other. The budget constraint ruled this option out. Even though mission planners stayed sufficiently under budget to divert some funding for constructing a backup spacecraft, the budget did not permit both to be launched at the same time. In the event that Mariner 10 failed, NASA would only allow the backup to be launched if the fatal error was diagnosed and fixed; this would have to be completed in the two and a half weeks between the scheduled launch on 3 November 1973 and the last possible launch date of 21 November 1973. The unused backup was sent to the Smithsonian museum for display.\nInstruments.\n\"Mariner 10\" conducted seven experiments at Venus and Mercury. Six of these experiments had a dedicated scientific instrument to collect data. The experiments and instruments were designed by research laboratories and educational institutions from across the United States. Out of forty-six submissions, JPL selected seven experiments on the basis of maximizing science return without exceeding cost guidelines: together, the seven scientific experiments cost US12.6 million dollars, about one-eighth of the total mission budget.\nTelevision photography.\nThe imaging system, the Television Photography Experiment, consisted of two Cassegrain telescopes feeding vidicon tubes. The main telescope could be bypassed to a smaller wide angle optic, but using the same tube. It had an 8-position filter wheel, with one position occupied by a mirror for the wide-angle bypass. \nTV camera exposures ranged from 3 ms to 12 s with each camera being able to take a picture every 42 s. The picture resolution was 832 x 700 pixels, 8-bit coded.\nThe entire imaging system was imperiled when electric heaters attached to the cameras failed to turn on immediately after launch. To avoid the Sun's damaging heat, the cameras were deliberately placed on the spacecraft side facing away from the Sun. Consequently, the heaters were needed to prevent the cameras from losing heat and become so cold that they would become damaged. JPL engineers found that the vidicons could generate enough heat through normal operation to stay just above the critical temperature of ; therefore they advised against turning off the cameras during the flight. Test photos of the Earth and Moon showed that image quality had not been significantly affected. The mission team was pleasantly surprised when the camera heaters started working on 17 January 1974, two months after launch. Later investigation concluded that a short circuit in a different location on the probe had prevented the heater from turning on. This allowed the vidicons to be turned off as needed.\nOf the six main scientific instruments, the cameras were by far the most massive device. Requiring 67 watts of electricity, the cameras consumed more power than the other five instruments combined. The system returned about 7,000 photographs of Mercury and Venus during Mariner 10's flybys.\nInfrared radiometer.\nThe infrared radiometer detected infrared radiation given off by the surface of Mercury and the atmosphere of Venus, from which the temperature could be calculated. How quickly the surface lost heat as it rotated into the planet's dark side revealed aspects about the composition of the surface, such as whether it was made out of rocks, or out of finer particles. The infrared radiometer contained a pair of Cassegrain telescopes fixed at an angle of 120\u00b0 to each other and a pair of detectors made from antimony-bismuth thermopiles. The instrument was designed to measure temperatures as cold as and as hot as . Stillman C. Chase, Jr. of the Santa Barbara Research Center headed the infrared radiometer experiment.\nUltraviolet spectrometers.\nTwo ultraviolet spectrometers were involved in this experiment, one to measure UV absorption, the other to sense UV emissions. The occultation spectrometer scanned Mercury's edge as it passed in front of the Sun, and detected whether solar ultraviolet radiation was absorbed in certain wavelengths, which would indicate the presence of gas particles, and therefore an atmosphere. The airglow spectrometer detected extreme ultraviolet radiation emanating from atoms of gaseous hydrogen, helium, carbon, oxygen, neon, and argon. Unlike the occultation spectrometer, it did not require backlighting from the Sun and could move along with the rotatable scan platform on the spacecraft. The experiment's most important goal was to ascertain whether Mercury had an atmosphere, but would also gather data at Earth and Venus and study the interstellar background radiation.\nPlasma detectors.\nThe plasma experiment's goal was to study the ionized gases (plasma) of the solar wind, the temperature and density of its electrons, and how the planets affected the velocity of the plasma stream. The experiment contained two components, facing in opposite directions. The Scanning Electrostatic Analyzer was aimed toward the Sun and could detect positive ions and electrons, which were separated by a set of three concentric hemispherical plates. The Scanning Electron Spectrometer was aimed away from the Sun, and detected only electrons, using just one hemispherical plate. The instruments could be rotated about 60\u00b0 to either side. By gathering data on the solar wind's movement around Mercury, the plasma experiment could be used to verify the magnetometer's observations of Mercury's magnetic field. Using the plasma detectors, Mariner 10 gathered the first \"in situ\" solar wind data from inside Venus's orbit.\nShortly after launch, scientists found that the Scanning Electrostatic Analyzer had failed because a door shielding the analyzer did not open. An unsuccessful attempt was made to forcibly unfasten the door with the first course correction maneuver. The experiment operators had planned to observe the directions taken by positive ions prior to the ions' collision with the Analyzer, but this data was lost. The experiment was still able to collect some data using the properly functioning Scanning Electron Spectrometer.\nCharged particle telescopes.\nThe goal of the charged particles experiment was to observe how the heliosphere interacted with cosmic radiation. In connection with the plasma detectors and magnetometers, this experiment had the potential to provide additional evidence of a magnetic field around Mercury, by showing whether such a field had captured charged particles. Two telescopes were used to collect highly energetic electrons and atomic nuclei, specifically oxygen nuclei or less massive. These particles then passed through a set of detectors and were counted.\nMagnetometers.\nTwo fluxgate magnetometers were entrusted with discerning whether Mercury produced a magnetic field, and studying the interplanetary magnetic field between flybys. In designing this experiment, scientists had to account for interference from the magnetic field generated by Mariner 10's many electronic parts. For this reason, the magnetometers had to be situated on a long boom, one closer to the octagonal hub, the other one further away. Data from the two magnetometers would be cross-referenced to filter out the spacecraft's own magnetic field. Drastically weakening the probe's magnetic field would have increased costs.\nCelestial Mechanics and Radio Science experiment.\nThis experiment investigated the mass and gravitational characteristics of Mercury. It was of particular interest because of the planet's closeness to the Sun, large orbital eccentricity, and unusual spin-orbit resonance.\nAs the spacecraft passed behind Mercury on the first encounter there was an opportunity to probe the atmosphere and to measure the radius of the planet. By observing phase changes in the S-band radio signal, measurements of the atmosphere could be made. The atmosphere was assessed as having a density of about .\nMission profile.\nDeparting Earth.\nBoeing finished building the spacecraft at the end of June 1973, and \"Mariner 10\" was delivered from Seattle to JPL's headquarters in California, where JPL comprehensively tested the integrity of the spacecraft and its instruments. After the tests were finished, the probe was transported to the Eastern Test Range in Florida, the launch site. Technicians filled a tank on the spacecraft with of hydrazine fuel so that the probe could make course corrections, and attached squibs, whose detonation would signal \"Mariner 10\" to exit the launch rocket and deploy its instruments. The planned gravity assist at Venus made it feasible to use an Atlas-Centaur rocket instead of a more powerful but more expensive Titan IIIC. The probe and the Atlas-Centaur were attached together ten days prior to liftoff. Launch posed one of the largest risks of failure for the \"Mariner 10\" mission; Mariner 1, Mariner 3, and Mariner 8 all failed minutes after lift-off due to either engineering failures or Atlas rocket malfunctions. The mission had a launch period of about a month in length, from 16 October 1973, to 21 November 1973. NASA chose 3 November as the launch date because it would optimize imaging conditions when the spacecraft arrived at Mercury.\nOn 3 November at 17:45 UTC, the Atlas-Centaur carrying \"Mariner 10\" lifted off from pad SLC-36B. The Atlas stage burned for around four minutes, after which it was jettisoned, and the Centaur stage took over for an additional five minutes, propelling \"Mariner 10\" to a parking orbit. The temporary orbit took the spacecraft one-third of the distance around Earth: this maneuver was needed to reach the correct spot for a second burn by the Centaur engines, which set \"Mariner 10\" on a path towards Venus. The probe then separated from the rocket; subsequently, the Centaur stage diverted away to avoid the possibility of a future collision. Never before had a planetary mission depended upon two separate rocket burns during the launch, and even with \"Mariner 10\", scientists initially viewed the maneuver as too risky.\nDuring its first week of flight, the \"Mariner 10\" camera system was tested by taking five photographic mosaics of the Earth and six of the Moon. It also obtained photographs of the north polar region of the Moon where prior coverage was poor. These photographs provided a basis for cartographers to update lunar maps and improve the lunar control net.\nCruise to Venus.\nFar from being an uneventful cruise, \"Mariner 10\"'s three-month journey to Venus was fraught with technical malfunctions, which kept mission control on edge. Donna Shirley recounted her team's frustration: \"It seemed as if we were always just patching Mariner 10 together long enough to get it on to the next phase and next crisis\". A trajectory correction maneuver was made on 13 November 1973. Immediately afterward, the star-tracker locked onto a bright flake of paint which had come off the spacecraft and lost tracking on the guide star Canopus. An automated safety protocol recovered Canopus, but the problem of flaking paint recurred throughout the mission. The on-board computer also experienced unscheduled resets occasionally, which necessitated reconfiguring the clock sequence and subsystems. Periodic problems with the high-gain antenna also occurred during the cruise. On 8 January 1974, a malfunction thought to be caused by a short-circuited diode occurred in the power subsystem. As a result, the main booster regulator and inverter failed, leaving the spacecraft dependent on the redundant regulator. Mission planners feared that the same problem could recur in the redundant system and cripple the spacecraft.\nIn January 1974, \"Mariner 10\" made ultraviolet observations of Comet Kohoutek. Another mid-course correction was made on 21 January 1974.\nVenus flyby.\nThe spacecraft passed Venus on 5 February 1974, the closest approach being at 17:01 UTC. It was the twelfth spacecraft to reach Venus and the eighth to return data from the planet, as well as the first mission to succeed in broadcasting images of Venus back to Earth. \"Mariner 10\" built upon observations made by \"Mariner 5\" six years earlier; importantly, \"Mariner 10\" had a camera whereas the prior mission lacked one. As \"Mariner 10\" veered around Venus, from the planet's night side to daylight, the cameras snapped the probe's first image of Venus, showing an illuminated arc of clouds over the north pole emerging from darkness. Engineers initially feared that the star-tracker could mistake the much brighter Venus for Canopus, repeating the mishaps with flaking paint. However, the star-tracker did not malfunction. Earth occultation occurred between 17:07 and 17:11 UTC, during which the spacecraft transmitted X-band radio waves through Venus's atmosphere, gathering data on cloud structure and temperature. Although Venus's cloud cover is nearly featureless in visible light, it was discovered that extensive cloud detail could be seen through Mariner's ultraviolet camera filters. Earth-based ultraviolet observation had shown some indistinct blotching even before \"Mariner 10\", but the detail seen by Mariner was a surprise to most researchers. The probe continued photographing Venus until 13 February 1974 Among the encounter's 4165 acquired photographs, one resulting series of images captured a thick and distinctly patterned atmosphere making a full revolution every four days just as terrestrial observations had suggested.\nThe mission revealed the composition and meteorological nature of the atmosphere of Venus. Data from the radio science experiment measured the extent to which radio waves passing through the atmosphere were refracted, which was used to calculate the density, pressure, and temperature of the atmosphere at any given altitude. Overall, atmospheric temperature is higher closer to the planet's surface, but \"Mariner 10\" found four altitudes where the pattern was reversed, which could signify the presence of a layer of clouds. The inversions occurred at the levels, confirming previous observations made by the \"Mariner 5\" encounter. The ultraviolet spectrometers identified the chemical substances that comprise Venus's atmosphere. The elevated concentration of atomic oxygen in the upper atmosphere showed that the atmosphere is stratified into upper and lower layers that do not mix with each other; photographs of the upper and lower cloud layers corroborated this hypothesis. \"Mariner 10\"'s ultraviolet photographs were an invaluable information source for studying the churning clouds of Venus's atmosphere. The mission researchers believed the cloud features they photographed were located in the stratosphere and upper troposphere, created by condensation; they also concluded that the contrast between darker and lighter features was due to differences in the cloud's absorptivity of UV light. The subsolar region was of particular interest: as the sun is straight overhead, it imparts more solar energy to this area than other part of the planet. Compared to the rest of the planet's atmosphere, the subsolar region was highly active and irregular. \"Cells\" of air lifted by convection, each up to wide, were observed forming and dissipating within the span of a few hours; some had polygonal outlines.\nThe gravity assist was also a success, coming well within the acceptable margin for error. In the four hours between 16:00 and 20:00 UTC on 5 February 1974, \"Mariner 10\"'s heliocentric velocity dropped from to . This changed the shape of the spacecraft's elliptical orbit around the Sun, so that the perihelion now coincided with the orbit of Mercury.\nFirst Mercury flyby.\nThe spacecraft flew past Mercury three times. The first Mercury encounter took place at 20:47 UTC on 29 March 1974, at a range of , passing on the shadow side.\nSecond Mercury flyby.\nAfter looping once around the Sun while Mercury completed two orbits, \"Mariner 10\" flew by Mercury again on 21 September 1974, at a more distant range of below the southern hemisphere.\nThird Mercury flyby.\nAfter losing roll control in October 1974, a third and final encounter, the closest to Mercury, took place on 16 March 1975, at a range of , passing almost over the north pole.\nEnd of mission.\nWith its maneuvering gas just about exhausted, \"Mariner 10\" started another orbit of the Sun. Engineering tests were continued until 24 March 1975, when final depletion of the nitrogen supply was signaled by the onset of an un-programmed pitch turn. Commands were sent immediately to the spacecraft to turn off its transmitter, and radio signals to Earth ceased.\n\"Mariner 10\" is presumably still orbiting the Sun, although its electronics have probably been damaged by the Sun's radiation. \"Mariner 10\" has not been spotted or tracked from Earth since it stopped transmitting. The only ways it would not be orbiting would be if it had been hit by an asteroid or gravitationally perturbed by a close encounter with a large body.\nDiscoveries.\nDuring its flyby of Venus, \"Mariner 10\" discovered evidence of rotating clouds and a very weak magnetic field. Using a near-ultraviolet filter, it photographed Venus's chevron clouds and performed other atmospheric studies.\nThe spacecraft flew past Mercury three times. Owing to the geometry of its orbit \u2013 its orbital period was almost exactly twice that of Mercury's \u2013 the same side of Mercury was sunlit each time, so it was only able to map 40\u201345% of Mercury's surface, taking over 2,800 photos. It revealed a more or less Moon-like surface. It contributed enormously to the understanding of Mercury, whose surface had not been successfully resolved through telescopic observation. The regions mapped included most or all of the Shakespeare, Beethoven, Kuiper, Michelangelo, Tolstoj, and Discovery quadrangles, half of Bach and Victoria quadrangles, and small portions of Solitudo Persephones (later Neruda), Liguria (later Raditladi), and Borealis quadrangles.\n\"Mariner 10\" also discovered that Mercury has a tenuous atmosphere consisting primarily of helium, as well as a magnetic field and a large iron-rich core. Its radiometer readings suggested that Mercury has a nighttime temperature of and maximum daytime temperatures of .\nPlanning for \"MESSENGER\", a spacecraft that surveyed Mercury until 2015, relied extensively on data and information collected by \"Mariner 10\".\n\"Mariner 10\" Commemoration.\nIn 1975, the US Post Office issued a commemorative stamp featuring the \"Mariner 10\" space probe. The 10-cent \"Mariner 10\" commemorative stamp was issued on 4 April 1975, at Pasadena, California.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38786", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38786", "title": "Mariner 1", "text": "Failed NASA mission to Venus (1962)\nMariner 1, built to conduct the first American planetary flyby of Venus, was the first spacecraft of NASA's interplanetary Mariner program. Developed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and originally planned to be a purpose-built probe launched summer 1962, Mariner 1's design was changed when the Centaur proved unavailable at that early date. Mariner 1 (and its sibling spacecraft, Mariner 2), were then adapted from the lighter Ranger lunar spacecraft. Mariner 1 carried a suite of experiments to determine the temperature of Venus as well to measure magnetic fields and charged particles near the planet and in interplanetary space.\nMariner 1 was launched by an Atlas-Agena rocket from Cape Canaveral's Pad 12 on July 22, 1962. Shortly after liftoff, errors in communication between the rocket and its ground-based guidance systems caused the rocket to veer off course, and it had to be destroyed by range safety. The errors were traced to a mistake in a specification of the hand-written guidance equations which were then subsequently codified in the computer program.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nWith the advent of the Cold War, the two then-superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, both initiated ambitious space programs with the intent of demonstrating military, technological, and political dominance. The Soviets launched the Sputnik 1, the first Earth orbiting satellite, on October 4, 1957. The Americans followed suit with Explorer 1 on February 1, 1958, by which point the Soviets had already launched the first orbiting animal, Laika in Sputnik 2. Earth's orbit having been reached, focus turned to being the first to the Moon. The Pioneer program of satellites consisted of three unsuccessful lunar attempts in 1958. In early 1959, the Soviet Luna 1 was the first probe to fly by the Moon, followed by Luna 2, the first artificial object to impact the Moon.\nWith the Moon achieved, the superpowers turned their eyes to the planets. As the closest planet to Earth, Venus presented an appealing interplanetary spaceflight target. Every 19 months, Venus and the Earth reach relative positions in their orbits around the Sun such that a minimum of fuel is required to travel from one planet to the other via a Hohmann Transfer Orbit. These opportunities mark the best time to launch exploratory spacecraft, requiring the least fuel to make the trip.\nThe first such opportunity of the Space Race occurred in late 1957, before either superpower had the technology to take advantage of it. The second opportunity, around June 1959, lay just within the edge of technological feasibility, and U.S. Air Force contractor Space Technology Laboratory (STL) intended to take advantage of it. A plan drafted January 1959 involved two spacecraft evolved from the first Pioneer probes, one to be launched via Thor-Able rocket, the other via the yet-untested Atlas-Able. STL was unable to complete the probes before June, and the launch window was missed. The Thor-Able probe was repurposed as the deep space explorer \"Pioneer 5\", which was launched March 11, 1960, and designed to maintain communications with Earth up to a distance of as it traveled toward the orbit of Venus. (The Atlas Able probe concept was repurposed as the unsuccessful Pioneer Atlas Moon probes.) No American missions were sent during the early 1961 opportunity. The Soviet Union launched Venera 1 on February 12, 1961, and on May 19\u201320 became the first probe to fly by Venus; however, it had stopped transmitting on February 26.\nFor the summer 1962 launch opportunity, NASA contracted Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in July 1960 to develop \"Mariner A\", a spacecraft to be launched using the yet undeveloped Atlas-Centaur. By August 1961, it had become clear that the Centaur would not be ready in time. JPL proposed to NASA that the mission might be accomplished with a lighter spacecraft using the less powerful but operational Atlas-Agena. A hybrid of Mariner A and JPL's Block 1 Ranger lunar explorer, already under development, was suggested. NASA accepted the proposal, and JPL began an 11-month crash program to develop \"Mariner R\" (so named because it was a Ranger derivative). Mariner 1 was the first Mariner R to be launched.\nSpacecraft.\nThree Mariner R spacecraft were built: two for launching and one to run tests, which was also to be used as a spare. Aside from its scientific capabilities, Mariner also had to transmit data back to Earth from a distance of more than , and to survive solar radiation twice as intense as that encountered in Earth orbit.\nStructure.\n \nAll three of the Mariner R spacecraft, including Mariner 1, weighed within of the design weight of , of which was devoted to non-experimental systems: maneuvering systems, fuel, and communications equipment for receiving commands and transmitting data. Once fully deployed in space, with its two solar panel \"wings\" extended, Mariner R was in height and across. The main body of the craft was hexagonal with six separate cases of electronic and electromechanical equipment:\nAt the rear of the spacecraft, a monopropellant (anhydrous hydrazine) 225 N rocket motor was mounted for course corrections. A nitrogen gas fueled stabilizing system of ten jet nozzles controlled by the onboard gyroscopes, Sun sensors, and Earth sensors, kept Mariner properly oriented to receive and transmit data to Earth.\nThe primary high gain parabolic antenna was also mounted on the underside of Mariner and kept pointed toward the Earth. An omnidirectional antenna atop the spacecraft would broadcast at times that the spacecraft was rolling or tumbling out of its proper orientation, to maintain contact with Earth; as an unfocused antenna, its signal would be much weaker than the primary. Mariner also mounted small antennas on each of the wings to receive commands from ground stations.\nTemperature control was both passive, involving insulated, and highly reflective components; and active, incorporating louvers to protect the case carrying the onboard computer. At the time the first Mariners were built, no test chamber existed to simulate the near-Venus solar environment, so the efficacy of these cooling techniques could not be tested until the live mission.\nScientific package.\nBackground.\nAt the time of the Mariner project's inception, few of Venus's characteristics were definitely known. Its opaque atmosphere precluded telescopic study of the ground. It was unknown whether there was water beneath the clouds, though a small amount of water vapor above them had been detected. The planet's rotation rate was uncertain, though JPL scientists had concluded through radar observation that Venus rotated very slowly compared to the Earth, advancing the long-standing (but eventually disproven) hypothesis that the planet was tidally locked with respect to the Sun (as the Moon is with respect to the Earth). No oxygen had been detected in Venus's atmosphere, suggesting that life as existed on Earth was not present. It had been determined that Venus's atmosphere contained at least 500 times as much carbon dioxide as the Earth's. These comparatively high levels suggested that the planet might be subject to a runaway greenhouse effect with surface temperatures as high as , but this had not yet been conclusively determined.\nThe Mariner spacecraft would be able to verify this hypothesis by measuring the temperature of Venus close-up; at the same time, the spacecraft could determine if there was a significant disparity between night and daytime temperatures. An on-board magnetometer and suite of charged particle detectors could determine if Venus possessed an appreciable magnetic field and an analog to Earth's Van Allen Belts.\nAs the Mariner spacecraft would spend most of its journey to Venus in interplanetary space, the mission also offered an opportunity for long-term measurement of the solar wind of charged particles and to map the variations in the Sun's magnetosphere. The concentration of cosmic dust beyond the vicinity of Earth could be explored as well.\nExperiments.\nExperiments for the measurement of Venus and interplanetary space included:\nNot included on any of the Mariner R spacecraft was a camera for visual photos. With payload space at a premium, project scientists considered a camera an unneeded luxury, unable to return useful scientific results. Carl Sagan, one of the Mariner R scientists, unsuccessfully fought for their inclusion, noting that not only might there be breaks in Venus's cloud layer, but \"that cameras could also answer questions that we were way too dumb to even pose\".\nFlight plan and ground operations.\nThe launch window for Mariner, constrained both by the orbital relationship of Earth and Venus and the limitations of the Atlas Agena, was determined to fall in the 51 day period from July 22 through September 10. The Mariner flight plan was such that the two operational spacecraft would be launched toward Venus in a 30-day period within this window, taking slightly differing paths such that they both arrived at the target planet within nine days of each other, between December 8 and 16. Only Cape Canaveral Launch Complex 12 was available for the launching of Atlas-Agena rockets, and it took 24 days to ready an Atlas-Agena for launch. This meant that there was only a 27-day margin for error for a two-launch schedule.\nEach Mariner would be launched into a parking orbit, whereupon the restartable Agena would fire a second time, sending Mariner on its way to Venus (errors in trajectory would be corrected by a mid-course burn of Mariner's onboard engines). Real-time radar tracking of the Mariner spacecraft while it was in parking orbit and upon its departure the Atlantic Missile Range would provide real-time radar tracking with stations at Ascension and Pretoria, while Palomar Observatory provided optical tracking. Deep space support was provided by three tracking and communications stations at Goldstone, California, Woomera, Australia, and Johannesburg, South Africa, each separated on the globe by around 120\u00b0 for continuous coverage.\nLaunch failure.\nThe launch of Mariner 1 was scheduled for the early morning of July 21, 1962. Several delays caused by trouble in the range safety command system delayed the beginning of the countdown until 11:33\u00a0p.m. EST the night before. At 2:20\u00a0a.m., just 79 minutes before launch, a blown fuse in the range safety circuits caused the launch to be canceled. Countdown was reset that night and proceeded, with several holds, planned and unplanned, from 11:08\u00a0p.m., through the early morning of the next day.\nAt 9:21:23\u00a0a.m. on July 22, 1962, Mariner 1's Atlas-Agena lifted off from LC-12. The launch went entirely according to plan up to booster separation. During sustainer phase, the guidance system began issuing improper steering instructions, causing the Atlas to fishtail left and right. Its flight trajectory began to point downward and to the left of where it was supposed to be, creating the danger that it could impact in the crowded Atlantic shipping lanes. At 9:26:16\u00a0a.m., just six seconds before the Agena second stage was scheduled to separate from the Atlas, at which point destruction of the rocket was no longer possible, a range safety officer ordered the rocket to self-destruct, which it did--the Atlas Flight Termination System was also designed to destruct the Agena if activated but Agena had no Flight Termination System of its own and could not be destructed following Atlas SECO. Telemetry signals were received from the probe for another 1-1/2 minutes. Mariner program director Jack James believed the destruction of the rocket was unnecessary and it would not have landed anywhere but the middle of the ocean.\nCause of the malfunction.\nBecause of the gradual rather than sharp deviation from its course, JPL engineers suspected the fault lay in the flight equations loaded into the computer that guided Atlas-Agena from the ground during its ascent. After five days of post-flight analysis, JPL engineers determined what had caused the malfunction on Mariner 1: an error in the guidance computer logic combined with a hardware failure.\nThe Burroughs guidance computer used data transmitted to it from the rate beacon on the Atlas and used this information to issue steering commands. The guidance program was supposed to contain a hyphen which instructed the computer to ignore data coming from the Atlas's rate beacon if it failed in-flight (to prevent incorrect commands from being sent), but it had been accidentally left out of the program, which a technician at Cape Canaveral had entered into the computer without realizing it had a mistake in it (the very same mistake that would afflict Phobos 1 26 years later).\nDuring its ascent, Mariner 1's booster briefly lost guidance-lock with the ground. Because this was a fairly common occurrence, the Atlas-Agena was designed to continue on a preprogrammed course until guidance-lock with the ground resumed. When lock was reestablished, however, the faulty guidance logic caused the program to erroneously report that the \"velocity was fluctuating in an erratic and unpredictable manner\", which the program tried to correct for, causing actual erratic behavior, which prompted the range safety officer to destroy the rocket.\nThe incorrect logic had previously been used successfully for Ranger launches, but the rate beacon had not malfunctioned on those, so the problem did not show up there. The Mod III-G guidance system used on Atlas-Agena vehicle was a persistent source of trouble, and malfunctioned on many launches after Atlas-Agena began flying in 1960. It was an adaption of the Mod III guidance system used on Atlas B, C, and D missiles, which had the original vacuum tube electronics converted to transistors, but the modification had been done hastily and was unreliable. After repeated Atlas-Agena guidance failures, the Mod III-G was redesigned during 1963 to properly accommodate transistor electronics.\nThe catastrophic effects of a small error \"summed up the whole problem of software reliability\" and contributed to the development of the discipline of software engineering.\nSubsequent popular accounts of the accident often referred to the erroneous character as a \"hyphen\" (describing the missing component of the symbol) rather than an \"R-bar\"; this incorrect mischaracterization was fueled by Arthur C. Clarke's description of the malfunction as \"the most expensive hyphen in history\".\nLegacy.\nThe loss of America's first interplanetary spacecraft constituted an $18.5 million ($ in today's dollars) setback for NASA. The incident underscored the importance of a thorough pre-launch debugging of software as well as a need to engineer programs such that minor errors could not cause catastrophic failures. The procedures implemented as a result served NASA well, ultimately salvaging the Project Apollo Moon landings; though there were program errors in the Lunar Excursion Module software during descent, they did not cause mission failure.\nWith the logic error quickly discovered, no undue delay was necessary. The identical Mariner 2 was already on hand, and a second launch from the same pad was manageable before the end of August. On August 27, 1962, Mariner 1's sister spacecraft was successfully launched, becoming on December 14, 1962, the first spacecraft to return data from the vicinity of Venus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38787", "revid": "1934512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38787", "title": "Mariner 3", "text": "Failed NASA mission to Mars (1964)\nMariner 3 (Mariner C-2, together with Mariner 4 known as Mariner-Mars 1964) was one of two identical deep-space probes designed and built by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) for NASA's Mariner-Mars 1964 project that were intended to conduct close-up (flyby) scientific observations of the planet Mars and transmit information on interplanetary space and the space surrounding Mars, televised images of the Martian surface and radio occultation data of spacecraft signals as affected by the Martian atmosphere back to Earth.\nAlthough the launch was initially successful, there was a separation issue and Mariner 3 stopped responding when its batteries ran out of power. It was the third of ten spacecraft within the Mariner program.\nBackground.\nMariner 2 had been a modified Ranger lunar probe, however Mariner 3 used a new, larger bus with four solar panels, a TV camera, and additional instrumentation. Because of the greater mass, the new Agena D stage would be used instead of the Agena B. Mariner 3 also utilized a new, larger fiberglass payload fairing. Of the two Atlas-Agena pads at Cape Canaveral, LC-13 became available first following the launch of an Air Force Vela satellite in July 1964. Atlas vehicle 289D was erected on the pad on August 17, with the backup Mariner probe and booster (Atlas 288D) erected on LC-12 on September 28.\nLaunch failure.\nMariner 3 was launched at 2:22 PM EST on November 5, 1964, from Cape Kennedy Air Force Station Launch Complex 13. After an uneventful boost phase, the Agena completed its burn to place the probe on a trajectory towards Mars. One hour after launch, the first telemetry transmissions from Mariner 3 were received, indicating that the scientific instruments were functioning correctly but there was no indication of any solar panel operation. Unsure of the exact problem, ground controllers issued a command to turn off the rate gyros to conserve power while they worked to figure out what had happened. Telemetry data suggested a separation failure of either the Agena or the payload fairing, but a below-normal velocity appeared to indicate that the fairing had not separated properly. A command was sent to manually jettison the payload shroud, but nothing happened. The ground controllers next considered firing Mariner 3's midcourse correction engine to blow off the shroud, but they ran out of time. Eight hours after launch, the batteries in the probe died and the mission was officially terminated. Even if the shroud could be removed, the mission would have failed, since the low velocity meant that Mariner 3 would miss Mars by several million miles.\nThree weeks later, on November 28, 1964, Mariner 4 was launched successfully on a 7\u00bd-month voyage to Mars.\nInstruments.\nThe instruments on Mariner 3 included:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38788", "revid": "47033785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38788", "title": "Mariner 5", "text": "NASA flyby mission to Venus (1967\u20131968)\nMariner 5 (Mariner V or Mariner Venus 1967) was a spacecraft of the Mariner program that carried a complement of experiments to probe Venus's atmosphere by radio occultation, measure the hydrogen Lyman-alpha (hard ultraviolet) spectrum, and sample the solar particles and magnetic field fluctuations above the planet. Its goals were to measure interplanetary and Venusian magnetic fields, charged particles, plasma, radio refractivity and UV emissions of the Venusian atmosphere.\nHistory.\nMariner 5 was built as a backup to Mariner 4, but after the success of the Mariner 4 mission, it was modified to be used for a Venus flyby mission to take place during the 1967 Venus launch window. Mariner 5 omitted several experiments from Mariner 4, including the TV camera, the ionization chamber/geiger counter, the cosmic ray detector, and the cosmic dust detector. It retained the helium-vector magnetometer, solar plasma probe, and trapped radiation detector from Mariner 4. Unlike Mariner 4, Mariner 5 needed to face away from the Sun to keep its high-gain antenna pointed at Earth because of its trajectory. As a result, the solar panels were reversed to be aft facing so they could remain pointed at the Sun. Additionally, since its mission to Venus brought it in closer proximity to the Sun, fewer solar cells were needed to achieve the necessary power generation, and as a result the solar panels were reduced in size to save mass as well as to make room for two 50\u00a0MHz dual-frequency receiver (DFR) antennas that were mounted on the frame of two of the solar panels. Since the aft side of the spacecraft faced the Sun, the solar plasma probe was relocated to the aft-facing side of Mariner 5.\nThe mounting for the high-gain antenna also needed modification. Unlike Mariner 4, where the geometry of the transfer orbit allowed for the high-gain antenna to be inclined at a relatively simple 38 degrees from the bottom plane, Mariner 5's trajectory required the high-gain antenna to be skewed at a more awkward angle. The high-gain antenna also included a single-use mechanism that allowed the high-gain antenna to make a shift in its angle as part of the radio occultation experiment. Mariner 5 also included some additional equipment that was not flown on Mariner 4, such as its Ultraviolet Photometer, two 50\u00a0MHz DFR antennas, a 423\u00a0MHz DFR antenna mounted on the end of one of the solar panels, and a deployable Sun-shade on the aft of the spacecraft for thermal control. The UV Photometer was originally supposed to fly on Mariner 4 and would have been mounted to its TV Camera scan platform. However, it was removed (allowing it to be flown on Mariner 5) and swapped out for a thermal/inertial mass simulator late in the assembly of Mariner 4 as it was discovered to create electrical arcing problems that would have jeopardized the TV Camera.\nPrior to the choice of Venus as the target, proposals had been made to send it to either the comet 7P/Pons\u2013Winnecke or 10P/Tempel.\nLaunch.\nLiftoff took place on June 14, 1967, from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station Launch Complex 12 on Atlas vehicle 5401. Booster performance was normal through the Atlas portion of the launch and the first Agena burn, with all systems operating at the proper level. During the second Agena burn, abnormal fluctuations in the engine chamber pressure occurred, however they did not preclude successful interplanetary injection. There had been several occurrences of this behavior on previous NASA and Air Force launches and a program was initiated to correct it which led to a redesign of the Agena turbopump gearbox.\nVenus flyby.\nMariner 5 flew by Venus on October 19, 1967, at an altitude of . With more sensitive instruments than its predecessor Mariner 2, Mariner 5 was able to shed new light on the hot, cloud-covered planet and on conditions in interplanetary space.\nRadio occultation data from Mariner 5 helped to understand the temperature and pressure data returned by the Venera 4 lander, which arrived at Venus shortly before it. The \"Venera 4\" and \"Mariner 5\" data was subsequently analysed together under a combined Soviet\u2013American working group of COSPAR in 1969, an organization of early space cooperation. With the data of these missions, it was clear that Venus had a very hot surface and an atmosphere even denser than expected.\nThe operations of Mariner 5 ended in November 1967 and it is now defunct in a heliocentric orbit.\nFurther communication attempts.\nFurther communication attempts were tried, in a joint spacecraft solar wind / solar magnetic fields investigation with Mariner 4, back in communication with Earth after being out of telemetry for about a year or more around superior conjunction. During the experiment, both spacecraft were going to be on the same idealized magnetic field spiral carried out from the sun by the solar wind.\nBetween April and November 1968 NASA tried to reacquire Mariner 5 to continue probing interplanetary conditions.\nAttempts to reacquire Mariner 5 during June, July, and early August 1968 yielded no spacecraft signal.\nOn October 14, the receiver operator at DSS 14 obtained a lock on the Mariner 5 signal. A carrier wave was detected, but outside expected frequency limits and varying in wavelength. Signal strength changes indicated the spacecraft was in a slow roll. Nevertheless, it was possible to lock the spacecraft to an uplink signal, but no response was observed to any commands sent to it. Without telemetry and without any signal change in response to commands, there was no possibility to repair or continue to use the spacecraft. Operations were terminated at the end of the track from DSS 61 at 07:46 GMT on November 5, 1968.\nExperiments.\nMariner 5 returned data from seven experiments:\nCelestial Mechanics.\nTracking data from Mariner 5, combined with Deep Space Network equipment, were used to refine the masses of Venus and the Moon, improve the astronomical unit, and update Earth-Venus ephemerides. Doppler measurements worked effectively up to 48 million km. Principal investigator was John D. Anderson from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.\nInterplanetary Ion Plasma Probe for E/Q of 40 to 9400 Volts.\nThis three-part Faraday cup measured positive ions from 40 to 9400 eV/Q in eight energy ranges. Always facing the Sun, it gathered directional data by comparing signals from its three 120\u00b0 collectors. It cycled through voltage settings in two modes\u2014total and individual plate currents\u2014producing 64 measurements every 5 minutes. The instrument functioned normally throughout the mission. Principal investigator was Herbert S. Bridge from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.\nS-Band Occultation.\nThis experiment aimed to study Venus's atmosphere and ionosphere by analyzing changes in the S-band signal, including phase shift, Doppler shift, and signal weakening. Principal investigator was Arvydas J. Kliore from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.\nTrapped Radiation Detector.\nThis experiment aimed to measure energetic particles in interplanetary space and investigate potential radiation belts or particle effects near Venus. It used specialized detectors to capture electrons and protons at various energy levels and angles relative to the probe-Sun line. Principal investigator was James A. Van Allen from the University of Iowa.\nTriaxial Low Field Helium Magnetometer.\nThis experiment used a helium magnetometer mounted on a 1.5-meter boom to measure interplanetary and Venusian magnetic fields in three directions. It operated in both high and low bit-rate modes, collecting precise data with a dynamic range of \u00b1204 nT and accuracy up to \u00b10.2 nT. High-quality data were gathered from June to October 1967, except for a brief period in late September. Principal investigator was Edward J. Smith from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.\nTwo-Frequency Beacon Receiver.\nA steerable antenna at Stanford transmitted two radio signals (423.3 MHz and 49.8 MHz) to the spacecraft\u2019s two-frequency receiver. The high-frequency signal acted as a reference, while delays in the low-frequency signal revealed total electron content along the path. Phase and group velocity differences were measured onboard and sent back to Earth, helping to determine interplanetary electron content and solar wind variations. The experiment ran successfully from launch through November 1967. Principal investigator was Von R. Eshleman from Stanford University.\nUltraviolet Photometer.\nThis experiment used a UV photometer to study Venus's upper atmosphere by measuring ultraviolet emissions caused by solar radiation scattering off atmospheric atoms. By analyzing these emissions, especially hydrogen Lyman-alpha and atomic oxygen lines, scientists could determine the composition and temperature at various altitudes. The instrument had three photomultiplier tubes with specific filters to isolate key wavelengths. Principal investigator was Charles A. Barth from the University of Colorado.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38790", "revid": "15415726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38790", "title": "Mariner 8", "text": "Failed NASA mission to Mars (1971)\nMariner-H (Mariner Mars '71), also commonly known as Mariner 8, was (along with Mariner 9) part of the Mariner Mars '71 project. It was intended to go into Mars orbit and return images and data, but a launch vehicle failure prevented Mariner 8 from achieving Earth orbit and the spacecraft reentered into the Atlantic Ocean shortly after launch.\nMission.\nMariner 8 was launched on an Atlas-Centaur SLV-3C booster (AC-24). The main Centaur engine was ignited 265 seconds after launch, but the upper stage began to oscillate in pitch and tumbled out of control. The Centaur stage shut down 365 seconds after launch due to starvation caused by the tumbling. The Centaur and spacecraft payload separated and re-entered the Earth's atmosphere approximately downrange and fell into the Atlantic Ocean about north of Puerto Rico.\nA guidance system failure was suspected as the culprit, but JPL navigation chief Bill O'Neil dismissed the idea that the entire guidance system had failed. He argued that an autopilot malfunction had occurred since the event had occurred at the exact moment when the system was supposed to activate. Investigation proceeded quickly and the problem was soon discovered to be the result of a malfunction in the pitch rate gyro amplifier. A diode intended to protect the system from transient voltages was thought to have been damaged during repairs/installation of the pitch amplifier's printed circuit board, something that would not have been detected through bench tests.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], Mariner 8 is the most recent US planetary probe to be lost in a launch vehicle malfunction.\nMariner Mars 71 Project.\nThe Mariner Mars 71 project consisted of two spacecraft (Mariners H and I), each of which would be inserted into a Martian orbit, and each of which would perform a separate but complementary mission. Either spacecraft could perform either of the two missions. The two spacecraft would have orbited the planet Mars a minimum of 90 days, during which time data would be gathered on the composition, density, pressure, and temperature of the atmosphere, and the composition, temperature, and topography of the surface. Approximately 70 percent of the planetary surface was to be covered, and temporal as well as spatial variations would be observed. Some of the objectives of the Mariner-H mission were successfully added to the Mariner-I (Mariner 9) mission profile.\nTotal research, development, launch, and support costs for the Mariner series of spacecraft (Mariners 1 through 10) was approximately $554 million.\nSpacecraft and subsystems.\nThe Mariner 8 spacecraft was built on an octagonal magnesium frame, deep and across a diagonal. Four solar panels, each , extended out from the top of the frame. Each set of two solar panels spanned from tip to tip. Also mounted on the top of the frame were two propulsion tanks, the maneuver engine, a long low gain antenna mast and a parabolic high gain antenna. A scan platform was mounted on the bottom of the frame, on which were attached the mutually bore-sighted science instruments (wide- and narrow-angle TV cameras, infrared radiometer, ultraviolet spectrometer, and infrared interferometer spectrometer). The overall height of the spacecraft was . The launch mass was , of which were expendables. The science instrumentation had a total mass of . The electronics for communications and command and control were housed within the frame.\nSpacecraft power was provided by a total of 14,742 solar cells which made up the 4 solar panels with a total area of area. The solar panels could produce 800 W at Earth and 500 W at Mars. Power was stored in a 20 ampere hour nickel-cadmium battery. Propulsion was provided by a gimbaled engine capable of 1340 N thrust and up to 5 restarts. The propellant was monomethyl hydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide. Two sets of 6 attitude control nitrogen jets were mounted on the ends of the solar panels. Attitude knowledge was provided by a Sun sensor, a Canopus star tracker, gyroscopes, an inertial reference unit, and an accelerometer. Passive thermal control was achieved through the use of louvres on the eight sides of the frame and thermal blankets.\nSpacecraft control was through the central computer and sequencer which had an onboard memory of 512 words. The command system was programmed with 86 direct commands, 4 quantitative commands, and 5 control commands. Data was stored on a digital reel-to-reel tape recorder. The 8-track tape could store 180 million bits recorded at 132\u00a0kbit/s. Playback could be done at 16, 8, 4, 2, and 1\u00a0kbit/s using two tracks at a time. Telecommunications were via dual S-band 10 W/20 W transmitters and a single receiver through the high gain parabolic antenna, the medium gain horn antenna, or the low gain omnidirectional antenna.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
